233. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
BOMBAY,
December 25, 1915
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have come to Bombay for the Congress week. There is no
sincerity about anything. 'Much cry and little work' proverb applies
most appropriately. What I should have done I do not know. The
boys are with me as volunteers and they are not wanted. I made a
great mistake in bringing the boys at all. Mrs. Gandhi is not here. She
does not yet appreciate my action about the Pariah friend. Manilal too
has remained behind. Dr. Mehta is here. He is likely to be here yet
for a few days.
1 The name misspelt" Bharathsarathi" here and in a few other letters has been
corrected to read thus.
Imamsaheb and young Sorabji have arrived from Natal.
More next week.
Yours ever,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence Courtesy: National
Archives of India
234, LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
March 11, 1916
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have just come here to revive my breath and prepare for going
to Hardwar. I shall be travelling yet for a while. I cannot send you
the things you want as both Maganbhai and Manilal are away on
business. There is no one else who knows anything about the things
that are put away.
My life here is curious. I feel like a stranger in the midst of so
many who think they know me. There is kinship only to a certain extent.
Everything I say pleases often, sometimes wounds, rarely convinces
and still more rarely is conviction followed by action. All this you will
see some day when peace takes the place of this seeming-never-to-
be-ending war. But I am quite happy in my aloofness. I feel that I
am right. It is this inner happiness which I would like you to have.
And your present position is just the experience that should give you
the happiness I have described. You have leisure for introspection and
no worry save what you will give yourself 'Man does not live by bread
alone.' Animal enjoyment is the least part of one's life. But we have
made it the most important of all — indeed in some cases it has become
the only important part of life. This ought to be changed. Each one
of us can do it in our own case. Will you not use your opportunity?
Ramdas is now better. He is not yet sufficiently acclimatized. That
accounts for his indifferent health. He is, however, gaining ground and
is likely to be all right in a short time. Fakiri is still far from well.
He does cause anxiety. He is unable to restrain his palate.
With love,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
