387. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Saturday, Jeth Sud 7 [May 30, 1925]
Correct mistakes and read.
BHAI SHANKERLAL,
I have your letter. Do not worry about the length. The
Working Committee did not meet after all. Only three members
were present. I have acquainted myself with Dr. Naidu's view.
I shall also know Deshbandhu's view since I shall be meeting
him in Darjeeling. Regardless of the outcome you should carry
on the work without worrying. We must not worry about
anything when we are doing our duty.
I have sent a telegram to Arjun Lal Sethi that the Work-
ing Committee could not meet, but that I am willing to give
my personal view. He must convey whatever he has in mind
within a week. It is planned to convene another meeting of the
Working Committee. We will at least manage the quorum. I shall
ascertain the views of other members before that. Do not worry
about the authority of the Board. Let me worry about it. Do
not be perturbed by the fact that the solution of the Ajmer im-
broglio will take a little time. You can certainly open any shop,
etc., you wish to have in Ajmer. Let him appeal against it if
he wants. He will surely not stop any work by resorting to phy-
sical force? Who can stop you from working in Jaipur and
other such places? It is also Dr. Naidu's view that the Board
can do any independent (khadi) work that it chooses. Provincial
Khadi Boards cannot make appointments without consulting the
Committee. We do not have much to do with the Provincial
Board. Who is connected with the shop opened in Bombay?
You can extend your activities in Rajputana as much as you
wish without the intervention of the Provincial Board. That is
also Jawaharlal's view. Even then, you need not do it if you do
not feel strong enough. You may consult me again if you want.
There is nothing at all to be done if Sethiji abuses Jamna-
lalji. He was at one time a dependent of Jamnalalji. The abuses
from a dependent do not have to be answered. Nor need there
be any angry reaction. That is Sethiji's nature. It would be
good for you to live in solitude for a few days. If nothing else,
you may come to me for some days and also talk things over.
If Jawaharlal did not have to go to Dalhousie the Commit-
tee could have been called in July.
I am at Santiniketan today. I shall reach Calcutta on Tues-
day. The same day I shall leave for Darjeeling for a three-day
stay. It is not possible to spare more days for Darjeeling. My health
is fine. I had a long talk with the Poet today - four hours. It is
very likely he will start plying the charkha. In any case he will
not oppose it. We are meeting again. I have built great hopes
on Bengal. You will see it from my articles in Young India.
Take good care of your health. I am also going to Assam
for 10 or 12 days.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am not revising this letter. It is time to go to bed. I may
not write a separate letter to Anasuyabehn. She will have all
the news from this.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32692
