123. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
September 6, 1913
15
There, all the evil-producing acts are destroyed, the very seed
of incessant births and rebirths is burnt up, and the soul shines
all light, all power, all purity and the knower of everything.
16
There, only the natural actions are performed automatically
without touching the soul which lives out the life in the present
body and after leaving it ceases to be liable to put on more bodies.
17
There, all the bondage of matter is loosened in thought, speech
and body. That state is one of supreme bliss and completely free
from bondage.
18
There, untouched by anything, the soul sits spotless and
steadfast. It is the essence of life incomparable, indescribable; it
is in its natural state.
19
It is a state attained by previous effort. It is the highest and
it is the abode of the Perfect. The soul is there all knowledge and
absorbed in divine contemplation.
20
Even thought-perfect soul, although it realized this state, could
not describe it. How can anyone else describe it ? It is only to
be known fully by self-realization.
21
My mind is fixed upon that state. I am incapable of reaching
it in my present state but it is my sole ideal. Rajchandra, the author,
is determined by God's grace to attain it.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Here are the balance of the verses. You may take them down
one by one or together. But contemplate them well.
Hoosen I found a little better. He now wants some of the books
1 Haji Hoosen Dawad Mahomed who had been ailing, passed away on September
22, 1913; vide Vol. XII, pp. 204 and 222-.
139
Daniel has sent. I am forwarding them.
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
Please tell Manilal I am not writing separately. The verses are my
letter to him.
19 1
[September 7, 1913]
My house is high, my sons are respected by good men, I have
inexhaustible wealth, I have a beautiful wife, I am young—thus
reasons man steeped in ignorance and considers this universe to
be indestructible and allows himself to be imprisoned in it. But those
who are far-seeing renounce the world, knowing it to be transitory.
20
O my soul! live joyously on fruits, roots and leaves. Let mother
earth cover you; let us go to the forest where we do not have
to meet people who know not discrimination, who being diseased
with money fever, utter thoughtless words and where we do not
even hear such people's names.
September 9, 1913
34
There is fear of disease in enjoyments, there is danger of
destruction in having a family, there is danger from kings in having
riches, there is danger of ignominy in trying to be respected, there
is danger of creating enemies in showing one's physical power, there
is danger of disfigurement in having beauty, there is danger of
disputation in discussing scriptures, there is danger from the evil-
minded in being endowed with high qualities, there is danger of
death in having the body — thus is everything a cause of fear.
Only complete renunciation is free from fear.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your two letters. I am glad that realization of weakness
now does not make you despondent but nerves you for the struggle
that is to come. I find that if we have trust in the Supreme, every
difficulty we face shows its own way out of it. 'One step enough for
me' was not spoken by an inexperienced man.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 The numbering of verses here is evidently duplicated; vide pp. 139.
2 The source has "ennerves".
