175. LETTER TO G. E. B. ABELL
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
6 TODIWALA ROAD, POONA,
February 21, 1946
DEAR MR. ABELL,
Here are a few more suggestions to meet the food situation
which have been sent to me by friends.
The Indian Army should be given this unique opportunity
of doing constructive work. They can be moved about easily.
They could, therefore, be sent to all such places where wells need
to be dug most urgently.
Regarding additional foods, fish has been mentioned. Fish
abounds in the seas around the coasts of India. The war is over;
there are innumerable small and medium-sized vessels which were
used for doing patrol and guard duties along our shores for the
last five years. The Royal Indian Navy could arrange about
staffing these with the Department of Fisheries giving all assist-
ance. If everything and anything can be done during a war,
why not a peace-time war effort? Dry fish does even now form
part of the normal diet of a great number of people who are very
poor—that is when it is available and they can afford to buy it.
All public gardens should immediately by law made to start
growing vegetables. Squads of army personnel should be put to
work here too. People requiring extra labour to transform their
ground or garden should also be able to obtain free help through
this channel.
The distribution of food should be through co-operative
societies or similar organizations.
All food parcels to friends or relatives in Britain or elsewhere
abroad should be stopped as also the export of groundnuts, oils,
oil-cakes, etc.
All stocks of foodstuffs in the hands of the military should be
released forthwith and no distinction should be made between
military and civil ranks. In this connection I draw His Excellency's
attention to the following A. P. I. message published in the Amrita
Bazar Patrika of February 11, 1946:
It is learnt that huge quantities of decomposed atta are being destroyed
for the last few days by throwing them into the river Shitalaksha at
Narayanganj.
The campaign against despondency and for growing more
food will avail nothing, unless bribery which is going on as never
before is stopped and honesty and straight dealing begin to
pervade the Government ranks and the public.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI,
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 141-2; also Harijan,
17-3-1946
