214. LETTER TO MAHOMED ALI
POST ANDHERI,
March 25, 1924
MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,
I have your letter. I am following your movement through
the papers, and I see that you have borne the domestic affliction
with the courage and resignation worthy of you. I had myself
expected nothing less. I regard it as a privilege of friendship to
receive the account you have given me of Amina's last moments.
She was a dear good soul. It would be exceedingly good if you
could pass a week with me. I would love to have you, Begum
Saheba and the whole of your suite, but the accommodation in
this big bungalow is now limited. I could easily take care of you,
that is to say, you will be left to take care of yourself and make
yourself as comfortable as it is possible in a place that has been
turned into an hospital. I am lying in the midst of patients.
Maganlal's daughter Radha and Vallabhbhai's daughter Manibai
are both here and they are much weaker than I am myself.
Prabhudas though not bed-ridden is also an invalid, and I have
invited mad Majli too to come here. And how I would love
to nurse the Big Brother also. But that can only be after
convalescence. Let there be no mistake about the motive in
having all these patients here. You may know that I am a better
nurse than a politician, if I am one at all, and what is more, I felt
ashamed to be occupying a big bungalow like this all alone when
there were patients, some of whom, brought up under me from
infancy, requiring far greater care, attention and change than I did.
They are all here, therefore, not for my consolation but for their
own good; but having turned the bungalow into an hospital, I
have disabled myself for looking after guests, whom I would not
have if I could not give them the attention they deserve. And
while I should be quite glad to leave you to yourself, and feel
that I have done enough, I could not feel likewise regarding Begum
Saheba.
Now you know all about me. Tell me when you are coming.
I wish you were here to join the discussions with the leaders who
are coming over in the course of the week. Please tell Shaukat
he had no right to be bed-ridden. The next best thing for him to
do is to get well quickly.
How is Hayat? He owes me a letter.
With love to you all,
Yours affictionately,
MAULANA MAHOMED ALI
ALIGARH
From a photostat: S.N. 8584; also C.W. 5345
