589. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
November 7, 1932
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
HOME DEPARTMENT
NEW DELHI
DEAR SIR,
My thoughts having been hitherto concentrated simply upon
what threatened to be an impasse about untouchability, I was
unable to think of any other matter. Now that it is happily over,
I would like to approach the Government of India on certain
decisions of theirs which I have not been able to understand.
I should, if I may, like to know why my reply telegrams to
Maulana Shaukat Ali and Abul Kalam Azad and to Dr. Ansari,
expressing my hope of Hindu-Muslim unity being achieved, were
disallowed. I saw in the Press the correspondence between His
Excellency the Viceroy and Maulana Shaukat Ali regarding his
request for permission to interview me on the same question.
If the reasons given to him for refusal to let him see me are also
the reasons for disallowing my telegrams I fail to see the connec-
tion between my association with civil disobedience and Hindu-
1 Vide p. 201.
2 Vide p. 265.
Muslim unity. My association with civil disobedience appears
to the Government to be bad. But I hope my views on Hindu-
Muslim unity and my desire to promote it do not so appear to
them. If I am right in my assumption, I can only understand the
ban on the interview and my telegrams on the supposition that
it is a 'punishment meted out to me and those who would see
me or correspond with me, even on matters that have no con-
nection with civil disobedience, only because I would not set aside
the dictates of my conscience and my reason and would not dis-
sociate myself from it. I hope Government of India have not
contemplated any such punishment.
The Government of India will admit that as a prisoner I
have given the authorities willing co-operation.
I should like
it also to be intelligent. Wherever it is possible, I should know
why particular requests are refused.
So far as in me lies I end-
eavour to make no unreasonable requests. They have been general-
ly either in the interests of my health or of public good as distin-
guished from selfish gratification.
So far as the telegrams which are the subject matter of this
letter are concerned, they do not now need to be sent. But occa-
sions for dealing with public matters outside untouchability and
having no connection with civil disobedience will undoubtedly
arise. I should like therefore not only to know the reasons for the
disallowance in the cases mentioned, but also to know the future
policy of the Government on similar occasions.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40)(4), Pt. I, p. 305
