387. LETTER TO LORD SAMUEL
[After July 2, 1945]
DEAR LORD SAMUEL 2 ,
I have your letter of 2nd July. I am sorry that you are still
unconvinced. The ground of your objections seems to be that whilst
the Congress may sincerely wish to embrace all parties and is trying
to do so, it has not yet been able to achieve it and that its ultimate
achievement is problematical, while the taking of the delivery is to be
immediate and certain. This objection again overlooks the very relevant
fact to which I have twice drawn your attention, namely, that the
Congress through its president has invited the Government to transfer
full power to the League and ask it to form a truly national government,
in which it would have the loyal co-operation of the Congress. This
offer was reiterated at Simla. But I am sorry to have to say it was
again turned down.
I still adhere to my statement that "there cannot be Swaraj without
an understanding with the Muslims." My contention is and has been
that the presence of the third party is the greatest stumbling-block in
the way of this understanding. So long as one community in the country
enjoys the power of vetoing all political progress there can be no
reasonable settlement. In India this anomalous power is assured to the
League by the British Government which supererogates to itself the
right of arbitrating and holding the balance of power between the various
communities. In the absence of an agreed solution, a just solution through
impartial arbitration is held to be the only feasible alternative in civilized
society, but in India the absence of an agreed solution is strangely held
to be a justification for retention of power by an alien Government
over a nation of 400 millions! 'Quit India' can be the only reply to such
a claim. It seems strange that you should see in this cry a manifestation
1 This was in reply to the addressee's letter dated July 2, 1945.
2 Herbert Louis Samuel, Liberal leader
of totalitarian spirit instead of the anguished despair of an enslaved
people to be free from totalitarian foreign rule which has in the past
demonstrably sabotaged all their efforts to achieve unity in order to
be free and spurned their united and unanimous demands for political
advance.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
