219. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
PARNAKUTI, POONA 6,
June 7, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
I must not write. The last letter that I wrote to you caused
much strain upon the hand. I am, therefore, dictating this letter,
in reply to yours of the 5th instant.
You say that the brief sentence I wrote at the end of the letter
written by Mahadev, gave you pangs. It is wonderful how we
create misery for ourselves where there is not even the slightest
cause. My sentence had reference to your fever, which you yourself
had said was due to over-anxiety on your part. You had explicitly
mentioned that you were ill able to bear the separation. It was
in answer to this that I wrote that sentence. It had reference
only to enforced separation. There was no thought whatsoever
that you should live out of sight even when it was possible for you
to be with me, that is, if we were both not imprisoned. Of
course, in that case, you would be most naturally with me. But
to be out of prison is not my natural life. My natural life is that
of a prisoner and therefore I suggest that you should learn to do
without my physical presence. Is not this as clear as daylight?
I do not like this loss of weight by you. There is something
radically wrong in your carrying this load of anxiety on your
shoulders. It is incompatible with a living faith in a living God.
As days pass I feel this living presence in every fibre of my vein.
Without that feeling I should be demented. There are so many
things that are calculated to disturb my peace of mind. So
many events happened that would, without the realization of that
presence, shake me to the very foundation. But they pass me by
leaving me practically untouched. I want you to share that reality
with me. Then you would not be disturbed because you cannot
be physically near me. Remember that no heroic effort is neces-
sary in order to be able to bear such enforced separation, as you
and I have to put up with. Millions of human beings do so
without any effort. Do not make the mistake of thinking that
they bear such separation because their nature is not sensitive
to such things. If we would examine them we would find that
they are just as sensitive as you and I are likely to be. Only
they have a natural faith in God of which they have not even
the knowledge. Ours is, beside theirs, a laboured faith. Hence
we have to put forth a Herculean effort to bear separation. Any-
way that is my analysis of your mentality. If it is not true you
will make your own analysis and somehow or other cure your-
self of the terrible anxiety. Carefully ponder over Krishna's dis-
courses in the second chapter of the Gita. Then go to the twelfth
chapter, and see whether you cannot find real peace and calmness
of mind. Do not try to give me a detailed reply to this argument
of mine. I do not want you to go through that strain. I have
advanced the argument simply to soothe you, if at all I can. I
know that argument is vain when one's whole being is in rebel-
lion against itself. Perhaps the painful process through which
you are passing is preliminary to the coming realization of the
living presence of God. May it be so. Anyway do not again
allow the thought to cross your mind that there is any question
whatsoever of your having to live in separation from me when
we both find ourselves out of prison.
Now about myself. I am flourishing. Rebuilding the body
at the age of 64 must be a slow process, and I see that it will
be slower than I had expected. Yet recovery is steady. I am
taking easily 24 oz. of milk. I am trying to go to 2 lb. and may,
under Dr. Dinshaw Mehta's care, do even better. I am entirely
satisfied with the way I am progressing. Besides milk I take
oranges and juice of three to four pomegranate[s]. I am taking
also a fair quantity of honey, perhaps 4 oz. Up to yesterday, I
was taking vegetable soup. Dr. Mehta has stopped it from today
in order to increase the quantity of milk. So you see that there is
nothing to grumble about my food, and the way I am progres-
sing.
You complain of sultry weather there. Here we have deli-
cious cool weather. Of course, Poona is ideal in the rainy
season.
Devdas will be married to Lakshmi on the 16th; that is the
date when the religious ceremony will be gone through. But as
this will be a marriage in breach of the present Hindu usage, there
will be also a civil registration on the 21st. Jamnalalji is trying
to fix up a match for Prabhudas also. If it comes off, he too
would be married about the same date. Ramdas is here; not at
all keeping well. His body largely depends upon his mental state
and he has not yet found his peace of mind. Jamnalalji is going
to mother him. Probably that will pull him through. He will
be living in Wardha with his wife.
N. seems to be shaping well. Margarete Spiegel, who is
named Amala, is as mad as a mad-hatter. But what was one to
do? She simply came and one had to take her. She is a good
woman. But it remains to be seen how she shapes. Both N. and
Amala are to do Harijan work.
I think I have now given you enough for the week.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6279. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9745
