88. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
[BOMBAY,]
January 21, 1919
BHAISHRI NARAHARI 2 ,
It is 12.30 a.m. just now. I got the piles removed yesterday.
When I had suffered enough, I was given morphia by injection.
I felt drowsy in consequence and fell asleep. I slept from 2 p.m.
onwards and have just awakened, at midnight. Hence the mind
is calm, and I am not likely to get sleep again for some time. Be-
sides, it is Mahadev's turn to watch, and therefore, feeling inclin-
ed to write to you, I am dictating this letter.
Everyone hopes that after the operation I shall be free of
piles for good. If that happens, my health is likely to improve
very fast. I shall have to remain here for at least a month, and
then, before going elsewhere, I shall first visit the Ashram. No one,
I beg, should worry about my health.
I was very glad to read your criticism of the freedom I have
allowed myself in regard to milk. If any person feels that a friend
of his has shown weakness, through illness maybe, or for any
other reason, it is his duty to draw the friend's attention to the
weakness he has observed. A man is under so strong a temptation
to fall, and Nature herself has made it so very easy for him to
indulge in self-deception, that even a vigilant person, if he is
weak, or if his abstinences lack the genuine spirit of renunciation,
is sure to fall. Therefore, as I have said above, friends must keep
an eye on one another and I wish that all of you maintain such
watch ever so thoroughly. It is in this that our elevation lies,
yours and mine. Before making any great change, I invariably con-
sult Mahadev at any rate, but I have always felt that, because
of his boundless love for me, he is incapable of noting any short-
comings in me and that, when he does, he condones them. I do
not, therefore, get full benefit out of my consultations with him.
Had you made your remarks in your letter to me, I would have
felt happier. I am sure of this, at any rate, that when friends
place the argument on the other side, I understand it very well
because I take an entirely detached view. That is why I feel that,
whenever we do not think alike, you should all come out with
your disagreement immediately. That will not disturb me very
much; rather, I shall be free from the unhappy position of having
to be my own judge. Personally, I feel convinced that I have
fully succeeded in observing my vows with the utmost strictness.
I deliberated for twenty-four hours before I commenced taking
goat's milk; I would even say that, whenever I have allowed myself
any freedom, there have always been strong reasons for doing
so. I am not at all anxious to live on and, though more than five
months have elapsed since I fell ill, this indifference of mine re-
mains. When I took the vow of not taking milk, I had, or
could have, no thought in my mind of any milk other than that
of the cow or the buffalo. I had considered the matter very care-
fully when I took the vow to refrain from milk. I was painfully
aware of the ill-treatment of cows and buffaloes and that was the
reason for my taking the vow concerning milk. What is my duty
in the present circumstances? Should I accept the natural mean-
ing that suggests itself or the one that is drawn out with much
hair-splitting? It appears to me that I should allow myself as much
freedom as is consistent with a very liberal construction of my
vows. I will not admit that, through the freedom I have allowed
myself, I am in any way violating my vow, even on the stric-
test view of it. The medical experiment [of a milkless diet] I was
making may indeed receive a great set back, but an experiment
in medical science is no affair of the spirit. The ideal of self-
control and the spiritual intention behind the renunciation of milk
have remained quite unaffected. With the passing of days, friends
become more insistent. Dr. Mehta goes on sending telegrams.
Thousands of other Indians are extremely agitated over my ill-
ness. Though Ba is not always weeping and grieving over my ill-
ness, yet I know that her soul is in torment. What should I do
under such circumstances? The question can have only one ans-
wer. Without detracting ever so little from my vow, I should
adopt a liberal attitude wherever possible and allow myself some
freedom. I shall stop here today. There are many other argu-
ments, but I have placed only the main one before you. If my
argument does not satisfy you, and if you still see weakness in
my action, do let me have your criticism. If you do so, more-
over, after consulting others, I shall be happy indeed. Even if
your criticism appears just to me, for the present I shall conti-
nue taking milk. Do not, therefore, hesitate out of fear that I
might give it up.
I am very glad that you teach Manibehn with care. If
we could place all our women in the forefront, we would produce
big results.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
