481. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 31, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I got your regular letter today. I am glad you are feeling
better in body. Your recipe is not of use for me. That requires
procuring goat's milk butter. I do not want to go to that trouble.
And I do not need to, as I am keeping excellent health without.
I have, therefore, no excuse for it either. For, we may not concoct
dishes for the pleasure of palate. I have done enough of that
for many years. You need the change especially there. I don't
hesitate to procure what I fancy I need for the body. Today I
have taken milk. But I propose to continue bajri and see whether
with milk it continues to keep the bowels in order. Without
milk it has produced most excellent results. This may not be
true of all constitutions. I have discovered this that each body
has its own peculiarities which have to be found out.
Tell little Lakshmi that I got her sweet little note before she
was locked up. I expect her to make the very best use of the
time she has now got. I am glad too that Shantabehn and
Gangabehn are also with you. Tell them they must make up
their Gujarati and make their Hindi pucca. And give them love
on behalf of us all.
I was quite prepared for the news that you will not be re-
moved from there. You ought to be able to keep well there also.
Narandas wrote to me about your orders for ghee and dates.
I hope you have both.
I dropped dates because I could not
get good ones weevils-free. You are able to take the hard, dry
thing called kharek . I cannot.
I hope you will have permission to see some friends at least.
But if you do not, after all we have no strangers. All strangers
are friends including criminals as also the jailors. We have here
learnt to recognize friends among animals. We have a cat who
is a revelation. And if we had vision enough, we should appre-
ciate the language of trees and plants and value their friendship.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6236. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9702
