7. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
MADRAS,
October 17, 1896
THE EDITOR
The Times of India
SIR,
I shall be obliged to you if you will be good enough to find
space for the following in your influential paper.
The Natal Agent-General has, it appears, told Reuter, with
reference to my pamphlet on the grievances of the British Indians
in South Africa, that it is not true to say that the railway and
tramway officials treat the Indians as beasts, that the fact that
the indentured Indians do not avail themselves of the return
passage is the best answer to my pamphlet, and that the Indians
are not denied justice in the law-courts. In the first place,
the pamphlet deals with the grievances of the Indians in the
whole of South Africa. In the second place, I adhere to the
statement that the railway and tram-car officials treat the Indians
as beasts in Natal. If there are exceptions, they prove the rule.
I have been witness myself to not a few such cases. What is it
if it is not being treated as a beast, to be removed three times
during a single night journey from one compartment to another,
to suit European passengers? To see Indians, apparently respect-
able, kicked, pushed, and sworn at by the station-master is not
an extraordinary sight on the railway stations. The Western sta-
tion in Durban is the dread of the Indians, so over-polite is the
station-master at that station, and this is not the only station
where the Indians are kicked about like footballs. Here is an
independent testimony from The Natal Mercury (24-11-'93):
On our railway, we have noticed on more than one occasion that
coloured passengers are not by any means killed with civility; and, al-
though it would be unreasonable to expect that the white employees
of the N.G.R. should treat them with the same deference as is accorded
to European passengers, still, we think it would be in no way derog-
atory to their dignity if the officials were a little more suaviter in modo
when dealing with the coloured travellers.
63
On the tram-cars the Indians fare no better. Spotlessly
dressed and well-behaved Indians have been pushed about from
one place to another to suit the fancy of European passengers.
Indeed, as a rule, the tram-car officials compel "Sammy" to go
"upstairs". Some would not allow them to take front seats.
Respect is out of the question. An Indian official was compelled
to stand on the tram-car board, although there was ample room
to accommodate him. Of course, he was addressed as "Sammy"
in the peculiarly offensive tone prevalent in Natal.
My statement has been before the public in Natal for the
last two years, and the first contradiction comes now from the
Agent-General! Why so late? As to the unwillingness of the
Indians to avail themselves of the return passage, I beg to say,
with due deference to the Agent-General, that the statement has
been repeated ad nauseam in the Press, and the official dignity now
given to it will not enable it to prove more than it actually can.
At the most, it can prove that the lot of the indentured Indian
cannot be very unhappy; and that Natal is a very good place
for such Indians to earn their livelihood. I am prepared to
admit both. That does not, moreover, disprove the existence of
the Colonial legislation restricting the freedom of the Indians in
various ways. That does not disprove the existence of the terrible
ill-feeling towards the Indians in the Colony. If the Indians
remain in Natal, it is in spite of such treatment. It proves their
marvellous forbearance, which has been so eloquently praised
by Mr. Chamberlain in his despatch in connection with, to use a
South African phrase, "the coolie arbitration".
The latest papers received from South Africa, unfortunately
for the Natal Government, lend additional weight to my state-
ment that the Indian is a cruelly persecuted being in South
Africa. In August last, there was a meeting of European artisans,
held to protest against the intended introduction of Indian arti-
sans. The speeches made would form interesting reading for the
Agent-General of Natal. The Indians were called "black ver-
min". A voice in the meeting said, "We will go to the Point
and stop them." A picnic party of European children used
Indian and Kaffir boys as targets and shot bullets into their faces,
hurting several inoffensive children. So deep-seated is the hatred
that children have begun instinctively to look down upon Indians.
Moreover, it should be remembered that the return passage story has
nothing to do with the trading class, who go to Natal on their
own account, and who feel the hardships the most. The thing is,
one fact is stronger than a hundred statements of belief. And the
pamphlet contains very little of my own. It bristles with facts,
mainly taken from European sources, to prove my assertion as
against the naked statement of Mr. Peace the Agent-General's
opinion. If Mr. Peace's statement is all that is to be said in
reply to the pamphlet, then there remains much to be done before
Natal can become a tolerably comfortable place for Indians.
As to the Indians receiving justice in the law-courts, I do not
wish to say much. I have never stated that the Indians do not
get justice in the law-courts, nor am I prepared to admit that
they get it at all times and in all courts.
Sir, I am not given to exaggerate matters. You have asked
for an official inquiry; we have done the same. And if the Natal
Government are not afraid of unpleasant revelations, let there
be such an inquiry as soon as possible. And I think I am safe
in promising that much more will be proved than is mentioned
in the pamphlet. I have given therein only those instances which
can be proved most easily. Sir, our position is very precarious,
and we will need your active support, which has been so liberally
given us till now, yet for a long time to come. The Immigration
Law Amendment Bill, which you and your contemporaries
condemned last year in such forcible language, has received the
Royal assent, as appears from the papers received this week.
To remind your readers, the Bill raises the period of indenture
from the original period of five years to an indefinite period and,
in default of re-indenture after the completion of the first five
years, makes it compulsory for the Indian to return to India, of
course, at the employer's expense, and, in case of non-compliance
with that term of his contract, renders the defaulter liable to an
annual poll-tax of £3, nearly half a year's earnings on the indenture
scale. This Bill was, at the time it was passed, unanimously pro-
nounced to be an iniquitous measure. Even the Natal papers were
doubtful whether the Bill would receive the Royal sanction. Yet the
Bill has been promulgated and it came into force on the 8th August.
Publicity is our best and perhaps the only weapon of de-
fence. "Our grievances," says one of our sympathizers, "are so
serious that they have only to be known in order to be removed."
I have now to beseech you and your contemporaries to express
your opinion with regard to this action on the part of the
Colonial Secretary. The Colonial Office, we thought, was our
safe resting-place. We may yet have to be undeceived. We
have prayed for suspension of State-aided immigration to Natal if
II-
the Bill could not be vetoed. That prayer has been supported
by the public. May we now rely upon the public to renew their
support in our fresh efforts to have that prayer granted?
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 20-10-1896
