307. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
April 23, 1930
BHAISHRI VITHALDAS JERAJANI,
There have been, from time to time, several changes in the
khadi propaganda movement and consequently in your work. In
my view, those changes were necessary in the interest of the khadi
movement and of Daridranarayana though, at the time those changes
were made, they did not immediately appeal to reason.
Our
experience so far has been that ultimately all those changes stood
the test of reason too, and were justified by the results. The change
which I am now suggesting may, I think, seem much more risky
than the earlier changes. However, I believe that the change is as
essential in the interest of khadi as it may seem dangerous to
khadi lovers on a superficial view. Anyone who has properly
understood the rationale of boycott of foreign cloth will immediate-
ly see the necessity for this change. We do not have in stock
enough khadi to meet the present demand. The demand is daily
increasing and we are not in a position to produce sufficient khadi
to meet it. Hence, if we do not somehow increase our capacity
to produce khadi, the supply of khadi would be inadequate. It can
be proved with mathematical certainty that, if that happens, the
boycott of foreign cloth will fail. The new suggestion which I,
therefore, wish to make is as under:
As quickly as feasible, that is, immediately in a day or two,
you should inform the Bombay public that no one who wishes
to buy khadi will get it for money but that it will be sold only
against hand-spun yarn. This is the only way to make it clear
to people that khadi is not a mere commodity, like foreign cloth,
which can be bought for money, but that it is a symbol of the
nation's strength and aspiration. According to the science of
khadi, as long as cotton is available there can be no scarcity of
khadi. However, this requires that the people should be imbued
with a zeal for spinning. Khadi will have no meaning if, at this
critical time and when we are about to win swaraj, we cannot
make the zeal for spinning universal. Moreover, it is not possible
for us at short notice to produce ten million pounds of khadi. Our
duty, therefore, is straight and simple. If the people have real love
305
43-20
for khadi, they ought to spin. My suggestion is not in fact as ex-
treme as it may appear on a superficial view, since the prospective
buyer of khadi is required to produce yarn not spun by himself
but by any person. Hence a resident of Bombay may procure
hand-spun yarn in any way he chooses. He may spin it himself
or get it spun by members of his family or his poor neighbours
or by the residents of any village in India. The Bombay man will
have to take some trouble, of course. If he does not take even
that much of trouble and has in consequence to go without khadi,
it would be best for himself, for others and for the cause of khadi
that he should go without it. You may think and decide for
yourself what the quality of the yarn should be and what articles
can still be sold for cash. I hope that the residents of Bombay,
who have been making a great contribution to the present struggle,
will understand this simple suggestion and take the little trouble
they are being asked to, for obtaining the khadi they require.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9772
