64. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
DURBAN,
November 13, 1897
THE EDITOR
The Natal Mercury
SIR,
It appears that some people are bent upon keeping up
the ill feeling against the Indian community in Natal, and, un-
fortunately, the newspaper writers have allowed themselves to
be duped. Some weeks ago, a correspondent of yours, evidently
an irresponsible person, stated that the Indians who were tried
in Dundee under the Immigration Act were new arrivals from
India, and had surreptitiously entered the Colony. Then appeared
the correspondence between the Government and the Demonstra-
tion Committee on the subject, leading the public to believe that
there was an attempt on a large scale to evade the Immigration
Act. You based a leader on these and other similar statements
that appeared in the papers, accepting them as correct, and
further informing the public that these men had secured certifi-
cates of domicile at Durban. A telegram was flashed from De-
lagoa Bay telling the public that 1,000 free Indians had landed
at Delagoa Bay, and that they were on their way to Natal. A
telegram appears in today's issue of the Mercury to the effect
that the Government have issued instructions to the police to
keep a look-out for Asiatics from the direction of Delagoa Bay.
This is all dramatic, and would be highly amusing if it were not
calculated to inflame the passion of the European community.
The "Man in the Moon" puts the finishing touch to all this
by giving a paragraph in his weekly columns. His is the un-
kindest cut of all, especially because his paragraphs are not
only eagerly devoured by the public but they carry weight. So
far as I know, this is the second time that he has lost his power
of distinguishing between fact and fiction with respect to the
Indian question. If it were allowed to the Indians to use strong
language on sufficient provocation, there is more than enough of
that in the "Man's" paragraph on the subject in question in
today's columns to justify the use of such language. But it can-
not be. I must simply content myself with placing the facts, as
I know them at first-hand, before the public.
I had the privilege, with two brother lawyers, of defending
the Dundee Indians, and I deny most emphatically that any of
the Indians charged were new arrivals from India. Proofs to
that effect are still in possession of the Immigration Officer at
Dundee. It is possible to establish conclusively that all those
Indians came to South Africa, or rather to Natal, before the
passing of the Immigration Act. Their licences, other docu-
ments and records in the steamship offices, cannot lie. As soon as
the correspondence between the Government and the Demonstra-
tion Committee appeared in the papers, I offered to bring most
of the men before a competent Court and to prove theirs
innocence; that is to say, to prove that they were all formerly
domiciled in Natal, and that, therefore, they had a perfect right
to enter the Colony. One of the men is at present in Durban,
and he can be brought before the Magistrate at any time the Gov-
ernment likes.
It is not true to say that these men got their certificates at
Durban. Some of them, after their discharge on technical
grounds, applied to the Magistrate at Dundee for certificates of
domicile. The application was refused. The papers were sent to
me, and I went to the Government for the certificates, but failed.
Most of the men have now gone to the Transvaal without such
certificates. It is true that three Dundee men got their certifi-
cates at Durban. Proofs on which the certificates were granted
consisted of affidavits which are filed on record. But there is a
world of difference between Dundee men getting certificates at
Durban, and those who get them contrary to the provisions of
the law. A man from Umzimkulu, and men from other districts
outside Durban, got such certificates at Durban. The question
was fully argued before Mr. Waiter before such certificates were
ordered to be issued.
There is absolutely no foundation for the fear that the
Indians who land at Delagoa Bay enter the Colony in defiance of
the law. I will not take it upon myself to say that not one new
arrival has attempted to cross the border at Charlestown, but,
so far as I know, not one has yet successfully escaped the eagle
eye of Sergt. Allan, at Charlestown. Before the Act came into
operation, and at the time the Demonstration Committee came
into being, it was publicly stated, on behalf of the Indian commun-
ity, that most of the Indians who landed at Durban from
month to month were passengers for the Transvaal. It was
particularly stated—and the statement remains to this day
without contradiction—that out of the 600 passengers on board
the Courland and Naderi, less than 100 were new arrivals for
Natal. The position is not changed now, and I venture to say
that, out of the 1,000 passengers alleged to have landed at Dela-
goa Bay, most of them are passengers for the Transvaal. It is
that country which has the capacity to absorb a large number of
new-corners of various nationalities, and so long as the Trans-
vaal continues to absorb Indians, and the Government is good
enough to let them come, you will find Indians coming to
Delagoa Bay in large numbers. I do not say that none of them
want to come to Natal. Some of them have inquired about the
conditions on which they could come, and, on being told that
they could not satisfy them, have remained in the Transvaal.
They are certainly not angels, and a few may try to evade the
Act, and may enter the Colony if there is no supervision.
My point is that there is no wholesale attempt to defy the
law. There is no organization, no advice to set the law at
defiance and come by the back door, such as the "Man in
the Moon" conjures up in his fertile imagination. With due
respect, his appeal to the Demonstration Committee, advice to the
officers and insinuations are painful in the extreme, because
unnecessary, and not warranted by facts. One would have
thought that he, of all men, holding a very responsible position,
would take the greatest care before giving currency to fiction as
if it were fact. Mischief once started may not be averted.
The Indian shipowners in Durban, on the Act coming into
operation, received a letter requesting them to co-operate with
the Government in enforcing it, and I happen to know that they
wrote in reply saying while they disapproved of the Act they
would loyally abide by it and aid the Government, so far as it
lay in their power, as long as the Act remained on the statute-
book. And I am not aware that any responsible Indian has
departed from the attitude taken up by the shipowners in
question. Indeed, whenever occasion has arisen, whether in or
out of the Congress Hall, the leaders of the Indian community
have endeavoured to impress upon the Indians the necessity
of not evading the Act. How could it be otherwise? If the Act
is to be ever removed, it can only be by persuasion and by the
Indian community showing a clean record. The policy of eva-
sion is on the face of it suicidal, and the past record of the Indian
community is not, I venture to submit, such as to justify the belief
that the community is likely to commit a suicidal act. After this,
is it necessary to assure the "Man in the Moon" that the
Indians have no wish to play with the Colony, if only because
they cannot afford to do it?
Let there, however, be a full public inquiry, and if an organiza-
tion to defy the law is proved to exist, smash it by all means.
But, on the other hand, if there be no such organization or
"wholesale invasion", let it be publicly acknowledged, so that
causes of friction may be removed. The Government can do it,
but you also can do likewise. Newspapers before this have sent
special correspondents to make inquiries into public matters,
and if you really believe that the Indians, as a community, are
attempting to evade the Act, you will render a public service,
and lay the Indian community under deep obligation, by
instituting a preliminary inquiry, with a view to enable the
Government to undertake a public inquiry, or to force their hands
if they are unwilling to make any inquiry at all. At any rate
the Indians court such an inquiry.
As the matter is very important, I venture to ask your contem-
poraries to copy this letter.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 15-11-1897
