378. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
AGRA,
September 17, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
If you get some time from your miscellaneous administrative
work, you or Panditji or Narandas should go to Gangabehn's help.
Without someone to help her, she cannot manage the women who
are misbehaving. It has been proved that . . . behn steals. I
have always felt that . . .2 had this defect. Everyone knows what
trouble . . .3 gives. . . 4 is a careless, thoughtless and bad-
mannered girl.
I think one of you should take [A] into confidence and tell
him about [B]. If her bad nature cannot be reformed, [A] should
take her out of the Udyoga Mandir and reform her with love. He
ought not to be angry with her and abandon her. In the Udyoga
Mandir, however, she will not improve. Those who live in the
Mandir ought to have certain virtues. If they lack them, they
are likely to grow worse instead of improving there, for they will
abuse the freedom which prevails in the Udyoga Mandir and, in
the absence of the restrictions which exist in the outside world, they
would slacken even those restraints which they used to exercise be-
fore joining the Mandir. It is also likely that [A] does not see the
defects of [B] which we see. I have known few husbands who
can see the shortcomings of their wives. If every husband can
do this, conjugal life would probably be impossible. I would not,
therefore, blame [A] if he cannot see [B's] defects. But it is clear to
me as daylight that, if that is so, both of them should leave the
Udyoga Mandir, for so long as he does not see her defects she will
have a powerful shield in him. It is but natural that he should be
partial to her so long as he does not see her defects. And so long
as this goes on, [B's] interests will suffer.
In admitting married women, we do assume that we shall
get the fullest co-operation from the husband and that, when
we confess our helplessness in regard to the wife, both will leave
the Mandir. What applies to [B] and [A] also applies to [C] and
[D].
If Lakshmi does not behave properly, Dudabhai should again
take her away. This should be done every time it is necessary; in
course of time, then, if it is our and her good fortune, she will
learn to behave better.
I have written all this for consideration by you. Carry out as
much from it as is practicable.
How is Krishnamaiyadevi behaving?
It was a narrow escape for Fulchand. But we should not al-
ways trust to similar good fortune. It is desirable to keep ready
facilities of ropes, etc., near the place where children go for
swimming. In any case, we should caution them from time to
time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5438; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 130-
