116. LETTER TO B. W. TUCKER
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 12, 1928
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I like the manner in which you are combating my views. I
discovered the difference between us even in Orissa. For me, there
is no difference between the individual and the social position.
At the same time there is ample room for the compromise of the
nature suggested by you, for the simple reason that I ever com-
promise my own ideals even in individual conduct not because
I wish to but because the compromise was inevitable. And so in
social and political matters I have never exacted complete ful-
filment of the ideal in which I have believed. But there are always
times when one has to say thus far and no further, and, each time
the dividing line has to be determined on merits. Generally speak-
ing where the sum total of a movement has been evil, I have held
non-co-operation to be the only remedy and where the sum total
has been for the good of humanity, I have held co-operation on
the basis of compromise to be the most desirable thing. If I seem
to be holding myself aloof from some of the political movements
just now, it is because I believe their tendency to be not for the
promotion of swaraj but rather its retarding. It may be that I have
erred in my judgment. If so, it is but human and I have never
claimed to be infallible. You will see this point somewhat deve-
loped in a recent autobiographical chapter dealing with my
participation in the late War. Tell me now if I have answered your
question, even if I have not solved the puzzle.
Andrews is here and will be for a few days longer. How nice it
would be if you could come and pass a few days of quiet with me so
that we could discuss the important problems you have been raising
in your letters. This is however not to say that you may not discuss
them through correspondence. Please do, so long as it is necessary.
Yours sincerely,
B. W. TUCKER
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 13104
1 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. IV, Ch. XXXVIII.
