56. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 25, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. I don't know whether I shall be able to
describe to you all that you want to know.
I didn't know that Dhurandhar had become the King's guest.
I very much enjoyed seeing the paintings in Rome, but what
opinion can I give after a visit of two hours? What is my com-
petence to judge? And what is my experience in these matters?
I liked some of the pictures very much indeed. If I could spend
two or three months there, I would go and see the paintings and
sculptures every day and study them attentively. I saw the
sculpture of Jesus on the cross. I have already written and told
you that it was this that attracted me most.
I didn't feel, however, that the art of that country excelled
that of India. The two have developed along different lines.
Indian art is entirely a product of the imagination. European
art is imitation of Nature. Probably this makes Western art
easier to understand. But, maybe, after we have understood it,
it keeps us glued to the earth, whereas the more we understand
Indian art the more it lifts us above the earth. I have stated
these views simply because I must say something to you. I put
no great value on them. It is likely that my unconscious par-
tiality for India makes me say this, or my ignorance makes me
ride the horse of fancy. But anyone who rides such a horse is
sure to fall ultimately.
Even so, if you can learn anything from these views you may.
If you have risen beyond such things, leave them aside. Parents
can freely tell their children, who know less than they, stories
from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in the manner they know
best; I am in a similar position in this matter.
You will be able to see from this that I do take interest in art.
But I have renounced, have had to renounce, many such interests.
I have relished to my heart's content the joy which everything
connected with the search for truth gives me, and I would be ready
still to relish it in more of such things. Tasks come unsought to a
votary of truth. That is why by nature he is equipped to follow
the teaching of the third chapter [of the Gita]. I believe I had
been practising karmayoga even before I had read that chapter.
But I am straying, I am afraid, from the path.
You have done well in putting me questions about the
Ashram. Work is given the chief place in the Ashram life, be-
cause it is man's duty to do body labour. Anyone who shirks
it, eats stolen food. Moreover, the work which we do in the
Ashram is as much for service as it is for one's own benefit. We
have put the spinning-wheel in the centre of our activities, be-
cause for the millions in the country spinning is the only work
we can think of as a universal supplementary occupation to agri-
culture. It subserves moral and economic ends alike.
The Ashram exists not only for the service of the country
but, through it, for the service of the world and to help us to
attain moksha, to see God, through such service.
Not everyone can join the Ashram. It is not an infirmary,
not an orphanage. It is meant for men and women who have dedi-
cated themselves to service, to the realization of a spiritual goal.
Hence it is not meant for people who cannot do body labour.
However, we may admit persons who are filled with the spirit of
service but who are disabled in body. Of course we can admit
only a small number of such persons. And we certainly cannot
ask those who joined the Ashram as regular members but who
may have become disabled afterwards, to leave the Ashram.
Outwardly, many of our actions in the Ashram may seem incon-
sistent but they will cease to appear so when examined more deeply.
If you do not understand any point in this, you may ask me again.
You may also express any other doubts which you may feel.
It was only rarely that I posed for a photograph while in
England. I believe I have not violated my vow in doing that.
It is certainly not my wish, nor is it desirable, that everyone
who comes close to me should be like me in every respect. That
would mean mechanical imitation. If anybody wishes to take
from me what may seem good to him, it will help him only if he
takes what he can assimilate. In any case, who can prevail upon
Sardar to stop taking tea? And may it not be that tea serves as
medicine to him? Some persons who are close to me, who are
my co-workers, are even meat-eaters! What do you say to that?
Only those with whom tea does not agree or who refrain from
it because they have considered how it is grown will never take
it. Though Ba lives with me, she does take tea. She takes coffee
too. I would even offer them lovingly to her. Why? I know,
of course, that your question was good-humoured joking, but some
false ideas and a degree of intolerance prevail among us in such
matters and it is necessary to get rid of them. I don't know if
you have this weakness, but it is desirable that you should know my
views on this subject. There is much else in my other letters of this
week; if you get an opportunity, read them and ponder over them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10269. Also C.W. 6717. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
