475. LETTER TO SURESH CHANDRA BANERJEE
February 19, 1933
MY DEAR SURESH,
I have been thinking of you almost every day, and not having
heard from you for a long time, in my despair I dictated a mes-
sage, quite selfish, to you, in my letter to Satisbaboo, and
immediately I had finished that letter, Mahadev put your letter
of 15th instant in my hands. You can better imagine my joy
than I can describe it.
I see you have been near death's door again. It is better
perhaps to realize that we are always near death's door, the
healthy-looking people no less than the ill-looking. I know many
bed-ridden people surviving the loss of dear ones who had looked
pictures of health and who they had thought were bound to
survive them.
Pray, do not become impatient. Understand thoroughly the
distinction I have drawn between caste and varnashrama. Caste
is a touch-me-not institution. If untouchability goes, you will
find that touch-me-not-ism will go. According to my meaning of
it varnashrama has not the slightest tinge of touch-me-not-ism.
It is a spiritual law just as valid as any physical law, whether we
recognize its existence or whether we do not. He who recognizes
the existence of this law profits by his knowledge, even as a scien-
tist, knowing the properties of a drop of water and the laws which
are responsible for those properties, makes railway trains to move
at a speed our ancestors had never thought of. So also if we re-
cognize the law of varnashrama and give effect to it, we can do
away with many ills of life. I can understand Dr. Ambedkar in
his rage against caste Hindus refusing to see the wood for the
trees, but you have no excuse whatsoever for not understanding
the very clear distinction I have pointed out. In any case I am
convinced that to precipitate a fight on varnashrama today is to
do a great disservice to the cause of the removal of untoucha-
bility. I must not worry you any more.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SURESH CHANDRA BANERJEE
88-G CORPORATION STREET
CALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S.N. 20298
