84. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
June 29, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
With reference to my letter of yesterday regarding the flogging
of certain Mulshi Peta prisoners, I beg to thank you and the Ins-
pector-General for giving me full information about the cause
of the punishment.
You will recall that, when some months ago similar punish-
ment was awarded to some other Mulshi Peta prisoners, I re-
quested the Government to let me interview all such prisoners
with a view to inducing them to conform to jail discipline. The
Government were good enough to thank me for the offer, but
declined to accept it. I did not press my request further, if only
for the reason that I had hoped that occasion would not again
arise for flogging such prisoners. But the hope has not been
fulfilled and flogging has been resorted to more than once since
the one referred to by me.
I believe that, if I could see the prisoners, I could induce
them to look at their imprisonment in the proper light and not
to shirk work or resort to insubordination, as they are said to
have done. To enable me to do so from time to time, I request
that I may be accommodated with them. If this cannot be done,
I request permission to see the prisoners as often as the occasion
may require.
I am aware that as a prisoner I may not ask or receive such
permission, but I respectfully ask it as a human being to serve a
humane purpose. The Government, I am sure, cannot wish to see
the punishment of flogging inflicted if it can be at all avoided on
any prisoner, much less on one who rightly or wrongly regards
himself as imprisoned for conscience' sake. They will appreciate
my position when I state that these floggings are most distres-
sing to me, specially as I believe that they can be avoided if I am
permitted to live with the prisoners.
I venture to trust that the Government will reciprocate the
spirit of my letter and not put me, by rejecting my offer of ser-
vice, in the most awkward position of being compelled to take
action, which may, without any such wish on my part, prove em-
barrassing to them. It is not my purpose whilst undergoing
imprisonment to embarrass the Government by any conduct that
I can possibly avoid.
In view of the fact that some of the prisoners are hunger-
striking in connection with the matter, I request as early a reply
as possible.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
No. 827
From a photostat: S.N. 8030; also Young India, 6-3-1924
