283. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
POST ANDHERI,
April 5, 1924
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I have read your pathetic letter to Devdas.
I have already sent my assurance to Mahomed Ali that I
am going to issue no statement till I have met him. You will see
how I have met the growing demand for some statement from
me. I am myself eager to make my views known on the Hindu-
Moslem question, and I am now held back only by Mahomed Ali's
desire for postponement, as also Pandit Malaviyaji's, with whom I
had a fairly long chat yesterday on this very question. But you do
not want me to keep silent about the Tibbia College incident, for
instance. I want to deal with that as also the charge against
Mahomed Ali. I have not got his reply to Swami Shraddhanand.
Though I am trying to overtake the vernacular Press, it is very
difficult to do the thing single-handed. If you could send me all
the choice cuttings from both Hindu and Moslem newspapers, I
would like to deal with them with all the firmness I can com-
mand. So much for the general question.
Not a day passes when I do not think of the Brothers and
their sorrows. The Khilafat is dear to every Mussulman, but the
Ali Brothers have made its prestige and honour their life-work.
I can therefore understand how the decision of the Turkish As-
sembly must have shaken them. Amina's death and Shaukat Ali's
serious illness filled the cup of sorrows. How I wish I was by your
side to nurse Shaukat Ali back to his former health and vigour!
It is so difficult to think of him lying prostrate on a sick-bed. May
God soon restore him to health! I wish I could go to Bombay to
meet him when you arrive. But I must not make the attempt.
One such journey may mean nothing, but you know my method.
If I break the self-imposed restriction once, I shall have to do it
many a time, and I should be nowhere. Even in this retreat I have
no rest. Crowds of visitors would not leave me alone, and from
today I am commencing some hours' silence practically every day
so that I might have some quiet and I might also be able to over-
take the correspondence which is daily growing in volume. I have
already added Wednesday as a day of silence to Monday so that I
may be able to cope with the editing of Young India and Navajivan.
I should not dream of Shaukat Ali coming to Juhu in his
present state of health. You must therefore take him to Matheran,
and when you can spare a day yourself, I certainly want to see
you. Mahomed Ali will bring me all the messages from Shaukat
Ali and that would be quite sufficient to go on with. As far as I
am concerned, there is not much really that I now want to know
except the views of yourself and the Brothers and of a few others
whose opinions I value. My mind is practically made up, and I
am becoming impatient to deliver my soul.
My love to you, the Brothers and all other friends, and please
remember me to Begum Saheba.
Yours sincerely,
DR. M. A. ANSARI
1, DARYAGANJ
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 8674
XXIII-24
