391. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Saturday
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,
I have your letter. It is possible that Vallabhbhai is at fault in
his dealings with the workers. But you cannot say for that reason
there is authoritarianism in Gujarat. I can, however, understand your
anger arising from anguish. I hear praise for Vallabhbhai in news
wherever I get it from. Sitting here I feel the same way about his
work. Man is full of faults. Vallabhbhai may have made mistakes. We
must try and understand them. And our dharma consists in drawing
his attention if we can, to these mistakes so that he may rectify his
faults. If he does not mend himself, we should not get angry but
remain patient. So much for your general criticism.
Now about the workers. Did you or Shankerlal meet Vallabhbhai
in person? If so, did you speak your mind freely to him? You should
not fight shy of being snubbed. We should quarrel with Vallabhbhai
if justice has to be got done. Friendship consists in that and so does
training for public life. In public institutions, those whom we
consider our opponents are sometimes really that, but often they are
friends. We should regard both kinds as equals and seek justice from
them. In the immediate present, I do not expect much from the the
owners. Our views are so divergent that they cannot be easily
reconciled. We should be content to take from them as much as we
can or fight them. What I like best is that the workers should build
their own chawls. But is that possible at present? However, I feel that
even if a small number of workers come forward to do so, we should
262
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
encourage it. If you are hesitant to write to Vallabhbhai about what
you should get from him, let me know and I shall do so readily. So
far I have not written to him. If you can manage that on your own,
there will be no need for me to write. Both of you should reflect on
this and let me know. I shall then do what I feel is proper.
[I quote] the above so that you can act upon what you believe
in from among the things you read. Ponder over it and cool down.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 32793
