333. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
April 3( 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your two letters. I have been watching the progress
of the Harijan Sevak. Of course there is a steady improvement.
There has to be a choice made, even of my writings; not all
that I write for the English Harijan can be fit for reproduction in
the Hindi edition, and I quite agree with you that what is repro-
duced should have the Hindi flavour about it; and not be a mere
mechanical translation. I will bear your remarks in mind and
will not send translations from here. Of course I want Viyogi
Hari to do that. It was only because he was just now unable to
cope with it that I began to translate here instead of sending
the articles to Kashinath and Ramdas Goud. I quite agree with
you that there should be some stories from Sanskrit or other
sources, and poems too, if they are original and have first-class
merit. I shall be entirely satisfied if you will look through the
Harijan Sevak week to week as you have been doing recently.
I understand now what to do about the transfer for funds
to you. Besides the money lying at the Press, I have received
an anonymous donation of Rs. 500 today to be used for the cause
at my discretion. I am having that too transferred to the Board
to be used subject to the donor's condition.
I am glad you have definitely decided to have the operation
performed. I would be still gladder when you give me the de-
finite date.
I understand what you say about the controversy in Bengal.
You ask me to send a copy of the Harijan to the Bengal Sec-
retariat for His Excellency the Governor. I have a great deal of
hesitation in doing so, for I do not know him personally. If
therefore I send a copy to one, I should send to all the Secre-
tariats, but that is not what you want me to do, and that is
not what is necessary either, as it appears to me. I think I
told you that Lord Reading and also Lady Reading used specially
to subscribe to Young India. These big functionaries do not hesi-
tate to express their wants, and it would look officious to supply
them in anticipation. But you know the Governor of Bengal,
and after all, the Harijan is being published under the aegis of
the Central Board. It would be therefore quite proper for you
to send a paper in your capacity as President to any of your big
acquaintances.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20814
