525. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[March 26, 1945]
CHI. MUNNALAL,
Here is for your guidance. There must be rules, and they
must be obeyed. Manage somehow during these five days.
Then after my return we shall see. I am in favour of two
kitchens. If I were in your place, I would attend to every-
thing you mention and do it well. I have done that. But that
does not mean that, your doing what I would have done
will necessarily bear fruit. There is no such rule. You may
act as you like, but on one condition, namely, that you must
be absolutely sure that you are following truth and ahimsa.
If the persons you have named do not observe the rules, you
should talk to them one by one and find out why. If a
person admits the fact, you may make an exception in his
favour, and if you find that the exceptions are so many that
they defeat the rule you should revise the rule. I understand
from what you write that the exceptions do defeat the rule. This
is indeed a hotel. But it is more than that. A hotel is a
place where people pay for boarding and lodging. They order
and get whatever they want, and feel no embarrassment. It should
be so here also. Here, too, we must have some rules, as every
hotel has. For instance, we would serve no non-vegetarian food
or cater to people's taste in regard to spices. Let Shakaribehn
start a separate kitchen. Anybody else who wishes may also do
that. Meet every permanent resident and know from him or her
their wishes, then frame rules and get them passed in the pre-
sence of all and see that everyone observes the rule which he
himself has accepted. I knew about Kamle today by chance.
He is suffering from dysentery. I have asked him today to go
immediately. He should have gone earlier. It was only from
your note that I came to know that Gurbuxani and Vimalabehn
have made separate arrangements for their meals. You ought to
have complete information as to which persons do that and why.
Instead, you permit anarchy to reign. Is it right? I think I
have given all the guidance you need.
Now think over Sushilabehn's advice. A plate, a cup for
water, two bowls and one spoon. The plate, the cup and the
bowls should be nickel-plated. About the spoon I am not con-
vinced. Two bowls may be all right, though I am not sure.
Serving ghee with the vegetable will not do. Perhaps it will not
do even to put it on the chapatis. If the vegetable is served in
a bowl, ghee may be added to it. But I have seen only one
bowl in many places.
I am giving no ruling in this matter. Personally, I would
provide only one bowl. But I give no ruling.
You had told me that you would take out from your note-
book and give me the portions regarding myself. Do that before
my departure.
The decision to talk to every permanent resident in private,
to frame rules and discuss them in the presence of all is for im-
mediate implementation. About the separate kitchen it should be
postponed till my return. Show me the rules. Those who wish
to have separate arrangements from today may be permitted to
have them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5861. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
