505. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
February 23, 1933
MY DEAREST SON,
Son you have become of your own choice. I have accepted
the responsible position. And son you shall remain to the end of
time. The tie between you and me is much thicker and tougher
than blood. It is the burning love of Truth at any cost. Therefore
whatever you may do will not disappoint me. But I was sad.
I am not thinking of superiority of celibacy over marriage.
I am thinking of what you had intended, almost pledged your-
self to be. But I know that you had to be true to yourself and
appear as you were.
I showed your letter to Jamnalalji and he too felt the same
as I did.
But whilst I was trying to make time to write to you, in
came Ala, tears dropping from her eyes. She put into my hands
your letter and said, "How can I bear this? It was agreed bet-
ween us that we were both to remain single, or if we could
not, we were to marry each other." I consoled her and advised
her to send you her blessings. I do not know what she has done
or written. You will tell me what understanding there was bet-
ween you and her.
But taking it for granted that your word was never given to
Ala as she imagines it was, you and Mary have my blessings.
I have met her. I have a vivid recollection that the innocence of
her face stamped itself upon my mind. I know that your joint life
will be one of complete dedication to service. But if there is the
slightest possibility of a breach (moral) of word given to Ala, you
must both-you and Mary-be prepared to bear what will be the
heaviest cross and sacrifice your cherished hope on the altar of
Truth which is God. If there is a trace of suspicion of breach,
you certainly and Mary and Ala-the latter two if they have
the same living faith in Truth as I have credited you with-have
to live single lives in spite of yourselves. Your love of Truth
will transmute your desire for exclusive marriage into the universal
marriage with Truth. For this divine marriage we men and women
are all women and Truth is the only Lord, Master and Husband.
I need say no more. My letter is not satisfactory because it
is written in ignorance of facts. But it need not be unsatisfactory
as being between father and son. You can fill in the gaps. Of
this you have my assurance that whatever you do, I am certain,
will have been done out of obedience to Truth as it might reveal
itself to you. More than that no man can do.
May God guide you and Mary.
With my deep love to you and Mary,
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
This was written just after the morning prayer-4.30 a.m.
23-2-33.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20351
