104. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 22/26, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet. I examined the account sent by you. I
think it is all right. Only, it does not include the information
about the total number of hours given to each type of work. Do
you wish to keep a record of that? The slips received from the
inmates will of course contain the information. If you intend
to paste them in a book, we shall be able to get any informa-
tion we want and whenever we want it. If only one person
enters all the information, I think he will take at least one hour.
Though such an arrangement would make the work very easy,
I do think that, if one person dictated and another took down, that
would save time, even taking into account the time spent by both.
But I can see even from the record of three days that the time
spent in this work will not be wasted. If anybody has shown
less than nine hours in his slip, it would be better if he also
explains in it the reason. A slip will be a mine of information for
us. Let this suffice for the present.
This is what I feel about the Giri family: This responsibility
has come to us unsought. Dalbahadurgiri's sacrifice was very
great. When he died, he asked Krishnamaiyadevi to go and live
in the Ashram; so great was the trust that he put in us. Nobody
else would have supported her. The Congress there did nothing,
or could do nothing. If I had begged from friends on her be-
half, I would have got enough help. But I did not think it
necessary. The affairs of the Ashram are planned on the assump-
tion that every inmate who works for nine hours a day would earn
his food and clothes. If, therefore, Krishnamaiyadevi lived in the
Ashram, I calculated that it would not be necessary to beg for
help specially on her account. We regard it as our duty to support
her only so long as she lives in the Ashram. After all these years,
she expressed a desire to leave. Krishnamaiyadevi, Mahavir, and
Dharmakumar, all of them kept bad health. Maitri, too, was
not very strong either. Krishnamaiyadevi, therefore, had suffi-
cient reason for wishing to leave. In deciding whether or not we
should pay the expenses of the family, it would be irrelevant and
unfair to think of its many shortcomings. Persons who have no-
gg
thing in them besides such shortcomings would not live in the
Ashram or would not be able to do so even if they wished. We may
give credit to the Ashram for tolerance for the fact that all those
who lived in it could do so, but it was no small degree of endu-
rance on their part too. You will come across many who would
prefer to starve rather than endure the severity of the Ashram
life. But this family bore the difference of language, of the general
mode of life and the absence of non-vegetarian food and endured
living in what was to them a foreign land. I think we ought not
to forget all this. That means that she was justified in leaving the
Ashram. If so, we should pay them their expenses. In Darjeeling,
if they maintain a separate establishment the expenditure would
easily come to Rs. 15 per head. Since they live with her uncle,
most probably the latter is saving something from the money given
to them. If, however, she emphatically states that that is not so,
I would certainly believe her. He must be incurring some expen-
diture because of them. I had asked her for accounts and for a
description of their daily routine. As for the accounts, she said
that since they were living with her uncle she simply paid him
the amount at the rate of Rs. 15 per head. And it is understand-
able that, if they live with the uncle, they cannot keep a separate
account of their expenses. Probably she keeps something for miscel-
laneous expenses, but I did not ask her about that. I had as-
sumed that you received detailed letters from her. The last
letter which I got from her a few days ago was after an interval
of 20 to 25 days and that, too, was only for complaining that she
had not received the money. I had asked her to send me a
description of their daily routine, but so far I have not received
it. Whether or not she keeps such a diary and sends it to me, just
now we must pay the money. Their living in Darjeeling will also
be a test for them. I don't think they will want to stay there for
more than two or three months. I have not fixed any limit in
my mind. Personally, I desire that they should stay as long as
they wish. I did ask her whether they would like to settle down in
Darjeeling permanently. Mahavir was emphatic in his reply:
"We belong to the Ashram and wish to live there. We have not
come here with the intention of taking up an occupation. If you
want us to go back, we would do so immediately. We wish to
stay on here for some time longer only because we have come
here after many years and because here our health has improved
a little. I am however fully conscious of my responsibility. We
will not do anything to tar the good name of the Ashram." This
was the substance of his reply. In future, if I get similar letters
from him I will remember to send them to you. Maitri's reply in
regard to the question of her marriage was equally emphatic. "How
can you ask me such a question just now? How can I think of
marriage at a time like this? I have not the least desire to get
married now, and, even when I wish later to get married, you
will have to fix the marriage." Finally, so long as we bear the ex-
penditure of Rs. 100 for Radha, we must bear this expenditure of
Rs. 90 too. We cannot here take into account the fact that
Radha is the daughter of Maganlal, who was the very soul of the
Ashram. If we pay attention to such considerations, we would
sink deep into the well of discrimination between person and per-
son. If at all we take that fact into account, it should be to expect
Radha to bear more than others do. But I don't have the cou-
rage yet to ask Radha or Santok to do so. I believe that mother
and daughter are doing what seems right to them and console
my mind with that thought. If you see any error in this whole rea-
soning, please do point it out to me. I have explained the matter
at such length in order that my attitude may be clear to
you.
Let me also say here what I think about Dudhibehn and
Nimu. Dudhibehn probably runs her own kitchen. If so, she
must be spending all the money she gets. Valji's mode of life is
extremely simple. Dudhibehn has lived in such atmosphere that
she would not ask for any help even when she is ill. I would
not, therefore, like to tell her anything. Nimu's case, I admit, is
in a different category, and you can even raise the matter with
her. If you wish, I also may write to her. However, if I write
from here that may give her pain. Ramdas makes repeated and
sincere resolutions to live in a simple style. But he grew up in
South Africa and always spent freely. After all, how simple can
he make his life? Moreover, Nimu is but a child and she must
also have spent freely when she lived under the parental roof. I
am certain, therefore, that she makes the Ashram pay for some
unnecessary expenses. Mahadev tells me that she takes her meals
in the common kitchen. That only means that she eats food worth
six or seven rupees-she probably pays for milk and curds from
the sixty rupees which she gets. The food for the two children can-
not be supplied from the kitchen. The expenditure for their milk
and curds is probably met from the sum of sixty rupees which is
paid to her. If so, that sum may not be so shockingly large as I
feel it is. However, that can be judged only by a person who
knows how she spends the sum. You should get the information
from her.
I left the letter incomplete with the last paragraph and busied
myself with the meal. Meanwhile I got another letter from you, in
which you have replied to my question regarding the hours of
work for each type of work. Your explanation helps me to
understand many things clearly. The word "Experiments" at the
top probably refers to Keshu's experiments. I observe that the
largest number of hours is for the spinning yajna, and that seems
very fitting. The fact shows that when a whole group of people
do work, the maximum possible time will be devoted to it and yet
it will not be a hardship to anyone. If, therefore, all people live
in a spirit of yajna, the problems of life would disappear. I knew
intuitively this value of public yajna, but I had never tested my
belief with figures.
Records are like the sixth finger. As things are, without that
sixth finger everything would come to a standstill. But where every-
body observes truth in thought, word and deed, there would be
no necessity at all for a department of records, or, if, there was
such a department, it would require a minimum of time.
In column 14, the entry is "ill" and in column 20 it is
"nursing". What does "ill" mean? With whom does Sharda live
now? That is, who is chiefly responsible for her support?
It is certainly a fine thing that the spinning for yajna is done
in the dehla and it would be very good if the practice is kept up.
I have no doubt that people will form many useful habits through
this practice. I am certainly glad that you are able to give two
hours to this work, and I can also understand very well that it must
be a time of rest for you. In the same way that prayer should
give rest to a person, such yajna also should. Only those who feel
it to be a burden will try to escape it or do it perfunctorily. I had
only one consideration in mind in suggesting to you to limit your
yajna work to only one hour. I thought that you had to do your
other work under excessive pressure and might also not be getting
enough time for sleep. If so, you should not look upon the yajna
work as rest. But since you enjoy perfect peace and don't feel the
work to be a burden in any way, I have nothing to say about
the matter.
Bhau had suggested that, as they do in Wardha, at Sabar-
mati too we should use only the takli for spinning for yajna. I had
replied to him that I would write to you, but I forgot in my last
letter. I am indifferent in this matter. I have not weighed the
pros and cons of the suggestion. But you may listen to what
Bhau has to say and do what seems best to you.
My arm is not bad, nor can I say that there is distinct im-
provement. I admitted defeat and started taking milk from today.
I have written a detailed letter to Mirabehn about this, which
she will get before you get this. It will of course be shown to you,
and so I don't repeat everything here. I remained on saltless diet
for eleven days. I cannot say positively that the result was good,
as is clear enough from the fact that I was forced to start taking
milk. But I cannot say, either, that the absence of salt was res-
ponsible for the ill effects which followed. I can guess many other
causes. But I cannot make here, ought not to make, any experi-
ment which has the slightest risk in it. If I try to take any such
step, I would put the officials too in a difficult position. They
would not desire to put any restraint on me in such a matter.
Hence, if any ill consequence followed, they would be put in a
difficult situation. That is why I started taking milk from to-
day, and have decided to eat bread from tomorrow. That means
the experiment of saltless diet is over. But such diet has one effect,
and, if anybody wishes to try it, the experiment is certainly worth
making. I can state it as proved beyond doubt in my case that
vegetables dressed without salt have a laxative effect. Saltless diet
may, therefore, prove beneficial to anybody who suffers from consti-
pation. When we were in South Africa, such diet was a rule.
There should be no doubt, moreover, that saltless diet for a period
is very useful for acquiring self-control. It is certain that Parner-
kar's aim has not been fulfilled. Has he calmed down a little
now?
Did you post the letter to Savitribehn which I had sent to
you?
Mahadev had in fact opposed the suggestion that a Muslim
bhajan should be recited on a fixed day. And now I have a letter
from Chhaganlal, too, opposing it. Their argument is that Mus-
lim bhajans are included in the Bhajanavali. It should be enough
if they are recited occasionally. To fix one bhajan to be recited
on a fixed day does not seem right. I appreciate the argument.
But I still feel in the depth of my heart that there is much force
in the suggestion to fix one day for a Muslim bhajan which
should be the same every week. There is a great difference between
1 Vide pp. 83-.
our singing such a bhajan occasionally when we feel inclined to
do so and fixing a certain day for the purpose. Why do we recite
certain verses every day? For that very reason it seems to me that
the feeling that one day in the week at least we establish a bond
of unity with Muslims is not altogether meaningless. Now do what
seems best to all of you there. I have put before you my real
conviction in this matter, but I don't press you to accept my
suggestion. And if you decide to select a bhajan, "Hai bahare bagh" 1 is
certainly the best, for not only was it dear to Maganlal but we have
been singing it from our days in South Africa. It was introduced
there at the suggestion of a pure-hearted Muslim youth. That
youth then passed away, so that for us the song has more in it
than its literal meaning. The song was so dear to that youth
that, when he came to the line "yad kar tu ay Nazir kabronke roz"3,
he used to substitute his name, Hasan, for Nazir's. Hasan was a
frequent visitor to Phoenix. To me he was another son, and we
sang that song not once but several times in Phoenix. Hasan
played on the piano too, and he often sang it alone to the ac-
companiment of the piano while we listened. The choice of this
bhajan is therefore excellent. Its meaning also is excellent.
Is Father Elwin being properly looked after? I feel anxious
because he has rather delicate health. There is no need to write
to Aluvihari about the suitcase. He will send it at his leisure.
I had his address, but I do not seem to have preserved it.
Puratan is in Bhavnagar. The letter will most probably reach
him if addressed clo "Dakshinamurti".
Vallabhbhai draws my attention to the printed words on
one corner of the Ashram envelope, "Satyagraha Ashram, Udyog
Mandir, Sabarmati". Why both "Satya" and "Udyog"? When
I looked at the words, my eyes fell on the letters "B.B.C.I."
printed below. Why are they in English? And why at all
are they necessary? Assuming that they are necessary, why should
we not print "B.B.C.I . Railway" in Hindi? This criticism is too
late for the envelopes we have in stock. It is meant only for
future guidance.
June 24, 1932
Narayanappa has referred to the difficulty experienced in
supplying milk to outside customers. In my reply to him, I have
asked him to discuss the problem with you. Read that letter.
June 26, 1932
It has been argued that, if one is not permitted to get one's
yarn woven into cloth for one's own use, khadi will be costly.
Other doubts, too, have been raised. This is how I feel in the
matter:
1. The best thing of course is that one should hand over
to the Ashram all the yarn spun by oneself and be satisfied with
the khadi that one gets as one's share from the stock in the
Ashram.
2. Those who are not ready to do this may hand over the
yarn spun during the hour set apart for the yajna of spinning and
keep for themselves the quantity spun at other times.
3. The khadi supplied to the inmates of the Ashram should
be charged for at the lowest possible rates.
4. The Ashram should always have a stock of khadi which
would suit everybody's requirements.
5. The khadi woven from the best yarn spun in the Ashram
should always be sent out.
6. The inmates of the Ashram should do with as coarse khadi
as they can accept and be happy with it. Our idea is that we wear
clothes only for protecting our bodies. We will, therefore, use the
cheapest quality and the minimum possible quantity.
7. If anybody fears that handing over all the yarn spun by
himself as his contribution to the yajna of spinning will probably
kill his enthusiasm for spinning yarn of fine count, let it be killed.
Such fear has the terrible implication that the person concerned
does the spinning yajna as a task. Dharma on the contrary tells us
that, howsoever indifferently we may spin or cook for ourselves, we
should do our best when spinning or cooking for others. Those
who do not do that do not really offer yajna but merely work.
Their yajna has no meaning and may be described as hypocrisy.
If, therefore, our spinning for yajna is not better than or at least
as good as our spinning previously, we shall have failed in the test.
Let everybody think over this and then express his or her
desire. Every person will act as he wishes. There is no doubt at
all that dharma lies in what I have pointed out. If a person is
convinced of what I have said, it is his duty to act accordingly. If,
however, anybody cannot do so, simply because he has acted diffe-
rently up to now, let him do as he wishes. I don't wish to create
any new difficulty for you. I think I have nothing more to explain.
My arm is all right more or less. I am continuing milk and
bread. It is too early yet to say anything about their effect.
There is no cause for worry.
I hope you do understand that although I write these letters, I
am not certain how long I shall be able to go on. I would not be
surprised if, like the visits, they too are stopped suddenly. We
should be quite ready for that too. Of course there is no such
possibility just now, but one cannot say when the necessity may arise.
I think I have inflicted a fairly long letter on you this time.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U./I. Also C.W. 8235. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
