346. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
1 WOODBURN PARK,
CALCUTTA,
November 1, 1937
DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Enclosed herewith is the judgement of the inquiry com-
mittee about the two issues raised by Shri Nariman in his
correspondence with you and me. I had thought that Shri
Nariman's acceptance of my recommendation to make a confes-
sion which was to take the place of the judgement was a fair
ending to an inquiry which gave me many an anxious moment.
But Shri Nariman's recantation of the confession which I first
saw only in the Press alters the position and reveals the painful
state of Shri Nariman's mind. The recantation contains a pa-
tent untruth as pointed out by me in my letter to Shri Nari-
man which you will find in the enclosure.
I recall the fact that Shri Nariman himself courted the in-
quiry and deliberately wanted an investigation into the charge
made on him by Sardar Vallabhbhai of a grave breach of trust
in the matter of the Bombay election in 1934. In his letter
addressed to you occurs the following sentence:
If the verdict of such an independent tribunal and enquiry tends
to blame me in the slightest degree, then I will willingly submit to any
penalty which you or any other authority chooses to impose, but at the
same time hoping and expecting that, if the blame is found elsewhere,
similar indiscriminating judgment should follow regardless of personali-
ties or personal considerations.
In his letters to me (I have not the copies with me), he
went further and said that, if he was found guilty of the
Sardar's charge, he would consider himself to be unworthy of
holding any office of trust.
I am of opinion that by his conduct Shri Nariman has
proved himself unworthy of holding any position of trust, not
1 Vide "Note on Nariman-Sardar Case", pp. 233-.
2 Vide "Statement to the Press", pp. 247-8, and Appendix VI.
3 Dated October 29, 1937; vide pp. 274-.
284
only because he has been found guilty of grave breach of trust
in 1934 election and has failed to prove the charge brought by
him against Sardar Vallabhbhai, but by his subsequent con-
duct as betrayed in the correspondence, and especially by his
unfortunate recantation of the confession freely given by him in
the presence of his counsel.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
PRESIDENT, A. I. C. C.
A. I. C. C. File No. 747-a, 1937.
Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
