310. LETTER TO "SOUTH AFRICA"
[LONDON,
Before October 16, 1909]
SIR,
Your Johannesburg correspondent, in his weekly letter published
by you in the current issue of your journal, has done a serious injustice
to the British Indian community in the Transvaal, by mis-stating facts
in connection with the Nagappen case. Moreover, your correspondent has
omitted to state in his letter, that many men besides British Indians who
have read the evidence laid before the Commissioner1, have refused to
accept the Commissioner's finding, and that Mr. Benson who represented
the British Indian Association at the inquiry, has exposed the weakness
of the finding in a three-column letter published in the Transvaal Press.
That letter still remains unanswered. And after all, what is Major
Dixon's finding? He does leave it an open question as to whether the
deceased had two blankets or not. He admits that the deceased did not
have rice supplied to him. It is very charitable on the part of your
correspondent to suggest that, if no rice were supplied, water certainly
was, and that amply. My countrymen, however, consider that even an
ample supply of water is not a substitute for rice, nor has the Commis-
sioner, as your correspondent suggested, found that poor Nagappen was
healthier when in custody. Any layman, and I should imagine even
a medical man, would consider, as certainly did Dr. Godfrey3, that partial
starvation and insufficiency of clothing, in the very rigorous winter on
the high veldt of the Transvaal, apart from anything else, would be quite
sufficient to induce pneumonia from which this poor passive resister
died within six days after his discharge.
In spite of your correspondent, the Indian community and many
other unbiassed Europeans in the Transvaal, indeed, throughout South
Africa, will continue to believe that Nagappen died a martyr to duty,
and that his death must lie upon the conscience of those who were in
immediate charge of him whilst he was serving imprisonment.
Indian Opinion, 16-10-1909
1 Major F. J. Dixon who had held the public inquiry into the case at Yokeskei
River Prison Camp on July 19. A report of the evidence tendered was reproduced in
Indian Opinion, 24-7-1909, and the Commissioner's findings, in the issue of 14-8-1909.
2 Alex S. Benson had watched the proceedings and reported his observations in
Indian Opinion, 24-7-1909. On August 14, he addressed to The Transvaal Leader a letter
criticizing the facile acceptance of the Commissioner's findings by a section of the
Johannesburg Press, which was also published in Indian Opinion, 21-8-1909.
3 Dr. W. Godfrey had attended on Nagappen during his last illness and later
certified that the primary cause of his death was acute double pneumonia and that
it had been "accelerated by the conduct of the gaol officials, if all is true".
4 Among these were Rev. J. J. Doke and Edward Dallow, whose letters to the
Transvaal papers were reproduced in Indian Opinion, 21-8-1909.
