150. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 30, 1913
TO
THE EDITOR
THE TRANSVAAL LEADER
SIR,
I trust that you will allow me to correct the many misrepre-
sentations made by your reporter with reference to the passive
resistance movement. No doubt they are not all consciously made,
but he certainly has been the instrument through which they have
been made. "The Indian Passive resistance campaign", you have
reported, "is threatened with collapse." This statement will prove to
be untrue even if there is one passive resister earnest enough to carry
it on, and I prophesy that, so long as there is one passive resister
left to fight, the points we are now fighting for will be granted, not
because of the strength of such solitary passive resister, but because
of the invincible strength of the truth for which he may be fighting.
That our demands are just you have admitted in your leading arti-
cle, only you have asked us not to revive passive resistance, but
to be patient and to petition. Which course is the better is a
matter of opinion. I hold that the points at issue are to the com-
munity of such vital importance that passive resistance is the only
remedy, petitions having failed.
Now for facts. Your report states: "The Indian merchants
throughout the Transvaal have dissociated themselves from the
movement, and have withdrawn from Mr. Gandhi sources of revenue
without which the campaign must fail." The fact is that the great
mass meeting of Sunday was attended by almost all the Indian
merchants of Johannesburg, and telegrams in support of the ob-
jects of the meeting were received from all the principal towns of
the Transvaal, sent by the Indian merchants of those places, and
delegates attended from the towns which could send them upon
hardly 24 hours' notice. If there is a split in the community, I
assure you that it will not be because passive resisters are asking
too much, but because they will be asking too little, for I admit
that there are men amongst us who undoubtedly want passive
resisters to go to the full length. They cannot be held blameworthy,
but they certainly will not represent the moderate wing. I do
not know who the influential Mahomedan merchants are who
gave your reporter the information that there is very little ground
for complaint, and that those who attended the Gold Law Con-
ference were against passive resistance. Your reporter is free to
see the names in my possession of the principal merchants in the
Transvaal who have expressed themselves heart and soul with the
movement. It is true that they have not all offered to go to
gaol, but they have certainly offered to help with their purses.
But I need not carry any further the refutation of the misrepre-
sentations contained in your report, for the proof of the pudding
is in the eating, and time will show whether the movement col-
lapses either for want of men or of money. This, however, I will
add, that the movement does not necessarily depend upon financial
help, as I endeavoured to make clear to your reporter yesterday.
Indeed, my view of passive resistance is that it is impure so long
as it has to depend upon any pecuniary assistance whatsoever.
It is essentially a religious force, but I do not claim for the move-
ment, in which I am a humble participator, that it has reached
the purest stage. When it does, it will be independent of any public
demonstration in the shape of public meetings, resolutions or appeals
to even England and India. Our ideal is that truth, in order to
assert itself, needs no such props. We are striving to reach it,
and we can but die in the attempt.
Lastly, permit me to say that the statement that passive resi-
sters "demand payment for their penance, there must be compen-
sation for enforced confinement, martyrdom is on a money basis,"
is an atrocious libel, and a cruel wrong to the men and women who
have suffered during the last campaign, and who will suffer now.
A statement of disbursements was published some time ago, and
details are open to inspection by any person who may care to go
through them. There never has been any payment to passive re-
sisters for their services as such. There has been maintenance
given to the dependents of those who were in gaol, and the pay-
ments were made for barest necessities of life. Your reporter should
challenge his informants for facts in support of the statements
made by him. Indeed, fairness should have dictated this course to
him before he undertook to publish them in the confident and
emphatic manner in which he has. Nothing could have been
easier for him than to have at least come to me and asked me to
refute or corroborate them. He admits that there was no want of
candour on my part in replying to any questions he put to me.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transvaal Leader, 1-10-1913
