5. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
DETENTION CAMP,
January 29, 1943
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I must thank you warmly for your prompt reply to my
letter of 19th instant. I wish I could agree with you that your
letter is clear. I am sure you do not wish to imply by clear-
ness simply that you hold a particular opinion strongly. I have
pleaded and would continue to plead till the last breath, that
you should at least make an attempt to convince me of the
validity of the opinion you hold that the August resolution of
Congress is responsible for the popular violence that broke out
on 9th August last and after, even though it broke out after
the
wholesale arrest of principal Congress workers. Was not
the drastic and unwarranted action of the Government respon-
sible for the reported violence ?
You have not even said what part of the August resolu-
tion is bad or offensive in your opinion.
That resolutions is in
no way a retraction by the Congress of its policy of non-vio-
lence. It is definitely against Fascism in every shape or form.
It tenders co-operation in war-effort under circumstances which
alone can make effective and nation-wide co-operation possible.
The Government have evidently ignored or overlooked the very
material fact that the Congress by its August resolution asked
nothing for itself.
All its demands were for the whole people.
As you should be aware, the Congress was willing and prepared
for the Government inviting Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah to form
a national government, subject to such agreed adjustments as
may be necessary, for the duration of the war, such govern-
ment being responsible to a duly elected assembly. Being iso-
lated
from the Working Committee except Shrimati Sarojini
Devi, I do not know its present mind. But the Committee is
not likely to have changed its mind.
Is all this open to re-
proach? Objection may be raised to that clause of the resolu-
tion which contemplated civil disobedience. But that by itself
cannot constitute an objection since the principle of civil disobe-
dience is impliedly conceded in what is known as the "Gandhi-
Irwin Pact". Even that civil disobedience was not to be started
before knowing the result of the meeting for which I was to seek
from you an appointment.
Then, take the unproved and in my opinion unprovable
charges hurled against the Congress and me by so responsible a
Minister as the Secretary of State for India.
Surely I can say with safety that it is for the Government
to justify their action by solid evidence not by mere ipse dixit.
But you throw in my face the facts of murders by persons
reputed to be Congressmen.
I see the fact of the murders as
clearly, I hope, as you do. My answer is that the Government
goaded the people to the point of madness. They started leo-
nine violence in the shape of the arrests already referred to.
That violence is not any the less so because it is organized on
a scale so gigantic that it displaces the Mosaic law of tooth for
tooth by that of ten thousand for one—not to mention the co-
rollary of the Mosaic law, i.e., of non-resistance as enunciated
by Jesus Christ. I cannot interpret in any other manner the
repressive measures of the all-powerful Government of India.
Add to this tale of woe the privations of the poor millions
due to India-wide scarcity which I cannot help thinking might
have been largely mitigated, if not altogether prevented, had
there been a bona-fide national government responsible to a
popularly elected assembly.
If then I cannot get soothing balm for my pain, I must
resort to the law prescribed for satyagrahis, namely, a fast ac-
cording to capacity. I must commence after the early morning
breakfast of the 9th February, a fast for 21 days ending on
the morning of the 2nd March. Usually, during my fasts, I
take water with the addition of salts. But nowadays my system
refuses water. This time, therefore, I propose to add juices of
citrus fruits to make water drinkable. For, my wish is not to
fast unto death but to survive the ordeal, if God so wills. This
fast can be ended sooner by the Government giving the needed
relief.
I am not marking this letter 'Personal' as I did the two
previous ones. They were in no way confidential. They were
a mere personal appeal. 2
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 24-6; also Correspondence
with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 8-
1 Vide pp. 49-53.
2 For the Viceroy's reply, vide Appendix II.
