304. LETTER TO JAYANTI
August 11, 1927
CHI. JAYANTI,
Your letter. The flood has disturbed all time [-schedules];
so it is not possible that my blessings would reach you on your
birthday itself. But take it that they have reached you on that
very day. May you live long and become a pure worker and may
your exalted hopes bear fruit! One thing you and all other pupils
should do is to make your handwriting beautiful like pearls. This
can be done easily. Just as singing out of tune is not music, so
too bad handwriting is no writing. I am not competent to
proffer this advice because I know that my own handwriting is no
good. But just as a drowning man's warning not to go to a parti-
cular spot is heeded by the wise, I hope all of you wise pupils
will take this warning from me. Words must be written sepa-
rately. There must be some space between the lines. A line
ought to run straight and every letter must be delineated as an
artist draws a picture.
Now about the Ramayana. I would certainly pay more respect
to Tulsi's Ramayana as a religious work. Valmiki's may excel in
art, but I have not the slightest doubt that Tulsidas is richer in
devotional spirit.
Moreover, at present Valmiki's Ramayana is
available in Sanskrit only. I have so far come across no Gujarati
translation which re-creates the interest of the original. You must
know that neither of the works is historical. True, Valmiki has
portrayed a few historical men and women, but these are not
clearly defined. I firmly believe that one cannot infer historical
facts from them. But in the case of Tulsidas the question of histo-
ricity does not arise. We might say that he adapted Valmiki to
suit his own age, but while doing so, having come under the spell
of bhakti, he took such liberties as he wished to and thereby
he has done no harm but only done good to Hindu society. With
the passage of time men and women of divine glory become gods
and goddesses and are ultimately worshipped as such. This will
always happen and that is right. A man being embodied can
never worship God in any other form. It being so, whatever
Tulsidas writes about Lord Ramachandra are only his own feelings.
Tulsidas has portrayed God as beyond description, as inappre-
hensible by mere sense-organs and as also beyond attributes. If
therefore we cannot swallow the killing of Vali, we should leave
aside that passage or believe that while depicting it Tulsidas
acted only in conformity with the beliefs of his own age and could
not transcend them. As man progresses, his idea of God neces-
sarily becomes subtle and pure, inevitably so. Therefore, we should
regard the Ramayana rather as a devotional work than a historical
record and while we read its fiction part we should ignore what-
ever we find contrary to morality. Tulsidas himself describes his
work Ramacharitamanasa as full of faults. He gives a different reason
for it but that he has regarded it as not without fault should
suffice for us. Moreover, in his well-known verse beginning, "God
created the world full of animate and inanimate objects with good
qualities as well as bad", Tulsidas has taught us the art of
looking at things. Since all human action is partly good and partly
bad, we should, like the proverbial swan1, take in the essence
in the form of good qualities and leave alone the defects that spoil
it. This is the golden rule that should apply to the reading of all
books. We should humbly ask the teacher what we do not under-
stand and we should leave aside what nevertheless we fail to
understand; we should however never let our reason be clouded
or our mind be corrupted. Whatever appears contrary to truth,
non-violence and so on, should be rejected as unauthoritative
although it may have been printed in an avowedly scriptural
work.
Although this letter is written for you alone, regard it as
meant for all of you and let them read it; and let the seniors too
read it. For, I do not remember having written my thoughts on
the Ramayana so clearly and concisely anywhere else, though I
have explained them often here and there.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
