59. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
July 6, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
[RAND DAILY MAIL]
SIR,
I trust I need not offer any apology for reverting to the Asiatic
question.
I did not say to your interviewer that "passive resistance" was a
new way to my compatriots. What I did say was that it was not possible
for me to forecast the result, as we had been for generations unused
to it, especially on a large scale. I, personally, feel proud to notice that
the faculty of suffering for the common good has only lain dormant,
and that, under stress of circumstances, it is being again quickened into
life. Picketing is by no means a new thing to the Indian mind. The
network of castes in India simply illustrates the use and value of that
weapon, provided that it is rightly used. Ostracism and excommuni-
cation are the most powerful instruments resorted to today in India,
in unfortunately trivial matters, and, if the Registration Act now enables
my countrymen to realize the use of that terrible weapon for a higher
purpose, both Lord Elgin and the Transvaal Government will have
deserved their gratitude.
1 This was published under the title "Indian Picketing" and reproduced in
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1907.
2 Vide "Interview to Rand Daily Mail", pp. 60-.
There is, of course, therefore, nothing strange in Indian pickets,
with (for them) rare self-sacrifice and courage, endeavouring to show
their ignorant or weakly brethren the path of duty. At the same time,
there is just as much difference today between Western pickets and
Eastern, or, rather, Indian, as there is, apparently, between West and
East. We have no desire to terrorise. We do not wish to compel obedience
to the wish of the majority, but, like the indomitable Salvation Army
lasses, we do, in our humble manner, wish with all the persuasive
power of which we may be capable to inform those who do not know
of what is held to be the right view of the Asiatic Registration Act. It is,
then, left open to such men either to accept the advice that may be given
by us, or to accept the degrading Act and to sell themselves for a miser-
able existence in this country. As I have said before, if the Colonists
knew what the Act means, they would themselves call such Indians as
obeyed it curs fit only to be kicked and despised.
You quote, I take it for the benefit of the Indian community,
Mr. Henry's remarks on the use of finger-prints in India. Their use,
however, has never been denied. It is the abuse of the system against
which I have ventured, in common with my fellow-countrymen, to
protest.
You hope that wiser counsels will prevail among my countrymen,
and that they will submit to the Act. I, on the other hand, hope that, if
my countrymen rise to the occasion and are prepared to sacrifice every-
thing rather than their honour and self-respect, you will change your
views and respect them as men of their word. Let me remind you that
Indians have sworn before God that they will not submit to the law.
Perjury before a Court of Law can be expiated by suffering punishment
that may be awarded by a judge. What expiation is possible before the
Judge of Judges, who never errs? If we perjured ourselves before Him,
we would then indeed be unfit associates for any civilised body of men,
and the ghettos of old will be our proper and deserved lot.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 9-7-1907
1 The original has "Legislation".
