17. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 21, 1929
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letters. The report about your health and Hem-
prabha Devi's is bad. I do not like the idea of always harbour-
ing the thought of never taking without giving. Once the atti-
tude of selfishness is destroyed there is never any taking without
giving but it is all an unconscious performance. If I always
40-
have to prove to myself that as against one tola of rice taken by me
from you I have given you 2 tolas of dal, I am giving nothing
and I am merely taking from you. Because the consciousness that
I have given you more than you have given me destroys the value
of my gift. Why should it not be a privilege to Hemprabha Devi
to be at the Abhoy Ashram and apparently be receiving all ser-
vice without giving anything in return? Is that how you act to-
wards each other in every little thing weighing exactly to find out
whether the balance is preserved? And if you are not, why calcu-
late when it is not husband and wife, but two different organi-
zations in which there is even a little coolness? I wonder if I
have made my meaning clear. Of course this argument is based
on the assumption that the Abhoy Ashram is ready and willing
to harbour Hemprabha Devi.
I am glad about your dietetic experiments. The changes
made are good. And now that you are on the track, you are
better able to find out than I can the exact qualities of different
oils. So far, in my estimation, linseed oil holds the field. But
what it is that makes it free from irritation I do not know. And
then, if your oil experiment is to be scientific, you must press your
own oil, for you never get pure oils in the bazaar. And some-
how or other oils don't keep nice for a long time.
You must carefully study the contribution in Young India on
"Fasting Cure". The writer is a learned man and seems to be a
very methodical man. More even than change of climate, I re-
gard fasting as a good cure for Hemprabha Devi and Tarini
at any rate. I am not quite sure about you. But it should be
judiciously taken. That can be taken only when the superstition
that something must be taken inside to keep up the strength is
given up. And I would add to the fasting sun-baths, which
have got to be taken absolutely naked. Therefore there must be
an enclosure. And whilst the fasting cure is taken, bowels must
be regulated by the enema. It is remarkable how hard faeces are
sometimes received in the discharge of enema water even after
three weeks' fasting, as happened in my own case.
I do not know what lead I can give you about khadi beyond
what I have written in Young India. The scheme I drew up has
been accepted. I would simply suggest workers, wherever they are
found, carrying out the scheme, or as much of it as is possible,
in their own persons.
Purging the Congress is not an easy process, but let us hope
that it will come. It will have to come if—the foregoing was
dictated in Delhi on Tuesday. But every one of us was so busy
that even the unfinished letter could not be typed or fairly written
in order that it could go to you. I was interrupted when I was
dictating the letter because the members of the Working Committee
came in. Now to resume the connection—we are to get swaraj
through Truth and Ahimsa. Without self-purification, we shall
never secure purification of the Government. I can only therefore
tell that in my own way, and in the manner I know, I am trying
to perform that double purification of my own and that of the
Congress. And you may almost take it that the two will go side
by side. Imperfections of the Congress are a resultant of the
imperfections of each one of us, and as I am the primary mover
in this matter, my limitations must count the most against the pro-
gress of the Congress in the direction of purification.
My only
satisfaction is that I am not conscious of leaving a single stone
unturned in order to remove my limitations.
I have your telegram regarding the instructions about en-
forcing the khadi rule. No instructions need be issued just now.
I hope to write about this thing in Young India. For the present
then you must look to the pages of Young India about all these
matters. Many things might be done through suggestions in
Young India rather than through the resolutions of the Working
Committee.
This is my programme. I leave here on the 1st of March,
on the 2nd for certain. I then reach Calcutta either on the
3rd or 4th morning. There might be some alteration about the
timings according to the train that I take. My inclination is to
come via Delhi, by doing which I save Rs. 8 per passenger and
save a little time also. I shall look up the time-table. I leave
Calcutta on the morning of Tuesday the 5th March for Rangoon.
I return from Rangoon during the last week of March, so timing
myself as to reach Sabarmati at the latest on the 27th March.
The award about Ram Binod is causing me the greatest an-
xiety. Rajendra Babu is deeply hurt. And he and his co-workers
consider it as a reflection upon themselves. He has tendered for
himself and his companions resignation. I have pooh-poohed the
idea, consoled Rajendra Babu and told him that after all I was
to be the final authority in this matter and that therefore I
should gladly go through every particle of evidence and consider
your award in the light of the evidence and then deliver my
own. I shall let you know the further developments. You need
not worry about this at this stage. I shall seek your assistance
when I need it. I hope to be able to tide over the difficulty.
But it means an extra load of work at the time when I am
heavily laden. But that is inevitable.
Another thing I wanted to write to you about before I went
to Sind and forgot. That was in connection with the letter from
Niranjan Babu regarding the security resolution of the A.I.S.A.
Council. The resolution is not as inelastic as Niranjan Babu
imagines. It is sufficiently elastic and subject to that elasticity,
I think it is necessary. As our organization grows, security will
have to be demanded. And no one may refuse to give security
on the score of his being a patriot or a national servant. Security
will be and should be waived in the case of those who are be-
yond suspicion and are of proved integrity but cannot find security.
Do you not agree with this proposition?
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1603
