270. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
June 1, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,
I received your two letters together. Now everything is
changed, is it not? My letters of yesterday and the day before
will have made this clear. Now I have more or less decided
that with the exception of Ba I will not accept from any other
woman any service involving physical contact. After that, there
is no question at all of an affectionate touch. I have made
another discovery. In saying that I alone might touch women
and that no one else might do so, I was guilty of a terrible
error-and for how many years I persisted in the error! I should
have known that I could claim no scientific sanction for the
experiment. I was impelled solely by my terrible arrogance.
Among all my colleagues I considered only myself entitled to
break the restrictions of brahmacharya. As long as I am not willing
to accept my colleagues touching women I have not the slightest
right to touch a woman. I hope to settle everything in a day
or two. I have only your firmness to thank for making me see
168
my error. In my view the restrictions I had laid down for you
and Mahadev are no longer justified. What qualifies me to lay
down such restrictions? When I admit that my accusing you
was merely the reflection of my own failing, not yours or
Mahadev's, where is the place for the restrictions set by me?
To the extent I am involved in this affair, I am the guilty
person, not you, nor Mahadev. I am writing all this dispassion-
ately.
And what reward I gave you for your services! Now for
Pyarelal. Mother's words were like nectar to me : "You have
already taken away Pyare. Now you want to take away Sushila
too ?" She was right. I did not do you any good. What good
have I done to Pyarelal? Pyarelal's future would be the test
whether my acts were good or evil. As for you, I still consider
you stupid. You have worked for me like a benign spirit. But
for your resolute stand, my eyes would not have been opened.
I would have still been in the slumber of my illusions.
Mirabehn has rightly said that I would have died repenting.
God has alerted me only through you. Even though you came
to me as a daughter, you have acted like a mother. Not my
merit but maybe yours will save your brother.
It is good that you are helping Brijkrishna. My advice is
that you should take the place for the hospital. You must be
fully recovered. But who am I to guide you? You have got a
brother like Pyarelal. He is with you. Do only what he says.
After all, how can God give you up ? Who will be left for Him
if He gives you up? You will always prosper. Do not worry
about me. I am well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
