317. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
November 6, 1934
MY DEAR MUNSHI,
My mind is off the constitution now. Therefore, it is difficult
for me to give you a definite opinion on your letter just received.
On all the points raised by you, therefore, you should give full
effect to that which was clearly understood at the sub-commit-
tee's deliberations. I sent you my phraseology to meet what I
thought was the prevalent view of the sub-committee. As you
know, I was in it the whole of the time, but so was also Kishore-
lal. I would gladly prefer his memory to mine. Now for the
details:
1. What was understood at the sub-committee was that, wher-
ever, whether in rural area or urban area, contiguous places
could be combined to form plural-member constituencies they
should be so combined. There was no distinction between the urban
area and the rural area except that in the urban area the maxi-
mum was fixed at ten members and the minimum at five, wher-
ever such a thing [was] possible; for rural area no maximum
or minimum was fixed, but wherever possible, by the process
of amalgamation suggested above, plural-member constituencies
were to be created. The question of amalgamating Ahmedabad,
Dhandhuka and Prantij does not arise at all in my conception.
My difficulty arose in your drawing the distinction between the
two areas. According to our definition of a town, it must have
a population of more than 10,000. Any place having 10,000 or less
is not a town and belongs to the rural area. I do not know if I
have made my own meaning clear. If it is not clear, and if there
is nobody whom you can consult as to the understanding, please
enforce your own view. After all if there is any difficulty or
difference of opinion among the members of A. I. C. C. it can be
removed at the next session of the Congress.
2. The difficulty for Bombay in the matter of readjusting the
proportion of 500 to one delegate was not before me, because
it has 21 members allotted to it as the maximum. For the other
provinces, I understand this to be the position. We have the
maximum fixed for them and we have also the maximum fixed
for urban and rural areas. Therefore, the distribution or readjust-
ment will be according to provinces and further readjustment
according to the areas in the respective provinces. My own
interpretation of my draft is that both these are provided for. But
if you think otherwise, then your draft should stand or any other
you may frame to carry out this meaning. That the meaning is
what I have given here I have no doubt whatsoever.
3. As to the special session I have no difficulty. The A. I. C. C.,
the Working Committee and the President will be at the disposal
of the delegates. They will do whatever they like with them and
I thought that our draft had so provided.
You may send me that final proof if you like, but I waive
that privilege, because the publication of the constitution is over-
due. If we have honestly tried to give effect to the views of the
sub-committee as adopted by the Subjects Committee, our duty is
done and we should stand the fire of criticism.
I hope you are not overworking yourself. I return the draft
sent by you.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI K. M. MUNSHI
BOMBAY
C.W. 7560. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
