100. LETTER TO SIR HUGH DOW
PATNA,
March 17, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
I was so struck by your reference (strange for a bureaucrat)
to individual conduct that I referred to it on Saturday at my
after-prayer speech.
Yesterday evening I met your Ministers and gave them the
purport of our talk of last Saturday. I told them that
1. you considered them to be dilatory about placating the
Muslims who were so much the injured party;
2. permanent officials interpreted this to mean that the
Ministers did not want them to be prompt in taking energetic
action to restore confidence among the Muslims;
3. the guilty ones were not properly dealt with;
4. the League demands were turned down not on merits
but because they were League demands.
The Ministers present totally refuted all these imputations
and the Chief Minister expressed considerable surprise. The Chief
Minister said that he and his colleagues had often differed from
you on several questions including the minorities. He added,
however, that on behalf of himself and his colleagues he had
given you the assurance that in their handling of the minority
question they would readily accept your advice even though there
were differences between you and them.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
I am showing this to the Chief Minister to check up my
version of what the Ministers had said.
My only reason for writing this is not to advertise differences
between you and your Ministers but to remove misunderstand-
ings and to assist, wherever I can, in promoting goodwill be-
tween the retiring British official world and the Indian politicians
who are, and are becoming growingly, responsible for the well-
being of the people whom they guide and serve.
I casually referred to the condition of the working men in
the mica industry. But I shall await your promised note before
I can pursue it fully.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE GOVERNOR OF BIHAR
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 228-
