129. LETTER TO "THE RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
April 14, 1904
TO
THE EDITOR,
The Rand Daily Mail
SIR,
There are features in the report of the Public Health Committee in
refutation of the statements made by me regarding the outbreak of plague
which necessitate my asking you to extend your indulgence for a brief
explanation.
It is worthy of note that it is not now any longer denied that I did
give information as to the outbreak on March 1.
An attempt has been made in the report in question to controvert
my statement that there was a terrible confirmation of my opinion given on
March 1 in the mortuary record. Figures have been produced for the period
commencing from July, 1903 to February this year, which show that the
highest mortality from pneumonia in any single month was seven, and the
average mortality from the same cause 4.75 per month.
During the first seventeen days of the month of March last, there were
fourteen deaths from the same cause, that is to say, at the rate of 25.35
per month. In other words, the mortality during the first fortnight after
the date of my letter was three-and-a-half times as much as the highest
mortality during the preceding eight months, and six times as much as the
average mortality per month during the same period.
I venture, therefore, to ask again whether there is not herein a terrible
confirmation of the opinion expressed on March 1 last. It is a gratuitous
assumption that my reference to the mortality has any connection with the
period prior to March 1. The letters addressed to Dr. Porter in February
merely gave warning of the calamity that was impending but never once
stated that the plague had actually broken out.
Mr. McCann, in speaking of my inability to furnish particulars of
suspicious deaths, refers to the single interview. What happened was
this. I had not the names nor the numbers of the Stands before me. I rang
for the clerk who knew something about this matter, and it was there and
then that Mr. McCann was supplied with the names of at least three men
who, in my opinion, had died from the plague, and the numbers of the Stands.
I have nowhere stated that the Kaffirs were first introduced into the
Indian Location after the Council entered on possession, and I freely admit
that some of my countrymen had Kaffirs as their tenants. But I have stated,
and I venture to repeat, that they were dumped down in the Location
after September 26th last, and I am in a position to show that several
Stands which were never occupied by Kaffirs before that date were crowded
by them after it. Even if the Council could not remove the overcrowding
that existed on that date, any increase thereto was, in my opinion, un-
pardonable. And that there was an increase in the Location, both in the
Indian population and the Kaffirs, is capable of proof. There were 96
Stands in the Location. Deducting, say, six unoccupied Stands, there were,
on March 20, 1904, in the Location over 35 residents per Stand; and, if
you will add at least 1,000, (which, I think, is the number that left during
the month of March,) you have 45 to the Stand.
The gravamen of my complaint is not that the Public Health
Committee failed to declare the outbreak of plague, but that it or the
Town Council failed in its duty to anticipate and provide against the
disaster of which it had received warning in the year 1902, repeated in
1903, and still more forcibly repeated in February last, although it
was in a position to do so effectively, at any rate, on September 26 last.
Yours,
M.K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 23-4-1904
