344. LETTER TO P. K. MATHEW
December 22, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter. I do not regard the Pulayas and
the others as aborigines, and so far as I am aware Hinduism
regards them as Hindus. That in spite of their being Hindus, they
1 Vide p. 73.
2 Vide p. 178.
3 Dated December 17, 1932 in which, dissuading Gandhiji from his fast,
the addressee had said that Pulayas and others were aborigines "who were in
India long before the Aryan invasion and were never amalgamated into
Hindu religion or society".
260
seem to be a class apart is the tragedy of Hinduism. You will
not quote school-histories or any historical text-books in order to
show that they are not Hindus but please understand the formula
under which the temple-entry movement is being conducted. It
is the caste Hindus who have to do an act of reparation by throw-
ing open the doors of Hindu temples to those who are regarded
as untouchables though still part of Hindu society. If Pulayas
are not Hindus they will never enter Hindu temples. I quite
agree with you that what is needed is a change of heart on the
part of caste Hindus. Temple-entry would be one of the signs of
that change of heart. If, as you say, it is quite possible that
"these reformers care little for religion and temples", might it not
be said with a little more truth that it is equally possible that these
reformers do care for Hindu religion and temples? Seeing that
they are working for temple-entry, is not the presumption in their
favour till the contrary is proved? It would be proper to say
that those who take no part in the movement, either for or
against, care little for religion and temples. If the reformers take
up the attitude of touch-me-not in their daily life whilst they
advocate temple-entry, their advocacy is certainly hypocritical.
But there again the evidence is contrary to what you think to be
the attitude of "many a present-day reformer". Believe me that
I would not risk my life "for achieving a sham". On the contrary
I am trying to achieve on behalf of Harijans a most substantial
thing from a religious standpoint.
Yours sincerely,
P. K. MATHEW, ESQ.
CHRISTAVA MAHILALAYAM, ALWAYE (TRAVANCORE)
From a microfilm: S.N. 18777
