107. LETTER TO ASHRAM MEMBERS
Silence Day, February 21, 1927
I see from the letters I get that attendance at the prayer is ir-
regular and thin. A general slackness is also creeping into the spin-
ning.
Spinning and prayer are the two beacons for us. If we do not
keep an eye on them, we will be able to do no credit either to
the Ashram or to ourselves. It is one thing not to do them after
deciding right from the beginning that we would not engage in
either of them, and another to omit doing them after under-
taking them. In my opinion, he who approves of neither can
achieve nothing at the Ashram, since we regard them both as
essential religious activities. Those who, while approving of them,
grow lax in their practice will develop a general laxity. If we
wish to learn to insist on truth and to experience the strength it
gives, we must never omit to perform the two aforesaid rites. Both
require faith on our part. To a certain extent we can adduce ra-
tional arguments in support of both, but in the last resort faith
alone can satisfy us. One sometimes feels that nothing is gained
by attendance at prayers, that one is unable to concentrate atten-
tion, one feels a sense of lethargy, and so on. These things cannot
be reasoned out; they can be dispelled only by faith. The Gita
recommends faith alone when it speaks of dispassionate action.
An effort is never wasted. It is an act of faith to believe in the
ultimate triumph of truth in the face of failures, and to follow
truth dispassionately. We should have the same attitude to spin-
ning as to prayer. It is not for me to calculate how this much
spinning would benefit me or the country. One may not see any
immediate benefit from spinning but one must stick to one's belief
that it is going to bring some benefit. The point is to learn to
stick to our resolve. The two external and common activities of
prayer and spinning are likely to develop this tenacity. If we are
lax in these activities, when shall we learn to stand firm on
truth?
I therefore appeal to all, young and old, not to neglect these
two activities.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8053. Courtesy: Raojibhai N. Patel
