235. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
April 27, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
You kept me waiting a long time for your letter which I have now
received.
You do not seem to have had any letter from Satyavati. Do not be
impatient. I hope you have realized that even if your parents give their consent
to your proposal for marriage I will have to obtain permission. If I do not
get such permission, the wedding ceremony cannot be performed here. But
you may of course come to ask for my blessings. If Chaturbhai comes along,
I will certainly see him.
If Devidutt etc. are there, they as well as you should tell any guests who
may arrive that no provision has been made by the Ashram for the necessary
expenditure on the facilities to be provided to guests. So, everyone who comes
will have to meet his or her own expense of staying, or will have to get the
required amount from the Ashram. We have no right to stay in any way
other than that. We cannot lead a pure life in any other way. Even if a person
like Pantji sends anyone, you may ask him, too, whether or not he or she
will bear his or her own expense. Just now, you have to learn the art of
living within the limit of your estimated expense and cultivate the habit of
plain speaking for that purpose. We are beggars and not rich people; servants
and not masters.
The Devidutt Brothers have no right to ask for Rs. 60 from us if they
cannot get that much from elsewhere. The people who live with us should be
persons of abstemious habits. They should, therefore, be content with less from
us than what they would get elsewhere. If they get more elsewhere, by all
means they should go there. You see the truth of this, don't you? You will
certainly get there servants to help you in your work. They will look after
the Ashram and also cultivate the land.
It is necessary to be moderate in spending money even in the field of
service. I think you are not at present well enough in health to be able to take
up the secretary-ship of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. Be content with what you can
do without taking it up. Let me know how you are keeping. We will consider
other things later. It will also have to be seen how you keep after your marriage.
For the present, it is advisable that you have all your time to yourself.
I have not the least desire to dispose off the Ashram lands. However, if
the Ashram buildings become too costly to keep, we may sell them off and
put up huts on the remaining land. Jamnalalji is now out of prison. Do as he
advises.
178
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
179
Give up your rather fond desire to call over Ramdas there. If he comes
of his own accord, it would be a different matter.
Does the Bengali gentleman live there at his own expense? It is good
that Navin feels at home there. He does not work beyond his strength, does
he? I do have a machine for shredding vegetables in mind. As for a machine
for grinding groundnut, we do have one. However, I would not think of
spending money on buying such things. If, however, the expense can be
incurred without inconvenience, I would not deliberately avoid buying them.
Inter-dining and inter-marriage is not an essential part of varnashrama.
It is and has always been a subject unconnected with varnashrama. One is
not bound to eat or marry where one does not wish to. However, one does
not violate one's dharma merely by eating where it is convenient for him or
her to do so or by entering into a marriage relationship which he or she
chooses as suitable for himself or herself; nor does he or she violate the
principle of the varna system. This is all that I mean. There is no doubt that
in practice more people limit themselves to eating and entering into marriage
relationship with persons belonging to the same varna. It is quite right to
say that varna has no place in a sannyasi's dharma.
Do not be tardy in writing to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33024
