508. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Sunday [May 9, 1926]
CHI. VASUMATI,
I have your letter. This time your handwriting can be des-
cribed as good. When you are here, I will certainly put you up,
if not in your old room, in the room adjoining Mirabai's. I shall
have to go to Mahabaleshwar for two or three days. Devdas is
suffering from appendicitis, and so I have sent him to Bombay
for an operation. It must have been over today. Ba and Mahadev
have gone with him. The report in the Press which you read, that
I was to leave for Mahabaleshwar on the 6th, was not correct.
Ramdas must be in Mahuva just now.
Blessings from
BAPU
SMT. VASUMATIBEHN DHIMATRAI NAVALRAM
KELAPEETH
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 470. Courtesy: Vasumati Pandit
509.
LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Sunday, May 9, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I have your letter. I expect a telegram from you this evening.
I am not at all worried. Tell Ba that Rami's daughter is quite
all right. I had got Ba's message. Manibehn and the younger
Kashi do the cooking. Kumibehn, Rami's aunt, arrived here
today. Kanti and Manu had been to the station to receive her.
Ba should not worry on our account.
Rameshwarprasad, his mother and others arrived yesterday,
and are leaving for that side today. You must have got my letter
in which I told you about my going to Mahabaleshwar. I take it
that Mahadev will remain there for the time being. He should
write to me if he wants me to fetch anything for him from here. I
think we shall have to take with us some extra covering for
nights. It seems that we shall have to stay in Mahabaleshwar for
three days, viz., Saturday, Sunday and Monday. I have also
been thinking that, leaving there on Tuesday morning, we should
look up Kaka in Sinhgarh and, if possible, make a trip to Deolali
as well. This may take up two more days. If we start on
Tuesday morning we can reach Sinhgarh at about 10 or 11, and
I am thinking that we may then go to Deolali if we can come down
the same evening. But I may even drop the visit to Deolali if
Mahadev thinks that it is not very necessary to go, because I
also feel there is no point in going to Deolali unless we can stay
there for a couple of days. Just now I shall write nothing about
this to Mathuradas. I have decided to be guided by Mahadev's
advice. Will you yourself arrange for a car from Poona? A train
for Poona leaves [Bombay] at 10-30 a.m. If that is so, I think it
will be best to catch that train, after seeing Devdas, and reach
Mahabaleshwar the same night. I think it would be better to
arrange for two cars from Poona.
I had just now a trunk-call from Vallabhbhai about the
operation. God be praised for His mercy!
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2683
