21. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
September 18, 1934
BHAI RAJENDRA PRASAD,
I sent through Mahadev the reply to your wire, which Prabha-
vati must have given you. Later your letter also arrived. I have
no recollection whether I replied to your first letter through some-
one or whether it remained unanswered. These days the work is
quite pressing, some rest is also needed. It does not seem proper
to make Abdul Ghaffar Khan the President this time. He is a
good man and is full of love for the country. He is sincere and
self-sacrificing. But he has little experience of the Congress and
the session this time involves great responsibility. Among the men
devoted to truth and non-violence and commanding popularity I
see none but you or Rajagopalachari or Jairamdas. But these two
men cannot now be chosen and that leaves only you. Moreover,
there is no other choice because of your contribution to the earth-
quake [relief] work. You have illness in the family as also your
financial problem; but are you a family man any more? In other
words, you can serve the family only so far as it is a part of
the people at large. The financial problem is almost solved. Jamna-
lalji is still at Bombay but that should cause no worry.
You should come over here as soon as you can. Come with
more time on hand if it is possible to stay over for a few days.
Anyway I shall be happy with whatever time you can give me.
If the date is fixed for certain I shall try to call Sardar too. You
can in no case go to Bombay before October 20. The Khan Brothers
will be here during this period and we shall send for any others
if their presence is required.
You must have seen my statement in the papers. The rela-
tions between Prabhavati and Jayaprakash have to be clarified.
Arrangements have been made for her to serve in Wardha but I
sent her away on receiving a telegram from Jayaprakash. I have
of course told Prabha to discuss everything with you and Brijkishore-
babu .
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 9732. Courtesy: Rajendra Prasad
