4. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[About January 20, 1912]
CHI. JAMNADAS5,
Your answer to Dorabji that you would reply to him only if he addressed
you as 'gentleman' was perfectly right. And you were also right in not
addressing him as 'Sahebji', though I have some doubt about its propriety.
Still, the spirit in which you refused to say 'Sahebji' was right. When such
things are being discussed, it is advisable for one to run away from the place.
Personally, I have found from experience that the best course is to remain
quiet and say nothing. At the time you heard that comment in the train, you
would have done well to say nothing whatever. When strangers who do not
know us, talk such things among themselves, why need we intervene?
We should keep a soft heart towards such persons and believing that they
do not know what they are saying, have compassion for them. Even if one
cannot do that, at least we should not despise them. We should take a lesson
from what they are saying and consider how careful we must be before finding
fault with the other person and how we should remain uninterested when anyone
finds fault with a person whom we do not know. Dorabji prattled all those
things under the influence of drink. And those two Muslims said what they
conscientiously believed. So why should they not have said what they did?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33814
1 Revashanker Jagjivan Jhaveri, a friend of Gandhiji and brother of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
2& Khushalchand Jivanji Gandhi, a cousin of Gandhiji and his wife, Devbhabhi;
parents of the addressee
4 Jamnadas Gandhi went to South Africa in July 1911 and staying first at Phoenix,
went to the Tolstoy Farm where he stayed upto December 14, 1912. Gandhiji has
noted in his Diary for the year 1912 that Dorabji arrived at Tolstoy Farm on January
20, 1912. Probably the conversation mentioned in the letter took place during a railway
journey from Durban to Johannesburg before January 20, 1912, or from Johannesburg
to Durban after January 20, 1912.
5 The youngest of the four sons of Gandhiji's cousin, Khushalchand Gandhi
