275. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR,
October 2, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),
I have your letter.
If you think you are not worthy of being a daughter, how
much more fit should I become to be a worthy mother and father
to you? If I who claim to be both, am slack in my effort to be so,
I shall have no place anywhere in the three worlds. Let us, there-
fore, not argue who is worthy and who is not. If a son or
daughter is unworthy, the parents bear no small responsibility
for that.
I understand the reason for your depression. Instead of
thinking that you have to do this, that or the other thing, you
should think that God does all that and uses you as His instru-
ment. If you think thus, you will feel no burden at all. It is
God who carries the burden, and His shoulders are so broad that
however heavy the burden we place on them He does not feel
it even as much as we would a speck of dust on our hand. We
should, therefore, forget 'I' and 'Mine'. "It is I who do this—
that is our ignorance, like that of the dog who thinks he draws
the cart": this line by Narasinh Mehta expresses his own expe-
rience. 'Shakat' in this line means a cart. If we believe that the dog
who walks under a moving cart draws it, then we may believe
that the burden of our tasks is on us; but anyone who works for
the love of God will never find his task a heavier burden than he
can carry. He does not have to take upon himself anything. Tasks
come to him unsought. He goes on working cheerfully, with God's
name upon his lips. You sing with sincere emotion: "Make me
your servant." Think over the meaning of that bhajan. Also think
over the meaning of the two verses which we have added to the pray-
ers for women. It is the Lord's assurance to those who surrender
themselves to Him that He will carry the burden of their happiness
and welfare. Why, then, should we worry? This is looking at
the matter philosophically.
But even if you and I feel agitated, what escape is there for
us? Our relationship with the Ashram is like the Hindu mar-
riage bond. The tie can never be loosened. Instead of thinking
194
whether others are half-hearted or firm in their attitude, you
should ask yourself whether you are half-hearted or firm, and
that is all that is necessary. Certainly seek what comfort Nath can
give you. Talk with Narandas and pour out your heart every week
to me. If you can free yourself for a few days and pay a visit to
Kakasaheb, that, too, will give you some comfort.
Do not work so hard that you get exhausted. One should
always preserve a sense of proportion in undertaking work in the
spirit of service. We can do that only if we have cultivated the
attitude of non-attachment. Non-attachment means freedom
from the sense of'!' and 'Mine'. The saying that while sleep-
ing one should stretch out one's limbs according to the length of
the covering has great wisdom behind it.
Read this letter again and again, think over it and overcome
your depression and put your heart in the bhajan when you sing
"Make me your servant".
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 42-4; also C.W. 8760. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya
