281. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
October 5, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
I am writing this after taking silence. Have just seen your
portrait in a group published in the Times Illustrated Weekly.
You are spinning on the takli and looking fit. Then I saw in the
columns of The Bombay Chronicle that you were in the women's
procession and spoke at their meeting. So you are again near
my lodgings and probably this will be in your hands at the
Ashram.
Yes, S. Aiengar's daughter is a very good woman but she
was hysterical even when we were travelling from Mysore. When
you write to her please give my love to her and tell her I often
think of her. It is a sad thing—her father's case. It is the same
thing with him as with the daughter. He can be hardly consider-
ed responsible for many of his strange acts. Did you see him at
all? Where did you stay whilst in Madras?
Last week, Kaka having been given my wheel, I thought I
would finish my quota on yours. I tried hard but I could not
make it work. The spindle won't turn. Whether the resin was
ineffective or what the cause was, I could not divine. But there
it was refusing to turn. Then I thought of the Gandiv of Surat.
I found it to be an extraordinarily effective thing. For the last
two days I have been finishing the whole of my quota on it and
that in very good time and without the slightest fatigue. It has
captivated me and I want you to try it. It is essentially a poor
man's wheel. The inventor is no mechanic. How it has come
to him, I do not know. But every part of it, in my opinion, shows
solicitude for the starving. It costs Rs. 1½ but it can be made
for only 8 annas, I am sure. It is the lightest wheel going in
India. It requires the least attention. It occupies the smallest
space of all the wheels I know. A little child can work at it.
Thousands of these wheels can be manufactured in a day if the
discs and spindles are kept in stock. Its mechanism is simplicity
personified. You naturally draw a fine thread. The very first I
drew was over 30 counts. And I fancy that it can compete with
any in giving speed. It admits of certain improvements, which
198
can be made without adding a pice to the cost. I have made
two and this reduces the cost. The original has noisy wooden
holders. I have discarded them and put on coir rope picked up
from rubbish. I have broken up the jingling glass bars on the
spindle and wound a few turns of yarn to hold the spindle in
position. This has made it absolutely noiseless. Such is the opini-
on of a new convert, who has tried it only for the last four days.
It may, therefore, need modification. But it is undoubtedly a
case for believers to give it a fair trial. I am writing to the
inventor suggesting certain improvements and am writing to
Keshu too to examine, try and if my preliminary observation is
at all sound, to improve it. There are other merits I must not
describe, as I have many more letters yet to write. If you can
think of the reason that has prevented the spindle on your wheel
from turning, please tell me.
How did you find Brajkishore Babu? Is he better? Did you
see Prabhavati? She is much reduced and her latest letter says
she had high fever.
And your health? You must not break down at the Ashram.
You will have met Kamalabehn Lundy. Of course you will be-
friend her. She appears to be a very good woman.
Both of us are keeping excellent health. My weight, if any-
thing, shows a slight increase. The vegetable experiment seems
to have proved a success and it gives me joy to know that the dis-
appearance of even dried fruit reduces the cost very materially.
In vegetables, for the last two days, I have been taking spinach
which has moved the bowels automatically. I take sweet potatoes
off and on. I hope you have by now got all my letters. I have
missed no week.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5414. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9648
