251. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
BOMBAY,
[May 4, 1919]
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I cannot get the time to send you a book—a mere letter gives
me no satisfaction. I feel so confident that your view of vows can
be shown to be wrong. Your interpretation of the action of
Rama shows that you have not understood it properly. And what
is the meaning of "Swear" in the passage from the Bible quoted
by you? May not your interpretation of that passage also be
at fault? To me the life of Jesus was one simple vow from which
no earthly power could oust him. Your two vows mentioned in
your letter were parody. They were no subjects for taking vows
over. Why should a man hesitate to stand before his Maker and
say: "Please, Sir, with your help I shall never tell an untruth"?
But I can't stand before my Maker and say, "I shall never forsake
this sty or that." I may not be clear enough, but you will admit
I am frank enough, and how can Love help being that?
Did you ascertain why the flogging was administered? I
should like to know.
As you know The [Bombay] Chronicle has suspended publication
by reason of the order of pre-censorship. Young India will there-
fore be turned into a bi-weekly. Later it may become a daily.
It is to be published under my supervision. Can you find time
to write for it? You may write on swadeshi, Hindu-Muslim
unity, satyagraha, Rowlatt legislation.
We cannot accept the Rowlatt Bill even under the reserva-
tion suggested by you, namely, that it is not to be enforced with-
out the previous sanction of the Legislative Council. Our objection
is not merely that it may be misapplied, but we object also to
the arbitrary procedure laid down in it for the trial of offences
enumerated in it. I would not let even a supposed anarchist be
tried summarily or under a special procedural subversion of
judicial checks and certainly not under any ordinary law giving
extraordinary powers. Exceptional powers have been reserved
for exceptional situations. Executive authority cannot be allowed
to deal with exceptional situations in anticipation.
Do please remain by the side of Shraddhanandji as long as it
is necessary. And when you are free, I would so like you to
come down, so that we may review that situation.
Yes, in the midst of all the carnage, prosecutions, martial law,
military dispositions, I find the law of love answering fully and
being abundantly proved.
With love to you and Swamiji,
Ever yours,
MOHAN
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
