191. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 5/9, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I again got the packet of letters on Wednesday. Read the
letters to Manibehn and Bhagwanji. Read out yourself to Mani-
behn the letter meant for her. If you read both the letters, every-
thing will be clear to you. I need not, therefore, give you any
other instructions. I had not thought that you would have to
attend to such duties too, but I should have known. It is God's
133
kindness that you are capable of attending to them. The problem
of Keshu seems to be difficult. Be careful and carry on as well as
you may. What made him break with Navin? The two used to
get on very well with each other. You may send me letters received
from abroad, if there are any which you think should be sent to
me. If a letter is very important, make a copy and send me the
letter or the copy. If Dudabhai is eager to have Lakshmi with him
and if the latter wishes to go, do not stop her. She is sufficiently
obstinate, but watch if you have a different experience of her now.
September 8, 1930
There is barely sufficient cotton for carding to last me up to
the 20th. If you have not sent any so far, send some immediate-
ly. It will be all right if you send 4 lb. Since slivers have to be
made for both of us, a good deal of cotton is consumed. Kaka-
saheb has started only recently. He is likely to spin more as
time passes. I have already written to you about the sandals.
Read about our weight and the changes in my diet, etc., in
the letter to Mirabehn.
Tuesday morning, September 9, 1930
REMOVAL OF UNTOUCHABILITY
This, too, is a new observance, like control of the palate, and
may even appear a little strange. But it is of vital importance.
Untouchability means pollution by the touch of certain persons
by reason of their birth in a particular caste or family. In the
words of Akha, it is an excrescence. In the guise of religion, it is
always in the way and corrupts religion. None can be born un-
touchable as all are sparks of one and the same Fire. It is wrong
to treat certain human beings as untouchables from birth. It is
also wrong to entertain false scruples about touching a dead body,
which should be an object of compassion and respect. It is only
out of considerations of health that we bathe after touching a dead
body or after an application of oil, or after a shave. A man who
does not bathe in such cases may be looked upon as dirty, but
surely not as a sinner. A mother may be "untouchable" so long
as she has not bathed or washed her hands and feet after cleaning
up her child's dirt, but if a child happened to touch her, it would
not be polluted by the touch. But Bhangis, Dheds, Chamars and
the like are contemptuously looked down upon as untouchables
from birth. They may bathe for years with any amount of soap,
dress well and wear the marks of Vaishnavas, read the Gita every
day and follow a learned profession, and yet they remain un-
touchables! This is rank irreligion fit only to be destroyed. By
treating removal of untouchability as an Ashram observance, we
assert our belief that untouchability is not only not a part and par-
cel of Hinduism, but that it is a plague, which it is the bounden
duty of every Hindu to combat. Every Hindu, therefore, who
considers it a sin should atone for it by fraternizing with un-
touchables, associating with them in a spirit of love and service,
deeming himself purified by such acts, redressing their grievances,
helping them patiently to overcome ignorance and other evils
due to the slavery of ages, and inspiring other Hindus to do like-
wise. When one visualizes the removal of untouchability from this
spiritual standpoint, its material and political results sink into in-
significance and we befriend the so-called untouchables regard-
less of such results. Seekers after Truth will never waste a thought
on the material consequences of their quest, which is not a matter
of policy with them, but something interwoven with the very tex-
ture of their lives. Similar is the case of those who have vowed to
remove untouchability. When we have realized the supreme im-
portance of this observance, we shall discover that the evil it seeks
to combat is not restricted in its operation to the suppressed classes.
Evil, no bigger than a mustard seed in the first instance, soon as-
sumes gigantic proportions and in the long run destroys that upon
which it settles. Thus this evil has now assailed all departments
of life. We practise untouchability against followers of other reli-
gions than our own, against those who belong to other sects than
our own within the Hindu fold and even against members of our
own sect, so much so that, ever busy observing untouchability, we
become a burden on the earth. We have hardly enough time even
to look after ourselves, thanks to the never-ending ablutions and
exclusive preparation of food necessitated by false notions of un-
touchability. While pretending to pray to God, we offer worship
not to God but to ourselves. This observance, therefore, is not
fulfilled merely by our making friends with untouchables but by
loving all life as our own selves. Removal of untouchability means
love for and service of the whole world and thus merges into
ahimsa. Removal of untouchability spells the breaking down of
barriers between man and man, and between the various orders
of beings. We find such barriers erected everywhere in the world,
but here we have been mainly concerned with the untouchability
which has received religious sanction in India and reduced lakhs
and crores of human beings to a state bordering on slavery.
Blessings from
BAPU
ps.
One Kantu Gajiwala is a resident of Surat and lives in Kha-
patia Chakla. I think he gave me Rs. 5 during the march. I
had given instructions to make a khadi-bound diary from the hand-
made paper which we have and send it to him. Because of my
arrest, the matter could not be pursued further. Now get a small
diary, of a hundred or more pages, bound by anyone who knows
the art and send it to Gajiwala. And write to me when you do
so. In any case drop a postcard to him immediately.
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 53 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
