100. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 5, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your two letters. Last was received only yesterday.
Your letter about the business of the Council was placed
before the Council. Jamnalalji and Shankerlal will write to you
fully. I have not attended any of the meetings except the first
one which I simply opened without any remarks and retired. I
think the Council has confirmed the original proposal to relieve
1& Vide item 97 above.
me from all administrative work. I remain the president; but
Jamnalalji becomes the officiating chairman of the Council. And
I think that this is the best thing to do. This spares me the trouble
of having to go into every detail of administration.
Your suggestion that the Council meeting should be held at
different centres has been adopted.
No vital changes should be made in the constitution for five
years according to the original intention. To change officers every
year, and especially the secretaries, would be a dangerous thing.
Secretaries should be helped by fresh suggestions. But as we are
really a business house, administrative control should be conti-
nuous, if we are to make the house stable. And, personally, I
think that it is impossible to get a secretary more energetic, more
conscientious than Shankerlal.
Your letter about Hemprabha Devi's latest developments pro-
vides food for deep reflection. Let there be nothing done in a hurry.
The suggestion about maintenance is startling and I would
like a long time in order that it may soak into me. We must meet
before anything is done. Supposing that I am free from the Sou-
thern tour about the end of August or middle of September and
go through it without any mishap, would you have me to under-
take the Bengal tour in gentle stages? Please do not be anxious
about me; for, I shall do nothing in haste and I shall watch my-
self as the tour progresses. Nobody wants to run avoidable risks.
Both Rajagopalachari and Gangadharrao are taking elaborate
precautions to avoid the slightest strain. Chikballapur was for
them also a good lesson.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19786
