291. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
NANDI HILLS,
May 2, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I wrote to you a postcard in Hindi just to tell you that I was
thinking constantly of you and to see whether you could read and
understand my Hindi. Do not be alarmed. I do not propose to
write to you always in Hindi. But if you can follow my Hindi, I
do want now and then to write my extra letters in Hindi, i.e., if
you like the idea, not otherwise.
Now for your disturbing wire. I wonder what in my letters
has prompted it. You can have no notion of the energy I have
already regained. I have written for Navajivan four articles this
week. For Young India I wrote three last week. I am really doing
almost the normal work for the papers now. And I do a fair
amount of love letters.
But all this is nothing compared to the result of medical
examination yesterday. The pressure dropped from 188 to 155,
and 155 to 160 is the normal for my age. I have been walking
for the last three days over one mile per day in two periods each
extending to 30 minutes. This is more than Amboli. So there
is now no anxiety about my health. There can be no question
now of leaving Nandi. It would be foolish to think of leaving it
till my previous strength is attained, if it can be at all or till the
season for Nandi ends which it does about July.
I observe from your wire that in spite of your previous letter
of attainment of peace, the pendulum has swung back and that
you are again perturbed. This does not surprise me. If our lucid
moments were lasting, nothing further will remain to be done. Un-
fortunately or fortunately, we have to pass through many an ebb
and flow before we settle down to real peace.
I have therefore left you free to do as you please. Better cer-
tainly if you can keep your peace and stay. Equally certainly come
away if you cannot keep your peace. Only, in any decision you
come to, please eliminate the question of my health. For if you
come, you would find little difference between me as you saw me
in Kangri and me as I am now. Dive deep into yourself then and
find out if you can where you are and act accordingly irrespective
of what I would like you to do. Or put it another way. I would
like you to do what your inner spirit tells you to do.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5224. Courtesy: Mirabehn
