92. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 23, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Among the Urdu books, are there two volumes by Nadvi?
He wrote something in continuation of Shibli's work. Perhaps
the author's name on the cover of the book will be Maulana
Sulaiman Nadvi.
About fish, I have not made an exception in your favour.
Though cod-liver oil is forbidden for us, I have allowed it in the
Ashram. Meat and fish are forbidden in the Ashram itself, but
they are not forbidden to individuals, cannot be. I at any rate
have never forbidden them to anyone. That is why Imam Saheb
was permitted to eat them outside the Ashram. Suppose it was
Narandas and not you. He has never touched meat, etc., in all his
life. But suppose he fell seriously ill and his life was in danger,
and he wished to save it by eating meat. I would certainly not
prevent him from eating it. Today he knows my views and also
what dharma teaches. But the approach of death may change
one's ideas. If, at such a time, anyone wishes to eat meat, it would
be my dharma not to prevent him from doing so. But suppose
it is a child and I have to decide for it. I would let it die but not
give it meat. Do you know that Ba once passed through such an
ordeal? Most probably the incident is described in the Autobiography.
If you do not know about it, nor does anybody else, write to me
and I will narrate it. It was a blessed occasion for both Ba
and me. Do you now understand my meaning? I don't wish
to urge you to eat fish. If by not taking it you are likely to die
and you are ready for that, I am ready to let you die. Even
if eating fish enables you to live longer, will not the end be death?
But, then, dharma is for one who has faith in it and is ready to
follow it. Do I follow such dharma in my own life in regard
to milk? I do not, though it is clear to me as daylight that
one should not drink the milk of any animal. Such principles of
dharma however are not meant to be enforced in the lives of
others. One should follow them in one's own life. I think I have
said enough.
Let me know what your present diet includes, with the quan-
tity of each item. If I feel like suggesting a change, I will.
Your questions about men and women are good.
We should explain to a child any matter about which it
shows curiosity, if we know the answer. Otherwise, we should admit
our ignorance. If we think the child's question should not be
answered, we should restrain it and also tell it not to ask others.
In any case, we should never give an evasive reply. Children
know more about these things than we think they do. If we
refuse to tell them what they do not know, they learn to satisfy
their curiosity in improper ways. We should, however, take
that risk and not tell them what we think they ought not to be
told. There are, of course, very few such things. If they want
to know about the obscene act, we should certainly not satisfy
their curiosity. Don't mind if they learn the facts in a clandestine
manner despite our forbidding it.
If children see birds engaged in the sex-act and want to
understand what it means, I would certainly satisfy their curiosity
and use the opportunity to teach them the lesson of brahmacharya.
I would teach them the distinction between man on the one hand
and birds and beasts on the other. All the men and women
who act in the same manner are, despite their human form, like
birds and beasts in that particular respect. There is no condem-
nation of anyone in this; it is only a statement of fact. We have
been granted the human form and our intelligence so that we may
rise above our animal nature.
All the facts about menstruation should be explained to a
girl who has reached puberty; if a younger girl comes to know
about the phenomenon and asks you about it, you may explain
to her, too, as many facts as she can understand.
Despite all our precautions, children will not always remain
ignorant about these facts. Hence, it would be better to impart
that knowledge to them at the proper time. If brahmacharya is
so frail a thing that a person who knows the facts about sex
cannot observe it, we have no use for such brahmacharya. The
knowledge of these facts should strengthen one's brahmacharya.
That is what happened in my case.
The motives for seeking or imparting this knowledge differ
from person to person. One person may seek it in order to gratify
his lust. Another may learn the facts without his showing any
curiosity about the subject. A third person may seek the know-
ledge in order to calm his passions and to help others.
One should impart this knowledge to others only if one is
fit for the job. You should have that ability, and also the con-
fidence that by imparting it to the girls you will not awaken
sex-thoughts in them. You should remember all the time that
you impart this knowledge to the girls in order that they may not
be disturbed by such thoughts. If you yourself are not free
from them you should take care that they do not disturb you
while you are imparting this knowledge to the girls.
The primary aim behind the partnership in life of man
and woman as husband and wife is physical enjoyment. Hinduism
has tried to teach in its place the practice of self-control, or
say, rather, that all religions have done so.
If the husband is Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwar, so is the
wife. A wife is not a servant; she is a friend with equal rights,
a partner in dharma. Each is the guru of the other.
A daughter's share should be equal to a son's.
A husband and a wife have equal rights in what either
earns. The husband earns with the wife's help, even if she does
no more than cook for the family. She is not a servant, but is
an equal partner.
A wife has the right to live separately from her husband if
he ill-treats her.
The two have equal rights over the children.
After the
children have grown up, neither of them has any. If the wife is
unfit to exercise her right, she loses it. And so does the husband.
In sum, I do not admit any differences between men and
women except those created by Nature which all of us can see.
I don't think now that I have left any of your questions on this
subject unanswered.
I have the fullest trust in Narandas. When he says that his
mind is at peace, I would not believe that it is not so. I have
cautioned him again and again. I will harass him no more from
this distance. He has great capacity for working in a spirit of
non-attachment. Such a person always works much more than
another who is attached to his work, and yet seems to be doing no
work. He is the last person to tire. Really speaking, he should
never feel tired, but that is only an ideal. Since you are on the
spot, your duty will be different from mine if you observe that
his mind is not at peace and that he is deceiving himself. In that
case you ought to caution him. I, too, would do that if I were
there and found that the evidence of my eyes contradicted what
he said. If he disagrees with you and rejects your advice, you
should accept what he says, so long as you believe that he is a
truthful man. Very often our eyes, too, deceive us. If I think
that you feel depressed but you contradict me, I must believe
you. If I have reason to fear or suspect that you are trying to
hide the fact from me, then it would be a different matter.
In that case I should not ask you.
I would have to seek other
means of discovering the truth. The Ashram life, however, can-
not go on thus. Truth is the very foundation of that life. There
even with a good motive one cannot deceive others.
You will read about khadi either in my letter to Narandas
or in the letter to children.
Ask Narandas and know from him why he does not try an
oil massage.
By all means wait for 4th July. But, then, 4th July of which
year is a matter for speculation. It doesn't matter which year,
though. It is much even if only the month and the date are
known for certain. We won't have to wait, then, for some other
month or date. After 4th July has passed, we shall wait in pati-
ence for the July of 1933.
BAPU
[PS.]
Vidya seems to require attention. I think she is dull.
She
does not even know how to ask questions. Look into this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10291. Also C.W. 6739. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
