179. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
BOMBAY,
Basant Panchami, [February 5] 1919
DEAR NARAHARI,
I have your letter. Even though we are meeting on Mon-
day, I am writing to you so that you can do some more
thinking. According to you, giving a literal meaning to a vow
amounts to special pleading. I do not agree, because I am not
aware of any special pleading at all. I gave it the meaning
that with the utmost humility and purity of mind I thought it
bore. Moreover, I also feel that our too strict adherence to the
words of the scriptures was not entirely special pleading, but
an admission of the fact that men are strong as well as weak.
For a man of strength, the literal meaning as well as the
implied meaning was kept. For a man given to weakness, the
literal meaning was considered sufficient, and the significance of
vows was retained.
One cannot find fault with this by saying
that hypocrites would stand to gain by this. The scriptures
were written with such people in view. Any loophole in a
vow indicates the uniqueness and completeness of the vow. Mere
abstention from milk does not serve the purpose for which the
vow had been taken. One must either prove that one can live
without milk or find a substitute for milk. And I shall conti-
nue my efforts to find a substitute for milk. Even if I die in
my search without succeeding it will not matter; because, if I
am fated to be born again, I shall re-enter the world with the
same desires with which I die. In writing all this, I am trying
to show that under some circumstances, even if we give up the
implied meaning of a vow and stick only to the literal mean-
ing, we will have followed the vow perfectly. The basis is the
same. Those who follow both the literal and the implied mean-
ing of a vow would no doubt occupy a higher place. Those
who follow the literal meaning will have to be content with
being at the ground level. But a person living at Matheran can
take full advantage of the place even if he lives in a hut. Simi-
larly, a person following the literal meaning can find the strength
which comes from the observance of a vow. Consider all this,
and when there is leisure, cross-examine me fully without any
hesitation. It is possible that wittingly or unwittingly I am be-
ing partial to the step I have taken. It is up to my colleagues
to save me from this fault. Maybe I have been wrong about
something, still I shall be making fewer mistakes than others.
But I know that that very knowledge can give me a terrible
blow. It is upto all of you to save me from that. I have dicta-
ted this letter while eating and while giving a sitting for a bust.
There will be no time even to revise it. If there is anything
that is not clear, ask me when I come.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11912
1 Gandhiji had taken a vow at the Tolstoy Farm in 1912 to abstain
from milk and milk products; vide Vol. XXXIX, pp. 262-.
2 After the very serious attack of dysentery in August, Gandhiji was not
able to recover his strength. He had been writing to friends to find a
substitute for milk. Vide Vol. XV, pp. 32 and 78-.
