189. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
November 1, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
There is a saying in English that great men think alike, and,
since both of us are great, we thought alike regarding the cre-
mation rites for Vithalbhai. I have written to Dahyabhai. I
am not likely to publish anything as being your view. With
regard to the wires and cables which you have received, after in-
forming the Major write one sentence in your next letter to me to
the following effect: "On my behalf please thank through the
Press all those who have sent letters and wires or cables of con-
dolence." If the Major cannot pass that on his own, he should
write to the I. G. and, if he passes it, we shall publish it . . . .5
Nariman was here yesterday. He took a fairly long time
with me and I readily gave it. My warden let me do that. Just
now, however, we may pound any amount of paddy we like but
we shall get nothing but chaff.
Deenabandhu is arriving here today. He is returning after an
extensive tour, and so I expect that he will want much time with
me and I shall have to give it.
Kaka's fast will end tomorrow. He is cheerful. He doesn't
seem to have been visibly affected by the fast.
He doesn't feel
a burning sensation [in passing urine] as I do. He can drink
plenty of water, no matter whether it is mixed with salt or
soda or is hot or cold. If God would grant me the same ability, I
should even at this age like to improve upon Bhansali's perfor-
mance. I wouldn't mind if, in consequence, I became crazy
like him. He wears a codpiece of hessian suspended from a string
of coir tied round his waist. He eats moistened flour and wanders
about. He reappears sometimes in the form of a postcard and
tells me in it that he is getting real spiritual experience only now.
During the fast, [Kaka] also did some writing through dicta-
tion. Prabhudas has become his honorary secretary and also
recites from the Gita for him. Since Prabhudas has been
Kaka's favourite disciple, the arrangement suits the latter very
well. Kishorelal and Gomati also arrived yesterday. I was
the cause of their coming.
.
.
.2
Kaka has done his duty as friend and father to the best of his
ability. . . continues to follow his own ways in his inordinate
pride. But I have not given up hope of him. I do believe, though,
that his eyes will not open till he stumbles some day. What you
say is quite right. A coward's wisdom won't carry him far. On
the contrary, if an insolent boy like . . .4 who is always flying
in the air, became wise, his wisdom would never desert him
afterwards and would help him fearlessly to mount the gallows.
But that seems too good to come true. I think Kaka will soon
regain his strength. Don't worry about him. During the fast, I
didn't let my knowledge as a quack rust, so that, over and above
the spiritual benefit from the fast, his body has certainly bene-
fited. You did well in administering a powerful dose of medicine
to . . .6 and Pandya .
But the effect of such medicines does
not last long and their reactions are sometimes dangerous. I am
not saying this to criticize your medicine. My only purpose is
to draw your attention to the truth. Mahadev writes to me regu-
larly. He has been collecting books from all sources. I suppose
one day all those books will go to a public library. I hope he
doesn't go blind in jail through excessive reading. I do intend to
send him a mildly-worded prohibitory order. Dr. Datta visited
Devdas [in jail]. The latter seems to be making good use of his
time. He reads, teaches, plays games and spins. My programme
is as follows: Up to the end of this month, the C.P., then Delhi,
then the Punjab, then Sind, then Rajputana, then the U.P.,
Bengal, Assam, etc. This is the plan at present. But it is not im-
possible that there may be some change in this programme and I
may go to Madras earlier. I shall be leaving this place on the
8th. I shall have to come back later for two or three days for
a tour of the Wardha taluka. I will write to Deodhar regarding
your letter. Rajendrababu has again been removed to a hospital.
I think he will now be kept there for some time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 39-43
