93. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Posh Sud 14 [January 25, 1918]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. The reason for handing over the material
to Mathuradas is that he may then publish it as he thinks fit.
English speeches must, of course, be translated. He can do this.
He is eager enough and likes the work. He is tempted by the
thought that, as he translates, he will discover himself. He is a
young man of character, and is anxious to serve the country. He
has clung to me and has made the request with the most admi-
rable motive. For all these various reasons, it seems right that he
should be allowed to do this work. He has ample time for
proof-reading, etc. Unless you help him, he is like a bird without
wings. He can collect the material only if we give him the arti-
cles. He too does not want to be content with translating Natesan's
volume. If you are free from this translation work, there is much
else you can do. There remains now only one thing to consider.
If you are committed to Akhandanandji and others and they
don't release you, then, Mathuradas will certainly have to be dis-
appointed. Even if they publish [the writings], it will be neces-
sary to make some arrangements about proofs.
I have gone through your list. You can expand it considerably,
if you care to. There are a great many articles of mine in Indian
Opinion which I thought very valuable. You can make a selection
from among them. Some of the petitions I drafted in South Africa
contain a good amount of history. The open letter I addressed
in 1894 and the Green Pamphlet which I wrote while here in India
are a digest of numerous Blue-books. The petition about indenture
which I drafted in 1894 contains the substance of several Govern-
ment dispatches on the subject. Thus, if you open the trunk of
South Africa [papers], you will get plenty of material of every
description. Anyone who feels tempted to collect it [in a volume]
will have not less than six months' work on his hands. If, however,
we publish Dharmaniti and other books, that will also make a
long list. The articles I wrote in England in 1890-91 are also
worth including. I don't know where you will find them. I have
a faint idea that Manilal or Harilal preserved them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the original Gujarati in Mahadev Desai's hand:
S.N. 6334
