318. LETTER TO VICEROY
August 14, 1931
Events have moved so fast that I have not had the time to
acknowledge your very kind personal letter of 31st July. I recog-
nize the sincerity running through that communication but the
latest developments have made that letter past history, and as
I have said in my wire of 13th inst., the sum total of all the
circumstances betrays a fundamental difference of outlook between
us. I can only give you my assurance that it was not without the
greatest and most anxious deliberation that I came to the con-
clusion that in view of your decision I could not, consistently with
my obligations here, attend the Round Table Conference. But I
was grieved when I heard that your decision was affected by the
opinion ascribed to you that I had insisted upon a board of
arbitration and that I was trying to set myself up as a head of
parallel government. As for the board of arbitration it is true that
I have claimed it as a matter of right but if you recall our con-
versation I never insisted upon it. On the contrary, I told you
that so long as I got the justice to which I was entitled I would
be quite satisfied. You will agree that this is wholly different
from insisting on a board of arbitration. As to the alleged parallel
government, I thought I had dispelled the illusion when, in
reply to a jocular remark by you, I had told you that I did
not claim to be a district officer but that my co-workers and I had
acted as voluntary Patels or village Headmen and that too with
the consent and knowledge of district officials. I should therefore
be sorry if these two opinions which I submit were erroneous
had affected your decision.
The purpose however of writing this letter is to inquire whe-
ther you regard the Settlement as now at an end or whether it
is to be still continued in spite of the abstention of the Congress
from participation in the Round Table Conference. The Working
Committee arrived at the following decision this morning:
In view of the resolution relating to the Congress non-participation
in the Round Table Conference passed by the Working Committee on
August 13, the Committee desires to make it clear that this resolution
should not be construed as ending the Delhi Settlement. The Committee
therefore advises Congress organizations and all Congressmen to continue
to comply, until further instructions, with the terms of the Settlement in
so far as they are applicable to the Congress.
From this you will observe that the Working Committee of
the Congress has no desire to embarrass the Government at the
present juncture and that therefore it is prepared to continue
honourably to work the Settlement. But such working must depend
upon a reciprocal attitude on the part of Provincial governments.
As I have told you so often through correspondence and our
conversations, this reciprocity has been found to be progressively
missing. Information continues to be received at the office of
the Working Committee of Government activity which can only
be interpreted to be token of a design to crush the Congress
workers and the normal Congress activities. If therefore the
Settlement is to abide I venture to think that an early relief in the
matter of complaints already filed is necessary. More, as I have
already said, are coming and co-workers are insistent that if
relief is not had in time they should at least get the permission
to adopt defensive measures. May I request an early reply?
Young India, 20-8-1931
