422. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER"
MARITZBURG,
April 9, 1907
[TO
THE EDITOR
THE NATAL ADVERTISER
DURBAN]
SIR,
You, as well as your contemporary The Natal Mercury, have
commented adversely upon Reuter's telegram regarding the report of
the Registrar of Asiatics, published in the Transvaal, on the working
of the permit system. If the facts as you state were true, every word
stated by you would be justified, and in order to deserve the credit for
honesty, which you have been good enough to give me, I should
undoubtedly have to recall all I have said in public in opposition to the
allegations as to illegal Asiatic influx into the Transvaal on a wholesale
basis. Happily for the cause I have the privilege of serving, it is not
necessary for me to withdraw anything I have hitherto said, for the
simple reason that Reuter's agency has been instrumental—quite
unwittingly—in telegraphing an utter mis-statement. It will now be
difficult to entirely undo the mischief created. Reuter's telegram stated
that out of 12,543 registrations only 4,144 were accepted as valid. This
is a condensation of a statement in the report which I have before me,
and the condensation gives a meaning opposite to the one intended
by the writer of the report. Allow me to state the position as briefly
as I can. Registration is not to be mixed up with the taking out of
permits. In 1903 there were 12,543 Asiatics at least in the Transvaal
with lawful authority. Lord Milner some time during the year issued
instructions to enforce Law 3 of 1885 and to exact £3 from those Asiatics
who had not paid the amount to the late Boer Government, and in
order to establish a uniform system of registration, he advised the Indian
community to take out new certificates, both for those who had taken
out £3 certificates before and those who had not.
This position the Indian community voluntarily accepted in order
to please His Lordship. What Mr. Chamney says in his report is that
out of 12,543 men who presented themselves for registration, 4,144
were able to make good their claim for exemption from payment of
£3. How many claimants were rejected is not stated, but the point is
perfectly clear that this registration did not affect the validity of the
permits already issued. As a matter of fact, registration was granted
only in favour of those who were in possession of permits. The statement
wired by Reuter, therefore, means that all but 4,144 had to pay the
sum of £3 in order to take out registration certificates, which did not
in any way replace the permits already issued, so that your inference
that 8,000 have managed to enter the Colony illegally is quite wide of
the mark. The fact that 144 Asiatics died, and only four of their permits
were recovered proves nothing except that the dead men forgot to return
their permits in anticipation. There is no law with reference to the
return of these documents, and it should be remembered that the men
died not in the Transvaal, but in India. The only paragraph, therefore,
in the report under discussion, dealing with illegal influx, is that wherein
876 men are alleged to have been found without permits or with stolen
permits. Assuming the accuracy of the figures given by Mr. Chamney,
all that has been proved is that about fifty stragglers per month entered
the Transvaal on false permits or without any. I will not trespass on
your courtesy by entering into further discussion beyond stating, without
meaning any disparagement to Mr. Chamney, that he, lacking the
judicial spirit, has not been able to distinguish between suspicion and
proof, and has made statements which do not bear a judicial scrutiny.
They are no more than assertions unsupported by facts, though, as I
have already stated, even the one assertion made in support of an illegal
influx is capable of being very much boiled down. There is, however,
nothing in that report to prove that there has been any encouragement
on the part of the Indian community as a whole to an illegal entry nor
of illegal influx on a wholesale basis. No one has ever denied the existence
altogether of illegal entries, but it is the wholesale basis that has been
challenged, and Mr. Chamney's report, even taken as it is, without
considering the natural defects I have drawn attention to, furnishes a
complete vindication of the British Indian position. Incidentally, I
might mention that your Johannesburg contemporary, The Rand Daily
Mail, who had the opportunity of reading the report itself, has come to
the conclusion opposite to yours, and it now asks whether, after all,
the new Bill is any cure for the evil of illegal entries so far as they have
been proved.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Advertiser, 11-4-1907
