54. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]
May 19, 1913
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 9th instant in reply to my letter of the 30th ultimo.
I observe that the Hon'ble the Minister resents any reference
to passive resistance. I am sorry but the reference as a state-
ment of facts was inevitable. There was no desire to use any
threats. Revival of passive resistance is no threat but a certainty,
should the Government unfortunately find it impossible or be
reluctant to carry out the sacred promise made by the predeces-
sor, in office, of the Hon'ble the Minister. The promise was made
in the name of the Government and in its name it was repeated
last year. Everyone of the points raised by the Association arises
out of the terms of the provisional settlement. Moreover, I am
constrained to point out that the policy hitherto pursued by the Gov-
ernment in administering the existing legislation affecting the
community represented by my Association is wholly at variance
with the "desire" expressed in your letter not to treat that com-
munity in any but an entirely fair manner! My countrymen consi-
der not only not fair but harsh and unjust the treatment meted
to wives who wish to join their husbands in South Africa or
minor children who wish to join their parents, or to those, as in
Natal, who want to re-enter on the strength of previous resi-
dence or to those, as in the Cape, who try to re-enter after the expiry
of the period mentioned in their permits of absence or to those
who want temporary permits to enter the Transvaal. It may be
added that, if the community in the Transvaal has not been al-
together extinguished under the combined effect of the Gold
Laws and the Townships Act, it has to thank the Supreme
Court and not the Government who so ungenerously attempted to
read a meaning into the Acts which they did not bear. Even the
marriage trouble is due entirely to the deliberately hostile policy
of the Government. They could have avoided the ruling of the
Court by simply allowing the only wife of the applicant in
South Africa to join her husband. It will thus be seen that any
pressure that could be put upon the Government by the Euro-
pean community cannot, in my humble opinion, result in greater
cruelty being practised upon my community, short of its utter anni-
hilation. And if passive resistance, i.e., self-inflicted suffering of
my community, should prompt measures to destroy its exis-
tence in South Africa, I doubt not that it will prefer such des-
truction to a destruction of its honour, its religious sentiments and
its self-respect.
I have, [etc.,]
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 5755
