280. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
7, BUITENCINGLE,
[CAPE TOWN,]
Phagan Sud 3 [February 28, 1914]
CHI. MANILAL,
I have your letter. I know that you are sorry. You haven't
the courage to answer when someone asks you why you went away.
It shouldn't be difficult for you to say that you were sent away to
live by yourself because father did not like your ways. You should
realize that in releasing you from attendance on Ba and asking you
to go, without thinking of my personal convenience, I must have
acted with the purest of love. More than your services, I want
good behaviour from you. If you become so good that you will
never make a slip, I should ask for no more. I would tell Ba too
that it was as well you had left. For the last four days I have
been seeing that there is meat on the table thrice a day. I
manage to finish my meals earlier since I have changed the
hours. It hurt me very much yesterday to have to see all that
meat in front of me and I simply did not know what to do. I
have now decided that, as far as possible, my meal-hours shall
not be the same as theirs. They are not at fault in this matter.
They tell me quite frankly [that I can fix my own hours].
Formerly, I was not sensitive about this. It is only now that I
am growing so. This sensitiveness on my part is a good sign. At
the same time they are not to be blamed for having all these
things prepared. But I would certainly not wish you to be placed
in such surroundings. But for Ba being with me, I would touch
none of the preparations. At present, all sorts of things are being
prepared. They have bun and also jam; and even ground-nut is
cooked. Of course, this is not the reason for my sending you
away. But having regard to this as well, I think it is good you
have left. So long as Mr. Andrews was here, he acted as a shield
for you, but they would not have desisted from meat-preparations
on your account. Your going away can do you nothing but good.
If you are keen on serving Ba or me, you will certainly have the
opportunity to do so. That will be only when you are earnest in
your desire, or when, wanting your services out of our pure selfish-
ness, I spoil you. This can never be, so that your serving [us]
depends entirely on the effort you make. Consider the full meaning
of this letter and ponder over it. Do not be angry with father.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5650
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
