254. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
CALCUTTA,
July 22, 1925
MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,
I have your two letters. I must not try to write myself just
now. My right hand refuses to bear any strain. It insists upon
rest. Hence this dictating. I had a long chat with Shuaib. He
thinks that he is utterly incompetent for Comrade work not be-
cause of his inability as editor, but because of incompatibility of
temperament. He says what is the use of going there only to prove
a dismal failure. Knowing Shuaib as I now do, I see considerable
force in what he says. I am quite clear in my mind that, if im-
mediate and definite assistance is not procurable, Mahomed Ali
should give up both the papers or at least one. A good soldier,
when he knows defeat to be a certainty, takes to an orderly retreat
and does not wait for completion of the disaster or annihilation.
But you know best, not he. I have the same faith in your robust
common sense that I started with. You must, therefore, exercise
your judgment and lay down the law for Mahomed Ali. I am
following the movements of both of you as much as it is possible
for me to do without reading newspapers. With us, or better still,
with you, the battle has only now begun. I say 'with you' for
the simple reason that I am now inured to difficulties and dangers
and defeats so called. My heart and my prayers are with you.
I must still remain in Calcutta to finish the ten lakhs. It is
an uphill job, but it delights my heart to see the poorest of Bengal
giving their pice and even their half-pice. You must have seen
what I am doing and I have done regarding the Swarajists. I am
trying to give them all help that I am capable of rendering, and
personally I am certain that the Congress must be wholly theirs,
and we who do not believe in Council-entry should remain in the
Congress on their sufferance. But this time I have avoided any
understanding.
The All-India Congress Committee will be
absolutely free to take any decision it likes unhampered by me or
anybody else. So far as I am concerned, I am becoming more
and more convinced that, when there is a wreckage of every-
thing else, hand-spinning and khaddar will survive.
It is only
safe and potent constructive activities which can remain un-
affected by any storm however violent. Shuaib knows, I think,
the goal of my mind and so does Shankerlal1, who was here.
I
must refer you to them for the balance and then to the pages of
Young India, which is more and more becoming my weekly letter
to my friends.
Yours sincerely,
MAULANA SHAUKAT ALI
From a photostat: S.N. 19339
