43. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
September 30, 1933
DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
As you are aware, the 'Satyagraha Ashram' grounds with the
buildings in Sabarmati were abandoned on the 1st of August
last by the Ashram people. I had expected that the Govern-
ment would, in view of my letter addressed to them, take charge
of this abandoned property, but they did not do so. It then
became a question with me as to what was my duty in the cir-
cumstances. I felt that it was wrong altogether to allow the
valuable buildings to waste. I consulted friends and co-workers
and came to the conclusion that the best use to make of the
Ashram was to dedicate it once for all for the service of the
Harijans. I placed my proposal before the trustees of the Ashram
who are out, as also fellow members. They have, I am happy to
say, whole-heartedly approved of it. When the property was
abandoned there certainly was the expectation that some day,
whether through an honourable settlement or India coming to her
own, the trustees would resume possession. Under the new pro-
posal, the trustees divest themselves entirely of the property.
This procedure is permissible under the Trust-deed service of
the Harijans being one of the objects of the trust. There-
fore, the new proposal is wholly in keeping with the letter
and spirit of the constitution of the Ashram, as also of the
Trust.
The question that the trustees and I had to consider was, to
whom was the property to be transferred for the specific use I
have mentioned; and we came unanimously to the conclusion that
it should be transferred to the all-India Harijan organization for
all-India use. The objects of the Trust are: (i) to settle on the
Ashram ground approved Harijan families subject to regulations
to be framed; (ii) to open a hostel for Harijan boys and girls with
1 Dated July 26, vide Vol. LV, pp. 301-.
2 Jamnalal Bajaj and Chhaganlal Gandhi
3 Vide Vol. XXIX, pp. 434-.
4 Vide Vol. XXXVI, pp. 398-410.
41
liberty to take non-Harijans; (iii) to conduct a technological
department for teaching the art of skinning carcasses, tanning the
hide so obtained, curing it and manufacturing leather so prepared
into shoes, sandals and other articles of daily use; and lastly, to
use the premises as offices for the Central Board or the Gujarat
provincial organization or both, and such other allied uses that
the committee, referred to in the following paragraph, may think
proper.
On behalf of the trustees, I suggest that the Servants of
Untouchables Society should appoint a special committee with
yourself and the Secretary as ex-officio members, and three
Ahmedabad citizens, with power to this committee to add to
their number, to take over this Trust and to give effect to its
objects.
Two friends who have been always associated with the Ashram,
viz., Sjts. Budhabhai and Juthabhai, have offered to reside on
the premises as honorary managers. They have their own means
and have been devoted to the service of the Harijans for a long
time. There is also an inmate of the Ashram, who has dedi-
cated his life to Harijan service, and who will gladly stay on the
premises. He has almost become a specialist as a teacher of
Harijan boys and girls. The committee I have suggested, there-
fore, should have no difficulty in managing the Trust; nor is it
necessary that all the activities I have mentioned should be simul-
taneously and immediately undertaken. Some Harijan fami-
lies, as you are aware, are already living there. It has long been
a dream of the members of the Ashram to establish a colony of
Harijan families, but beyond having a few of them we were not
able to make further progress. Experiments in tanning were also
conducted there. Manufacture of sandals was going on up to the
time of disbandment. The buildings contain a spacious hostel
easily accommodating 100 boarders. It has a fairly big weaving
shed and other buildings exceptionally fitted for the uses I have
named. The property contains 100 acres. I venture to say,
therefore, that the site is none too large for the fulfilment of the
objects mentioned, but it is large enough for the response that
may be reasonably expected for some time to come. I hope that
the Society will have no objection to accept the offer of the
trustees and to take over the responsibility implied in the ac-
ceptance.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
PRESIDENT
SERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES SOCIETY
BIRLA MILLS, DELHI
C.W. 7937. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
