110. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
POONA,
November 13, 1945
CHI. JIVANJI,
I have your letter.
I have been working since the last eight days on the booklet
regarding constructive work. That is to say, I have been giving
it every minute that I can spare from time to time. I finished it
two days ago, but I made so many revisions that I intend to get
some portions rewritten. So that has taken another two days
and is likely to take two more days still. To that extent the
pamphlet will become new and perfect. I could have polished it
still further. But is not greed a hill that lives and grows? It
is not inert. Do not believe all that has appeared in the news-
papers regarding Sardar's biography. I have not seen the report.
Patel or Nehru and merely signed by Gandhi"! The Transfer of Power,
Vol. VI, p. 48. In his Journal, p. 185, he describes the letter as malevolent.
When I heard about the plan for presenting a book of tributes
to Sardar, as promised, I put an end to it and suggested that
an authentic biography be written instead. There would be no
question of presenting it to him. I therefore refused to give a
message when they approached me and thus stopped the plan
for tributes. It was Munshi who took the lead and I, therefore,
suggested that if he took up the work he would be able to do
full justice to it. I have not inquired what happened or is hap-
pening after that. I do not know whether you are writing the
biography or getting it written. You may ask Munshiji direct.
The work is entrusted to Patil and Tendulkar. The latter is to
work as Munshi's assistant. If, therefore, Munshi has agreed,
you should put together all the material you get and send it to
Munshiji. If he is not going to do the work, ask me again. I
had also suggested that the date for publication of the book
should be announced right now and we should adhere to it.
You may take it that as regards the journals I am ready.
I do not know, though, how far I shall be able to cope with
the work. But I think I must do it if the publication can be
resumed without difficulty. You need not flatter anybody. Mava-
lankar or you may meet the Magistrate officially and ask him.
If he agrees, take out a licence. We should give no binding,
orally or in writing. Only if the Government also wants the
publication of the journals to be resumed may we bring them
out. It would be intolerable if they were to demand a security
as soon as an article appeared. If they are interested in the
publications being resumed, they will have to give us the required
paper. After all, how much would we need? There is no question
of advertisements. We shall have to print a large number of
copies. We must print as many as there is a demand for. I
expect that we shall have to print at least as many as we used
to do. Give me full details. And give me reasonable time for
the first issue. You may, thus, assume that I shall be ready even
if I am touring at the time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9957. Also C.W. 6931. Courtesy :
Jivanji D. Desai
