57. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
CAMP SAHARANPUR,
October 25, 1929
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I noticed in the papers that you and Lala Shankerlal are
appealing for a purse to be presented to me on my arrival in
Delhi earmarked for local Congress work. Nowhere have purses
of this description been countenanced. Purses earmarked for
provincial service have been accepted in some places but every-
where the principal purse has been for khadi. Here if the papers
1 Vide p. 36.
correctly report you the purse is exclusively for local Congress
work. This may not be done on any account. If nobody cares for
khadi I think that no collections should be made. I must also
say that I would discountenance anything done by Lala Shankerlal
in connection with my visit. My experience of him has not been
happy. He has still not refunded so far as I am aware the moneys
due to the All-India Spinners' Association. He has not sent the
full amount collected in the name of the Bardoli struggle to Bardoli.
There have been several other complaints made to me from
time to time about his financial dealings but I have not thought
it worth while to investigate them. I know that Jamnalalji and
several others have the same experience of him. I am sorry. But
as I saw his name associated with yourself I thought I should tell
you what I feel about him. You may certainly show this letter to
him. If any injustice has been done to him and if I can be con-
vinced of it I shall tender my apology to him. I did write to him
once or twice about the All-India Spinners' Association money and
then in despair gave up writing anything to him further. I would
have preferred silence even now. But I would have been guilty of
suppressing the truth if I had not told you of my opinion of Lala
Shankerlal. I hope you will not arrange for any public meeting
either unless it is really called for. I must visit Delhi now as it
has been announced and I have sent appointments to some
people. I am staying with Raghbir as he wrote to me whilst I
was in Mussoorie reminding me of the promise I made him when
I was last in Delhi that on my next visit I shall stay with him. I
expect to reach Delhi on the 1st proximo, by car from Meerut
time in the evening.
I hope you got a fat sum from Bhopal and that you had a
successful tour in the South so far as the Jamia is concerned. I saw
in the public Press that your tour was wholly successful otherwise.
Hayat met me in Mussoorie. Rest of this when we meet.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 15709
