514. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
PANCHGANI,
June 12, 1945
CHI. PREMA,
I have your long letter. I have explained the ideal to you.
You yourself can, by keeping it before you, answer all the ques-
tions in the same way as every student of geometry can draw
a line by keeping Euclid's ideal line in his mind. Now try to
understand.
I know the ideal, and I will, therefore, utilize the services of
educated women only for the realization of the ideal. If necessary,
I will pay them enough for their livelihood. But they will give
more than what they take. If they do not, they will be of no use.
If it becomes necessary to run a camp to train them as teach-
ers, I will do so.
Whether I give six months or twelve months
or even more to the backward class women will depend on ex-
perience. Won't it? I shall not bother about that, for, since they
will be learning through the crafts, they will be paying their
expenses, or will be fit to do so in the shortest possible period.
What if people believe that I have failed? My failure is not
the ideal. And how can a man who is progressing towards the
ideal be regarded to have failed? Does the fact that you yourself,
though you have lived in the Ashram, are not able to live up to the
ideal prove that the ideal is impossible to attain or that you are
unworthy?
If the admission of uneducated women to the camp makes it
impossible to run it, then it will be impossible to effect progress in
villages. Even if it is proved that Acharya Bhagwat has failed or
even if he shares your view, I will not be deterred. Our mettle will
be proved by our making possible what seems impossible today.
Sushila Pai is here. I will give her this letter. She will write
further.
And now the next point. I stick to what I told you concern-
ing Bhulabhai. He is here just now. It is 6.40 in the morning.
He will leave at 10. I don't know that those who are in prison
will be released. It will of course be good if they are. If people
are angry with Bhulabhai, they should be angry with me, too.
For he will not pursue his plan, which I know, if I disapprove
of it. I do not believe what the members of the Working Commit-
tee are supposed to have said. And if they have in fact said
that, they have done so without authority. What do prisoners
know about conditions outside? According to my principle, they
have no right even to try and know. And even if they differ
from me, what does it matter? They will be free to do what
they like after they are released. I have no right at all to vote.
Am I not only an adviser? Don't ever believe what the news-
papers say. Of what good is it anyway? If I knew that I should die
tomorrow, such knowledge of the future could only do harm.
The same is true in this case. Yes, I will say this much : Bhula-
bhai does not know what the newspapers know. If so, how am I
likely to know?
How can I or anyone else say what I would do in certain
circumstances? If you can guess about the future from what I
am doing today, you may do so. I cannot do even that, for I am
daily coming to realize more clearly that we ruin our lives by form-
ing views about hypothetical matters. There is meaning only in
what we do concerning what is actual. All else is meaningless.
Don't you still know my limitations and my approach? Didn't
Kumarappa resign only after consulting me? Wasn't I a party to
the offer of military help in the resolution of August 1942?
What does it matter if, while I do one thing, the others do the
opposite and I let them? And what else could I do? I would tell
you only this : that after having been with me for so long, and
later staying away from me, you now behave as if you were
still with me. Even then I would advise you to observe my
actions and the views I express, think over them and then do
what seems to you best, feeling certain that you will have my
support in what you do. For I do not wish to make everybody
like me. My teaching is that everybody should be true to himself.
Anybody who has digested my teaching will never fall into doubt
but will ever go forward.
Manibehn also is here. I have left the rest to Sushila Pai.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Read the letter carefully. Ask me again if you do not under-
stand any point.
From a photostat of the Hindi and Gujarati: G.N. 10435. Also C.W.
6874. Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak
