1. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 4, 1922
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have kept your letter of the 19th February in order to be
able to write to you at length.
Your first question is whether the requisite non-violent atmos-
phere can at all be attained and if so when. This is really a ques-
tion as old as non-co-operation. It puzzles me to find some of
the closest and most esteemed of co-workers putting the ques-
tion as if the requirement was a new thing. I have not the shadow
of a doubt that, if we can secure workers with an abiding faith in
non-violence and in themselves, we can ensure the non-violent
atmosphere required for the working of civil disobedience. The
discovery I have made during these few days is that very few
understand the nature of non-violence. The meaning of the adjec-
tive "civil" before "disobedience" is of course "non-violent".
Why should the people not be trained to refrain from partici-
pating in activities which are likely to throw them off their
balance? I agree that it will be difficult to get 30 crores of
people to be non-violent, but I refuse to believe that it is
difficult, if we can get intelligent and honest workers, to
make people who are not actively participating in the move-
ment remain indoors. Now, at Chauri Chaura the procession
was deliberately formed by volunteers. It was wickedly taken
in the direction of the Thana. In my opinion, the forming of
the procession itself was easily avoidable. Having been formed,
it was the easiest thing to avoid passing the Thana. Two or
three hundred volunteers are reported to have been in the
procession.
I hold that it was equally easy for this large
number of volunteers to have effectively prevented the atro-
cious murder of the constables or at least for everyone of them
to have perished in the flames lit by the mob which they were
leading. I must not also omit to tell you that these men knew
that trouble was brewing, knew that the Sub-Inspector was
there, knew that there was collision between him and the people
on two former occasions. Was not the Chauri Chaura tragedy
absolutely capable of being avoided? I admit that nobody plot-
ted the murder, but the volunteers should have foreseen the conse-
quence of what they were doing. Of the Bombay tragedy I was
myself a witness. The workers neglected the duty of telling the
people, whilst they were preparing them about boycott, to remain
tolerant, as also of posting volunteers in areas visited by the
labouring population. I myself neglected the duty of putting down
every insolent laying of hands upon other people's turbans and
caps. Finally take Madras. Not one single incident which hap-
pened in Madras was unavoidable. I hold the Congress Com-
mittee responsible for all that happened in Madras. With the
experience of Bombay fresh in their minds they could, even if they
were not fully confident, have avoided hartal. The fact is in every
case all the workers did not understand the full purpose of non-
violence nor its implications. They liked and loved excitement,
and underneath these vast demonstrations was an idea unconsci-
ously lurking in the breast that it was a kind of demonstration of
force, the very negation of non-violence. To follow out non-vio-
lence as a policy surely does not require saints for its working,
but it does require honest workers who understand what is expec-
ted of them.
You say that the people work under the spell of one year's
limit. There is much truth in what you say, but there again, if
the people worked slowly under that spell, they were certainly not
working for swaraj. I can understand some temporary excite-
ment, but excitement must not be the whole thing, nor the main
part of a great national activity. Swaraj after all is not a mango
trick; it is a steady evolution, steady growing into strength such
that a period must arrive when our strength has assumed such
proportions as to tell upon the usurpers, but every moment of our
activity we are gaining swaraj.
Certainly a peaceful Tehsil at the foot of the Himalayas will
be affected by a violent hamlet situated near the Cape Comorin
if there is a vital connection between the two, as there must be if
they are both integral parts of India and your swaraj flag is to
dominate both. At the same time, for mass civil disobedience in
Bardoli, I would certainly have thought nothing of anything hap-
pening in an out-of-the-way Tehsil which had not come under
the influence of the Congress and which had not resorted to vio-
lence in connection with any Congress activity. You cannot predi-
cate any such want of connection about Gorakhpur, Bombay or
Madras. Violence broke out in connection with a national acti-
vity. You have the forcible illustration of Malabar. There it was
organized and sustained violence offered by the Moplahs, and yet
I did not allow Malabar to affect any of our plans, nor have I
altered my views during all these months.
I can still distinguish
between Malabar and Gorakhpur. The Moplahs themselves had
not been touched by the non-co-operation spirit. They are not
like the other Indians nor even like the other Mussulmans. I
am prepared to admit that the movement had an indirect effect
upon them. The Moplah revolt was so different in kind that it
did not affect the other parts of India, whereas Gorakhpur was
typical, and therefore, if we had not taken energetic steps, the
infection might easily have spread to the other parts of India.
You say that, individual civil disobedience being withdrawn,
there will be no opportunity to test the temper of the people. We
do not want to test the temper. On the contrary we want the people
to become immersed in industries and constructive activities so
that their temper is not exposed to the constant danger of being
ruffled. A man wishing to gain self-control instead of exposing
himself to temptations avoids them, though, at the same time,
he is ready for them if they come to him unsought and in spite
of his wanting to avoid them.
We certainly have not suspended any item of non-co-opera-
tion. This you will see clearly brought out in Young India. I am
satisfied that our success depends upon our cultivating exemplary
self-restraint and not disobeying even unseen orders of prohibition
of meetings. We must learn to conduct our campaign in spite
of prohibitions and without civil disobedience. If the people want
excitement, we must refuse to give it to them even though we have
to risk unpopularity and find ourselves in a hopeless minority.
Even a few hundred chosen workers, scattered throughout the
length and breadth of the country, stolidly following the programme
will create a far more lasting impression than a haphazard mass
movement undertaken in order to truckle to the multitude. I
would like you therefore to become introspective and to find out
for yourself the truth. If you still consider that there is a flaw in
the reasoning I have put before you, I would like you to com-
bat the position I have taken. I want us all to think originally and
to arrive at independent conclusions.
A drastic overhauling of
ourselves and of the movement is absolutely necessary. I do not
mind having finally to find out that non-violence is an impracti-
cable dream. If such is our belief, it will be at least an honest
belief. For me there is but one thing. I would love to con-
template the dreamland of non-violence in preference to the
practicable reality of violence. I have burnt my boats, but that
has nothing to do with any of my co-workers. The majority of
them have come into the movement as a purely political move-
ment. They do not share my religious beliefs, and I do not seek
to thrust them upon them.
You must get better soon and, if necessary, you should come
here to further discuss the matter.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 7977
