18. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
Private
As AT SABARMATI,
June 19, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your two letters, both of them quite like you. Here is
my answer to the moral questions you have placed. It is perfectly
true that I would have prohibition of foreign cloth by one blow
if I could manage it and would not feel that there was the slightest
trace of violence in it. At this conclusion I arrived in 1889 and
'90 when I was studying in London and keenly following the con-
troversy between total prohibitionists and temperance reformers.
The former were led by Sir Wilfred Lawson who contended that
all public houses could be closed without any compensation being
paid to the keepers. The temperance party which was really the
party financed by the public-house keepers put up a strong and
successful fight for compensation and graduation. If a man is
making a living out of wrongdoing he gains no prescriptive right
and therefore is entitled to no compensation or consideration when
his business is stopped whether by the State or by his customers
refusing to deal with him. It is irrelevant to consider what would
happen to the many labourers who might be engaged uncon-
sciously in helping the wrongdoer. The assumption at the back
of this argument is that wrong must be righted at any cost and
that the harm that may temporarily seem to result to the wrong-
doer and his dependents is only apparent and that in the end he
and they are all the better for it. If such was not the case, many
a reform would become impossible. Of course it is open to you
to say that you will not put foreign-cloth trade on a level with
liquor or opium trade. But this is a matter of opinion.
If I was bolstering up the Bombay mills in any shape or form
it would undoubtedly be violence. But my conscience is quite
clear on that point. I am not only not bolstering up the Indian
mills but I am fighting them in many matters. My intervention
has resulted in steady improvement of the conditions of labour.
If these mills interfered with khaddar I should desire their boycott
just as strongly as that of foreign mills.
The remedy for unemployment in England is not thoughtless
generosity of India but a complete realization by England of the
awfulness of exploitation of people, violently brought under sub-
jection by her, and consequent radical changes in her conception
of the standard of life and a return to simplicity. Has generosity,
in respect of a man more fortunate than himself, any meaning for
the man who is living in a state of chronic starvation?
The South African analogy you have quoted is improper.
What you regard as generous action was really necessary action in
terms of non-violence. In order to show that my fight was not in-
tended to embarrass the Government or to seize power I was
bound in pursuance of non-violence to suspend the struggle in
order to show that I had no sympathy with the Europeans who
were bent on embarrassing the Government to the point of mak-
ing it so powerless as to enable them to seize the reins them-
selves. Occasions here for what you would call generosity occurred
at the time of the Delhi Settlement and are occurring whilst the
Settlement is being worked and it would delight your heart if you
knew how every such occasion has been fully availed of. And even
with reference to the present unemployment in England, many a
generous gesture is possible but none is possible if it means con-
tinuance of injury to India or fresh injury. If England ceased
to think imperially, if India came to her own and instead of be-
ing a dependency of England became a real partner or ally,
England could get preferential treatment in hundreds of things,
which an awakened India on her road to prosperity would re-
quire from the West. If therefore Lancashire cannot keep all its
labour going through spinning and weaving mills working for
other markets, it should find out some other use for it. Lastly,
remember that even if there was no boycott of foreign cloth and
open competition Japan would outdistance Lancashire as it is al-
ready doing.
I have your cable. Of course if I came to London my move-
ment will be in your hands and I would gladly go to Lancashire
as early as you would want me to.
I quite agree with you that your name should remain in the
background as much as possible.
What undignified controversy over my part in the Boer War.
I had to give the facts to Reuter & The Statesman.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 969
