467. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
August 28, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
I got your small booklet of nine pages. I could hardly hold
my sides with laughter. I remember to have laughed like this
only once in my youth when I had drunk some bhang. But please
do not conclude from this that you should go on sending amusing
books. It is for you to teach the boys to say sthira or khade ho
instead of "stop". Under the intoxicating effect of your letter,
I mix Hindi with Gujarati. I cannot explain from here how you
can persuade the boys to do so. They must feel the power of your
love and knowledge so that they will start using a Hindi or Urdu
word for "stop". As you become more and more frank and
loving and humble, those who are learning Hindi will increasingly
come to love the language. Any boy or boys who acquire
sufficient proficiency in Hindi to be able to teach it to small
children may certainly be given charge of their class.
By showing that even Arjuna gets exhausted and that no one
remains alive, the author of the Mahabharata has demonstrated
the folly of armed war. The Lord's description of Himself in the
Gita is put by the author in His mouth. In fact God is formless
and speaks or does nothing. The question, then, is whether such
words can be put in God's mouth. I feel that it can certainly be
done. God is omnipotent and omniscient. Anything that an
omniscient Being speaks is perfect truth, and therefore it cannot
be described as boasting. Such description of himself by a human
being would not be proper, since man cannot know his strength
and power rightly. If, however, in reply to a question, a man
gives his correct height, his doing so is not boasting but simple
statement of truth. If a person who is five feet tall says that
he is four feet tall, that is not humility on his part. It is either
inexcusable ignorance or hypocrisy.
Lady Cat and her children are always enjoying themselves and
turn up at meal-times to claim their share. They never touch
anything except what is offered to them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6102. Also C.W. 3424. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
