134. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
WARDHA HOSPITAL,
September 10, 1936
CHI. LILAVATI,
I understand from Mahadev that you have developed a
dislike for Segaon, and whenever you think of the place you
become miserable. You have lost your peace of mind. Since
you had taken a decision, you want to spend a year somehow
with me. I had known this all along. Now it is all the more
clear. I must consider now what my duty is. For me to seek
forgiveness from children is nothing new.
The most recent
example is that of Kusum. If you do not know about it ask
her. Perhaps even Mahadev can tell you. If I had reason to
ask Kusum's forgiveness, I have still more reason to ask your
forgiveness.
I thought I was protecting you like a flower.
Whether you were aware of it or not, despite all the harsh
words I threw at you, I was protecting you against attacks
from others. But I set no store by it. What has value is the
impression made on you. Judging by that standard, I acknowl-
edge my failure. Forgive me for the unhappiness I caused
you. I shall not let such a situation be repeated. But now I
have lost self-confidence. You do not have to ask your freedom
from me. But you have to free yourself of me. Or, say, I have
to give you your freedom. Only a few can learn from me by
being physically near me. Countless persons have been able
to do that while being away from me. You are one of them.
If you wish to learn something from me while being away, I am
willing to teach you regularly through letters. Your coming to
Segaon is going to benefit neither you nor me. I shall have
to be constantly on my guard if I take you with me. You
would not like me to be in such a pitiable state. The situation
in which parents have to guard themselves from children is
always to be avoided. So you should give up your insistence on
coming to Segaon. There is no reason to be unhappy about it.
There is no reason for you to feel ashamed as you are not
giving up Segaon. In despair I am making you give up Segaon.
Respect this wish of mine in good cheer. It is my duty and
81
SV: III. 6
yours to avoid a situation in which you may break down at the
end of a year and your heart may be filled with contempt for
me. How can I explain this better? I particularly wish that you
should go to Rajkot and help Narandas. You have hardly any
place now at Maganwadi. The kitchen is being discontinued.
What would you do in that event? There is no provision at
all at Maganwadi to accommodate women. Of course, you may
stay in the Mahila Ashram.
But Mahadev will guide you in
this regard. I urge you once again that you should forget the
unhappiness you have suffered at Segaon.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
