70. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
October 29, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You have made yourself an advertising agent for me. You compel
people to like me where before they did not. I can only hope that
I shall die as you think I am. I have, I think, often told you that no
man may be called good before his death. Departure by a hair's breadth
from the straight and narrow path may undo the whole of his past.
We have no guide that a man whom we consider to be good is really
good except after he is dead.
Mrs. Mayo writes to me about you in most flattering terms. You
have found a place in her heart and she in yours. Your reply to her
about me is quite characteristic of you. And I feel sure of this much
that if I did go to India, I should certainly not surrender an iota of
my (our) ideals. But I do not think I am going. I need not therefore
detain you on this topic. How I wish I had seen the people whom
you describe. Your descriptions would then be more life-like for me.
1 Maganlal Gandhi
2 Vide also Vol. XI, pp. 176-.
Horhoff has been deducting 10/- per month for a certain tenant he says
he has brought in. Did you make any such arrangement with him ? Miss
Bennett says Horhoff never brought any tenant. I have therefore asked
him to refund what he has deducted.
I have not worried about the extracts from the book — can't get
the time at all.
Albrecht does unthinkingly profess to know more than he does. He
has no notion of fence-building. I have been doing it myself for the
last five days and I think that I shall be able to finish it myself. Albrecht
has a very good eye for straightness. He is still with me and I am
doing the work subject to his approval. I can only hope that we all
unknowing people will not make a mess of it. Anyhow we are making
steady progress.
I may tomorrow accept the tender of Stewarts and Lloyds for a
windmill for £72 odd. Kennedy says his is the best tender. I propose
shifting one of the tanks. The windmill will draw 400 gallons per hour.
Our tanks are, I think, 1,000 gallons each. The overflow water will
be allowed to run through the natural gutter on to the present dam.
In all this I am being guided by Albrecht. He thinks we ought to make
some use of the water we have.
I fear your hope that I should be the first agriculturist on the Farm
is a vain hope. I hardly think I can overtake you there. You have,
in this matter at any rate, a natural ability that I have not. And I am
still hovering about the outskirts of farming. I have not yet really touched
and mastered a single tree.
We had a visit from Adams 1 today. He would not get off his cart.
He, however, had our coffee.
With you I do not think much of the medical examination by the
doctors. You must be the best judge of your system. Loss of weight
is of no consequence. I still feel that both morally and physically we
are well without salt and the things we have abandoned.
I must now close as I have much more to write and the watch
shows already 9 p.m.
Kennedy has not come again.
Gordon, I think I have told you, passed nearly the whole of last
week at the Farm. He will come again.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Dr. Adams
