385. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
JOHANNESBURG,
March 4, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
Will you please convey my thanks to General Smuts for the en-
couraging wire just received? I need hardly repeat what I have said
in my letter of the 2nd instant, that it is my sincere desire to help to
bring the struggle to a close. I, therefore, welcome the assurance that
those Asiatics who pass the education test will not be subject to the
Registration Act No. 36 of 1908 of the Transvaal, which is not to be
repealed.
I have naturally not relied, in this very important matter, on my
own unaided interpretation of the Bill. I have now received Counsel's
opinion, which advises that my interpretation is totally wrong, and that
Section 1 of the Bill does not protect educated Asiatics from being sub-
ject to Act 36. The opinion before me states emphatically that Section 7,
if nothing else, militates against any such interpretation. I, therefore,
venture to submit that the Bill should be so amended in Committee as to
make the point absolutely clear. I am sure that General Smuts will
agree with me that this time nothing should be left understood or un-
certain so far as the meaning of the Bill and the intention of the Gov-
ernment are concerned.
The opinion in question also raises a difficulty which I had not
anticipated, namely, that the minor children of registered Asiatics who
are not at present in the Transvaal are not at all protected, in spite
of the judgment in the Chhotabhai case, and that neither the wives nor
the minor children will have common law protection in this Bill. I
trust, therefore, that these two points will also be made perfectly clear
during the Committee stage.
On receipt of a satisfactory assurance on the points I have taken
the opportunity of raising in this letter, I shall be prepared to advise
the community in the Transvaal to send a formal acquiescence, and
passive resistance will then naturally end. May I also express the hope
that, if the assurance requested is given, those who are now in gaol will
be discharged, and those who have been suffering rightly or wrongly
for conscience' sake will not be penalised, but that the rights which every
passive resister would have under Act 36 of 1908 will be respected.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5227; also
Indian Opinion, 18-3-1911
