481. LETTER TO GULBAI D. MEHTA
SODEPUR,
January 5, 1946
CHI. GULBAI,
I have your letter. I was thinking of writing a third letter
when yesterday I got your letter. I certainly have no faith in
vaccination. My views have not changed. They are firm. There-
fore if I had my way I would not have Chi. Ardeshir vaccinated.
I would risk an attack of smallpox. But I know Dinshaw
believes in vaccination. His views on nature cure differ consider-
ably from mine. I cling to him in spite of this knowledge for
I regard him as a man of truth. In the case of a man of truth
either I accommodate him or he accommodates me. There is no
trace of obstinacy in me. Firmness I certainly have, as I should
have. A man devoid of this quality can never cling to truth.
He does not worry about the risks that confront him because a
satyagrahi has faith only in God. Therefore do what you think
right about vaccination after mutual consultation.
I have sent your letter to Dinshaw because it is a nice letter
worthy of you. Dinshaw however should know that it expresses
your pam. I hope I did not do wrong in passing on the letter
to him.
When is your confinement due?
Please don't worry about the nursing-home. It is for me to
think about the expenses. Only yesterday I sent a sum for the
expenses. According to my reckoning, it will not be necessary
for us to keep the account we maintain for the poor going for
long.
I see no need for Maji to move into the house which Bal-
krishna used to occupy. She may continue to live where she is
or wherever she wants to till my return. I would suggest that
Maji should live in the quarters that I used to occupy. When
I return you may put me up there if you like. Since the party
accompanying me will camp in tents the arrangement will cause
you no inconvenience. In this way the room that you allot to
me, with attached bath-room and the adjacent room will suffice
for me. Let us see when Dinshaw comes by any new income.
It is desirable that he does not go in for any fresh expenditure.
I would be far from pleased if he accepted defeat for one reason
or another.
I hope you and Ardeshir are well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
