587. LETTER TO PYARELAL
October 26, 1940
CHI. PYARELAL,
He who wants to see only wrong cannot see right. I am
not even aware that I wrote to you in Hindi.
I rushed
through the mail in ten minutes and sent it on to you. It may
be that the last letter I saw was in Hindi and I mechanically
wrote to you in Hindi. Is even this a cause for complaint?
I did not take away any work from you. For no reason
whatever you said that Rajkumari should take up everything.
Hence I said that if she could take it up, so could I and it
would not be a burden on me. I said I would do the sorting
and send whatever needs to be sent to you. I did that and that
is my second fault, is it? You did not even care to see how
quickly I carried through the whole thing.
It is news to me that A. S. has contempt for you. I was
under the impression that you two got on very well together.
I have not found in her any contempt for you. What was there
in it that you saw as contempt? A father may point out the
mistakes of the son, get angry with him, make him cry and may
see his other children as outsiders. What does it matter if someone
sees contempt in it? But you are really unique. What can be
done when you are not ready to put up with anything at all?
Is it not merely your imagination that you do not satisfy me
in anything? Had it been so, how would I have taken from
you so much work involving responsibility?
You no doubt suffer from an inferiority complex. But your
real trouble is your pride. To tell you the truth, you never
realize your mistakes. I have done a candid analysis today
from my point of view. Let me suggest once more that you
should lighten your mind. Be humble and cheerfully follow my
instructions. Do not look at anyone with suspicion, attend all
the programmes regularly, have a full night's sleep and remain
fully alert during the day. You must definitely have half an
hour's rest. If you do this much, both of us will be happy.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
378
