563. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
September 23, 1941
BHAI VITHALDAS,
I had meant to write to you when I saw your English letter
to Jajuji, but I could not manage it. I have now your Gujarati
letter.
Why did you write in English? We can never pour out our
hearts in English. A man like Jawaharlal may be able to do that
for he has studied English since his childhood, and he learnt it
in England. But let that be.
There is some error in your reasoning. If we wish to open
small stores everywhere, we shall necessarily have to entrust each
store to one man only. We cannot employ another man to help
him. You do not seem to have any experience of village stores.
Poor village store-keepers, how can they afford assistants? If
the man leaves his store, he will shut the door and lock it up,
and then go out. If he has a son, he might perhaps leave it in
his charge. In South Africa thousands of stores are run by our
people and by Jews, and they are, each of them, in charge of
one person only. It would not be paying to have more than
one person. And in most cases the person lives just behind the
store itself. If he has to leave the store for any reason, he will
shut the door and go out. The store has stocks hardly worth
Rs. 500. How can the man, then, afford an assistant? Moreover,
we are dreaming of ushering in a new age, the age of ahimsa. We
should keep our stores open only for reasonable periods, not
from six in the morning till twelve at night. In England the
stores are closed at fixed hours by law. We should follow that
practice voluntarily. The English in India do so. But irrespec-
tive of their practice, we should arrange our affairs on the basis
of the law of ahimsa. We should, therefore, plan the whole thing
from that point of view.
I believe that we should give thought to the question of
location, too.
I agree with your view that the science of sales is different
from that of production. And as the science of khadi produc-
tion is different from the science of production of other goods,
so also is the science of khadi sales different from the science of
selling of other goods. We have always postponed thinking about
this matter. The little thought we have occasionally given to
the matter is not enough. Morning is when we wake up. I have
now been making the khadi world think about this matter.
Our work is not being controlled by one man, but we have
still not been fully organized as an institution either. The reason
is that we have not trained the requisite number of workers.
We started no school for them.
Now we have started one.
Let us see how it fares.
The implication of your English letter was that the question
should be considered by the Council. I think that the time for
that has not yet come. First, Jajuji, you and I should think
about it.
Finally, of course, the Council will have to consider
the matter. The objection you took in your English letter to
Jajuji expressing his views seemed altogether improper to me. If
a secretary does his duty conscientiously, he must guide the others.
That you did not approve of his suggestions was a different matter.
But so long as we accept a man as secretary, he is bound to
guide us.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9801
