91. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
[February 25, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your letter calls for a long reply. I see that you are very unhappy.
The remedy is not in Palestine, nor in studies in London. It lies in
two things: either in applying yourself entirely to your office and studying
whilst in practice or in your living with me and coming to India. The
first is hardly feasible for you as you are; the second is, as you yourself
say, the course for you but it is hard. There's the rub. You want to
112
avoid difficulties and yet do the right thing. The two things are
inconsistent. You would study in London. That is an easy life and
pleasant. No worry of office. You would go to Palestine and there
(at the bottom of the idea) have an independent and simple life, such
as you have come to appreciate. It won't do. You have to see happiness
in unhappiness and feel that life is made up of worldly miseries which
rightly understood hammer us into shape. You cannot serve God and
Mammon. The Mammon of ease, self-pride, luxury should be permitted
to do its worst and inflict all the hardships it can by depriving us of
its gifts. Then and then only could God be enthroned in our hearts.
Thus far I can see quite clearly. Whether you should go to India with
me or whether you should continue your practice is a difficult question
to answer. It largely depends upon yourself. My suggestion is, come
down here for a brief visit. See things for yourself. We would compare
notes. And then you may tentatively decide. You could usefully occupy
yourself doing gardening in the morning. The afternoon you could devote
to study. We could chat on Saturdays and Sundays and thus you could
pass a fortnight, longer if you wish. What you should do is to think
for yourself but not independently of me. We would discuss, thrash
out and then you will finally decide what to do.
The charge of your being able to do things with me which you
would not continue for long without me is not without foundation. Only
the analysis made by those who bring the charge is faulty. You are
not hypnotised. You are acted upon by what is good in others. My
life seems to stand your scrutiny and therefore you often prefer my
judgment to your own. And that is what everyone of us does. We
worship our idols. I surrender my judgment to Mr. Gokhale's in matters
in which I hold him to be my superior. I surrender my judgment to
yours in gardening, architectural and several other matters. But it would
be false in either case to consider me as hypnotised either by Mr.
Gokhale or by [you].
I shall pack up the tools and send them to you, I hope before the
week is out.
More later. The time for the evening school is on.
With love,
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 The original has "me".
