129. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 12, 1927
MY DEAR RAIHANA,
In the abstract, there can be no doubt that you have a right
to wear whatever you like and to see or be seen by any friends
you like. But when it comes to reducing an abstract right to con-
crete practice, innumerable things present themselves for consi-
deration. And my advice is that in everything you do, you should
possess confidence enough to bear down all opposition and to be
able to convince everybody around you of the justice of your
action. Do you reason with mother with the same frankness that
you show in your letters to me? But let me give a concrete sug-
gestion. Do you permit me to discuss your letter with both
father and mother? Can I send them your last letter? I destroy
all your letters after replying. The last one I am preserving till
I receive your answer. From what I know of them and the manner
in which they have brought up their children, it seems to me that
they are most considerate, liberal-minded parents and will not
interfere with the independence of their grown-up children. Your
recent letters have therefore been a surprise to me. I therefore
say nothing further just now and await your reply.
Meanwhile I ask you not to worry about things over which
you may have no control. If you cannot have your way about
your dress or choice of friends or dealings with them, know that
there are many in the same condition in which you are, and that
there is no person on this earth who has really got the liberty
to do what he or she likes. Some restraint on liberty is demora-
lizing and some is uplifting. No restraint is demoralizing which
one submits to, not out of fear, selfishness or the like, but out of
consideration for, or affection for others. I cannot conceive your
yielding to fear under any circumstance whatsoever.
I heard some very fine music yesterday. It went on for full
one hour whilst I was spinning. I thought of your voice the whole
of that time, and fine as both were yesterday, I observed that yours
was in no way inferior, and to me, it even appeared to be supe-
rior. But that may be due to my partiality for you. Anyway
you have a voice that would certainly sing away others' cares. In-
voke it for dispelling your own.
With love,
BAPU
MISS RAIHANA TYABJI
SOUTHWOOD
MUSSOORIE
U.P.
From a photostat: S.N. 9604
