82. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
September 25, 1934
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. I had already asked [them] to write [to
you] before I received it.
Nobody will read your letter, though it contains nothing pri-
vate and anybody who reads it is likely to learn something from
it. I would like it if you send me your articles, etc. I may be
able to know your progress from them.
Your time-table is good. Your hours of rising and meals
seem to be all right.
I will arrange that a sum of Rs. 5 be sent to you every
month as suggested by you. I should like you to let me know
your needs without any hesitation. Ramachandran will not accept
boarding charges for you. I will respect his wishes.
Your reading is good. Don't mind if he teaches you poems.
One should learn them too. I suppose you are learning short-hand
only for my sake. I think you have unnecessarily taken up that
burden. But I am not asking you to stop it now. It is certainly
a useful thing. I am very glad that you are learning Malayalam.
I think it would be very good if you pick it up and also Tamil.
It is not difficult for one who loves languages to learn several of
them. After you have had some experience there, you may spend
some time in Madanapally if you wish to do so. Try to acquaint
yourself with the music of that place.
I have not read the book about the renascence.
You did
well in quoting the passages.
Many such things are being written
about me. I learn something even from them. At least one
learns humility.
It is necessary for us to know how others see us.
Sometimes they may even be right.
For self-examination, such
criticism is very useful indeed. Praises are of no help here.
One
learns very much from criticism.
Write to me regularly.
I receive letters from Harilal regularly. He at any rate says
that a very good change has come over him. He is studying the
Gita fairly well.
I have written to him and promised to help
him. Let us see what happens. Ba and Ramdas are still at Sabar-
mati. Ramdas is fairly well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7288. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi
