176. LETTER TO HARILAL
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Kartak Vad 5 [November 23, 1918]
BHAISHRI HARILAL,
I have your letter and the translation. I am still confined
to bed. But I have gone through your corrections. Once again
I have to hurt you. If I had been satisfied with your correc-
tions, I would not have been so impudent as to reject the trans-
lation after it was printed. But I withheld the publication of
your translation only when I was convinced that your translation
needed drastic changes. It still retains what appear to me to
be mistakes. My complaint is that the translation cannot pass
as good Gujarati. This defect remains even after your correc-
tions. Lest I be unfair to you even unwittingly, I placed the
translation before the teachers.
They went through it carefully
and expressed the view that the Gujarati of the translation did
not do justice to the original, that it did not convey the strict sense
of the original, and the language appeared clumsy. While they
were going through the translation, an inmate of the Ashram
having only passable familiarity with Gujarati was sitting by.
He was not aware of what the teachers were doing. But when
he heard the translation, he commented that he was not able to
follow the Gujarati language. Under these circumstances it seems
only proper not to take the risk of publishing the translation as
it is. I had hoped that you would discard your translation and
do it afresh. Instead of going over the same translation thrice,
if you had laboured as much over a fresh translation, both of us
would have been satisfied. But how could you do a fresh trans-
lation so long as you do not see the faults that we see in your
translation?
I am returning you translation. After I recover, if you can
spend a few days at the Ashram, we shall go over the translation
together and I shall give my comments. I naturally wish that
you should be able to see the faults in it.
I felt sad for a moment when I learnt that your family were
afflicted with influenza and there was even a death. But such
news is pouring in from everywhere so that now the mind is
hardly affected.
From a copy of the Gujarati: S.N. 19990
