525. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
PANCHGANI,
June 13, 1945
BAPA,
I have received a pile of papers from Mridulabehn. One of
those is of course about her office. I am writing in that connection
just now in the morning. I had forwarded your remarks about the
office to her. She has raised an objection. It is justified. She says
that if the minutes cannot be amended, then her office should
really be shifted to Wardha for the time being. I have already
expressed the opinion that it is not necessary to do so. She can
keep her office wherever she wants. If this attitude is correct, and
according to me it is, then it should be included in the minutes.
If it is not included, then her office should be shifted to Wardha
till the next meeting of the Executive Committee. It is clear to me
that that can't be done. And it should also be clear to you,
because I have said that Mridulabehn can keep her office where-
ver she likes. We must accept that her demand to get that change
or addition incorporated in the minutes is justified. If she raises
her objection constitutionally, I as President cannot deny what I
said in the Executive Committee meeting. I want to get the work
done somehow because the main thing is that the work should be
done. For the sake of truth it is better to incorporate the change,
if Shyamlal has not already done so, and amend the minutes.
Otherwise we should incorporate it at my instance when the mi-
nutes come up for signing. By doing so we can wriggle out of the
constitutional requirement. Otherwise I, as President, must say that
it is not obligatory on the part of Mridulabehn to take her
office to Wardha along with Bapa's. If we do so, we shall not then
need any more money for the time being because as long as an-
other resolution is not passed, the office can be retained in the
Scindia House without making any payment and she should
manage with as many paid workers as there are today. We shall do
as you want. The first proposal accords more with truth, while the
second is more in conformity with the requirements of the situation.
In order to enable you to understand the whole thing better
I am sending you Mridulabehn's letter even though it is marked
personal. In this connection I have to raise yet another ques-
tion. Do you in your inmost heart feel that it would be better
if Mridulabehn gave up the office? If you say that she should not
leave, then we should have some clear-cut decision in writing so
that this confusion is cleared once and for all. Draw up a draft
in accordance with what you have in mind or leave it to me and
I shall make it and send it to you for modification.
BAPU
SHRI THAKKAR BAPA
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
POONA
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
