277. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 3, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
It was not difficult for me to read even those portions in your
letter which were scored out. You have harassed Sushila for
no reason. But she has already passed through the ordeal. It
was just as well that she was thus tested. You too should stop
lamenting. My decision is based on entirely different grounds.
It has nothing to do with Mira's argument. It is not possible
that my argument would have occurred to Mira. If I see some-
thing wrong in a practice I have continued for forty years, shall
I not say that there is the hand of God in it? That was why
I did not wait for your and Sushila's letters. Now you can both
see that even if it could be proved that Sushila was perhaps on
the verge of succumbing to impure thoughts, my conclusion would
remain unaltered. So long as I am not prepared to allow others
to do what I do myself, why should I do it? This seems to me
self-evident. I am now beginning to see this fault has a his-
torical background. After my decision all of us must feel at
ease. According to me everything has become clear.
I understand about the machines. Only you can put them
to use. Right now I am not even in a position to tempt Sushila.
When she comes on her own I shall of course embrace her in
spite of my having stopped taking service from women. But
right now her well-being does not lie with me. It lies in her
settling somewhere. But it is not for me to decide. Only you
two should jointly decide. I see from what you have scored
out in your letter that you are shouldering a heavy responsibi-
lity there. I do wish you would leave as soon as the problems
are solved. And if Sushila wishes to come, her place will be
higher than it was. Where would you escape to by running
away from me! Such words should not have come from your
pen. I am returning your letter.
My health I should say is good.
Blessings from
BAPU
176
[PS.]
Reply at Wardha address.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
