440. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
October 3, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,
Your letter brings tears to my eyes. On the one hand, I
think that what you say about milk and fruit is true, while
on the other hand, we cannot afford your falling ill for want of
that kind of food. What is more, any saving thus effected would
be spent in paying the expenses of the doctor and the medicines
in case you fell ill. So difficult is dharma.
It is not proper
for me to send you the extra money nor proper for you thus
to take more milk and fruit. I must keep my peace having
said that you should, if somehow it is possible, take more milk
and fruit. God will protect you. Who am I to worry on your
account?
You are quite right in saying that you do everything after
consulting me. You are also right in saying that you do it
in obedience to my command. If your dharma to do what
you have been doing is clear to me, how can I give you an
order to the contrary? And, how can I arrange to pay you
Rs. 25 as long as you remain occupied with your own family?
Hence, I have decided to obtain another Rs. 25 also for Jaya-
prakash and have even given instructions to send it. You
should of course take full rest, and also do a little walking.
I expect you are not taking oils and spices, and that you
take whole-wheat flour. What leafy vegetable can you get?
Is the jaggery that you get good?
I have written to you about myself earlier. I am on
milk, fruit and vegetables. I have not started taking chapatis
for fear of fever. I have not been weighed recently, as the
necessary arrangements do not yet exist. Ba is still with Dev-
das, and Manu too.
What else would I tell Father about you? He praised
your nature and was pleased with you. Yes, I shall reach
Kashi on the 24th and leave it on the 26th for Rajkot. After
paying my respects to Narandas's parents, I shall go to Ahmeda-
bad and after staying there for three days, to Segaon. You
aren't likely to come to Kashi, are you?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3483
