261. LETTER TO HARJIVAN KOTAK
BOLGARH, ORISSA,
December 11, 1927
When the mind is disturbed by impure thoughts, instead of
trying to drive them out one should occupy it in some work, that
is, engage it in purposeful thoughts. Or one may engross it in
Ramanama, engage it in reading or in some bodily labour which
requires mental attention too. Never let the eyes follow their in-
clination. If they fall on a woman, withdraw them immediately.
It is scarcely necessary for anyone to look straight at a man's or
woman's face. This is the reason why brahmacharis, and others
too, are enjoined to walk with their eyes lowered. If we are sitting,
we should keep them steady in one direction. This is an external
remedy, but a most valuable one. You may undertake a fast if
and when you find one necessary.
It is not necessary for you to go to Satavalekarji. He will
certainly teach you some asanas. If you wish to go to him to learn
them, you may certainly do so. I know him very well. He is a
fine man.
You should not be afraid even if you get involuntary discharges
during a fast. Vaids say that, even when impure desires are absent,
such discharges occur because of pressure in the bowels. But, in-
stead of believing that, it helps us more to believe that they occur
because of impure desires. We are not always conscious of such
desires. I had an involuntary discharge in sleep twice during the
last two weeks. I cannot recall any dream. I never practised mas-
turbation. One cause of these discharges is of course my physical
weakness, but I also know that there are impure desires deep down
in me. I am able to keep out such thoughts during waking hours.
But what is present in the body like some hidden poison, always
makes its way, even forcibly sometimes. I feel unhappy about this,
but am not nervously afraid. I am always vigilant. I can suppress
the enemy but have not been able to expel him altogether. If I
am truthful, I shall succeed in doing that too. The enemy will
not be able to endure the power of truth. If you are in the same
condition as I am, learn from my experience. In its essence,
desire for sex-pleasure is equally impure, whether its object is one's
wife or some other woman. Its results differ. At the moment, we
are thinking of the enemy in his essential nature. Understand,
therefore, that so far as one's wife is concerned you are not likely
to find anyone as lustful as I was. That is why I have des-
cribed my pitiable condition to you and tried to give you cou-
rage. If Ba is as a mother to me now, this is the result of long
struggle and God's grace. The legacy of that unclean life, how-
ever, afflicts me. I, in return, try to overcome it and, with God's
grace, shall overcome it in this very life.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
