239. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
June 24 [1916]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
This letter will make you sick. Yet I must give you the information.
Manilal has deceived me again. He gave some money to Harilal and
disowned all knowledge of it when I questioned him. He had no leg
to stand on. He confessed his fault immediately. But the incident showed
the boy's extreme weakness. He has therefore left the Ashram for
Madras and has to throw himself on his own resources. If he makes
proper use of this disciplinary period, one may yet make something
of him. He is a very weak boy. I have been fasting during the week.
I fasted 3½ days. I broke it yesterday. The last day found me very
weak and suffering much. I am all right now and not much the worse
for the fast. You will please therefore not worry about me or Manilal.
Apart from this incident the Ashram is going forward. The handloom-
weaving is being pressed forward for all it is worth. We hope to make
the place self-supporting in a year's time. This I know you will like
immensely.
Of shifting to Dehradun or elsewhere, only when you are here.
The climate of Ahmedabad is by no means so bad or at all bad. Only
the boys were becoming acclimatised and I had not yet found out the
food proper for the climate. Now I think I have hit upon it. All the
smallpox patients are now hale and hearty and probably by the time
you are here, the marks will have all gone. Naransamy has gained.
He has almost lost his deafness and he is daily growing fatter. There
are some new men whom you will be delighted to meet. They are
1 From the contents
strong and conscientious workers. Of old and experienced hands
Maganlal is the only one left. But then he is a host in himself and
he is not likely to desert me.
I do hope that by this time at least you are in possession of all
your things.
Good-bye and much love.
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
