409. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[April 22, 1932]
CHI. MIRA,
Your expected letter has just arrived. Like you I need not
delay mine.
I am delighted that you have Kamaladevi with you and
that she joins you at the morning prayer and sings bhajans in the
evening. Her vigorous skipping reminds me of the time when I
used to skip for the same reason as Kamaladevi. I had taught
the boys also. Ramdas was the gracefullest and best. It is
certainly a fine exercise especially in winter.
It is good that you are continuing your saltless experiment
and that it is agreeing with you.
We have here a new doctor. He is a Parsi Major. He loves
his work and has the innate dignified courtesy that you see in-
variably associated with a cultured Parsi. He has been giving
me electric massage for the right thumb and the left elbow. The
elbow has been causing pain for some time, but only when I
work in particular ways. He thinks that it may be necessary to
stop spinning for some days. Having done double work during
the National Week, so far as my output is concerned, it is now
about 85 rounds per day. For I have anticipated Dr. Mehta
by using the left hand for turning the wheel. This is my fourth
day. I have made very good progress. The right hand draws
much more steadily and the thread is finer and more uniform.
This additional practice with the left hand again makes me
think of the necessity of our trying to use the left hand equally
with the right. And we should teach the children from now to
be ambidexterous. I have already written about this to Naran-
das.
As a result of the two days' fast, I suppose, I have lost 2 lb.
in weight. There is nothing in this loss, if I do not lose steadily.
If I do, I shall go back to milk without the slightest hesitation. I
have given you this information only by way of report. You
must not brood over this loss of weight.
The history of the Ashram goes on, though slowly. In order to
overtake the arrears of correspondence, I have suspended it for
the past three days. I shall soon resume it.
Study of the heavens has come to stay. I have now a few
books on it. This study puts me more in tune with the Infinite.
I won't need to card for spinning. Mahadev has already
begun. He always cards more than he spins and this he does for
me. The present stock being so regularly replenished is not likely
ever to be exhausted.
Radha is largely to blame for her bad health. She broods
too much, gives more time than necessary to external tidiness and
does not give herself full rest as prescribed by medical men. I am
not now inclined to press for Almora. We should learn the poor
man's art of living. I know that I am the greatest hindrance in
our march towards that ideal. You and the other survivors will
have to re-arrange many things that, by my identification with
them, have been or will be left as they should not be.
We are all keeping well except that Vallabhbhai's nose and
constipation still worry him as before. Dr. Mehta is now dealing
with both the disorders and hopes to produce some relief in a
short time.
Whilst this was being written in the midst of interruptions,
we saw from the newspapers received, that Kamaladevi had been
transferred to Belgaum. A prisoner has no choice. His or her body
is not in his or her own keeping.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6218. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9684
