400. LETTER TO C. ROBERTS
[LONDON,]
October 16, 1914
DEAR MR. ROBERTS,
An unfortunate situation has arisen in connection with the
Indian Field Ambulance Training Corps which may disrupt it
if it is not handled in the right spirit.
Last week, Colonel Baker appointed section commanders with-
out reference to the wishes of the members of the Corps. There
was grave dissatisfaction and, when it was brought to my notice, I
shared it. On Tuesday morning I appealed to Colonel Baker to
recall the appointment, and appoint those whom the members of
the Corps may choose, subject to further election by them, in the
event of the choice not being accepted by Col. Baker. He, however,
much to my surprise, took up what to my mind was an untenable
attitude. He thought that any complaints that the members might
have to make could only be brought before him through the sec-
tion commanders and that recall of the appointments would be sub-
versive of all discipline. My committee at once called a meeting of
the members of the Corps and a resolution was adopted on Wed-
nesday night requesting Col. Baker to recall the appointments
and to allow us to submit names for his approval. He not only did
not accede to our request but considered it a grave breach of mili-
tary discipline to have convened the meeting.
I submit that Col. Baker has grievously misunderstood his
position and that of the Corps.
I venture to think:
1. That up to the present we are only probationers under-
going training in ambulance work.
2. That we have yet to sign contracts which would bind us
in the military sense.
3. That the internal administration of the Corps should rest
in the hands of the Volunteer Committee.
4. That our services have been accepted only as a volun-
tary aid detachment and that, therefore, the full military
code can never apply to us.
I may be permitted to draw your attention to two precedents
within my knowledge. At the time of the Boer War the Indian
Ambulance Corps was 1200 strong. There was also a European
Ambulance Corps, I think much larger. We were all under
Col. Gallwey's command. But Col. Gallwey never claimed to inter-
fere with the internal administration of the Corps, although we were
under military discipline. And we were not then, as the Corps
is now, merely a training body. We were in action at the most
critical period of the war. Col. Gallwey did not appoint section
commanders. We appointed our own leaders and others. As it
so happened, all orders ultimately passed through my hands. Simi-
larly, at the time of the Zulu rebellion in Natal, we were under
Col. Sparks' command. Col. Sparks never appointed officers of
our Corps. We appointed from among ourselves our officers and
the sole responsibility for carrying out orders as to military duty
rested upon one of us. You may be aware that both Corps found
honourable mention in dispatches. There may be precedents to
the contrary. I do not know the military code. If a grave and
punishable breach of discipline has been committed in the calling
of the meeting alluded to above, or in any other manner, I alone
must be held responsible and I shall cheerfully bear the penalty.
But if the Corps is to be held together, I cannot help feeling that
the appointments of the corporals should be recalled, the status
of the Corps exactly defined and the position of Col. Baker and my
Committee determined.
I need hardly assure you that I have addressed this communi-
cation to you in no irresponsible manner. I know that this is not
the time for squabbles or quibbles but for solid work. I fear
however that Col. Baker's uncompromising attitude has made it
impossible for many of us to work through him unless he can
alter his attitude. I venture to trust that you will be able to sug-
gest a way out of the difficulty.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
CHARLES ROBERTS, ESQ., M.P., ETC.
INDIA OFFICE
From the typewritten office copy signed by Gandhiji: S. N. 6069B
