105. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Monday night [July 17, 1911]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Your letter regarding the trust and other matters came to hand
only today. It will be better if you address your letters to the
Farm hereafter. I propose going to Johannesburg only once a
week, that is, on Monday.
The arrangement about the Library is all right. Do not order
books for the present. It is better just to collect money.
I also think it is no longer necessary to keep a separate account
of the profits from the store. If the matter cannot be settled just
now, we shall dispose of it when I go there [next]. Please make a
note of this.
And now to the main part of your letter. With a little reflec-
tion, you will be able to see that the question who should send out
whom just does not arise. When Phoenix is really in difficulties,
there will be no question of sending out or retaining anybody.
He alone will stay on there who has got into the true spirit. The
problem then will be whether anyone will stay at all. No salaries
are paid today, but only a kind of maintenance allowance. Who
will remain, prepared to have this reduced, to face extreme suffer-
ing and live on plain bread—that will be the problem. This
means that the problem will not arise. We shall know then
who the true mother is and who the false. The doubt that has
occurred to you is pointless.
And so are your fears about the children. India, being a land
of virtue, has spots of wickedness. So also, other countries, though
lands of sin, have oases by way of virtuous spots. We are, how-
ever, doing our work with our eyes fixed on India. Where is the
room, then, for any question about the children? Phoenix will
have, and has, a constitution which will enable all children who so
desire to visit India. And how can anyone say that [the spirit of]
Phoenix will remain confined to Phoenix alone? Wherever the aims
of Phoenix are present, there you will have Phoenix. Do you forget
that we are all preparing ourselves for India? Should you and
your children, however, lay down their lives for India in Phoenix
itself, what harm will there be?
If we live in Phoenix as we would in India, there will be only
this difference between India and Phoenix: we shall have adopted
the virtuous practices of India and eschewed the evils that obtain
there to-day. Is this anything to be sorry about? I shall write
more on hearing from you.
If you consider my atman to have great power, yours, too, has
it. There is no difference between us in respect of our atmans. The
moment you rid yourself of whatever in you is foreign to the nature
of the atman — timidity, doubt, irresolution, etc. —we are equals. The
only difference lies in the fact that I have, with great effort, got
rid of many of my defects. If you make the bid with a determined
mind, you, too, will be able to cleanse yourself of all such defects
and more.
Chhaganlal, Anandlal, Jamnadas and others may possibly
be there before this letter reaches you. I for one am very glad
that they are all coming.
You ask to have a test; but that you cannot have from me.
When the time is ripe, you will get it without asking for it. Readiness
is all.
It does not seem likely that any member [of the party coming]
will have difficulty in landing. All the same, I have made the
necessary recommendation to the office.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.] I hope a copy of the Trust Deed will be in your hand
next week. It is only a draft.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5091. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
