307. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 24/29, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet yesterday. Gangabehn came and saw me.
It is necessary that we should think about Indu's health. When he
returned from Bangalore, he weighed 100 lb., and he is 90 now.
Discover the cause. Know from him where and what he eats,
what he used to eat in Bangalore and what was his way of life
there, and how, according to him, he can keep better health in
the Ashram.
If anybody does not keep good health in the
Ashram, we should try and discover the cause and, if he or she
does not improve with such measures and changes as we can try
and as would be in keeping with the principles of the Ashram, we
should send the person to some other place, to Visapur or Wardha,
for instance. Think over this problem and, if you consider it neces-
sary, entrust the responsibility in this matter to one particular
1 Addressee's brother
person. You will not be able to look after every inmate of the
Ashram. You should be burdened only with the responsibility of
giving the final decision.
I take it that you got the letter which I wrote last week
and in which I explained about visitors, and I do not dwell further
on the subject in this letter. I also wrote about Champa in that
letter. There were two or three other points too.
Indu has raised a very good question in his letter. Read my
reply to him. However, you, Panditji, Premabehn, Chimanlal,
Valji and others in the Ashram who think on such matters should
ponder over the problem. Indu had asked whether Krishna did
not do wrong in advising Arjuna to keep Shikhandi in front of
him and kill Bhishma and in employing his Sudarshan wheel to
hide the sun behind clouds, so that Jayadrath might be killed, and
had raised the question whether plays which treated of such inci-
dents should be performed in the Ashram. I was very much
pleased by his question. If the general tendency of the drama is
to show such actions as morally wrong, I would have no objec-
tion to its being performed. All the same, I do have some doubt
about the propriety of such dramas being performed in the
Ashram. I don't think we do any good by repeatedly presenting
to children unworthy actions of great men, even though we repre-
sent the actions as unworthy, unless it is absolutely necessary to tell
them about such actions. They will probably forget the un-
worthiness of the action and leave with the impression that we, too,
could do what great men did. It does not, therefore, seem pro-
per to me to select such incidents and present them in dramatic
performances before children. I think that the dramas which we
perform in the Ashram should be of a different type. For ins-
tance, Rabindranath's Muktadhara. Maithilisharan Gupta's Anagh,
which I recently read here, is also a good play and could be per-
formed before the children there. Its Hindi is simple and sweet
and the moral is excellent.
I go and inquire after Haridas from time to time.
Do you get news about Krishnadas from any source? If you
do not, write to Mahavir Prasad and ask him if he has any.
Amtulbehn may certainly come and see me. Your scabies and
Kanu's ought to be cured now.
About the Vidyapith library, so far as we can judge from
this distance, all of us feel that we should not introduce the kind
1 Vide pp. 210-.
2 Vide p. 232.
3 Krishnadas Simharai, one time secretary to Gandhiji
of dyarchy which has been suggested. It would mean control by
two authorities. Either they should hand over full control to us
or should themselves exercise it properly as long as they retain
it with them. However, do only what seems best to you. I shall
not be able to see the women prisoners lodged in this jail, but I
shall be permitted to write to them and receive letters from
them.
Anandi had referred to Prema in her letter. Read my reply
to her. The matter requires further thought, however. In teach-
ing the children in the Ashram to be fearless and to stand erect,
we have, unknowingly, taught them rudeness. Even grown-ups
are not free from such rudeness and, sometimes, their rudeness
assumes a painful form. It seems that a guest had arrived in the
Ashram and the boys did not answer his inquiries properly. One
directed him this way and another that way, and none would
even reply to his questions. And of course none took the trouble
to accompany him to the office. I understand from Anandi's letter
that she was somewhere near about but she felt unhappy after-
wards and wrote to me about the incident, it seems, to confess
her error and atone for it. She has asked me about the duty of
the inmates of the Ashram in such circumstances. There is no
doubt about what it is, but since the question has been raised
you should draw everybody's attention to it. Explain what I
have written to Anandi, filling in the necessary details. In my
letter I could write only a sentence or two explaining the general
principle.
Vanamala tells me in her letter that Mohan's body tempe-
rature always remains 99°. Inquire about this. If necessary, consult
a doctor. Why should a child of his age continually show 99°
temperature? Or, maybe, just because he is a child, on taking
his temperature with a thermometer or examining his pulse, we
may feel that he is having fever but in fact there may be no
fever. The heart-beat of a very active child who is playing about
the whole day is bound to be faster, and, therefore, he is bound to
have more heat in him and the thermometer or the examination
of his pulse may show a little fever. In such a case, the real test is
provided by the child's stool, the appearance of his tongue, his
digestion and his weight. A child's weight must show increase every
weak. His tongue should be clean and moist, he should be passing
stool without effort and it must be well formed and without foul
smell. If all these signs are there, we need not pay any attention
to what the pulse or the thermometer may tell us. Every mother
in the Ashram, and Jethalal too, should learn these things.
There was a letter from Amtul to which, as desired by her,
I have replied at her Delhi address. Tell her this if she has ar-
rived there. She may certainly come and see me. I agree with
you that it would be better for her not to live at Sabarmati in
summer. It would be very good if you can arrange for her to
stay in Porbandar, Chorwad or Sasavne. If she has relations in
Mussoorie, she may go there. It would also do her good if she
can stay with Padma in Almora. I have given this advice in my
letter to her also. Do help to accommodate her, if you can, as I
have suggested.
On taking your letter in my hand, I read Pyare Ali's name
in it. At the place where he lives the air may be cool, and so
Amtul will perhaps feel happy there and may also be able to help
Pyare Ali. Sultana and other children are there, too. How-
ever, treat all this as no more than suggestions. Do what you think
proper.
I and Gangabehn have started writing to each other. She
informs me that all the women prisoners are keeping well.
I got the leather sent by you for repairing sandal soles.
My experiment of milkless diet is continuing. It has proceed-
ed all right so far. I deduce from this fact that for a person leading
a quiet life milk is perhaps not necessary. From the point of view
of spiritual well-being, it may even be harmful. As yet, this is
only an inference. I can be positive only if the experiment conti-
nues successfully for a long time. In my own case this is cer-
tainly true, that before I was attacked by dysentery in 1918 I could
do without milk no matter how hard I was working. However,
these speculations serve no purpose just now. All that is neces-
sary is that I should let you know about the effects of the experi-
ment from week to week. For the present, let nobody even think
of following my example.
Blessings from
BAPU 2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8216. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
