345. LETTER TO SWAMI ANAND
Wednesday [April 16, 1924]
BHAISHRI ANANDANAND,
Three letters of yours have remained unanswered. But what
could I do? For me too, as for the poor ascetic, the only shelter is
the heavens above and the earth below. You will read about
this gentleman in today's article. Why did you, even for a moment,
think that I praise you because you are at a distance from me?
If I have praised you, it must have been necessary at that time.
I praise myself, too, on occasion. I have praised Ba, and have
frequently praised Devdas also. Now tell me who is near and who
is at a distance? Do you understand that nothing but a mere
hint would have been proper in regard to Mahadev and Kaka?
I cherish some pride that, in such matters, I possess a pretty good
sense of proportion and, do what I will, I cannot get over it.
I have done exactly according to your suggestion in regard
to the History of Satyagraha. I liked it. To make it too long
would not have been advisable either.
I cannot say whether it is desirable or not to print the mat-
ter for the book, too, right now. In the book, a few changes may
have to be made, and it would be better to compose the matter
afresh. But you know what is best in this matter. I would not
blow your trumpet if I did not know this.
Print the Kelavani issue in such a way that it will bring us
credit. Do use good quality paper. It must be such that it can
be preserved. Let Mahadev or Swami make the necessary cor-
rections in the sentences in that issue as well as in this. They
should also let me know whether I should send every time as
much as I am sending with this, or more. As for the English
material, I shall post all of it tomorrow. I shall send a little
on Tuesday, if that becomes necessary.
From time to time give me information about the number of
subscribers and sales of Navajivan and Young India.
Send me immediately the figures of subscribers to Navajivan
from Kathiawar, from the rest of Gujarat, from Bombay—
I include these in the second—and from Ahmedabad too, as also
the figures of sales by hawkers and sales in other parts of the
country. I shall know then how to distribute the sum of Rs. 50,000.
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 7756
