85. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
July 9, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
You will recall the fact that I wrote to you on the 29th ultimo
on the recent flogging of certain Mulshi Peta prisoners. By way
of protest against this punishment some of the Mulshi Peta
prisoners have been fasting ever since. Of these a few have weak-
ened and given up the fast.
In view of the fast, if not for my request, I had expected that
the Government would send an early reply to the proposal con-
tained in my letter. It is now ten days and there is no reply
as yet received from the Government.
As time passes, the agitation of my soul increases. I have
attempted again and again to regard myself as a mere prisoner
and therefore not to think about what happens to the other
prisoners. But I must confess that I have failed. I cannot forget
that I am a human being, or public worker and reformer. Rightly
or wrongly I feel that, if I could but meet the hunger-strikers, their
fast, if it is unreasonable, as you say and I believe it is, will
end. If it was my brother who was fasting in this prison instead
of a stranger, I wonder if I would be expected to look upon his
fast with the indifference which prisoners are supposed to adopt
regarding their fellows. I feel about these fasting prisoners exact-
ly as I would about a blood brother. Though the fact is irrele-
vant, I may mention that two of these prisoners are well known
to me and have considerable status in society in their respective
provinces.
The situation has become well-nigh intolerable for me. Unless,
therefore, in the meantime some satisfactory reply to my offer is
received by the end of the day, purely as a solace for my own
soul, and for no other reason, I propose to fast from tomorrow (not
denying myself water or salt) till a satisfactory solution is reach-
ed, i.e., till the hunger-strike ends and the situation sought to be
covered by my proposal contained in my letter of the 29th ultimo
is fully met.
I know that my decision will cause you pain. You have been
so extraordinarily kind and attentive to me. I know, too, that it is
likely to cause some embarrassment to the Government. But I hope
both you and the Government will appreciate my moral difficulty.
The Government can at any moment end the unfortunate
situation by accepting my offer.
I shall fast not because these Mulshi Peta prisoners are fast-
ing, but because I am debarred from helping, though I feel
confident that I can help, to end the prevailing hunger-strike
and prevent a recurrence of the events that have ended in the
hunger-strike.
I have no desire to interfere with the prison administra-
tion. But where a question of humanity arises, that of adminis-
trative prestige, in my humble opinion, recedes into the back-
ground. And any civilized Government will, I imagine, gladly
accept the willing co-operation of even a prisoner if thereby the
interests of humanity are served.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
From a photostat: S.N. 8031
