91. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[JOHANNESBURG,]
February 23, 1910
SIR,
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of a letter addressed
by Mr. Parsee Rustomjee to the Press about the treatment he was sub-
jected to at the Diepkloof Gaol. I beg to append copy of medical certi-
ficate issued by his family physician as to the state of his health upon
discharge from prison:
FIRST AVENUE,
DURBAN,
February 16, 1910
This is to certify that I have examined Mr. Parsee Rustomjee, and, knowing
him of old, I now find him very much reduced in weight and size, and that his
health has greatly suffered from his late imprisonment, and that it will be some
months before he will regain his former self. I find that his heart is affected,
1 At Pretoria; presumably drafted by Gandhiji
2 Vide Appendix I I .
but whether it is an organic disease or not, it is difficult to say at once on the
first examination. His eyes have also suffered from constant exposure to the
sun, and are now in a state of congestion. There is distension of the flanks of
the abdominal wall, which appears to me to be due to the distension of the large
bowel, and which is also responsible for the constipation he suffers from. He is
also subject to delayed and difficult micturition.
(Sgd.) R. M. NANJI, M. R. C. S., etc.
Both the certificate and the letter speak for themselves. My Com-
mittee therefore content themselves with drawing the attention of the
Government to the facts narrated by Mr. Rustomjee, who is one of the
most respected members of the Indian community in South Africa,
and a vice-president of the Natal Indian Congress, and venture to trust
that the civilized Government of the Transvaal will not permit a repeti-
tion of sufferings such as have been undergone by Mr. Rustomjee.
Mr. Imam Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, who has been just discharged
from the Diepkloof Prison, has himself suffered very severely. He
states that once, when he was extremely feverish and when he was
obliged to report himself sick, the medical officer suggested, without even
examining him, that he was shirking work; but when Mr. Bawazeer
indignantly repudiated the suggestion, his temperature was taken by the
officer, and it was found to be 104 degrees. This alarmed the officer and
Mr. Bawazeer was placed in the prison hospital. Mr. Bawazeer has lost
22 lbs. in weight, and is so weak that he can walk about only with
difficulty.
Mr. Bawazeer reports that most of the passive resisters have lost
weight owing to insufficiency of food, and specially owing to want of
ghee, and this notwithstanding the allowance of two ounces of haricot
beans. It is respectfully submitted that the persistent refusal to restore
the use of a fat equivalent in the shape of ghee is interpreted by my
community to mean that the Government intend to starve into sub-
mission the conscientious objectors to the anti-Asiatic legislation of the
Colony. I beg once more to draw attention to the fact that the Native
prisoners' dietary allows one ounce of fat per day.
Mr. Bawazeer further reports to the Association that Mr. Joseph
Royeppen, a barrister and a Cambridge graduate, was, when he was
transferred to the Diepkloof Prison, taken, together with three other
Indian prisoners, in a manure cart, and was compelled to walk barefoot
and bareheaded for nearly two miles, and that he and his fellow-prisoners
were given no breakfast on the day they were transferred. Mr. Royep-
pen reported the matter to the Governor, who enquired into it and,
Mr. Bawazeer thinks, also gave the assurance that the mistakes above
referred to would not be repeated. My Committee, however, cannot help
remarking that a system under which such grave mistakes are possible
must be badly in need of revision.
X-11
My Committee hope that the various matters hereby brought to the
notice of the Government will meet with the consideration that they
deserve.
I have, etc.,
A. M . CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 5-3-1910
