22. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
WARDHA,
September 24, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter of the 19th in Bombay and of the 21st
today in Wardha after I had entered upon my weekly silence.
*
*
*1
I understand what you say regarding your teeth.
I think
you should be able to carry on with them for some time.
With me are Ba, Mirabehn, Chandrashankar, Prabhudas,
Nayar, Anandi2, Nirmala (Mahadev's), Sharada (Chimanlal's)
and Prabhavati. Brijkishan also is here. He will return home on
Tuesday. I met Radha and Santok on the way. Radha keeps
good health these days. She is your neighbour. Write to her.
Lilavati is in a sanatorium at Deolali. Keshu is here. He is
working in Jamnalalji's gin. I have got his pay fixed at Rs. 50
per month. The nature of his work is good. If he is steady,
he will go forward. Jamnalalji seems to be satisfied with him.
N. and Amala are problems. The former is an emotional
type, and the latter has no sense. She can't do any work. Both
are something of a burden here. I will try to see if the burden
can be lightened. Duncan and Mary Barr are doing very well.
Both are hard-working and upright. Narahari's children, Vana-
mala and Mohan, don't keep good health and have gone to
Kathlal. I met them in Ahmedabad. They were to leave for
Kathlal on Friday. Amina's children feel perfectly happy with
the other children. They will stay during the vacation in the red
bungalow . Sirius was ill. He is all right now. He was in a hospital.
I met Rama Joshi. She was quite well. Her health is improving
rapidly indeed. She could raise her arm fairly well. Mani came to
Bombay on the very day I left it. She spent most of the time
with me. I took her with me even when I called on Elwin . I
have advised her to see you and then come to me after getting
her teeth and eyes treated. Aunt is still in Bombay, and so also
Mathuradas. He feels very much tired. He had shouldered a fairly
heavy responsibility. Sastri (of Harijan) is doing well. Chandra-
shankar will accompany me and send all the Gujarati material
from where we are. I have written to Prithuraj to stay on in
Calicut. Indu is in Bhavnagar. He is doing fairly well there.
Jayaprakash must have returned to his father. He was in Bombay
till I left. He used to come and see me. He saw Prabhavati
daily. I know his charge against me. But I am helpless. He
seems to have calmed down a little now. Ramdas's own mind is his
enemy. And so I can't say anything about him. When will he
become really calm? Nimu keeps indifferent health. The Ben-
gal problem is in my mind. I will see what I can do. Jamnalal
will not go again to a hill station just now. He had been to one
and stayed there for ten days. I will try to persuade him, though
he feels better these days.
Anandi and the other girls and Qureshi's children are in
Anasuyabehn's Harijan Boarding. I thought that was the proper
place for our children. They are very happy there. Narandas's
Purushottam is engaged to the daughter of Harakhchand8, the
brother of Jivanlal. I didn't like the engagement because both
the parties belong to the same caste. But they say that she is
a good girl, and so Narandas also gave his consent. Jamna is in
Rajkot. Kanu also is there. He studies what he can in Jamnadas's
school. Mahadev's Babu is with his mother's sister in Bulsar.
He has written to me that he will go and stay with Anandi after
Diwali. I get reports about Rajenbabu every other day. His
health is improving very well. Lakshmi is here. She was to go to
Jullundur. On second thoughts, Devdas got the plan abandoned.
It is still not finally decided what should be done. Prabhudas's
problem is still not solved. That is why he has come with me.
. . . has as good as become a sadhu. He is all the time dis-
contented.
Even if you stop after completing the Gita, you will have
made fairly good progress.
The Ashram dairy is being run near Kankaria. Titus is
in charge of it and Shankerlal Banker exercises general supervision.
It is running fairly well. Jawaharlal's Krishnakumari will most
probably be engaged to the son of Kasturbhai's sister, who has
just returned from England after qualifying for the Bar. I met
Kasturbhai, his sister and her son. It was the parties' own choice.
They had met in Bombay twice or thrice at Rao's place. Sarup-
rani has given her consent. The formal betrothal will take place
in a few days. If it does, a big load will be off Saruprani's head.
I am fairly well. I don't know whether or not the blood-
pressure remains high here. The doctors here are not of that level.
Nor is there the need. I drink one pound of milk at present
and eat green vegetables twice every day. The latter include
gourd, ridge gourd, etc. The weight was 99 lb. when I was
weighed on my arrival here.
I will weigh myself again after a
few days. Ba is fine, and so is Mira. Jamnalalji's Kamala was in
Dinshaw Mehta's sanatorium. She seems to have benefited a
little. She has come with me here. Kamalnayan also is here.
Vakil's school is closed at present because of the plague. It will
be shifted to Vile Parle now.
My programme, up to October 15, is to rest here itself.
Since the Government has not taken possession of the
Ashram1, it is now being converted permanently into a Harijan
colony. Jamnalal has approved of the idea. Friends in Ahmeda-
bad, Ranchhodbhai and others have also approved of it. It is
planned to have some Harijan quarters, a tannery, a Harijan hos-
tel and an office of the Harijan Seva Sangh there. I am think-
ing of handing over the land and the buildings to the All-India
Harijan Seva Sangh. If you wish to offer any comments about
this, please write to me.
I think I have written a fairly long
letter.
Are you satisfied now?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 26-30
