495. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEVAGRAM,
March 7, 1940
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have read your previous letter. My impression was cor-
rect. There was nothing in it to which I could object. I do
not consider your second letter proper. Sushila is convinced
that she is here to provide me medical care. Hence she consi-
ders it her duty to be wherever I may be. She says that it is
of no consequence to her whether I accept this position or not.
She will be content if I always keep her with me. She will be
ready to make exceptions in cases of emergency sickness. If I
take her along with me with any other thought, it will be sheer
self-deception. Hence, as I view the situation, it presents a
dilemma. Then, Sushila also says that she does not mind being
considered the sixth in the same place as the other five. I would
not be inviting any blame if I take it that way, because Sushila
is useful to me in many ways other than medical services. But
I do not consider any of the other five indispensable. I can
let any of them go whenever I desire. Actually, five are not
like that. Just as I can relieve any of the five any time I wish,
I can also relieve Sushila. But when I say so, she refuses to
believe me because she does not trust me. That is the crux of
the matter. The fact remains, however, that one may try to gloss
it over with sweet words. How can I overcome this distrust?
It is a pitiable situation.
Now about you. If I considered you someone separate, I
would consider doing something by way of repentance. But
that thought is not in my mind any longer. Now you are what
Mahadev is.
So you must now guide Sushila in a manner you think fit.
I am absolutely clear in my mind. Her decision to leave is a
great mistake. But what I think is of no consequence. What-
ever you two consider as dharma will be dharma.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
309
