350. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
[Before January 15, 1928]
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got your letters.
Only today I had a letter from Akola which gives the news
of Sushila's miscarriage. Manilal has written neither to Ba nor
me about it. There should be no shyness or hesitation in
writing to me about such matters. It will not help you to keep
back such things from me because of my views about them. In
any case, I would come to know about the thing indirectly. I
might feel hurt for a moment. People may hold the same views
as I do about this matter and yet not be able to refrain from
indulgence. If they could, would they ever marry? The wish
to marry comes from the desire for self-gratification. Our rishis,
however, tried to make marriage a means of learning self-restraint,
or say that they regulated through marriage a relationship which
was unregulated. But man is more inclined towards self-gratification
and he turned marriage also into another means of self-
gratification. However, from a couple like you I can expect
nothing more than that you should remain vigilant and con-
stantly strive for self-control. There is, therefore, no need for
you to keep me ignorant about the fruits of marriage.
Sushila must be better now. If after a miscarriage proper
treatment is taken, its harmful effects can be controlled. You
may trust me that one such treatment, and a very effective one,
is the Kuhne Bath. It removes the cause of miscarriage and
makes future deliveries easier and less painful. Sushila should
have plain food and regular sleep, and should keep away from
things that excite the body. I should like both of you to read
Kuhne's book, as also Juste's. Dr John Nicholson's book, too, is
worth reading.
The Ashram has started filling up and in two days it will
be full. Nearly thirty persons are coming. Among them there
will be twelve to fifteen Europeans too. Ramdas arrived today.
Rami, Manu came yesterday. Devdas is still in Bombay taking
treatment for one of his bones.
I do not know why you did not get the chapters of the Gita.
I have finished the translation. I will tell Mahadev.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4728
