330. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 17, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter. I do not think Mr. Mavalankar says
it is better not to have this security, if the shares can be trans-
ferred. In any event nothing more is necessary to be done
beyond transferring the shares if that is possible. If for any
1 This was evidently in reply to Gandhiji's letter of August 6.
reason you think that it is not possible, your other suggestion may
be adopted.
Do what you like with Sodepur and Hemaprabhadevi's money.
I have only the inflexible condition, that the giving on the part of
Hemaprabhadevi must be an irresistible thing.
There is something wrong as long as you feel worried. She
cannot be cheerful and happy if you are not. I would, therefore,
plead with you to go slowly. Do not force matters. Let there
be complete assimilation before taking in a fresh dose.
Yes, indeed, I have read Tolstoy's "How Much Land a Man
Needs" many times over. Years ago I translated it in Indian
Opinion and it was published in pamphlet form. If Tolstoy had
known much of cremation, he would even have allowed much
less space and, if the body were to receive scientific treatment of
reduction, it would be resolved into the five elements and then
no space at all would be required. And that is precisely what
our mental state should be. In practice we will always fall short
of the theory. But any little possession we may keep would then
be irksome. We would recognize it as our limitation and not as
our right. And, therefore, if suddenly we are deprived of it, we
should feel as if so much burden was taken off our shoulders and
so finally we should feel even when the body of ours is taken
away. Beyond all your sacrifices, therefore, I want perfect equani-
mity and cheerfulness. The greater the detachment with which
you organize khadi work the more prosperous it will be.
Are you coming for the 27th? If you want to be released
from the Utkal responsibility, I shall certainly release you. I
am anxious to ease your burden as much as is possible.
Herewith a letter from Calcutta with a copy of my reply.
You will please let me know what is it all about.
Yours,
SJT. SATIS CHANDRA DAs GUPTA
CALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 11228
