418. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 15/16, 1932
At Night, October 15, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I duly got your mail.
Champa seems to be seriously ill. I had a direct letter from
her. She asks me in it what she should do if her expenses go up
because of illness or some other reason. Read my reply to her.
Please reassure her. If she spends more sometimes, let her do so.
Do you draw the money for her from Bombay or from Rangoon?
I guess from your letter that Champa's illness has improved Rati-
lal's temper. This is certainly good news.
4.15 a.m., October 16, 1932
Panditji had asked me where the inmates of the Ashram may
work to make their contribution towards removal of untouchabi-
lity, and what work they should do. I had replied to him. Still, I will
say something more here. One of the aims of the Ashram is that
the persons trained in it should afterwards spread out in villages
and start doing work in them. The work will of course be connected
with khadi, removal of untouchability, etc. But they should also
take advantage of the prevailing atmosphere at any time and pay
more attention to that particular activity. If, therefore, we can do
any work in the surrounding villages for removal of untouchabi-
lity, we should certainly do it. We should, if possible, work even in
cities. There is a temple on one side of the Ashram. There is one
opposite to the Ashram, too. See if you can get them thrown open
to Antyajas. We may acquaint ourselves with their conditions.
If we can accommodate them, we should invite more Antyaja fami-
lies to come and live in the Ashram. Vinoba's scheme is certainly
excellent. If we can implement it, we should try to do so. These
are only a few isolated suggestions for guidance. What is essen-
tial is that each one of us should take up whatever work he can
think of and do his best. We should become one with the work as
sugar becomes one with milk, and still remains detached. We
should never think that some work was done by the Ashram or
by an inmate of the Ashram. We should feel that we do every-
thing as instruments in God's hands and act in that spirit. These
suggestions do not-ought not to-interfere with other vows which
we may have taken. They should remain undisturbed. Everybody
should go on working in accordance with his vow and, in addi-
tion, participate in the present movement against untouchability
as much as he can. If such work is not compatible with one's vow,
the path is clear. However noble another's dharma may be,
one's good lies in one's own dharma. Whether we live or die doing
that dharma is the same for us, that is, we shall advance spiri-
tually in either case. Who had placed Punjabhai in such a chair
that he fell down? Anybody who gets fainting fits should have a
seat which would not overturn. But this is wisdom after the
event. However, don't we all advance by learning from one's own
or other people's mistakes to avoid similar mistakes in future? We
need not be perturbed by the death of Trivedi's brother's wife,
Taragouri. Her death was ordained. In her case the stove has
been only instrumental. And, moreover, she could not get im-
mediate help. Taragouri also got frightened and could not loos-
en the knot of her skirt. Her attempt to loosen it resulted in a
further knot. All these things were preordained. We ever live
besieged by Death. Nobody knows from which side and when
he will attack. We should draw only one lesson from such a
death. What we can do today, we should not leave for to-
morrow, and what we can do this minute we should not leave
to the next. Apart from that, we should overcome our love of the
primus stove, and everybody should also learn what to do when
his or her clothes accidentally catch fire.
The leather for repairing sandal soles received this time seems
to be excellent. If you had not sent the pair of sandals, I could
have done without it, for I have already three pairs with me.
Their upper sides are in quite good condition. But the soles of all
three of them are worn out. I will now get them repaired, so
that they will become as good as new. The pair which you have
sent will then be the fourth. But never mind. Instead of your
having to keep it safe there, we will keep it safe here.
Think a little more about Kusum. Can you arrange to send
her to Almora? The whole family seems to be infected with the
disease. Navin clearly exhibits signs of tuberculosis. Dhiru also
seems to me going in the same direction. And Kusum does not
improve at all. The condition of Manjula's ear is only a symp-
tom. The real disease seems to be the same as in the case of the
others. However, all the four may possibly recover, provided strict
measures are taken immediately. Change of air may perhaps be
the chief among them. Navin and Dhiru are still strong enough to
be able to look after themselves. Apart from their health, they
have had sufficient experience to be able to manage things. If
they have the requisite spirit of service in them so that they would
willingly look after Kusum, if there is sufficient space in the room,
if they are eager to go, and if Prabhudas is ready to have them,
and if you think that they can go, only then should you go ahead
with this plan. Otherwise you should forget it.
But this is for people who are passionately eager to live.
The royal road was shown by Gangadevi. If they can keep alive
remaining in the Ashram, they should try to do so. If they can-
not, they should realize that life is always accompanied by death.
I would advise them to resolve to stay in the Ashram, to live
in the open air all the twenty-four hours of the day and do what
work they can without exerting themselves too much, eat the
plainest food, take hip-baths, etc., and thus pass their time. If
they live thus with cheerful minds, they may even get all right.
First you should think over all this. You may then discuss the
matter with them if you think it proper to do so. If you think it
inadvisable to discuss this just now, forget the suggestion. I have
received a copy of Madan's book about fasting. Most probably
you have got a copy in the Ashram. If you do not have it, I will
send the one which I have received. You may go through it.
Bhau at any rate should reflect over it. It is not at all necessary
to get Keshu's machine patented. Nobody is likely to compete
with him. And if anybody tries, we need not mind. We cannot
take out a patent. This is how I feel just now. I write to
Godse from time to time.
I had completely followed the method of making bread. The
method used here is easier. As the fast intervened, I could not
send a description of it. I will do so now. Try this method there.
BAPU
[PS.]
Test Mahadev's and my yarn carefully and let me know the
figures of the strength, evenness and count of each. When will
you get cloth made from it? Do you have a rach 2 and a heddle sui-
table for weaving such yarn?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8260. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
