183. LETTER TO S. V. KAUJALGI
As AT KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 21, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Owing to the touring, I have not been
able to overtake it. I have shown it to Gangadharrao, and I see
that though you are both servants of the country, you are tem-
peramentally so hopelessly different or seem so to me.
I have not resumed the tour with full confidence. I simply
felt that what little strength I had gathered might be care-
fully used for finishing in a mild form the programme that had
already been mapped out and for realizing the khadi collections.
The tour was undertaken also purely in the interest of khadi. I
had neither the desire nor the capacity for doing general propa-
ganda work in the existing state of the country. For me, khadi is
my propaganda. For, if that one thing can be shown to be a
thorough success, everything else will follow.
My idea is that
we must have at least one constructive item made a demonstrable
success on a wide scale. As it is, the people seem to have lost
confidence in themselves, and have made up their minds that they
can succeed in no constructive effort.
Gangadharrao is a wholehogger like myself for khadi. I would,
therefore, let him take me to those parts which may be promising
either for khadi production, or for sale, or for collections for khadi.
I would therefore not ask you to join me in the tour, but would
expect you to give Gangadharrao or khadi work such help as you
can by way of writing to friends in the places I may visit.
Mysore will take me up to the end of August, and if I feel
at all strong enough, I shall do the Tamil Districts after.
For
Karnatak, I am not likely therefore to be ready, if at all this
year, before the middle of October. But I should know definitely
only after the Mysore tour is finished. I am asking everywhere for
reduction of the programme to a minimum and avoidance of
places which can be avoided.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. S. V. KAUJALGI
BIJAPUR
From a photostat: S.N. 12612
