296. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 24, 1936
CHI. MANILAL, SUSHILA,
I have your letters to me and have also read the one to Ki-
shorelal. The idea of having share-holders does not seem right.
Where there is a field ready for share-holders, one for customers
and expert workers can well be assumed. Having share-holders
does not mean having subscribers or expert workers. In my opin-
ion, there may be difficulty in getting men in spite of a flow of
funds. Plainly speaking, the subscribers to Indian Opinion are not
exactly its readers but rather patrons. This is a pitiable situation.
You should stop running around and find another honest trade
which can support both of you. You may pay the loss in run-
ning Indian Opinion or those who desire its continuance should give
a guarantee to bear the loss. You should close down Indian Opin-
ion if this cannot be done. The insistence on continuing it could
be right only up to a point. You ought to have the ability to
support yourself by means of some other trade in case Indian
Opinion cannot run. You should also be equipped to support
yourself solely on agriculture. You ought to think over all this
patiently. Very little help can be had through exchange of ideas
across this distance. You alone know the present condition there.
It may, however, be right to inform me before taking a final deci-
sion. If there is no time for it there is no harm in deciding inde-
pendently. In any case do observe these conditions:
(1) Incur no debts.
(2) Transact no business on credit.
(3) Take up no business in forbidden goods such as selling bidis.
(4) Don't engage in a business to get rich quickly.
I am pained to read about Sorabji. Sheth Rustomji's fears
about him seem to be proving true. After all things must go the
destined way and one's understanding follows the same way.
Perhaps I have already written to you about Kanti, who too
is drawn into the current of examinations and degrees. He would
not be satisfied without it. Now I recollect that I even asked
you to help him. It seems Devdas has offered him some help
which would reach here in two or three days when I expect to
learn more about it. Ramdas writes to say that he will not be
able to help.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4857
