92. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
March 13, 1933
RESPECTED BHAI,
I have your letter. I will not give up hope of you, nor
should you give up hope of me. Many have been able to get
along together in this way. It has also happened that some were
not able to do so. I shall not dismiss our case as belonging to
the latter category. It is in God's hands. However, I shall go
on trying.
All reformers are not pure. Nobody is pure. But many
struggle to be pure, many love dharma. They believe that un-
touchability is really an inner matter and that it has no external
sign. We must all keep away from such untouchability. No
one is born an untouchable. If there is anything in Hinduism
which is not to be found in any other religion, which promotes
dharma, it should be amenable to rational proof. And its result
should be manifest to the eye. The theory of untouchability by
birth neither appeals to reason nor has it any visible beneficial
effect. If you say that Antyajas should be helped except in the
matter of admission to temples, why should you not regard it
your dharma to give such help? If you don't wish to give such
help through me, you may give it independently.
You also see the continual degradation of dharma. But do
you think it can be prevented by laying exclusive stress on ex-
ternal cleanliness? I am not averse to such cleanliness. I think
I observe all rules of cleanliness which I know, but I don't
believe that their observance purifies me spiritually. They help
me to preserve physical cleanliness. For preserving spiritual purity,
it seems to me that what is necessary is observance of rules of
internal cleanliness. These we have forgotten altogether. The
result is that, though we have forsaken dharma, lost our spiritual
strength and remain absorbed in worldly pursuits, we believe that
our dharma is safe and, if somebody like me comes forward to
wipe out the blot of untouchability, a loud cry of dharma being
in danger is raised and lies are spread against that person. (I do
wish that people like you should not lend your support to such
activities and that is why I plead with you). On matters on
which we differ, we should try to understand each other's point
of view and, in regard to other things about which we have no
differences between us, we may work separately but with the
same aim. If all of us do this, the waste of energy that is taking
place at present would stop.
Read this letter when your mind is free from other worries.
I am sure you will be able to get some time in Adhoi.
Pranams from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20564
