169. LETTER TO SIR DANIEL HAMILTON
BARDOLI,
February 15, 1922
DEAR SIR,
Mr. Hodge writes to me to say that you would like to have an
hour's chat with me, and he has suggested that I should open the
ground which I gladly do. I will not take up your time by
trying to interest you in any other activity of mine except the spin-
ning-wheel. Of all my outward activities, I do believe that the
spinning-wheel is the most permanent and the most beneficial. I
have abundant proof now to support my statement that the
spinning-wheel will solve the problem of the economic distress in
millions of India's homes, and it constitutes an effective insurance
against famines.
You know the great scientist, Dr. P. C. Ray, but you may not
know that he has also become an enthusiast on behalf of the spinning-
wheel. 1 India does not need to be industrialized in the modern
sense of the term. It has 7,50,000 villages scattered over a vast
area 1,900 miles long, 1,500 broad. The people are rooted to the
soil, and the vast majority are living a hand-to-mouth life. What-
ever may be said to the contrary, having travelled throughout the
length and breadth of the land with eyes open and having mixed
with millions, there can be no doubt that pauperism is growing.
There is no doubt also that the millions are living in enforced
idleness for at least 4 months in the year. Agriculture does not
need revolutionary changes. The Indian peasant requires a sup-
plementary industry. The most natural is the introduction of the
spinning-wheel, not the handloom. The latter cannot be intro-
duced in every home, whereas the former can, and it used to be
so even a century ago. It was driven out not by economic pres-
sure, but by force deliberately used as can be proved from authen-
tic records. The restoration, therefore, of the spinning-wheel solves
the economic problem of India at a stroke. I know that you are a
lover of India, that you are deeply interested in the economic and
moral uplift of my country. I know too that you have great
influence, I would like to enlist it on behalf of the spinning-wheel.
It is the most effective force for introducing successful co-operative
societies. Without honest co-operation of the millions, the
enterprise can never be successful, and as it is already proving a
means of weaning thousands of women from a life of shame, it is
as moral an instrument as it is economic.
I hope you will not allow yourself to be prejudiced by anything
you might have heard about my strange views about machinery.
I have nothing to say against the development of any other indus-
try in India by means of machinery, but I do say that to supply
India with cloth manufactured either outside or inside through
gigantic mills is an economic blunder of the first magnitude,
just as it would be to supply cheap bread through huge bakeries
1 Vide, "Dr. Rayon Charkha", 2-2-1922.
XXII-26
established in the chief centres in India and to destroy the family
stove.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 6-4-1922
