486. LETTER TO JOHN S. HOYLAND
S. S. "PILSNA",
December 21, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I was able to read two days ago your good book on the
Cross. There are in my opinion several inaccuracies inevitable
in a condensation like your book. But there is one I would like
to correct. You have said that the movement in India was
not kept to the high level at which it was kept in South Africa.
My own experience and opinion are to the contrary. You have
instanced the consideration shown to the South Africa Govern-
ment when it was in distress. The instance is not to the point.
In South Africa there was no question of displacing the Govern-
ment. Therefore when European movement to displace the
Government took place, as satyagrahis, Indians were bound not
to join the insurgents.
In India the movement is to displace the Government.
Therefore there never can be any question of showing tenderness
to it. It would be wrong to show tenderness to it conceived
as it is as an evil. But instances of chivalry shown within
the limits of satyagraha can be multiplied ad lib. The suspension
after Chauri Chaura is the most outstanding one. I should not
have pursued the subject but for the imperative demand of
truth. You have written the book from the highest motive,
i. e., of religion. The inaccuracy I have pointed out betrays
not only that of fact but also of judgment. I wonder whether
you have caught what I am driving at. If I have not made
myself sufficiently clear, do please write to me.
Now about the hymns. I have gone through them. They
cannot be printed as my translation. For they have undergone
drastic changes at your hands and that rightly. In the circum-
stances they must be published if at all as being your original
work based on my literal translation of the hymns. If you will
shoulder that responsibility I have no objection to your publishing
them, if you think that they help seekers. Mirabehn and Mahadev
will be writing to you separately their own opinion. At the time
of writing I have not discussed the matter with them.
Yours,
JACK HOYLAND
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
