165. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 24, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
I have your two letters of September 23 in reply to my
letters of the 22nd and 23rd.
With your assistance, I am exploring the possibilities of reach-
ing an agreement, so that the claim embodied in the Muslim
League Resolution of Lahore may be reasonably satisfied. You
must, therefore, have no apprehensions that the August Resolution
will stand in the way of our reaching an agreement. That Resolu-
tion dealt with the question of India as against Britain, and it
cannot stand in the way of our settlement.
I proceed on the assumption that India is not to be regard-
ed as two or more nations, but as one family consisting of many
members of whom the Muslims living in the north-west zones, i.e.,
Baluchistan, Sind, North-West Frontier Province and that part
of the Punjab where they are in absolute majority over all the
other elements and in parts of Bengal and Assam where they are
in absolute majority, desire to live in separation from the rest of
India.
Differing from you on the general basis, I can yet recom-
mend to the Congress and the country the acceptance of the claim
for separation contained in the Muslim League Resolution of
Lahore, 1940, on my basis and on the following terms:
The areas should be demarcated by a commission, approved
by the Congress and the League. The wishes of the inhabitants
of the area demarcated should be ascertained through the votes
of the adult population of the areas or through some equivalent
method.
If the vote is in favour of separation, it shall be agreed
that these areas shall form a separate State as soon as possible
after India is free from foreign domination and can, therefore,
be constituted into two sovereign independent States.
There shall be a treaty of separation, which should also pro-
vide for the efficient and satisfactory administration of Foreign
Affairs, Defence, Internal Communications, Customs, Commerce
and the like, which must necessarily continue to be matters of
common interest between the contracting parties.
The treaty shall also contain terms for safeguarding the rights
of minorities in the two States.
Immediately on the acceptance of this agreement by the
Congress and the League, the two shall decide upon a common
course of action for the attainment of the independence of India.
The League will, however, be free to remain out of any
direct action, to which the Congress may resort and in which
the League may not be willing to participate.
If you do not agree to these terms, could you let me know
in precise terms what you would have me to accept in terms of
the Lahore Resolution and bind myself to recommend to the
Congress? If you could kindly do this, I shall be able to see,
apart from the difference in approach, what definite terms I can
agree to. In your letter of 23rd September, you refer to "the
basis and fundamental principles embodied in the Lahore Resolu-
tion" and ask me to accept them. Surely, this is unnecessary
when, as I feel, I have accepted the concrete consequence that
should follow from such acceptance.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
