182. LETTER TO SURENDRA
WARDHA,
December 3, 1935
CHI. SURENDRA,
I had your previous letter. It did not particularly call for
a reply, hence I saved my time for some other work. Now I
shall not treat your letter of the 29th ultimo in the same
manner.
Do continue to post me with your bitter-sweet experiences.
It would be a mistake to regard the experiences at Sindi as fully
comprehensive. I fail to see a reflection of my own experiences
in the picture that I form in my mind by putting together
Mahadev's description of the experiences at Sindi. There is a
restraint in Mahadev's description, hence the bitter experiences
included in it are like sugar refined in a factory. I can summa-
rize my experience of Sindi in one sentence. Justice has not
yet been done to Sindi. But willy-nilly I happen to be its
director. And what sort of a director? I used to pay only short
visits. Now I visit the place daily and stay there for a few
minutes. I have not mixed with the people. Mirabehn tried
hard to do it. But she had gone there only to stop me from
settling down in the place. She had not set her mind on it.
She was staying under my pressure. Now Gajanan is there but
it is also only an experiment. Hence it is likely you are mis-
taken in placing Sindi in line with the others. I can say that
for me [the work at] Sindi is vast enough.
We have done nothing about Vadaj. A separate ashram
has come into being at Nalawadi. It cannot be said that it has
any appreciable impact on the people of Nalawadi. It is a differ-
ent kind of activity. We have not yet mastered the art of
living in a village. We still have to learn the way of mingling
with them. Hence Nalawadi, Vadaj and Sindi, and all the three
are different things. Your experiment is the fourth and it is
in line with the experiments that are now being carried on. Let
us see what finally comes out of it. I am therefore closely watch-
ing your work. I am intentionally forgoing the temptation of
taking more work from you. I had to exercise great firmness
in sending my reply to Navli. . . .1
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
