386. LETTER TO CHAIRMAN, CHAMPARAN COMMITTEE
BETTIAH,
August 13, 1917
DEAR MR. SLY,
I have thought, slept, prayed and read 1 Cor. XIII which latter
I always do before coming to the committee meetings. I have
discussed the question with my friends too. I was surprised to find
in Babu Brajkishore the strongest supporter of Mr. Rainy's ener-
getic defence of the fairness of the enhancement so far as it is
measured by the outturn. All the others resisted him. Babu Braj-
kishore to my astonishment held his ground and said that on the
score of lowness of rent he was entirely at one with Mr. Sweeney's
finding. His argument however is totally unconvincing. But all
my friends held that I would sell the raiyats' cause, if I agreed to the
planters' proposition. They unanimously appreciated the fact that
the planters who are so strong in every way had at all accepted the
idea of a reduction of sharahbeshi. The majority of them would
have me to buy peace from the committee even though it may
mean a big sacrifice. I thought that I ought to mention these pleas-
ing incidents. They augur well for the future. My friends who re-
present, as I hold, the culture of Bihar are not fanatics as
planter-friends have so often urged. There is no greater fanatic
among us than myself.
Now for my offer which is absolutely final. My last state was to
accept the Raja Saheb's proposition That reduced to percen-
tage represents a reduction of 55 per cent as against the planters' 25
per cent. And if I am to write a dissenting minute, I should write in
defence of that offer with the clearest conscience. For the sake of
securing unanimity among ourselves, I am prepared to accept a
reduction of 40 per cent only, i.e., 15 per cent more than the plan-
ters' offer. For me this borders, in my language, upon the penal.
Under the planters' offer, they get Re. 0-6- per rupee, under mine
Re. 0-5- per rupee. My final offer therefore covers all possibilities,
the possibility even of Mr. Whitty's appeal succeeding.
My own original offer was a rise of Re. 0-3- in the rupee. That
is equivalent to a reduction of 66 per cent. My present offer
represents a reduction of 40 per cent. I have therefore put up 26
per cent. If then pressure is now to be applied, it must be
not to me but to the planters.
Mr. Irwin has without the slightest justification taken large
sums in tawan and has collected sharahbeshi for the past 6 years. He
can have little to grumble about if he accepts my offer. For both
Turkaulia and Peeprah, there is evidence before the committee of
sufficient pressure exerted upon the raiyats to vitiate sharahbeshi.
We have it on record that Mr. Sweeney in coming to his decision
on coercion had not read the judgment in Lomraj Singh's case nor
had he the full Bench decision before him on undue influence. It
is settled law now that there is no distinction between undue
influence and coercion. I just mention these facts to show that we
as a committee dare not ignore them. It is not possible to base
our decision merely on the theoretical ground of the so-called low-
ness of rent.
I am sure the committee will think a hundred times before
putting on the Government the strain of arbitrating upon a figure
dispute between its members. I have gone to the furthest limit in
order to avoid any such calamity. If you and the other members
cannot find it in your conscience to accept my approach, I shall
sorrowfully write my minute of dissent but it will be, as I have
said, in support of 55 per cent reduction. 40 per cent reduction is
for the consideration of the members (and the planters only, if, in
your opinion, they should be consulted again).
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
I have omitted decimals in my figures.
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten original signed by Gandhiji in the National Archives
of India; also Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No.
162, pp. 313-
