350. LETTER TO JAGJIVANDAS MEHTA
[NADIAD,]
July 18, 1918
Got your letter. I was sorry to hear of the theft of your coat
and money. It is as if a weak cow should be infested with too
many gadflies. There is a thief around here in the Anathashram.
The thing has happened twice or thrice before now. Somebody
should have warned you but it seems this did not occur to anyone.
Your fever must have left you completely. I could write to
Jivraj only today. The letter is enclosed. You may despatch it
if you think it proper.
I could, this time, get some idea of the condition of your busi-
ness. I am not happy about the source of the money with which
you have started it. If my advice is of any value, wind up your
business this very day, return the money to the person from whom
you have borrowed it and secure a job. I am sure you will have no
difficulty in getting one. If you would live the simple life, the
Ashram is always open to you. I do not press, though. If, how-
ever, you want to work for things which the world regards worth
striving for, you may, but on your own strength. The longer you
take to act in this matter, the more reason you will have for re-
gret afterwards.
Everywhere people bring misery on themselves by their own
actions but, the more I look into the net in which your family affairs
are caught, the more I realize this to be especially true of you all.
I wish you would free yourself from this. Be satisfied with the
normal risks which attend an enterprise and do not go in for
anything more. See that your relations with everyone are above
reproach. As for father, he goes out of his way to heap misery
upon misery on himself. Living a life of religious devotion, why
should he have so many desires? Why should you encourage him
in them ? . . . .2 We should be happier than the gods if we respected
the voice of conscience as much as we respect public opinion. We
don't recognize the happiness at our door-step and go searching for
it in all directions. Why do you bother yourself so ?
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
