298. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
CAPE TOWN,
Phagan Vad 10 [March 21, 1914]
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,
I have your letter. I had heard about your fast. If you had a
reason for going on a fast, I have nothing to say. You will cer-
tainly enjoy no solitude there. There should be more of physical
activity in Phoenix. That is conducive to peace. There the first
place is assigned to service.
The breakdown in J's health has given me a fright. I wish she
recovers soon.
I feel anxious on account of Maganbhai. I cannot judge
why things do not get right [with him]. I also feel that it would
be good if he went along with me. Please keep on preparing his
mind to that end. We shall see what can be done in India. I have
a persistent feeling that the thing is due to mental illness. I am
trying to discover why he enjoyed good health in gaol, but this
is all that I can think of. While in gaol, the mind had been forc-
ed into an equable state and this had an effect on the body, too, so
much so that he kept well despite the sort of food that he had to
eat. Cannot he attain to that mental poise out of gaol? Be that as
it may, the only right course for Maganbhai seems to be that
he should go with me to India. Let him also think it over.
I shall cite in passing one instance, my own. Ba wanted to
take ginger. Since I was under no vow to avoid it, I started tak-
ing it along with her in order to test its properties. Ba's tongue
loves dainties. She happened to discover some shoots of ginger.
I fell in love with them, so much so that I also used to chew
four or five of these tender shoots, of the size of a grain of gram.
One day, Ba collected a quantity of these from Mrs. Gool's basket
and placed them in [our] room. I was struck with horror to see
them. The night passed. I sprang out of bed in a fright, early in
the morning. How could one eat ginger? This thing, a single
joint of which proliferated into so many shoots, must indeed be
full of lives. Moreover, to eat fresh shoots was as good as killing
delicate babies. I felt extremely disgusted with myself. I resolved
that I would never eat ginger, not in this life. But the real fun
comes now. Ba saw that I would not take ginger. She asked
me the reason. I told her. She also caught my point. She
carried away the very tender shoots and pressed me to take some-
thing from the rest. I declined. The vow holds, but the tongue
and the eye are like dogs. The desire to eat ginger comes over
me whenever the eye falls on a piece of it. The tongue starts
licking. But just as a dog greedily watching food left over will
not dare to eat it in the presence of the master, the tongue is
prevented from touching the ginger by the watchfulness of Mr.
Atman. My eye falls on it the whole day because it is lying just
where my papers are. It seems more difficult for me to turn
away my mind from ginger than it was to give up sugar or salt,
such is the state I find myself in.
What, then, should you blame yourself for? It is not for
nothing that the mind has been compared to a monkey that has
got drunk. What is the point in having high hopes of learning
wisdom from me? We are all sailing in the same battered ship and
I, with greater wisdom than the rest by way of experience, point
out the direction in which you are welcome to toddling along.
We are all in darkness, groping for the same thing. Maybe my
steps are firmer and move with greater confidence. To hold me in
greater respect than this will amount to arresting your up-
ward progress. When I have conquered all desire, I will instruct
you without the least hesitation. For the present, let us pull to-
gether in quest of Narayana who grants moksha and, undeterred
even if we lose our way or fall or get knocked about, go on
seeking with courage and patience.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana and Jivannu Parodh
