13. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
November 2, 1945
BHAI MUNSHI,
I think I have told you that I observe silence while spinning.
I do listen, though not to what people say. Valjibhai therefore
reads things to me. In this manner I heard the whole of your
speech at the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan. I liked what you said
regarding my resignation. I was glad, too, that you had firmly
expressed your views regarding the national language. But I feel
that what you have said about writers is not correct. I would
let the thing pass if the views expressed were not harmful. If I
have not heard right, please correct me. I have understood your
view to be this: that if a writer can make his art interesting he
has fulfilled himself. It has always seemed to me a terrible
thought that the end of art is for it to be made interesting.
Leaving aside debauchery, even hypocrisy, violence and untruth
can easily be made interesting. Would such writing be called art?
On your recommendation I read Prithivivallabh . According to
me it owes its popularity not to the interest it sustains but to
the meaning it contains. Besides, you have beautifully blended the
beautiful languages descended from Sanskrit. But, as you have
not been able to forget that history4, can you, as a historian,
forget the whole of Muslim history? Even if you can do so, can
you make the whole of India forget it? Can you reverse the flow
of water and make it go upward? After the British have left,
will it be possible to wipe all the consequences of the British
connection off history?
I have placed these two ideas before you with some hesita-
tion, for I do not regard myself either as an expert on art or as
a student of history. I, however, felt it was my duty to place
before you the experience I have gained as, with my eyes open,
I have wandered around the world. I realize, of course, that
the principle which I have followed in this very letter in welcoming
your views regarding the national language might equally well
apply to your ideas on these two subjects.
I liked your Press statement correcting the article which
appeared in The Chronicle. I had been considering asking you
about it, when I read your reply. What is this confusion re-
garding Jawaharlal's letter? Or is it just a concoction?
From Gujarati : C.W. 7690. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
