525. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
October 31, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,
As the Government have not granted the relief sought in my
letter to Col. Doyle of the 24th inst. and unless it comes in the
course of the day, the progressive non-co-operation adumbrated
in that letter will commence from tomorrow.
As stated in that letter, I shall begin by denying myself the
special food issued to me.
Will you kindly therefore have the
goat's milk stopped as from tomorrow? Besides this, just now
I am only drawing sour limes and vegetables in common with
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and sometimes taking a little brown
bread from Sjt. Mahadev Desai's ration. Sardar Vallabhbhai
sends for the limes and vegetables and I have asked him not to
send for my portion. In lieu of this, I shall take, for the time be-
ing, and if they are issued to me, the morning kanji and the noon
and the afternoon bhakri out of the 'C' class rations. I may not
take anything else from the 'C' class rations, and I can only take
during any twenty-four hours five ingredients besides salt, soda
and water. The vegetables and dholl generally issued to 'C' class
prisoners contain more than three or four ingredients. These there-
fore I may not take. I do not propose to take anything spe-
cially prepared for special 'C' class prisoners.
As a large amount of correspondence on untouchability, some
of which is very important, has accumulated, and requires answer-
ing with a view to publication, I think that it is incumbent upon
Government either to publish my correspondence with Govern-
ment on the matter or to inform the public, in any other manner
Government may choose, of my request and their refusal to accede
to it.
It is needless to add that I have scrupulously avoided, either
directly or indirectly, the leakage of any information about the
correspondence.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3855. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Depart-
ment, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(4), Pt. I, p. 245
