588. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Morning, March 2, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
You must have received the letter which I wrote to you yes-
terday. Make careful preparations for Lakshmi's marriage and
see that everything goes well. Jamna and you should give away
the bride, and Velanbehn should offer the bridegroom. If possi-
ble, I will send Lakshmidas there. As usual, keep a dhoti, shirt,
cap, takli and a copy each of the Gita and the Bhajanavali ready
for the bridegroom. Tie the marriage knot with the ends. Give
a translation of the vows to both the bride and the bridegroom.
And they should fast on that day and eat nothing till after the
ceremony is over. You, Jamna and Velanbehn also should fast.
Both the bride and the bridegroom should perform the ceremonial
worship of the cow and the tree and recite Chapter XII of
the Gita. It is not necessary to invite any friends except Anasuya-
behn. We don't want the marriage to be published in news-
papers, though we do not wish to keep it a secret either. The
bride and the bridegroom may leave for home by the night train
and start working immediately. Velanbehn will arrange for the
sari on behalf of Maruti. If you wish to ask any other question,
you may do so. Invite all Harijan friends to attend the wedding.
If you wish, you may serve them refreshments. In that case,
I believe fruit will be the best. But consult your own convenience
in all this, and make any changes which you feel necessary. Let
the members of the Committee come together and plan the arrange-
ments. Invite the senior women inmates also to the meeting
of the Committee. Let the day of marriage be for us a sacred
day of tapascharya and self-purification and one to be celebrated
in keeping with our ideal of simplicity and self-control. Let all
present shower their blessings on the bride and the bridegroom.
Maruti's letters simply fill me with admiration for him. If he
remains true to the aspirations which he expresses in them, we
shall believe that he must have become a member of Lakshmi-
das's family blessed with the holy merit of his good deeds in pre-
vious lives. Lakshmidas's love for him, too, must be wonderful
beyond words. And what excellent training he must have given!
Explain to everybody in the Ashram that it is the universal
experience that anybody who does not give his best, physically
and mentally in serving the sick, can do no other useful work,
and that the Ashram exists to enable its inmates to serve others.
Nobody in the Ashram, therefore, should be half-hearted in doing
service.
BAPU
[PS.]
Doesn't Velanbehn keep well? Read my letter to Duda-
bhai. I have not pressed him to attend the wedding. I am
enclosing letters for Dudabhai, Lakshmi, Velanbehn and Durga.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
