231. LETTER TO K. B. MENON
[Before May 22, 1937]
You tell me that the Conference on civil liberties will be
held in London on June 5. Whatever tends to preserve the civil
liberties, no matter where, must command the sympathy and
support of all sane people.
The Hindu, 22-5-1937
232. TRAVANCORE COCHIN
The reader will find elsewhere an authentic and exhaustive
note on the Koodalmanikkam controversy prepared by Shri G.
Ramachandran, Secretary of the Kerala Harijan Sevak Sangh.
The note is authentic in the sense that it is based purely on
official records. Add to this note the following from the Kerala
Harijan Sevak Sangh's office in Trivandrum:
In the issue of Harijan of 8th May in the article "Cochin-Travan-
core" by Mahatmaji, in paragraph three, the following sentences are
found:
"The pundits of India should dispassionately examine the orders
and express their unbiased opinion. I am inclined to think that the
Travancore Durbar may well invite the opinion of pundits on the single
question of the religious propriety of the Cochin order and undertake
to abide by their opinion. In other words, Travancore may well offer
to abide by the verdict of an arbitration tribunal consisting of unbiased
pundits who will be universally accepted as such.
The opinion of an
assembly of such pundits would be the nearest approach to an arbitra-
tion tribunal. For, whilst the Travancore Durbar had a perfect right to
open to Harijans the temples within their sole jurisdiction and ownership
and without reference to the opinion of pundits, it would hardly be
right to propound a new Smriti in respect of temples where there is joint
jurisdiction."
I am herewith forwarding a true copy of a judgment of the Chief
Court of Cochin which discusses the Kaimal's position with regard to the
Koodalmanikkam Temple. This judgment shows the Kaimal to be the
supreme spiritual authority in all matters connected with that Temple,
and therefore the opinion of the pundits in this instance seems to be
unnecessary.
These enable the reader to form his own judgment as to the
propriety or otherwise of the action of the Cochin Durbar. If
the note and the Cochin Court judgment are to be trusted, evi-
dently the Cochin Durbar's action was wholly wrong. This is
not to say that the Kaimal's action was right in the religious
sense. But if it was not, the only course open to the Cochin
Durbar was to reason with the Kaimal, not to force his hands
as was done. The Kaimal evidently becomes the supreme and
final authority on spiritual matters after his appointment by the
Travancore Durbar. Like the king he can do no wrong. But
even he may not long resist the opinion of his peers. And the
only way the Cochin Durbar or anyone else can influence the
Kaimal's judgment is, I presume, by evoking the opinion of
pundits learned in spiritual matters. And legally speaking even
their opinion has no binding effect on the Kaimal.
Harijan, 22-5-1937
