10. LETTER TO P. S. TO LT.-GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
BOX 299,
JOHANNESBURG,
March 28, 1903
TO
PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge your telegram of yes-
terday's date, informing the Association that His Excellency has
been pleased to instruct the Magistrate at Rustenburg to grant
the licence to Suleman Ismail but that the Magistrate at Wak-
kerstroom has properly refused the licence to Hoosen Amod as
there is a Location in Wakkerstroom.
I am to tender the Association's respectful thanks to His
Excellency for granting relief to Mr. Suleman Ismail.
As to Mr. Hoosen Amod my Committee is enquiring into
the condition and position of the Location at Wakkerstroom but
in the meantime my Committee would humbly draw His Excel-
lency's attention to the fact that the principle that the decision
seems to lay down is fraught with very serious consequences to
the whole body of Indian traders. For the Licensing Officers
may refuse licences to old Indian traders to continue to trade
in towns where there are Locations set apart for Indians.
Almost in every township of importance, the Indian merchants
are liable to be compelled to trade in Locations. This would
virtually mean that Indian merchants now trading in towns may
at any time have to close business altogether. For the trade in
towns is by no means always of the same description as in Lo-
cations.
Hoosen Amod's case, in my Committee's humble opinion, is
probably the strongest that could be imagined. He has been
trading in Wakkerstroom for over ten years under licence granted
1 & 2 Vide p. 16.
20
in his own name, a privilege that very few Indians enjoyed
during the old regime. He is the only Indian merchant in the
midst of many European merchants trading in towns. He held
a licence up to the outbreak of War. Almost every Indian oc-
cupying a similar position has been granted a licence. This case
was brought before Mr. Chamberlain's notice on the strength of
a newspaper report that his licence was to be refused for this
year. The Right Honourable gentleman was not disposed to
credit the report.
Hoosen Amod brought out from Durban Mr. Goodricke, a
solicitor, who waited on the Assistant Colonial Secretary who,
my Committee understands, assured Mr. Goodricke that at least
temporary permission would be granted to Hoosen Amod to open
his store pending consideration of his case as to a full license on
its merits.
My Committee, therefore, respectfully requests His Excellency
to reconsider the decision and order the licence to be granted to
Hoosen Amod, if only temporarily pending final decision.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: LG. 92 97/LG
