51. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL PATWARI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
Monday, Ganesh Chaturthi [September 9, 1918]
RESPECTED SHRI RANCHHODBHAI1,
I have your letter. I am improving. There is much weakness,
though, and hence I am confined to bed. There is no reason for
worry. Just when my health was returning to normal, I got fever
for a few days and that increased the weakness. There is no fever
now. I am ashamed of this illness of mine. I thought I would
never get a disease like dysentery. I was myself to blame for it.
Though I kept well enough, my skin had grown too soft and,
though I did not feel handicapped, the calf-muscles were not as
hard as they should be. Doctor friends have always told me that
I should not go without salt. I thought it was better that the
skin should be a little rough, in case I had to go to France or
Mesopotamia, and with this idea I started taking salt. This
brought on diarrhoea. I should have taken this as a warning
that I should stop eating, but I fasted only partially. The result
was acute dysentery. In this disease, food is like poison; despite
that, I continued to eat. Thus I have had to pay for my lack
of self-control.
No doubt, people will have a hard time of it for lack of rains.
On this side, there has been some rain at any rate. About Kathia-
wad I keep inquiring from visitors and also read the news in the
papers. I gather from all this that conditions there are much
worse than here.
I quite see that you cannot leave the work there and come
over here. I shall get hold of a copy of Pataka and read the arti-
cle about untouchables. I want to understand the other side
fully and, if I find dharma in it, I shall not hesitate for a moment to
give up my view. The arguments I have so far come across are
all based on tradition. I have yet to hear an argument based on
true dharma. I have taken up the problem of the untouchables
purely out of considerations of dharma. It has nothing to do with
politics. It certainly has political implications, but I have never
looked at it from that point of view. I should also like to add
that it is not my intention that tradition should never be respected.
The true dharma is unchanging, while tradition may change with
time. If we were to follow some of the tenets of Manusmriti1, there
would be moral anarchy. We have quietly discarded them alto-
gether.
With regards from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2793. Courtesy: Patwari
