171. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Monday, July 11, 1921
CHI. MANI,
I got your letter. The object of burning foreign cloth is to
create greater aversion to it. The idea, too, that such cloth had
better be given away to the poor is born of ignorance. What
difference does it make whether or not the poor get cloth worth
a few lakhs of rupees? We have done the country great harm by
importing such cloth for so many years. I do not think it will do
any good now to give it away to the poor. There is some point
in sending it to foreign countries. I am, however, asking everyone
for his view. We shall adopt the course which appeals to all. You
may ask again if you have still any doubt left.
Dahyabhai's monkey-army seems to be doing excellent
work. They should, however, bear one thing in mind. They
should appeal to people courteously, never ridicule or . . .3 anyone.
Drink addicts are to be pitied.
Kaka Saheb is a fine teacher, there is no doubt about it. I
am glad that all of you like him.
I have had many meetings with uncle Vithalbhai. He got a
fine resolution passed in his District Board. Visitors tell me that
uncle still has no faith in the spinning-wheel and that he even ex-
presses his disapproval in small gatherings. I will, even so, discuss
1 Vijayaraghavachariar had wired from Kodaikanal on July 10: "Dharwar
implores Kelkar supports wire urgently Bombay or Dharwar imperative
with date."
2 Schoolboys who served as pickets. The reference is to the army of
monkeys in the Ramayana.
3 The source indicates that the text, as printed, is doubtful at this point.
4 Dattatreya Balkrishna Kalelkar (b. 1885), popularly known as Kaka
Saheb; colleague of Gandhiji since 1915
the matter again with him when I meet him. The impression left
on my mind by our last meeting was that his doubts about the
wheel had been more or less resolved.
Blessings from
BAPU
MANIBEHN
C/O SHRI VALLABHBHAI JHAVERBHAI PATEL
BHADRA, AHMEDABAD
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-Manibehn Patelne
