323. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Sunday, April 3, [1932]
DEAR SISTERS,
Since I cannot write with the left hand as fast as I can
with the right, I dictate this letter instead of writing it.
'Whatever women do, how can you, being their elder,
employ satyagraha against them?' There is a big flaw in this
argument and it is based on a misunderstanding of the nature of
satyagraha. In that question, you equate satyagraha with duragraha .
Satyagraha makes no distinction between the young and the old,
the prince and the pauper. God also employs satyagraha against
us. His satyagraha is unceasing. In essence, satyagraha means
simply this-scrupulous regard for truth.
If God did not
adhere to truth, the whole world would perish in an instant.
The point is that offering satyagraha is as much a duty as it is
a privilege. But I shall now take your own instance. If you
do not discuss my letters among yourselves and reply to them,
I really need not write to you every week. Even if I write,
my letters will have no value and no effect. A lover of truth
never writes or speaks merely for the sake of writing or speaking.
There must be some definite purpose in his writing or speaking.
Ordinarily he should observe complete silence. Really speaking,
there can be nothing for me to tell you or anybody else, parti-
cularly while I am in prison. Though I am imprisoned, the
Government permits me to maintain limited contact with the
outside world, and I avail myself of that freedom. But I should
do so only for writing letters with a definite aim. A person like
me should teach what he wishes to teach only through his own
conduct. Those who do not learn from my actions, how can
they learn from my words? This is the general rule. But there
are persons in the Ashram as also outside it who regard my
manner of life as worth following and, for that very reason, want
me to explain my ideas more clearly. It is my duty to write to
them. You are included among these persons, but only if you
ask me some questions. That is why I told you that, if you do
not reply to me, ask me no question or discuss nothing with me,
why should I write to you?
I know that you feel shy. I also know your nature. You do
what service you can and say nothing. That is perfectly right,
and it befits you. But even though we should learn to live in
that manner, after all we have to mix with one another. Living
in the Ashram means that we should live as a small community,
that is, live together, have our meals together, work and spend
our free time together and think together. This is the meaning of
the mantra which we recite before commencing every meal. Animals
also have some capacity for living and moving together. But
man has it in unlimited measure, and it must be so because it is
his dharma to realize his oneness with all living creatures. He
cannot do this if he cannot live in a community. You must,
therefore, strive your best and cultivate this capacity. Hence even
if you do not meet regularly just now as members of an associa-
tion, you should do so at least to qualify yourselves to get weekly
letters from me and to reply to them. In this manner you can
make some progress [towards collective living]. When any of
you write to me individually, I do reply to her. But since I
started the practice of writing a common letter to the women I
have realized that I must write regularly something meant for
all the women. The women should discuss it and I should discuss
the questions which they raise. I think that I have now made
quite clear what I wished to tell you and what I want from
you.
This was only a preface to the letter. Trivenibehn has
asked me one question which concerns all women. Today, there-
fore, I will discuss that. She asks why women, not only the
women in the Ashram but all women with whom she has come
in contact, look as if they were dead and have no spirit in them
at all. There is some truth in her description, though of course
it will not apply to all women. The reasons which I have been
able to discover are these: (1) lack of order in women's life;
(2) excessive worries; (3) wrong upbringing; (4) adoption of un-
scientific measures at the time of child-birth and during confine-
ment; (5) lack of exercise; (6) eating food which is harmful to
health; (7) the habit of remaining within the four walls of the
home; (8) the habit of eating things which they ought not to eat;
(9) in many cases, harmful thoughts which they do not try to
regulate wisely, but repress.
These are the reasons which I can think of. I do not mean
that all of them apply in every case. Every woman should think
and find out which reason applies in her own case. I have
observed one great defect in our women, namely, that they hide
their thoughts from the world. As a result, their behaviour
becomes hypocritical. This can happen only to those who are
habitually hypocritical. I do not know anything in the world so
poisonous as hypocrisy, and especially when the evil affects our
middle class women who are suppressed throughout their lives
it eats them up like a canker. At every step they do things
which they dislike in their hearts, and believe that they must
do them. If they only think a little, they will realize that they
need not let themselves be suppressed by anybody in the world.
If they learn this first lesson and cultivate the courage to stand
before the world just as they are, they will be able to eliminate
the other causes which I have mentioned.
According to me, this is a very important letter. Think
over it again and again and ask me about anything in it which
you do not understand. If you read the letter twice or thrice,
you will be able to understand it very clearly.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
