131. LETTER TO SURENDRAJI
May 6, 1933
DEAR SURENDRAJI,
Ramdas told me that you had tears in your eyes when he
conveyed my message to you. I am sure that in your eyes there
cannot be any tears but of joy. There was no way out of this
fast and this was the auspicious occasion. It seems to me im-
possible to destroy a hydra-headed demon like the untouchabi-
lity by any other means. Ravana had ten heads only but this
demon has a thousand. It is not necessary to explain to you
what these thousand heads are. It is impossible to bring about
its permanent destruction by ordinary, time-honoured means.
We must, therefore, perforce, resort to ancient, valuable wea-
pons. This is as clear to me as a mathematical axiom. Is it pos-
sible to change the heart of sanatanists by collecting a crore of
rupees? Only a true votary can bring about this reform and
not hundreds of so-called ones. The Ashram through which I
am hoping to overcome this evil must not stand divided on
this question. Harijans are in mortal dread at present. Those
who have given up fear have become shameless. If these latter
run into a fury, it would be no surprise. To destroy all these
evils we cannot too often and too determinedly draw on our
spiritual possessions. If it is God's pleasure that I alone can
bring about this desired end, I shall only be too pleased for such
a sacrifice. But I am not sure that I have so much of purity in me.
If hundreds and thousands of persons like me can undertake
as many fasts, then alone we can bury the sin that has accumu-
lated through centuries.
I expect a lot from you and people like you. But I must
make one thing clear that no one must follow me during my
fast. Your duty is to remain peaceful and try to be as pure as
possible in mind, deed and word. This letter has been written by
Mahadev and he will continue to do so everyday. I shall sign it as
long as it is possible for me to do so. I have obtained Government's
permission that I can write to you everyday and so also you can.
My blessings to all.
BAPU
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 10, 1933
129
55-
