371. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
September 20, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,
You are in danger of losing caste even with Tai, if you per-
sist in defending my non-violence so long as it has not become
your very own. That the savage in us may get the better of us
when we are tried does not affect our position, if we even while
we are savage know that we are doing wrong. The fact is that
in this age of doubt, we are never sure of our ground. Some at-
tractive argument which we cannot answer baffles us instead of
humbling our pride in our intellect. These questions of non-
violence, birth-control, and the like are eternal problems. So it
might be better for you in the long run, never to seek to defend my
views. When it is your own views, I know [you] are more than
able to hold your own. I do not want your great ability to be
discounted because of your association with me.
Rather would
I like it to be said that neither your body nor your mind had
suffered decay after you began to come to Wardha.
I am glad Shummy is now treating your eczema. You
must not be touchy about the feet. Is it not better that what
is in is now coming out. The only thing is to have a remedy
that results in elimination, not suppression.
I hope you will have no difficulty in deciphering the leaf 4.
You will have none if you will treat this as part of it. You know
what I mean.
Even among closest relatives some can be shameless. I belong
to that class. Therefore don't send me a thermos till I call for
it. I assure you I am getting hot enough drinks. On that score
you need not worry.
I entirely agree with you that women are better nurses and
more attentive to details than men.
Whether it is so for
modern women or not you can speak with greater authority than
I can.
Your recent letters make me feel uneasy. You seem to be
overdoing things again. Learn to say "No" when you are phys-
ically or mentally too tired.
Ba and Manu went to Delhi yesterday. And Lilavati is still
at Maganwadi. Mira has no temperature today as yet though
this is the day for it.
Your apples were eaten with great relish by Khan Saheb
and me.
Sufficient for the day.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3591. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6400
