323. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
[NADIAD,]
July 2, 1918
I am very glad that you write so very regularly. I also wish
to be regular, but you should not wait for my letters. There was
no letter from you today. The conversation about Natesan was
interesting. Do as suits you best. The work in which you are
engaged at present is very important, how very important you
may not perhaps realize just now. Generally, such work would be
entrusted only to a very intelligent and mature person. Even if that
were done, it is doubtful whether enough people will come for-
ward to learn [Hindi] in a place like Madras. If you succeed in
getting the people of the province of Madras to accept your gift
of Hindi, you will have solved a difficult problem. You will then
have joined Madras with other parts of India. This bridge which
you have undertaken to build requires greater skill and patience
than would be required in building a bridge across the Ganga. The
task of making Hindi simple and interesting will exercise all your
skill. To succeed in this, you will do well to read, during your
leisure hours, books on Hindi, Gujarati, English and Tamil gram-
mars. This might reveal to you some key which will enable you to
impart more knowledge with less effort. Teach a large number of
derivative words [at the same time as the root word]. That will tax
the memory less. I have told you to consider what arrangements
can be made for the Hindi-speaking people whom we want to send
there to learn Tamil. You should discuss this with Mr. Natesan,
Hanumantrao and others. Revashankar Sodha and Chhotam have
returned to the Ashram. I welcome this, although it adds to the
responsibility. Harilal will pass through by the night train today
on his way from Rajkot. We have had news of the death of. . .'s
mother. Write to her from your end. I brought up the matter
yesterday and we had a purifying discussion. I call the discussion
purifying because everyone gave truthful answers, with the utmost
civility and reverence. The question was this: Now . . will
like to go for the customary mourning visit on her mother's
death. This will cost eighty rupees. Can the Ashram afford the
expense? Should it agree to bear it? A person who has embraced
1 & 2 Names have been omitted in the source.
poverty in the cause of the country and has dedicated himself to
service of others can never lose his mother by death, because all
women, old enough to be so, are his mothers. The father also
does not die because every elder is like a father to him. Service is
his wife; can she ever know death? The rest of the world are like
brothers and sisters to him. To go on a mourning visit on the death
of one's mother is only a formality. Should money be wasted to
follow it out of deference to the world? This was the question dis-
cussed. Everyone replied, in all solemnity, that such an expendi-
ture would be unjustified. Santok and Ba were also present. It was
unanimously decided, though, that the idea should not be acted
upon this time and the matter should be left entirely to the
discretion of . . . 1 and . . .2 behn. Most probably they will go.
Do you read any newspapers there? May I send you any from
here?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
