215. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
CHUDKHANA,
Sunday [December 7, 1919]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I got your letter while I was touring. I shall return to Lahore
the day after tomorrow, Tuesday. I had a telegram from Harilal
to say that he was coming to see me.
With Ba things are as you say and I am unhappy about it.
So long as she does not consider you all with the same regard as
Harilal, her staying in the Ashram is in vain. But we cannot
escape the situation and, therefore, must submit to it and feel com-
passion for Ba.
There was no help but to send Santok. I do not expect the
results which you do, for the thing is extremely difficult. Keep up
your efforts, though. It will not be convenient to build a house
for me outside the Ashram. I think it will be desirable to have one
in the Ashram itself, which would give me some privacy. This is
already included in our plan. It will suffice if the house is a part of
the library.
I have sent a telegram so that I may know what Chi. Anand-
lal has to say. I do not think it possible to revise the prices.
Anandlal must have in mind the prices in Kathiawar. However,
it would be better to make sure.
As for the kitchen, we are not to prepare any vegetables. I
think that is the best course if it helps us to save and to keep
better health. At any rate, this should be the ultimate goal. Just
as we do not look out for company when going for evacuation, we
should have no one to keep us company at meals. If we can really
regard eating as in no way different from evacuation, we would
attend to this also in private. It would be shameful for us to ar-
range for separate cooking for ourselves, so that we might indulge
our palate. But I know that our experiment is not inspired by
the high ideal mentioned above. If, therefore, such separate
cooking has unhappy consequences, we should certainly stop it.
Plan your work yourself. If only we can achieve our aim some-
how, that is all we want.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W.5780. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
