79. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 1, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
My fast will be for all the inmates of the Ashram, including
you. You should, therefore, get rid of all your diseases.
I assume that you have kept a copy of your questions
and so I give here only brief replies to them. I am hard
pressed for time today.
1. If persuasion does not succeed, you may become silent
and pray in your heart for that person, whether she is a girl or
a grown-up woman. This will help you to overcome your im-
patience.
2. We should know what is meant by 'necessity' in this
question. Suppose that I am reciting Sanskrit verses and leading
a prayer, and just then I see a snake. It is necessary that I
should catch it, and I may, therefore, stop reciting the verses
1 Which read: (1) What should one do and how should one overcome
one's impatience if someone older, younger or of the same age misbehaves
despite persuasion and thereby creates a bad impression on others and time is
wasted and work delayed? (2) How would it affect others if a person violated
Ashram rule or discipline under some necessity while doing one's duty? (3)
How far should we pay regard to social practice or custom in the path of
satyagraha?
(4) What would be my duty as a satyagrahi when I disagree
with a renowned mahatma like you on a certain step which I find to be right
according to the voice of my conscience and which might violate the rules of
the institution? (5) Should one love the individual for the sake of the institution
or the institution for the individual? (6) By what test can one find out that
one has bad thoughts about others? (7) If a person is found on every occa-
sion telling lies, or shirking work or being selfish, and others too have com-
plained about it, would it be proper for a satyagrahi to have doubts about him?
(8) What is the limit for simple living? To embroider one's sari, to wear
fashionable blouses, to adorn the hands and neck with flowers, wear chappals
-should this be considered as love for art or breaking the Ashram principles?
(9) Would it be slander or violence if in the Ashram one person finds fault
with another and commits the same fault himself, i.e., indulges in mutual
fault-finding? (10) As those who join the Ashram do so with different motives,
should we judge each of them from his own standpoint?
and violate a rule. I may also do that if I feel an immediate
call of nature at that time. If, however, I feel thirsty, I should
control my desire for some time and go on reciting the verses.
You felt something in the throat and yet continued. That was
worse than foolishness.
3. We may disregard any social practice or custom which
obstructs our quest for truth.
4. If you have absolute faith in me, you should believe that
what you regard as the voice of your conscience may not be so.
If, however, that voice is so direct as to be more powerful even
than your faith in me, you should follow it whatever the cost.
5. It is not possible to reply to this question categorically.
6. I do not follow this question.
7. If a person is often found telling lies or shirking work, even
a lover of truth will suspect him of doing the same on another
occasion, but will, despite his suspicion, love him and continue
to give him opportunities.
8. There can be no one rule for all people in this matter.
It depends on one's attitude. However, simplicity should not be
sacrificed for the sake of art.
9. Mutual fault-finding is always bad. It is petty-minded-
ness to retort, 'You are no better.'
10. This is implied in ahimsa.
Thinking that you may have had no time to keep a copy
of your questions, I return them with this.
I am sending two women to the Ashram. I hesitate very
much to do so, but I send them because I feel that I ought to.
I do hope that they will not increase your work but will help
you. Make some arrangement to help them to learn Hindi.
I should like Sushila to spend this vacation in the Ashram.
That is likely to give rest to both of you. I hope you know
the English saying that change of occupation is rest. There is
a good deal of truth in it. Treat this only as brain-wave which
I got while writing this letter. If Sushila has made some
other plan, I certainly don't want her to abandon it to please
me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10342. Also C.W. 6781. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
