340. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
P.O. Box 6528,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 7, 1903
DEAR SIR,
In the Indian Opinion being posted today, you will notice
an extract from Mr. Chamberlain's speech.
You may recollect that a Commission went to India on be-
half of the Natal Government last year with a view to induce
Lord Curzon to agree to the compulsory repatriation of inden-
tured Indians after the termination of their indentures. The
Commission has returned, but no statement has been yet made
by the Natal Government. Mr. Chamberlain's speech, however,
would go to show that the Indian Government accepted the prin-
ciple of compulsion in a most objectionable manner—that is to
say—a portion of the wages of the indentured men is to be paid
them on their return to India. This will be nothing less than
temporary slavery, and we, in South Africa, feel it so strongly
that such a stipulation should not be agreed to even in exchange
for a grant of more rights to free Indian settlers in Natal. The
fight regarding the licences and other matters affecting free
Indians ought to be carried on independently of the question of
indentured labour, except that, if the free Indians are not guaran-
teed fair treatment, indentured immigration may be withdrawn
entirely. But to give away the liberties of indentured Indians
who may be brought to Natal, for the sake of a better treat-
ment of free Indians, would be highly immoral, and would never
be acceptable to the latter. It is to be hoped, therefore, that a
continued protest will be made against the principle of compul-
sory repatriation. From Mr. Chamberlain's statement, it would
appear that the thing is already done. The Natal Government,
however, is quite reticent and, therefore, there is just a hope
that, after all, Mr. Chamberlain has made a mistake in making
the announcement he has done.
The struggle about licences (Dealers') in Natal has been
revived as a direct result of Lord Milner's Notice. Natal has
naturally grown bolder, and, in view of the coming new year,
the situation has become very acute.
In Newcastle, as you will notice from the Opinion, a licence
in respect of ideally good premises has been refused to a British
Indian. Four licences in Durban have been refused simply be-
cause it was a matter of change of premises, not that they were
new licences. Mr. Nazar would probably be writing to you from
Durban, but as I know the history of the Dealers' Licenses Act
from the very commencement, I thought I might deal with it also.
In the Transvaal, the position is just as it is described in
the long cablegram that was sent some time ago.
It is high
time that a definite pronouncement was made regarding the exist-
ing Indian licences here, and that the congestion regarding
permits to bona-fide refugees was removed.
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
THE HONOURABLE DADABHAI NAOROJI
WASHINGTON HOUSE, 72 ANERLEY PARK
LONDON S.E.
India Office: Judicial and Public Records, 2852, and India, 2-10-1903
