29. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
January 12, 1933
MY DEAR VENKATAPPAYYA,
I have your letter. I fear that your suggestion is fatal, espe-
cially at the present moment. To set up new temples would be
to set up a new religion and accept defeat. If it is to be defeat,
I should take it and resign myself to it, but I will not set up a new
religion. If our contention is right and the public reject it, we should
know that untouchability is not to be destroyed or even shaken
during our time. Whether the contemplated legislation should be
there or not is a matter that should be examined on its own merits.
I have come to the conclusion that both from the point of view of
interference in matters religious and seeking Viceregal sanction, it is
free from reproach. Any time we would want legislation in order to
correct errors and, in the hottest non-co-operation days, I should not
hesitate to promote legislation backed by public will. No law or
rule can be cited to defeat its own end. You may then be sure
that there is flaw in your reasoning. The cry of religious inter-
ference is perfectly thoughtless where it is not obviously hypo-
critic[al]. Of course, there is a third objection to the proposed
Bill, namely, that the question who should or should not enter
a temple should not be decided by those who are temple-goers,
but by some extraneous authority, in this instance, learned men.
I totally deny the validity of that proposition. No religion
could grow under such a chilling rule. Hindu religion, so far as I
1 The addressee had written: "So far as Guruvayur temple is concerned,
the object may be taken as having been practically fulfilled, the opinion of the
people being found to be decidedly favourable. . . . There will be no need to
seek the aid of law if public opinion is secured in favour of the movement and
legislation will be of no value if public opinion is adverse."
know it, has never followed any such rule. Mind, I do not insist
that all old temples should be opened to Harijans, but I do insist
that all old temples should be opened where the majority of present
worshippers are willing. It is the acid test of the sincerity or the
reality of the Bombay Resolution.
I suppose we must resign ourselves to the prospect of your wife
leaving this stage any moment. Perhaps it would be a welcome
deliverance from a lingering death. I hope you are feeling better.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19231
