126. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Bhadarva Sud 5 [August 28, 1911]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I got your letter only today. You will, given patience, recover
there. If you want to stay with me for some time for the sake
of your health, I can take out a permit for you. I think you will
feel better here. But I leave the decision to you.
It is a good question you have asked me. You are entirely
right in your interpretation. If "is" were to be used, the meaning
would change. "Is" is implied in "equivalent". It is surprising
that Purshottamdas should fail to understand this. I think he has
a sharp mind in such matters. The Gujarati word generally used
for "civilization" means "a good way of life". That is what I had
meant to say. The sentence "The Gujarati equivalent for civili-
zation is sudharo" is quite correct. But that is not what I intended
to say. Were we to say, "The Gujarati equivalent for civilization
is good conduct", according to the rules of grammar, "good con-
duct" would have to be taken as a Gujarati phrase. If you point
this out to Purshottamdas, I think he will understand it all right.
Please let me know whether it was for this reason or for any other
reasons that you concluded that "means" was the right word.
I cannot tell you just now why Ayodhya is called a virgin
city. I would have to read Dutt. Ask me another time. The
interpretation you give does not appeal to me. I may be mistaken
though. It does not seem likely that yodhya came out of yuj.
"Virgin" in this context should be interpreted to mean "holy" in a
general sense.
This is the explanation in reply to Maganlal's question.
"Community of interest" means identical interests. If all
of us pursue the same object, it can be said that we have a "com-
munity of interest". If the whites seek to gratify only physical
needs and we, spiritual needs, we have no "community of interest".
I have no information on what Muslim books there are in
Gujarati. I know that a biography of the Prophet was written
by Narayan Hemchandra and that copies used to be on sale at
the Gujarati Press. Please tell Maganlal that it would be better
for the present not to publish any list of books or journals. It
will do if he reads this letter.
By sheer chance, my school has gained three more pupils, for
the present at any rate. All of them observe the vow of doing
without salt, vegetables and pulses between Monday and Saturday.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5640. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
