702. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
ASHRAM,
WARDHA,
October 19, 1933
CHI. PANNALAL,
It seems your letter has crossed my postcard.
Your purity has so impressed me that anything you write
or any step you take cannot hurt me. By that I do not mean
that I shall always agree with you on the rightness of your step.
But the more experience I gain the more I realize that there
are as many conceptions of dharma as there are individuals.
The deeper I delve the greater is my comprehension of the dictum
of the Gita : Better to die following one's own faith.
I certainly wish you success in what you have considered your
dharma. I personally did wish that when others slackened, you
would be able better to understand satyagraha. I hold that
satyagraha has not yet manifested itself in India in its true form.
The duty of manifesting it devolves on you and me, that is, the
inmates of the Ashram. For you, civil disobedience cannot be
423
a political matter. It can only be a matter of dharma. Dharma
reveals itself in its true form only when there is despair all around.
If we join the crowd in offering prayers, it would not be an
indication of our faith. But it would in some measure be a test
of our faith if when others lost faith in prayer a handful of us conti-
nued to offer prayers and derived joy from so doing. But what
is dharma to me may not be dharma to you. Only what you
see as dharma will be dharma to you. I have only conveyed
my views to you as an elder. If your reason does not accept it,
if it does not appeal to your heart, then do not act on it. Indi-
vidual civil disobedience must be taken to mean perfection. If
you are starting a goshala, are you going to do it on your
own, or is there any room for suggestions and guidance? If there
is such scope, meet me. I shall then send you my suggestions. Do
come over if you feel like coming.
What you write about Gangabehn and Nanibehn seems
correct. It is your duty to guide the two of them. And it is also
your right. I mayor may not be able to write letters. But both
of them have got to write to me. In fact I have been awaiting
their letters. I hope you yourself are in good health.
Prabhudas's marriage was solemnized yesterday. The bride's
name is Amba. She is 24 years old. She is competent, and has
a deep sense of sacrifice. She has been to jail twice. She had
been trying to come and live in the Ashram for several years
but there were restrictions from her guardians. Kishorelal and
Gomati have gone to Akola today. Anandi, Babu and Bachu
have gone in that direction today. Prabhudas will be staying here
for some time. Amba is of course with him. I am regaining
my strength. I am gaining weight. The blood-pressure is going
down. There are more than forty girls here.
I have received your second letter. I am here till the 7th
November. I shall leave on the 8th.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari-Pannalal Jhaveri, pp. 31-
