15. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
4.30 p.m., December 20, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter betrays about my health an anxiety which is wholly
unnecessary. The weight which was taken on Thursday showed
an increase of 1½ lb., a very good increase in seven days. Nor do
I feel any weakness. I do my two hours' spinning on the takli
standing as a rule without feeling any appreciable fatigue. I have
just now sat down to write this after finishing the takli. All the mis-
takes made last time are being avoided. Stools are well formed.
Pyarelal tells me there is no smell worth noticing. The food is all
well cooked, i.e., vegetables and chapati. The latter is rebaked
when I receive it. Last time, you should remember, it was all raw
food including cereals and pulses. As a matter of fact, I am now
taking practically what I was taking before starting the raw cereals.
The only difference is taking bajri or jwari in the place of wheat.
Perhaps it is a change for the better. I am taking once boiling
water, lemon and salt. In spite of all this apparent improve[ment]
if I find any irregularity about the stools or weakness (persistent)
or a continuing decrease in weight, in anyone of the three things
happening, I shall go back to milk. But just now with the good
feel about the health I must not deprive myself of the joy of avoid-
ing milk and taking the bajri or jwari chapati. And what is more,
I like the taste of these chapatis. This detailed explanation and
description ought to give you and other friends full satisfaction
and free you from all worry as to the future.
In my opinion, while it is necessary, so far as you are concern-
ed, to keep a watch on your menu, your chief trouble is mental.
Any pressure on the mind reacts immediately on your body. This
anxiety complex, you should try to throw off. "Be careful for no-
thing." "Look at the lilies of the field, they toil not, neither do they
spin and yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these." I do not know whether I have quoted correctly. Anyhow the
lilies only seem neither to toil nor to spin. They do both but so
naturally that we do not notice their toilsome spin. If they did not
toil, they would wither. Only they have not the egotism and hence
attachments, likes and dislikes that we have. But when we toil
like them detachedly, our toil will not be noticed and therefore
will not adversely affect the body.
7.30 p.m.
You and I and all of us have to make a conscious and deli-
berate effort to realize this blessed state. Or else, our reading of the
Gita is vain.
You will take care not to burn yourself with the primus. You
know how Gujarati women have burnt themselves over the use of
the primus. The loose saris lend themselves to the wick especially
at the time of lighting it. As it is kept on the floor, they have to
bend and the rising flame easily catches a fold or a loose end of the
sari. It may be wise for you, therefore, to keep it on a metal-
mounted stool. Then too there is precious little room in your little
dormitory. Anyway, you have my warning. You will now take
what precautions you may think right.
In my seclusion, the idea of your bringing out a paper does
not at all commend itself to me. That ties you down and I should
like you to remain free for what comes to your lot. And then
the paper will absorb the labour of several others. I dread the idea.
But my opinion has no value. You and the other workers are the
best judges.
Yes, I have just finished the first part of the introduction to
my translation of the Gita. I hope to do at least a paragraph
every day. If I succeed, the introduction cannot take long.
The new Gandiv has almost all the improvements I had
contemplated. It has two springs for the two mals. It is working
like a musical instrument and requires very little attention. For
the execution of these improvements I am thankful to the Superin-
tendent and an English co-prisoner, who is a clever mechanic and
who takes a serious interest in the work. He has applied the
spring to the holder in an original way. The idea is incredibly sim-
ple and equally effective. But I must not keep you over this any
longer.
I am glad you have taken Surendra in hand. It is criminal
how he neglects his body. Even St. Francis, though he called his
1 Anasaktiyoga; vide Vol. XLI.
2 A new type of spinning-wheel
body an ass, took some care of it. And after all the ass is a most
useful and patient animal. The brother ass can be equally useful
if properly treated and neither pampered nor neglected.
And now here is the first verse of the morning prayer:
"Early in the morning, I call to mind that Being which is
felt in the heart, which is sat (the eternal), chit (knowledge), sukham
(bliss), which is the state reached by perfect men and which
is the super-state. I am that immaculate Brahman which ever notes
the states of dream, wakefulness and deep sleep, not this body,
the compound made of the elements (earth, water, space, light and
air)." You will be interested to know that the first verse was com-
menced on 6th May last.
I am sorry that the very first verse needed correcting. The
more I think, the more clearly I see the meaning. And then I
don't mind how often I cut about the translation. Formerly I used
to shudder to utter this verse thinking that the claim made therein
was arrogant. But when I saw the meaning more clearly, I perceiv-
ed at once that it was the very best thought with which to com-
mence the day. It is a solemn declaration that we are not the
changeful bodies which require sleep, etc., but deep down, we
are the Being, the witness pervading the countless bodies. The
first part is the recalling to mind the presence of the vital principle
and the second part is the affirmation that we are that vital princi-
ple. The description of the Being, the Brahman, is also quite appo-
site. It is, nothing else is (sat), it is all knowledge or light (chit),
and naturally, therefore, it is all bliss (sukham) or the word gene-
rally used is anand. The rest is simple. You will compare this
translation with what you have already, translated by Valjibhai. If
there is a material difference, let me have his translation. In
scholarship I should yield the palm to him. So now God willing,
you may expect a present of this character every week. And here
goes the bugle telling me it will presently be 9 p.m.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9284. Courtesy: Mirabehn
1 Vide "Ashram Bhajanavali", Vol. XLIV, p. 386.
