261. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
December 9, 1940
DAUGHTER,
The more I think of your letter the more highly I think of you.
And I feel happy. You should do your work on your own responsi-
bility. It is true that you came over here on your mission; you
went to Sind and will go there again in pursuit of your own mission.
You will certainly get my counsel; but whatever you do should
be your own responsibility. You will, of course, consult Jairamdas
and others whom you wish to. You can go whenever you like. It
was good that I sent for you here. For the present be guided by
Dr. Das. Do not call on anyone here. Give up the temptation of
rendering even the least little service to me. If you cannot desist,
you may well do it. But the less you serve me, the less friction
there will be. You will be with Madam Wadia as long as she is here.
Seek her advice. That will keep you busy for quite some time.
Now about your work in Sind. You have to give up all interest
in the [problems of] prisoners and [dispute about] Manzilgah. You
may listen to everyone; but this is a matter for the courts to decide.
You have to explain to the Muslims of Sind that in political matters
and the like, justice cannot be secured through murder, force or
untruth. Your going to Sind and even sacrificing your life should
be for stopping the bloodshed, whether or no the Muslims get
justice or injustice. That was my object in sending you, and remains
so even now.
Despite these views of mine, I do not wish to explain things
to you or advise you elaborately. I shall not be in a position to
advise you in political matters since I shall have to listen to and
abide by the words of Maulana. In respect of bloodshed, it is not
necessary to consult him. I do think that you should not do any-
thing against the wishes of Maulana. It is your duty to meet Muslim
Leaguers, to listen to them and to love them. I believe that there
can be no Hindu-Muslim unity without them.
May God clear the path for you. He alone is the Compas-
sionate One and you and I are all His slaves; everything else is unreal.
Millions of blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 459
