99. LETTER TO ANAND SWARUP
November 26, 1932
BHAI ANAND SWARUP,
I have your letter. All the questions are good, but I do not
have sufficient time to answer them all. I am not sure when I
shall be able to reply through the newspapers, and so I think I
may write at least this much.
Ramanama and Omkar are one and the same. Tulsidas too
has shown this most clearly. He has extolled the name pre-
cisely because one lacks concentration while reciting prayers.
All the Shastras assure us and the experience of devotees shows
that anyone can ultimately gain concentration of mind if one
goes on praying with a feeling of reverence. Closing eyes while
chanting the prayer is enough but it is certainly good if the
thoughts are centred on the point between the eyebrows.
The assertion that God himself is truth has a drawback that
it implies some further qualities possessed by God. That God has
many names, a thousand, is quite true. But remembering God
as the possessor of many names is fraught with the possibility of
a diminution in the significance of the entity to which we wish to
offer total surrender. But all other attributes fade away when we
proclaim that Truth alone is God; only the idea of truth remains
in mind and this is more prevalent in monism. Atheism has no
place here as even an atheist accepts existence which is a deve-
lopment of sat. Here truth does not imply merely truthfulness of
speech; its meaning here is unity of thought, word and deed and
yet more. Whatever is in reality here, what existed in the past
and will remain in the future is the substance, truth, Parameshwar
and nothing but that.
Now for the scavenging and hygiene of commodes. A commode
should be placed in a room which constantly receives sunlight.
It should be constructed in such a way as to be removed daily
and cleaned. Two buckets should be placed on a wooden frame,
one for urine and one for stools. After evacuation of the bowels
the excrement should be covered with sand or mud. A bucket
full of earth should be kept in the room. If the house is near
a field or a garden the excreta should be regularly buried there
for being converted into manure. Except during the rainy
season, the roof should be removable during the rest of the year so
that the room receives sunshine throughout the day. With this
arrangement and daily washing out of the buckets and the room,
the lavatory will be and should be as clean as a bed-room. This
arrangement is very convenient in the villages and it should not
prove difficult in towns like Meerut.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
[PS.]
It is not essential to place the buckets in a wooden frame.
They can be placed on a frame made of stone or bricks.
From Hindi: C.W. 9452. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan
