53. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
May 4, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
With reference to the interview with General Smuts, I
have conferred with Mr. Cachalia and other leaders. It seems
to be no easy matter to give you a complete list of the names of
those who as passive resisters would be competent to apply, and,
in any case, the preparation of the list will take some time. But I
think I can easily describe the classes who may be permitted to
apply. I do not deal with those who are in South Africa, for
General Smuts, I understand, does not anticipate any difficulty
about them.
There are no Chinese passive resisters outside South Africa.
Those Indians who may be in India should fall under one or
[the] other of the following sub-heads:
(a) Those who, after the 1st of January, 1908, were deported
under the Registration Act 2 of 1907 or Act 36 of 1908, and have
not yet applied under either of the Acts;
(b) those who, though not deported, left South Africa ow-
ing to the struggle some time after the 1st day of March, 1907.
The onus of proof of deportation under (a) and of leaving
under (b) should fall on the applicant.
By adopting the above method, General Smuts' fear that the
door may be opened to applicants who may have left South Africa
for India years ago and may now set up a fictitious claim is set
at rest.
I understand that not more than thirty Indians are likely to
fall under (a) or (b), and that not more than 150 are likely to
apply from South Africa.
It follows from the correspondence between us that those who
have applied to the Registrar for registration under either the
Act of 1907 or that of 1908, and have been rejected, cannot now
reapply. But there are some in South Africa who applied for
voluntary certificates before the Act of 1908 was passed, but
who, having been rejected by the Registrar, did not apply after
the Act of 1908. These men will now apply under the Act so
as to be able to avail themselves, if necessary, of the right of appeal
reserved under the Act of 1908.
Of the Chinese in South Africa, there are not more than 30,
of whom all but two are in the Transvaal, these two being in
Delagoa Bay.
I take it that registration will proceed at once. I venture to
suggest that applications be not received after, say, the 31st Decem-
ber next.
May I point out the desirability of finally closing this matter,
as some passive resistance prisoners are still in gaol who are to
be recommended for discharge, and as I am most anxious, if I can,
to close among ourselves further discussion of the interminable
points that crop up pending a final announcement.
Yours etc.,
[M. K. GANDHI]
From Indian Opinion, 27-5-1911; also photostat of draft in Gandhiji's
hand, in which the last paragraph is missing: S. N. 5529a
