64. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before July 11, 1907] 1
[MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,]
I have your letter. I note what you say about Kajee. Mr. Polak
has just returned from Pretoria. He has done exceedingly well there.
I have written to Mr. West about jobs. The Customs Forms, as
I have said to Mr. West, are to be sent to the address in your possession
of Ebrahim Mahomed. He is one of the subscribers.
1 This was obviously written prior to his letter of July 11; vide the following
item in which Gandhiji refers to the printing of the Ramayana.
2 Printer of Indian Opinion and inmate of Phoenix Ashram.
Vide Vol. IV,
pp. 325-6, Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XXIII, XL VII and Autobiography, Part IV,
Ch. XVI, XVIII, et seq.
I am certain that it is a short-sighted policy not to print Hindi.
We are really not even using our capital. Ramayana is bound to sell,
and, in my opinion, it will be a work of very considerable merit, for
the simple reason that thousands of people who cannot possibly study
the whole work will gladly avail themselves of the condensation. If,
therefore, a good man is available, you should certainly not hesitate to
incur the expense. The reasoning which tells you that, according to
the expenses here, the book will be dear is faulty to a degree. It should
be plain to us that, if the expenses are high, the prices charged are
correspondingly high. The term high, therefore, is merely relative. The
Bhagavad-Gita1, which we would issue in India for one anna, we charge
one shilling for, because the expenses were comparatively high. I am
perfectly certain that whenever we think of having things done cheaply
outside the country of our adoption, we bring into play the ordinary
weakness, namely, to drive the hardest bargain possible, and it is for
that reason that I have condemned in my mind the idea of having the
South African book printed in Bombay, and I feel this so keenly, that
I have not yet summoned up sufficient zeal for writing out the book.
I would ask you to reason this thing out for yourself.
Never mind
whether we employ an extra hand or not and whether we publish the
book or not; that is a matter of detail. The first thing is to lay down
the principle. If we cannot enforce it, or if we have not sufficient courage
to do it, then we cease to worry about it, and cease to think of enlarg-
ing the scope of our work. If you need money, please let me know in
time.
Yours sincerely
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4674
