412. LETTER TO AN INMATE OF THE ASHRAM
September 5, 1927
I have your letter. It was good you gave me all the details.
I cannot doubt you.
We should observe a convention which does not run counter
to morality. Brahmacharya is said to be protected by nine hedges. If
you have not read of it, do so in Raichandbhai's book. We neglect
some of those hedges. I am responsible for this. Hence such neglect
is only tentative. But we do observe the rule of never being alone
in the company of even our own sister. I fully see the need for
this. That protects both.
A brahmachari should be utterly humble and should not trust
himself. There are two reasons for such diffidence. One is that
he himself may thereby remain pure and the other is that the
sister who comes in contact with him may not entertain lustful
thoughts even in her dreams.
All the world has a right to suspect a brahmachari and it ought
to have this right. The world does not observe brahmacharya. The
world believes that no one can conquer the passions which it cannot
itself conquer and that is only right. Hence we should not be
offended by the world's suspicion. Know that all who stay there are
included in the world.
Others have slipped through the liberty which you have taken
innocently. In the beginning they were innocent. Even if you
yourself have reached the stage at which you can never succumb
to passion, you should still observe the restraints for the sake of
others. We come across many who claim to observe brahma-
charya. Could we allow them all to take such liberties?
I myself have not yet been able to conquer passions. Do you
not know this? If I am not able to assure myself or the world
about myself, you should be all the more careful about yourself.
Desire is a scorpion. One never knows when it will sting. It
is ananga. So we cannot see it; we cannot catch it, even if we try.
That is why a brahmachari has to remain ever vigilant.
What you write about Bhai Chhaganlal Joshi and others is
not right. They are all making efforts. We do not live outside the
world, nor do we wish to hate the passions in others; we only
wish to be free from them ourselves and live on thus free.
You should therefore be vigilant. If you wish to ask me
something more, do so.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
