547. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
August 8, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
1. You did take interest in Sevagram, but you did not
consider it your duty like your work there. Your heart was
not in Sevagram. It was wherever I was.
2. Conflicts do not arise overnight. Nothing would have
happened if you had not regarded it as conflict. You made a
mountain out of a molehill without seeing or listening and
without paying attention to my letters.
3. What I have said is a cruel, stark truth. Your statement
that the old do not let the young have their way is far from
true. Had your observation been correct, the Ashram would
not have continued to grow at such a pace as it is doing.
4. I have not raised you high. Nor have I pulled you down.
But you are so touchy that you did not hesitate even being
unfair to me. Bapu has not changed but you saw him changed.
It is another matter that you forgave him out of generosity.
5. There was jealousy indeed, but it was not of you. Had
you understood this much, there would have been no need for
you to suffer as you did.
6. Pyarelal says that you have understood it all wrong. But
if Pyarelal really believes what you have told him, then he does
not know me at all. Bapu's entire life has been spent in coping
with opposition-internal and external, never in submitting to it.
I have always preferred losing colleagues rather than wrongly
submitting.
7. I changed my attitude, when protests were ceasing. Does
it not show that it had not been in any way related to the
protests?
8. But I do not agree that I changed my attitude. I have
proved to you that I explained the truth. I claim that my
attitude has remained unchanged.
9. This is true.
345
10. But he who regards me as the centre, must consider
himself safe. Instead of taking that view, you followed your
own mind and then felt puzzled. This much in reply to your
letter of 29-7-1940.
Now for the letter of 2-8-1940.
1. 2. 3. If your experience till the time of my going to
Calcutta was sweet, you must accept that if it turned bitter later
you should have put up with it. You could not do so because
you never considered Sevagram your field of action and field of
duty. Your field of action was only I, which was wrong in itself.
I must never become the field of activity for anyone. The
cause of envy lay in this fact, not outside it.
4. It is not true that I had raised you high.
5. The reply has been given above.
The rest is nothing new.
I hope you will be able to read this.
How can I expect that my reply will satisfy you? I shall
be content if you can only accept that we are considering the
same thing from different points of view. But forget all this;
start afresh. Not for my sake but for the sake of my work.
Come whenever you can decide to come. Right now you are
in your field of duty. You are well trained for it. Go on with
it. Later on you can come if you think it proper to come. So
long as our view-points are different, you will not find peace
even if you come. Pyarelal will explain this better.
In your absence I cannot keep the dispensary in its present
shape. It is your thing. Now that you have gone, I cannot
bear the sight of it. But I cannot bear it either that you
should return merely for the sake of the dispensary. I had and
have altogether another use for you. It may include the dispen-
sary. But that is a different matter. You need not feel miserable
that we had a dispensary and now it may be closed down. I
would not hesitate to set up and let go such things for your sake.
That is how I am made. I have always incurred such expenses
for those I like. All I want is your good, be it anywhere.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
