115. LETTER TO SARDUL SINGH CAVEESAR
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your two letters. In answer to the general letter here
is my article or message, whatever you may call it, for the Hindu-
stani.
Your second letter makes painful reading. There is nothing
to be done but to let the fury work itself out and if we who know
the evil of these dissensions and self-seeking survive the shock all
will be well.
The copy of your third letter is deeply interesting. Your jail
experience is very useful. Your impressions of the things as you
see them after your discharge from the prison provoke deep think-
ing. I agree with you that non-co-operation has not failed and that
we have not seen the last of it. I agree also that swaraj is nearer
than many may think. The whole thing resolves itself into con-
version of the educated classes. This is bound to happen if some
of us remain true as I know we will. The attitude of a staunch
non-co-operationist like myself towards the Swarajists requires
fairly elaborate argument. I shall not therefore deal with it
here. Put in one sentence, I can say that my attitude is based
upon the hope that most is to be expected from them in the way
of a forward policy.
It is quite true that the spinning-wheel cannot be introduced
as a subsidiary employment amongst those like the Punjab farm-
ers whose time is almost fully occupied with more profitable con-
cerns. But the middle class who have always ample time to waste
if they feel for their country as a whole should think of the mil-
lions of paupers and for their sake wear khaddar and spin for
half an hour per day by way of example and encouragement if
nothing else. Its greatest political value should not escape your
keen penetrative intellect. It lies in the fact that millions who
are today leading less than animal life will have an honourable
occupation and a means of livelihood. Today they can be induced
to do nothing whilst they are passive instruments of submission to
any tyrant. And why does khaddar lose its political importance
because I invited Lord Reading to use it? Will non-co-operation
or civil disobedience lose their importance if I invited Lord Reading
to take to either or both?
Lastly, civil revolution on a mass scale I hold to be an im-
possibility unless we acquire sufficient control and influence over the
masses so as to ensure their abstention from disturbing the peace
of the country by a violent demonstration. Every time in the past
when I have called off Civil Resistance upon outbreak of violence,
you will find that Congressmen had a hand in it and that there-
fore it had a political value. I should not hesitate to go forward
even if there were a thousand eruptions in the country if I was
sure that they had nothing to do with the political upheaval and
that Congressmen had no hand in them directly or indirectly.
Regarding my health I am certainly weak but you have given
me full credit by hoping that I know the value of my life much
better than any of my admirers. I assure you that I shall
try to conserve it to the best of my ability but old age will overtake
the most careful men. On the whole I think that I am keeping
very good health.
Yours sincerely,
SARDAR SARDUL SINGH CAVEESAR
LODGE LIBERTY
RAM GALI, LAHORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 19358
