626. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 22, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,
It is 6.15 now and I must stretch myself. And if I feel sleepy,
I must sleep. That is why I am dictating this letter. I read your lessons
and I like them. It would not do your spoiling your handwriting and
then asking to be forgiven. Asking forgiveness every now and again
would be like following the English practice. That would not be proper.
Your handwriting should be such that you do not have to ask for-
giveness at all. You may write less. If you resolve that whatever you
write will be in a beautiful handwriting, writing Manu's lessons in a
beautiful handwriting will not be burdensome to you. Duty should never
be a burden. And it is one's duty to make one's handwriting beautiful
like beads. In spite of knowing this I myself do not follow this. You
should consider it a failing on my part, and not imitate me in this.
I have sampled your other roti too. It was harder and there must
be something lacking in it. If you have started making roti and if you
have decided to do it, why not do it the way you formerly did ? In
other words you had started mixing in it lime or tamarind juice or tomato
juice. If you do that, the roti will be lighter and easily more spongy.
In case you do not do that, I have already suggested bhakhri. It would
turn out nice if you add sufficient oil in the dough. Do not think that
you have to send it to me. You may send it whenever it is convenient
to do so.
Sushila's letter is enclosed. I am very much impressed by it. If
she is able to act according to the wish she has expressed in it, I
shall consider it a great triumph in this yajna. You must also encourage
her. Have I not told you that you, Sushila and Manu could play the
greatest role in the success of this yajna. And even there, Manu would
be undergoing the severest test. The indications so far are good. Its
complete success would no doubt depend very largely on my own
efficiency. On the one hand is the gravest doubt on the part of Kishorelal
and others and on the other my stubbornness. My mind is oscillating
between the two. But it bends more toward action.
There is only to act, not to think about the reward.
My letter to Parasram could go only yesterday. It was merely
negligence on my part. What could I do ? Once the letter goes in
the file, it is immediately forgotten. The moral of the thing is that
everything should be promptly attended to. Whatever comes later, should
also be taken up later. The diary came into my hand only yesterday.
I am sending the previous one today.
At night, February 22, 1947
I have your second letter. I have already told Dev to send the
roti tin. I do not know if it has been sent or not. And Dev is not
here at present. I shall send William's letter. It would be a great feat
on your part if Kalu Mian recovers. It is of course good that you are
writing to him. I am writing about him to Kul Ranjan. He may be
able to suggest something. You try applying mud-pack even on the
eyes. I am doing it everyday. I am not using a piece of cloth now
but applying the earth direct. Needless to say that the eyes must be
kept closed. Jaya's letter is enclosed.
February 23, 1947
I am in a great hurry. Hence, I am sending this without revising.
Now, send the papers about my subject.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
