122. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
AHMEDABAD,
September 26 [1915)
MY DEAR WEST,
I have your typewritten letter.
I note the changes made and I accept them. The central idea
is that Indian Opinion should be kept up at any cost. If you can
be totally independent of public support, i.e., from the Passive
Resistance Fund, so much the better.
This means revision of the account sent to you by me. For-
tunately there was delay on my side. The new scheme requires a
revision which I shall do shortly.
I am not going to keep the large sum with me but it will be
handed over to the Trust.
As for part of the payment to Pragji and Imam Saheb being
debited to the P. R. Fund, I am inclined to think that they were
present at the meeting, where the matter was settled. But if they
object, the amounts could be debited to the P. R. Fund as assistance
to Indian Opinion. In either case, the money has to come from
the P. R. Fund. It was debited by way of relief as the whole
amount could not be a legitimate charge against Indian Opinion.
But for their being passive resisters, we could not have availed
ourselves of their services. But it was a matter of account keeping.
I should be prepared to defend the outlay in any case.
Unless Chhaganlal is bodily incapable, his withdrawal from
Indian Opinion is a bad sign. However I must not grumble. You
who are on the spot must know what is best. The ideals we are
working are common to us and you will work according to your own
way. Hence the Phoenix Trust. I can only advise from this dis-
tance.
Auditing, if it is to cost anything appreciable, is useless. Our
books contain all the transactions. The bank-balance represents
the savings from the Fund, etc. However, even in this matter you
know best what should be done.
Mr. Rustomjee's warning is now superfluous as I shall not be
handling the funds any more. For the Phoenix funds there are the
trustees and they may, subject to the sanction of the schemers, do
the needful.
This exhausts the points raised by you. The amount fixed for
Polak should stand until he himself feels that he can dispense with
it.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4420. Courtesy:
A. H. West
