472. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
NANDI HILL,
May 15, 1936
CHI. MARY,
I have just had a wire saying that Tara died at Hrishikesh.
The news is stunning, unbelievable. I have no further parti-
culars. I had warned her against braving the pilgrimage. But
she had an iron will. Once it was made up it was immovable.
I have wired for particulars. Perhaps you have them already.
Her forgiving nature and charity had captivated me. Her belief
in the goodness of human nature was beyond all praise. She
has sacrificed herself for the cause she believed in. Shanta is
here and she has given Miss Blythe's address. Miss B. was her
partner. You will tell me all you know and I ought to know
about Tara. I got your letter yesterday. All these days I had
taken you at your word and never wrote to you.
I am looking forward to Miss Madden's letter. I am glad
she will be with you for one year. Tara wanted me to invite
her to see me again. There was no question of doing so imme-
diately as I was coming to Nandi. But I think the present ar-
rangement is better. Only, she must go slow in making changes
in her life. Europeans simply cannot make some changes. Each
one has to recognize his limitations. Of course you can spend
for the roof and the like what you might have saved from your
expenses. You will take a lesson from Tara's life and not overdo
things.
The office is and still will be at Maganwadi. Segaon is a
good place. You will see it one of these days, I hope.
This is a beautiful place. Not too high. It is isolated and
quiet. Not many people can live here. No cars or carts or
even horses. We walked up. It took me 2½ hours. Writing-
paper has improved all over. Choudhary the expert has revolu-
tionized the making of hand-made paper. And an assured demand
has cropped up for the time being. Kumarappa is with me. Of
course Ba is and also Sardar and Manibehn. I have come here
for Sardar's health. Dr. Ansari insisted on his having a change
to a hill. And he himself is gone! !! God's will is there un-
mistakably in everything. Ours is only to strive in all humility.
Love to both of you.
BAPU
[PS.]
The enclosed is for Gopal. Try to read it and hand it to
him or send wherever he is.
From a photostat: G.N. 6060. Also C.W. 3390. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
