164. LETTER TO K. S. KARANTH
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 19, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter and the medal. Here are the answers to
your questions :
1. I do not think that there is any moral obligation for a
man to take out an insurance policy for the sake of his creditors.
But it is enough that he strains every nerve to pay his creditors
while there is life in him. Of course, the great thing is never to
incur debts on any account whatsoever. Having thus dealt with
the ethics of insurance, I must warn you against throwing up your
policy merely on the strength of my opinion. There is nothing
wrong or sinful in your keeping up the insurance policy unless
the consciousness of wrong comes upon you apart from my opinion.
I would therefore dissuade you from hastily giving up the policy.
There must be a definite living faith in God and complete reliance
upon Him before one gives up what are generally regarded as
legitimate things like insurance policy. Many other things should
precede this sort of renunciation.
2. I think you were quite right in attending the marriage
ceremony. It should be a warning against hasty promises.
3. I should draw a sharp distinction between kirtans and
theatricals. The question of theatricals is very serious, and as
you seem to know all about the lives of actors, it may be as
well for you to avoid the profession. But I am myself not on sure
ground here. The theatre is as old as mankind. How far it has
tended to make men better, I don't know. I have not studied its
history. You must, therefore, not accept me as a guide. Either
use your own judgment or go to those who can guide you with
confidence and about whose purity of life you have no doubt.
This covers the fourth question also.
5. In the male the sexual act is a giving up of vital energy
every time. In the female that giving up process commences
only with parturition.
6. M. Bureau does not refer to wet dreams at all. They are
undoubtedly harmful. He merely refers to the conversion of the
excess of nutrition into seminal fluid in the male. But it requires
to be husbanded and reserved for reproduction when the latter
is desired, or transmutation into spiritual energy. This is my
conviction. Whether M. Bureau means it or not, I can't say,
because I have not the book with me at the time of answering.
So long as your friends know that any gift that they may
make to you will go for some public purpose, there is no harm
in accepting it if it pleases them better to serve the public cause
by making gifts to their friends. There is, however, no doubt that
it is best to dissuade friends from such practice.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. K. S. KARANTH
C/O G. N. POI, ESQ.
NIHALCHAND BUILDING
NEW QUEENS ROAD
GIRGAUM
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 14187
