542. LETTER TO FULCHAND B. SHAH
May 16, 1932
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
All of us were glad to receive your letter. We need not worry
over such incidents. After all we are prisoners, and should be con-
tent with whatever facilities we are allowed. Time was when
prisoners were not permitted either to read or write, were not even
given sufficient food to eat, were kept in fetters all the twenty-
four hours and made to sleep on straw. We should, therefore, think
it God's kindness that we get the facilities which we do. When our
self-respect is attacked, we may lay down our lives to save it, but
we should endure physical suffering.
We were happy to learn that all of you were happy there.
After all, happiness and unhappiness are states of one's own
mind. The fact that you and Mama obey the rules and persuade
others also to obey them and to observe cleanliness does great
credit to you both.
I hope that everyone of you there makes the best use of his
time. You are not likely to get such quiet and leisure again in
life. You may read if you get books, and you can always think
and reflect. And there is so much work, too, from which you
should volunteer to do something or the other. There is one
serious mistake which all of us commit, and it is that we waste
Government's time or property as if they did not belong to us per-
sonally. A little reflection will show that the Government's time
and property belong to the people. If we waste them because they
are at present controlled by the Government, it is the people's pro-
perty and time we waste. We should, therefore, make the best
use of anything which we have occasion to use. The goods also
which we produce by our work in jail increase the nation's
wealth. The fact that the present Government is foreign does not
affect this argument. But I would be entering the field of politics
if I go further than this, and as prisoners we cannot discuss poli-
tics. I, therefore, stop here on this subject. Tell me, when you write
next, who else I know are there, or somebody else whose time for
exercising his right of writing a letter has come may write to
me. Is Diwan Master in that jail? Is Madhavlal of the Ashram
also there?
The three of us, it may be said, are really enjoying our time.
There are no restrictions on food except those which are self-
imposed, nor on the hours of rest and sleep. Carding and spin-
ning are going on fairly well. And we also read. We get a rea-
sonable supply of newspapers too. As for books, friends send them
regularly. We pray at regular hours. That is our daily pro-
gramme.
Our regards to you all.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9445. Courtesy: Chandrakant F. Shah
