393. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 18, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
You certainly wrote a fine poem for Vimal. After all you are
a father and do love him, and it is right that you should. I do
not believe that he does not take interest in study. In a proper
atmosphere, children learn spontaneously. I have often found
that they learn more outside the class-room than inside it. It is
our duty, therefore, to create the school atmosphere even at home
so that the children may spontaneously go on learning all the
time what they can. This is the true Montessori method. But this
means that all the grown-up members should behave as teachers,
that is, should have purity of character and should love the chil-
dren. This does not mean that we should close our schools, but it
certainly means that we should, as quickly as we can, make the
whole atmosphere of the Ashram like that of a school, and that all
the grown-up men and women should regard themselves as the chil-
49-21
dren's guardians and make themselves fit to be so. If we do this,
the children will no longer feel the hours in the class-rooms boring.
You should not include for reading Saket and Anagh just be-
cause I have made that suggestion. You may do so only if you
like the suggestion and feel that some at least in the Ashram will
appreciate it.
1. You may give the children some work to be done outside
the class-room.
2. When you go for a walk, sometimes being alone may be
good for you, sometimes talking and sometimes reading and teaching,
depending upon your mood at the time. You should follow your
inclination.
3. All persons who deserve to be looked upon as our parents or
gurus are also worthy of being revered as God.
4. Anybody who joins the Ashram should follow only the rules
of the Ashram, since even the best inmates are imperfect and,
therefore, their actions should not be taken as examples to be fol-
lowed. It is, after all, in human nature that persons who are eager
to follow rules will spontaneously be drawn to those who observe
them most scrupulously.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7494. Also C.W. 4971. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
