10. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
April 27, 1935
CHI. JAMNALAL,
Kamalnayan has left for Allahabad. I have written to . . .2
that I would be glad if she could come here; I should like to
meet her before the betrothal takes place. Ramakrishna had
accompanied me to Indore. He has been detained there by Gulab
for two or three days. He will see Ujjain and other places near-
by. Both are expected to arrive today.
Prabhavati had a letter from Brijkishorebabu s . He has
written to her that she should be ready to go to Bihar when he
asks her to do so. That means she may have to go there even
when there are no holidays. Prabhavati has replied to him
that she will be ready to leave as soon as she hears from him.
Chaudhari has come here. . . . 6 I do not know what talk
you have had, but from what he and Valunjkar said, I under-
stand that you are prepared to give his wife Rs. 100 for serving
in the maternity home. I do not remember having discussed
this subject with you. But I do remember that Chaudhari had
talked to me. On the basis of our talk, Chaudhari's wife has
resigned from the Seva Sadan at Poona. Chaudhari has already
arrived here, and his wife also will be arriving soon. From your
postcard to Valunjkar, it appears that you have not come to any
decision so far. You do not even know that lady. Please write
to me what you would now like to do about this matter. His
wife can be lodged in the orchard for the time being, though it
may not be possible to accommodate . . . The maternity home
will have to be built, and perhaps, we shall have to consider the
desirability of building it in the orchard. If you have decided to
engage that lady, then some portion of the upper storey of the
old bungalow or of the new one in which you are now living
should be spared for cases of delivery. But before taking in such
cases, she should visit the women in their homes and examine
ordinary cases, give them medicines, meet village women, and so
on. For starting a maternity home, it will also be necessary
to spend some money on buying cots, etc. All this can be done
only after you arrive here and think over the whole matter. The
main thing, however, is, whether or not you wish to engage that
lady. Chaudhari cannot be given Rs. 100 from the Industries
Association. The Association can give him Rs. 25 per month at
the most, for he can be useful only in the experiments of making
hand-made paper.
I will pay a short visit to Bombay to see Kamala. I think
it will be difficult to see her while she is on her way.
Madalasa must have arrived there.
I should like you to
give up travelling by trains and cars for some time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2965
