154. LETTER TO MOHANLAL M. BHATT
KANPUR,
September 23, 1929
DEAR MOHANLAL,
I have your letter. Legally Swami's name will be necessary
as one of the founders of the Trust. Having your name would
not be legal. It is my impression that there is or was some
property in Swami's name also. Hence his name should be there.
Swami or Shankerlal or I can be entered as the founders of the
Trust because we three had assumed the original responsibility.
Shankerlal was there before we two. His name has not been
included as one of the founders of the Trust because he had
subsequently withdrawn. The question in this is only one of
law and policy.
Now regarding the trustees. There is substance in your
argument. Rajaji's name can be omitted if you wish. Even if
it is, his advice will always be available. Valji's name is not
included because he does not wish to spend his intellectual
energy in administrative work. He wants to do only writing
work. Personally I would certainly like to have his name.
Vallabhbhai's name should be kept, for he is in a position to
take interest whenever you trouble him for advice. He was a
great support to Swami. I have always felt that Shankerlal
should be there. His devotion is wonderful. His intelligence is
sharp and he takes great interest in such activities. I have kept
him in reserve because by temperament he is not able to mix
with everyone. If you wish, however, his name may be kept
out. Your name should definitely be there. Since Swami insisted
on withdrawing I was helpless. Ultimately, you are going to
run the press. You have succeeded to Swami's chair, such as it
was, and are definitely bringing credit to it. I cannot imagine
the Trust without you. Who in this world is wholly free
from failings ?
We must insist on your name being included. As for the
other names, your view will be mine. Show this letter to Kaka.
If you arrive at a decision only after consulting him, I shall
abide by it. Mahadev takes interest in this matter, and if you
wish, you may trouble him also.
Kaka has not yet sent me the Gita.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32578/31
