296. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
CAMP DELHI,
February 23, 1931
MY DEAR REGINALD,
I honour you for your long, frank and emphatic letter. It
will help me to remain firm where firmness is required. Having
said this, let me tell you that I do not at all agree with you that
I was wrong in suspending judgment or action pending the arrival
of the three friends. Satyagraha can afford to wait. It can be
gentle, and should be gentle, where gentleness is a duty. However
mistaken their judgment may be found to be, I regard these
friends as equal lovers of their country with me. I have no busi-
ness to judge them as I would not have them judge me and
by waiting I assure you that the cause has not suffered a bit.
It may be that the friends there who are whole-hoggers may feel
embarrassed to find me acting contrary to their expectation. But,
as time goes by, you and they may discover many such shocks. I
regard myself as a seasoned soldier in satyagraha. I have acted
before, as I have acted now, at similar critical junctures and I
cannot recall a single occasion when the cause espoused had lost
by waiting. On the contrary I can recall many an occasion
when the waiting had proved fruitful. Let my assurance there-
fore be sufficient for you that so far as I am concerned there will
be absolutely no surrender on principle, i.e., on the substantial
part of the demand and I doubt not that there will be none on
the part of the Congress. Remember too that satyagraha is a
method of carrying conviction and of converting by an appeal to
reason and to the sympathetic chord in human beings. It relies
upon the ultimate good in every human being, no matter how
debased he may be for the time being. If this does not satisfy
you, do by all means strive with me. You are entitled to do so
and demand satisfaction from me. I need not say a word about
the brave manner in which you are fighting there.
May God
bless you and give you strength. Of the doings in Delhi I need
say nothing because the talks are still going on and I have no
doubt that the cablegrams are keeping you informed of the doings
from day to day. Anything, therefore, that I can say today would
be out of date when this letter reaches you.
What about your marriage?
With love.
BAPU
REGINALD REYNOLDS, ESQ.
8 FAIRDENE ROAD
BOULSDON, SURREY
From a photostat: C.W. 4539. Courtesy: Swarthmore College; also
S.N. 16948
