317. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
February 5, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
Major Bhandari has just shown me the Bombay Government's
order in connection with my cable to Mr. Andrews. As it was
rather important that it should go at once I have asked Major
Bhandari kindly to withdraw an amount from my private account
which as a matter of fact is not my own property. I am hoping
for a revision of the Government's order and thus to reimburse
my private account. My reason for asking for a revision is this.
But for the very heavy bill that was paid to the dental surgeon
my account would show a good balance. You will recall that the
dental surgeon was called in at your suggestion and not mine;
also that when you suggested that I should obtain a new plate
I asked for Dr. Desai, a dentist friend, to be called in; and that I
also told you in my letter of the 28th June, 1932 that I had sugges-
ted his name as "I had no desire to land the Government in the
expense of a new set of teeth", and I knew that "Dr. Desai would
not want to make any charge for the plates he might make for
me." You will thus see that I could have had the plate without
any charge and at that time I had never suspected that the dental
charges if they had to be paid would be paid out of monthly
allowance. As you are aware, from month to month I was sav-
ing as much out of the hundred rupees as possible. But you chose
to call in a dental surgeon of your own selection. I could have
no objection and when the bill was shown to me by Major Bhan-
dari and when he told me that the money had to be paid out of
my allowance, though I demurred I did not wish to raise any objec-
tion because I did not think then that I would want to draw upon
the balance that was then outstanding in my favour.
But in the new circumstances that have arisen, I must ask
for the dental charges being removed from my account and if
that be done there would be at once a balance in my favour. I
would further suggest that Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's and my
accounts be amalgamated. There is a balance in his favour still
left. If therefore these two accounts are amalgamated there would
be a surplus left. I have consulted the Sardar and he is quite
willing that our accounts should be amalgamated. In fact both of
us have often suggested the adoption of this course to Major Bhan-
dari.
May I ask you please to secure an early decision on this point
as telegrams have to be frequently sent by me especially at this
moment.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I. G. P. File No. 10
