324. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
December 20, 1932
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your letter posted days after it was written, and I
have your two dear cables. I was wondering whether the later
developments in the anti-untouchability campaign including the
prospective fast were thoroughly understood by you. Your wires
show that you have understood them fully, and I am so glad, for,
whereas the fast in connection with British decision was appreciat-
ed by many, the one contemplated to take place on the 2nd
January next is misunderstood by many, and I am afraid that
you might not understand it at all, whereas to me the necessity
is clearer than when I fasted about the British decision. The
British decision was a political issue, though with me it had
a deeply religious significance. In the present instance, it is a
purely religious issue. I have given many explanations in defence
of it. All of them put together fall far short of what I feel about
it, but what, I have no adequate language to express. Of course,
for me personally, it transcends reason, because I feel it to be a
clear call from God. My position is that there is nothing just
now that I am doing of my own accord. He guides me from moment
to moment. This is a thing which you cannot make other people
believe, and it would be quite proper for them to reject such
testimony. That has happened before now. That which was
1 The reference presumably is to addressee's letter of November 10, 1932;
vide Appendix XVII.
claimed as the voice of God proved to be the prompting of the
Devil. What it is in my case will be partly judged by results and
partly after my death, never wholly in any case and at any time
except by God. After all, the intention behind an act is the final
criterion, and that God alone can know, not even the author of
the intention.
There is no knowing whether the fast will have to be taken
on the 2nd January. It will depend upon the legal difficulty.
Yes, I read your book What I Owe to Christ immediately I
got it. Both Vallabhbhai and Mahadev have glanced through it.
Mahadev had not the time to go through it fully. The opening
chapters are very good indeed. All the chapters are a great help
to a struggling soul. They reveal you as nothing else that you
have written can do, but there was a chapter in it which as I
read I criticized and I thought I had written to you about it, but
evidently I have not. I should have to look at the book again in
order to be able to recall the chapter and the subject. I could
do so without much trouble, and if I can find a few spare moments,
I will look it up and give you my criticism. I shall await copy
that you promise of Gurudev's thoughts on his reading your book.
I hope that you got my cable already in answer to yours from
Birmingham.
I am quite clear that your presence is most useful there,
and you are not to have anxiety complex if I have to fast. You at
least will have no difficulty in believing that if I enter upon the
fast, it would be by God's will, and He will keep me intact if He
has more service to take through this body.
With love and greetings from us all,
Yours,
[PS.]
My love to all the other members of the family in both the
senses. Please tell those who do not hear from me that I get
little time to attend to all my correspondence.
From a photostat: G.N. 995
