174. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
Not revised
HARDWAR,
Fagan Vad 3, 1983 [March 21, 1927]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
Your letter about Rs. 2,000 has been referred to me. I have
not a cowrie left with me. Whatever had been saved has been
spent, so I shall have to go abegging once again.
I have written to them to send you the amount this time,
whatever their difficulty. But what about later?
Now you will have to get your budget approved by me. You-
i.e., you and Devchandbhai-should have the influence to raise
the funds needed to run the Parishad. If this cannot be done,
how long can we hold on?
Budgets for all the other centres should also receive prior
approval. You should show to Nanabhai the budget for your
school in particular. He should inspect the school and I shall
try to raise the amount that he approves of. I am always think-
ing of affiliating all the national schools to the Vidyapith, because
it is now becoming difficult to ask for separate funds. Of course
we do collect from a great many donors in the name of khadi. I
had hoped to accomplish something at the Parishad; but it did
not come off. So now we have to think anew since it has been
postponed to August. So get your budget first sanctioned by me
before you put in your next demand. Ultimately each [insti-
tution J will have to stand on its own as in the rest of the country.
Or we shall have to draw up some special scheme for education in
Maha Gujarat. You should contact Nanabhai and consider all the
matters. We may be said to have taken up three tasks, viz., the
khadi movement, work among the Antyajas and national education
in general.
I see all the three combined in khadi; education it certainly
covers. I have not yet discovered any final solution for the
Antyaja problem. I write all this for your co-workers to think
over. You should write to me for clarifications, which might
solve some of your problems.
Chi. Chhaganlal will go through this before delivering it to
you, so that they will all know where I am at the moment.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
23-24 Bombay
25-26 Kolhapur
27
Belgaum
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2833. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah
