102. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
POONA,
August 1, 1946
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I have not been able to answer your letter fully. The main
problem is about Ambedkar. I see a risk in coming to any sort
of understanding with him, for he has told me in so many
words that for him there is no distinction between truth and
untruth or between violence and non-violence. He follows one
single principle, viz., to adopt any means which will serve his
purpose. One has to be very careful indeed when dealing with
a man who would become a Christian, Muslim or Sikh and
then be reconverted according to his convenience. There is much
more I could write in the same strain. To my mind it is all
a snare. It is a "catch". Besides, it is not necessary for him
at present to insist on 20 p. c. If India becomes independent
in the real sense-the provinces to some extent are-and if the
caste Hindus are true to themselves, all will be well. But if the
number of fair-minded persons is small and if power passes into
the hands of fanatics, there is bound to be injustice, no matter
what agreements you make today. You may come to any
understanding you like today-but who are the people who
beat up Harijans, murder them, prevent them from using public
wells, drive them out of schools and refuse them entry into
their homes? They are Congressmen. Aren't they? It is very
necessary to have a clear picture of this. I therefore feel that
at present we should not insist on an agreement such as you
suggest. However, we should stress the capacity of the Congress
to do justice. Mine may be a voice in the wilderness. Even so
I prefer it that way. Therefore, if we negotiate with Ambedkar
out of fear of the League we are likely to lose on both
the fronts.
I will definitely leave here on the 5th and reach Wardha
on the 6th. I have already written to you and informed you
that I have deliberately decided not to go to Bombay and I
adhere to that decision. But if you want it to be modified, do
tell me by all means-that means I shall have to remain in a
railway compartment for a few hours more. You may see me
there if necessary but in any case not at the cost of your health.
There is nothing we cannot deal with through correspondence.
In any case do come to Wardha on the 8th. You may come
even a day earlier if you like.
If postmen are using high-handed methods, I think it will
be perfectly proper to raise our voice against it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 319-20
