14. LETTER TO D. B. JAGTAP
November 12, 1947
BHAI JAGTAP,
I had your letter. Your complaint about this letter of Dr.
Dinshaw should be regarded as directed against me.
If you
have been at all humiliated it is my fault, although it could
never have been my intention, for the language in Dr. Din-
shaw's letter is mine. Won't you please now forget the matter?
Dr. Dinshaw and Jehangir Patel have been here for the last four-
five days. I had long discussions with them. On the basis of
that I am of opinion that if you wish to reject the Trust Deed
you can do so now, you can also remove the Sanatorium. It
will not involve any legal procedure or even arbitration. You
may, if you want, make some addition to the present list of Dr.
Dinshaw or have a talk with him. I can only say that if you
want the Trust to stay you should donate to the Trust the land
which I was occupying and where the patients were being treat-
ed. This should also include the rear portion which was being
used for the labourers. The place is not to be used for pro-
ducing anything but only to be developed in case we have to
accommodate a few people there for the sake of some patients.
The rest of the land should be returned to you. Then it can-
not have the Sanatorium either. It means that apart from the
land and building I have asked for, you will use the portion
which you are now occupying and which is included in the
schedule. When I am free myself from the work here, the other
trustees and I can live on the premises donated to the Trust.
Dinshaw, his wife, mother and such other relatives as can be
accommodated on the premises can live there; the Trust has
recognized their right to reside on the premises. Jehangir says
you have another complaint that Dr. Dinshaw does not at all
intend to let me be your guest. This is not correct. If my
suggestion is accepted, even if I stay in the house donated by
you, I shall still be your guest because, if you wish, arrangements
for goat's milk, etc., will be made by you. Goats, etc., cannot
be kept on the premises I expect from you. I may say one more
thing, namely, that you are going to lose nothing by your
donation to the Trust. Dr. Dinshaw has invested more than a
13
lakh in your property. He has also spent a substantial sum on
the construction of bathrooms and a steamhouse, etc., on the
premises I am asking for. If you take all the land these expen-
sive additions will be of no use to you. Now you may do whatever
you think proper. You can have a further talk in this connec-
tion with Dr. Dinshaw and Jehangir.
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
