61. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
June 18, 1932
CHI. MANILAL,
I got your letter sent with Medh . I don't think I shall be
able to see him. In the first place, as Mirabehn is not permitted
to see me I have stopped seeing any visitors. And, secondly,
the name of every intending visitor has to be sent to the Govern-
ment and Medh's name is not likely to be approved. Even if he
is permitted to see me, I don't think we would be allowed to
discuss the affairs of South Africa.
In the letter asking for the
permission, he should state as the reason his intention to discuss
them. If I see him then, there would be no need to send a cable
to you. But I did not have even a letter from Medh. He can
at any rate write to me.
So you were all attacked by the virulent fever. In the
absence of any news by cable, I assume that all of you are well.
I approved of Sushila's and Sita's staying on there because I
thought they were certain to keep better health there. And so
it seems God sent me this message through your illness:
'You
are a fool. Who are you to think who would keep better health
where? I keep people healthy or make them ill as I choose.
Why don't you understand this simple thing?' Though I have
now learnt this wisdom, I still think that it might be better for
them to remain in South Africa. But now it seems that you,
too, will have to remain there. I also think that, if Pragji is
not ready to shoulder the responsibility or if the responsibility is
beyond his capacity and if you cannot make any other arrange-
ment, you cannot come. It would not be proper to close the
paper at this time.
The problems here will take care of them-
selves. Stay there without worrying about things here, and don't
feel unhappy that you cannot come. After all, you live there for
public service and not for your own happiness. Write to me re-
gularly.
All three of us are very well. We do plenty of spinning,
of course. I now rotate the wheel with my foot and draw the
thread with the right hand. Even otherwise, I wished to ex-
periment on this spinning-wheel for the sake of Prabhudas. But
now I have an additional reason for spinning on it, namely, that
my left elbow needs rest. Mahadev spins yarn of 40 counts.
Sardar makes envelopes from useless paper. It is in one such
envelope that I intend to seal this letter.
Ramdas is in this jail. He sees me sometimes. His health
is all right. He is reading and studying at present. Nimu and
the children are in the Ashram.
Devdas is far away in Gorakhpur. He has been having fever
for some days. But there is no cause for anxiety. The fever is
now receding.
Ba is in Sabarmati [jail] and Kanti in Visapur [jail]. There
are many others, too, in jail, but I need not mention them here.
Did I tell you that Devdas is engaged to Rajaji's daughter ? The
engagement was the result of the strong desire of them both.
Because of the struggle, they have put off the marriage.
A good many reforms are being introduced in the Ashram.
By reforms I mean further measures of self-control.
Personally, I never think as to when the struggle would end.
Let it end when it will. For him who fights for Truth and with
truthful means, victory and defeat are the same. That is, he al-
ways wins, though the victory may come now or in future.
Sardar and Mahadev send their blessings.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4790
