464. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
April 29, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
1. It does not befit us to ask the questions you have asked
about Maulana Shaukat Ali. We should not pay attention to the
short-comings of other people or sit in judgment over anybody.
We should exhaust all our energies in examining ourselves. As
long as we can detect even a single weakness in ourselves and,
despite it, inwardly wish that our relatives, acquaintances and
friends should not cut off relations with us, we are not entitled
to see short-comings in others or criticize them. If we unin-
tentionally see such short-comings in anybody, we may, if it lies in
our power and if it is proper for us to do so, ask the person con-
cerned about them, but nobody else. There is no gain in asking
other people. However, since you wished to ask me, you did
quite well in doing so. For otherwise I would not have had an
opportunity to lecture to you in this way.
And now I reply to your question. From a distance and on
the basis of the known facts only, we should not approve of the
Maulana's activities. However, I cannot arrive at any definite
opinion without hearing in detail about his activities from his own
mouth. According to me, it is not correct to say that the followers
of the Prophet ought to, or may, do all things done by him. All
people are not entitled to do everything that the great men may
have done. We have seen that such imitation leads to undesir-
able results. However, we find that Hindus, Muslims and fol-
lowers of other faiths do not only not follow this golden rule al-
ways, but even act as if they were entitled to do certain things
because the Prophets or avatars had done them. Seeing that this
is the general attitude, I am not surprised that the Maulana
has cited the Prophet's example.
2. What we do about Bhishma and others we may also apply
to social workers of the present day. I feel that the present prac-
tice of (offering) Jalanjali needs reform.
Everyone who has written to me on the subject had nothing
but praise about the Ramayana class which you have been conduct-
ing. Go on in the same interesting way. It would be in my view
a great achievement if all at the Ashram come to love speaking
in Hindi and become interested in the Ramayana. I am, therefore,
very much pleased that you have thrown yourself heart and soul
into this work.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7495. Also C.W. 4972. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
