354. LETTER TO THE INDIAN PRESS
[LONDON,
November 12, 1909]
SIR,
I venture to trust that you will give as wide publicity as possible
to the statement that my colleague, Mr. Hajee Habib, and I have
issued in connection with the British Indian struggle in the Transvaal.
Although it is raging in the Transvaal, the fact that it is a matter of vital
importance to the whole of India is so clear that he who runs may read,
and the Transvaal Government have made that issue clear by emphati-
cally declaring that, although they would give us the incidence that would
flow from the granting of the principle we are fighting for, they are not
prepared to meet us on the question of the principle itself, and so the
struggle must go on. The principle we are fighting for cannot be better
described than in the words of the Transvaal Government itself. Lord
Crewe says in his reply to the Transvaal British Indian deputation:
His Lordship explained to you that Mr. Smuts was unable to accept the
claim that Asiatics should be placed in a position of equality with Europeans
in respect of right of entry or otherwise.
The phrase "or otherwise" may, for the time being, be dismissed from
consideration. All that we have asked for is equality in the eye of the
law with Europeans in respect of the right of entry. It should be remem-
bered that we are fighting for the restoration of this equality, which we
enjoyed before the legislation in question was passed, as well during the
Boer regime as after the British occupation, that is, up to the close of the
year 1906. The doctrine laid down by the Transvaal Government, and
assented to by the Imperial Government cuts at the foundation of the
Empire. In the words of Lord Ampthill, who has made the cause his
own:
It is a matter which touches the honour of our race and affects the unity of
the Empire as a whole; it, therefore, concerns every part of the Empire.
Moreover, it is certain that any departure from principle, which may be sanc-
tioned or ignored at the heart of the Empire, will operate as a mischievous
example to other places inside and out, and then only by some rude shock to
the whole system will the arrest of moral decay be possible.
1 This was published under the title: "The Indian Struggle in the Transvaal".
Vide also "Letter to the Press", pp. 514-.
2 These are from his introduction to Doke's biography of Gandhiji; vide Appen-
dix XVIII.
Further on His Lordship states :
Theory can be modified in practice to suit the exigencies of time and place, but
if theory is cast to the winds, there is no means of steering practice.
I cannot place our position in clearer terms. If the doctrine of the
Transvaal Government be true, the people of India cease to be partners
in the Empire, and it is in order to resist this dangerous, immoral and
pestilent doctrine that we in the Transvaal are fighting. How is India,
including Anglo-India, to help in this national struggle? It should be
remembered that we have taken practical steps for seeking redress, that
is, we are suffering in our own persons by disregarding a law which we
hold to be repugnant to our conscience and to religion in the highest
sense of the term. Hundreds of Indians, otherwise illiterate, drawn from
all classes, have gone to gaol to vindicate their ideal. Will not India
come to the rescue? Will she not make this the all-important issue?
Will the Congress give it the most prominent place in its programme?
Will the reformed Legislative Council assert its right and dignity by un-
dertaking to solve the problem? Whether all this is done or not, may I
conclude by assuring the public in India that the fight in the Transvaal
will go on so long as a single passive resister is left alive, and I very
much question whether the death of every resister can end a struggle
such as the Transvaal Indians are engaged in.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Gujarati, 5-12-1909
