428. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
ON THE STEAMER FROM MAHISHADAL TO CONTAI,
MAIN CAMP: SODEPUR,
December 30, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
I have your letter.
It is good that you have started hand-carding. Vinobaji's
new attempt is actually a very old thing. It can be perfected
by practice.
Somebody gave a demonstration at a public meet-
ing. He separated the cotton from the seeds and pulled the cot-
ton on all sides with his hands, made slivers from the same and
started spinning. He did the spinning on the takli. His yarn was
very neat. One woman had started spinning without separating the
seeds from the cotton. But I do not value all these things much.
I value Vinobaji's experiment very much because he says that he
is doing it scientifically and from the point of view of social
benefit. Hence, I would always be eager to know the results of
the new experiment.
I understand about Gitai and other things. Just as Vinobaji
has written about sleep to Balkobaji and made it into a beautiful
article, he should also write about observing silence while walking
and follow it in practice. I understand its significance, but even
so I am not practising it in this tour. I am caught by desire
and temptation. But I know that if one wants to live up to 125
years, desire, etc., should necessarily be given up. I shall not
write anything more about it today.
I am glad that Kanam has gone to Paunar. But it is rather
disconcerting that Vinoba should spare one hour for him.
It is good that Balvantsinha has gone to Kharangana.
Let him continue the same way. It will do him good. I also
infer from this that Hoshiaribehn is doing well and she has
completely regained her balance.
I understand about Om Prakash. He must be provided
sufficient money for travel.
Vasumatibehn must be in good health.
Shantabehn will be all right. It would be nice if Hoshiari,
Kailas, Shanta and others wrote to me.
Let Chakrayya get himself trained there. Let him learn there.
Everything is bound to be well if his mind and body are in
good shape.
We had elaborate recitations from Gita on Ba's death date .
And we did spinning. Some outsiders also did spinning with us
for an hour.
I am not in the least interested in keeping that sadhu any
more. I have realized too that my suggestion to keep him
arose from unworthy attachment and temptation.
I shall see about the clock. Remind me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 4540
