105. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
March 16, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
I promised to write to you at length in reply to your com-
plaint of the 11th instant. You have done well in writing as freely
as you have done. That enables me to explain what I have done.
Perhaps your letter was dictated without your having seen the
Harijan. I dealt with Swatmadas's letter without mentioning his
name, or the Province, or the organizations and purposely gave it
a general colouring, so that even Swatmadas could not make out
that I had built my article on his letter, and you will be agree-
ably surprised to know that Lele thought that it had reference to
Bombay. This is the way I have successfully dealt with so many
things for over a generation. But at the same time I did not want
to wait till you had dealt with the report yourself and were able
to send me your observations. That would have been a long
drawn out agony, whereas what I wanted to do was to drive
a lesson home as early as possible. The particular Province and the
particular complaints about particular organizations were left
untouched and awaited treatment till after you had examined the
whole question. Do you see anything wrong in this method? Have
the Punjab organizations been compromised in any manner or
Swatmadas given undeserved credit? In the hypothetical article
in the Harijan I have not even said that the writer's complaints
were true. I simply called for self-introspection on the part of the
uplift organizations throughout India. And let me tell you that
that article is serving its purpose. It is still open to you, and
I want you to investigate all the complaints of Swatmadas and
give me your reply so that I can deal with them. I know that the
Punjab organizations mentioned by Swatmadas are not all affi-
liated to the central organization. That should not matter. Nor
need these organizations take it amiss if we made courteous enqui-
ries of them. Their reception of your enquiry would naturally
depend upon the manner of it. You, I know, would always write
in a courteous tone and a perfectly friendly manner, and make
your intention perfectly clear that you wanted to help them as
a friend and not approach them in an inquisitorial manner. How-
ever, that is really my suggestion. You will do whatever you
think is proper, and if you think that no enquiry is necessary you
will say so and I shall be quite satisfied. My purpose is served if
I have made it clear to you that there was nothing improper in
my having dealt with the subject anonymously and in a perfectly
general manner.
As to Swatmadas himself, I was not at all unprepared for your
description of him. But we have to deal with and come in contact
with such young men. It is inevitable. We are responsible for
what they are and it serves us right. Therefore we have to deal
with them in the gentlest manner possible, listen to them most
patiently, and try to take what service it may be possible to take
from them. I think this covers all the points raised in your
letter.
I hope you had my letter sent you on the 14th, and the draft
constitution went to you yesterday by registered post. I sent you
a telegram also advising you of its despatch.
Your description of the Punjab Alienation of Land Act makes
bad reading. Can nothing be done to correct the mischief? I
would like you to send me a copy of that Act.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1114
