411. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 15, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,
With reference to the two communications received by you
from Government, I beg to state as follows:
1. As to the reply to my letter of the 10th instant addressed
to the Government, whilst I am thankful for the permission to
hand over the Harijan manuscript to the acting Editor and give
instructions, this permission does not meet immediate require-
ments. It is difficult without being in touch with correspondence
from day to day to write usefully for the Harijan. Again, to be
in touch with the correspondents on untouchability is just as
urgent as editing the Harijan. For instance a difficult experiment
under my supervision is being carried on in connection with a
Harijan school. I have to be in contact with the teacher, if the
school is to be a success. I have put some Ashram girls and boys
in a Harijan boarding house, an experiment probably the first of
its kind. It cannot go on without my constant attention. This
was started on the eve of my arrest. These are but two out of
the many instances I can cite, of matters demanding my personal
attention.
The least therefore that I require at once is:
(a) the delivery of all the correspondence in your possession
with permission to reply to so much of it as may have any con-
nection with untouchability;
(b) access to, and disposal of, all correspondence received
at the Harijan office;
(c) access to newspapers received by you or the Harijan office
so as to enable me to deal with points on untouchability that may
have been discussed in those papers.
If the permission is given on these three matters, pending
final orders on my request, I shall not need to fast from tomorrow
noon, as stated in my letter to Government yesterday. If it can
be obtained in the course of the day, I would like to see Kaka-
saheb Kalelkar or Sjt. Anand Hingorani today. I should be able
then to hand over some manuscript to go on with.
2. What I have said above perhaps answers the Govern-
ment's letter regarding the disposal of my correspondence in your
possession. I have no desire to receive a fortnightly letter under
the classification rules. The bulk of my correspondence is likely
to have a bearing on untouchability and would demand my per-
sonal attention or instructions. If the correspondence is handed
to me I would gladly return that which may not pertain to un-
touchability. There are likely to be letters concerning business
affairs. I should take the Government instructions regarding such
letters. The fact of the matter is that I have many public
activities besides the political, and as I told you personally this
morning, in my opinion the just way to deal with me is, after
insuring my strict abstention from participation directly or in-
directly in civil disobedience, to give me the facilities mentioned
in my letter to you of the 5th instant.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3902; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (14), Pt. V, pp. 99-101
