167. LETTER TO GANGADHAR SHASTRI JOSHI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 19, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter and the pains you have taken to
answer my questions. Do you claim cheapness, simplicity and
efficacy for Ayurvedic medicine as we find it at present? After
my own fashion, I have been interested in its success ever since
1891, and have even spent what little I was capable of and in-
duced friends to spend on behalf of Ayurvedic physicians. But so
far, I have found it to be neither cheap nor simple nor efficacious.
Some of the prescriptions are most complicated. Ayurvedic physi-
cians have been known to charge as much as men with medical
degrees. I know Ayurvedic physicians who charge today even as
much as Rs. 1,000 per day. The best of them are beyond the
reach of the poor. And what I have also unfortunately found is
that a very large number of patients have gone to the physicians
with Western degrees after having found Ayurvedic treatment to
be inefficacious. I am aware of the converse also having happen-
ed. But the scales seem to me to weigh in favour of Allopathy.
My own desire has been and is now also to find Ayurveda prac-
tice successful, if only because I am probably fanatically vegetarian
and because I have a horror of Allopathy for many reasons I
need not go into. Even for simple home treatment, having studied
something of both Ayurvedic and Allopathic drugs, I have been
obliged to use Allopathic drugs instead of Ayurvedic. For instance,
I have found nothing so efficacious as quinine for malaria or iodine
for simple pains or Condy's fluid as a disinfectant. I must not,
however, worry you with my own experience. If it is not trouble-
some, will you kindly illustrate in what way Ayurveda aims at
purifying the whole system rather than affording only temporary
relief? As time permits me, I shall go through the pamphlets
you have kindly sent me. I shall also await the views from the
friends to whom you have shown my letter. You will please write
to me if you do not receive the relevant texts from Pandit Sata-
valekar.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. GANGADHAR SHASTRI JOSHIJI
9/2, SADASHIV PETH
POONA CITY
From a photostat: S.N. 14190
