322. LETTER TO RAVISHANKAR SHUKLA
[On or after October 19,] 1939
BHAI SHUKLAJI,
The report you have sent me of our talks is not worth revis-
ing. You will realize it from the few lines that I have revised.
There are very few short-hand writers in India who can accurately
take down conversations. I have summarized below my thoughts
on the subject, which may perhaps better clarify my attitude. You
may publish it if you like. If you need an English rendering get
it done there. If you want the same thing in English from me
I shall send you one. In that case you will please return the
Hindi.
Here is an abstract of the discussion with the Chief Minister
regarding his scheme and mine:
There is no need to co-ordinate the President's scheme with
mine. Both can run parallel but their aims are different. Under
the President's scheme the burden of expenditure on primary edu-
cation is to fall on the individual village. And this through the
dedication of the land. This is certainly commendable if it can be
done. People will develop an interest in the education of their
children. But I doubt the possibility of earning Rs. 15 per month
from a plot of land thus acquired. None the less, there can be no
harm in making an experiment if some zamindar gifts a large plot
in the village. The experiment, if it succeeds, will certainly be
beneficial. We shall not come across many people who will utilize
the land profitably. Those who graduate from the agricultural
colleges are not at all trained for work on the land. Hence the
knowledge acquired in agricultural colleges proves generally sterile.
The aim of my scheme is to change the very system of educa-
tion. The new system will fulfil the needs of the country as well
as the individual and bring about self-reliance. Self-reliance is
also a true test of the fulfilment of education. Hence it makes no
difference to my scheme of education even if someone gives a dona-
tion for running a primary school. And here is the scheme in a
nutshell:
Primary education shall be given only through some craft or the
other. Real education and an all-round development of the child is
not possible without it. And such education must be self-support-
ing. This does not mean that each class will be self-supporting.
However, boys or girls who will go through the seven-year curri-
culum in a craft-based school will be able to pay all these years'
expenses through their earnings from the crafts.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
