150. LETTER TO REGINALD REYNOLDS
Unrevised
March 31, 1930
MY DEAR REYNOLDS,
I have been daily thinking of you and thinking of writing
to you too. But time would not permit my writing. Today I must
begin the day after the morning prayer with this.
I did not like your writing in the Chronicle. It is not ahimsa.
The Indian Daily Mail did not deserve the notice you took of it.
If the notice had to be taken, the way was bad. Why should you
spoil a good case by bad adjectives? And when you have a good
cause never descend to personalities. Yours is a case where the
saying 'Resist not evil' applies. It means: 'Resist not evil with
evil.' You have neutralized the evil writing of the I.D.M. by a
writing of the same kind. That you had a good case makes no
difference. The I.D.M. writing was a piece of violence. You
have supported your good case with counter-violence. So you
see, what I want to emphasize is not merely bad manners. It is
the underlying violence that worries me. Is this not quite clear to
you? If it is, I would like you to promise to yourself never to write
any such thing without submitting it to someone in whose non-
violence you have faith. If you have realized the fundamental truth
of what I have said, you will even partially mend the evil by apolo-
gizing to Wilson by writing a private note somewhat after this
style: "Although I hold your charges and innuendoes to be
wrong, I feel that I ought not to have adopted towards you the
language I did. I want to follow Christ. I own that my conduct
was not Christian. I had no right to judge you. I would feel
somewhat relieved if I could have a line from you to say that you
had accepted my apology."
You have undertaken at the call of duty a great task. I do not
want you to damage it on the threshold of your career.
Your writing in Young India was unexceptionable.
If my argument does not convince of course you will go on
as you have begun. I know you are well able to take care of
yourself. My concern was merely to elucidate the principle we
hold in common.
How are you getting on? Are you keeping good health and
insisting on getting what your body may need?
What is this paragraph about your engagement, etc.! Is it
all true? Is your mother correctly reported?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat:
C.W. 4532. Courtesy:
Swarthmore
College,
Philadelphia
