14. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
NADIAD,
August 10, 1918
TO
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES OF INDIA
SIR,
Your report of my recruiting address to a Surat meeting shows
how dangerous it is for a public man to deliver anything but a
written speech. My experiences of the reporting of my own
speeches make my sympathy go out to Mr. Tilak and I certainly
think that so long as reporting remains what it is in India, the
safest thing is to challenge against them, and to accept their re-
pudiation if they repudiate what is imputed to them. And it is
quite likely that Mr. Tilak has been unjustly gagged. I hardly think
that his gagging will improve recruiting in Maharashtra. But I
know that here in Gujarat my own position becomes difficult.
Many people will keep aloof simply as a protest against Mr. Tilak's
gag. I hold no brief for him and I differ from his views and have
told him that the conditions he requires are assured in the act of
recruiting by men like him, and it hastens the grant of responsible
government because it inspires confidence in us and gives us a
power and strength which we do not possess today. I can only
hope that Government will reconsider their decision and remove
the gag and thus also remove a serious obstacle in the path of re-
cruiters.
I have, however, digressed from my main theme. I wish to
point out that I never said that those who ask for conditions should
be "cast out from their party" nor did I lay stress on the help
to the Empire. On the contrary, after showing the differences bet-
ween Mr. Tilak's views and mine on the question of recruiting, I
sympathized with the audience in their dilemma in having to choose
between the advice of a great distinguished and self-sacrificing
patriot like Mr. Tilak and mine. I told them, however, that in
their march towards responsible government, they could no longer
be satisfied with the ipse dixit of leaders, no matter how great they
might be, but that they would continuously have to weigh con-
flicting opinions and make their choice without in any way dimi-
nishing their regard for those leaders whose opinion they felt con-
strained to reject. And I then told them how it was to their whole
interest that they should join the army. Then finally I put my
favourite idea before the audience that if they wanted partner-
ship with the British, the most becoming manner of effecting their
purpose was to help them during the war. Your correspondent,
however, makes the helping of the Empire the central point of my
speech. I do not mind it. But I do wish to emphasize the fact
that if public men were to be judged in accordance with the news-
paper reports of their speeches, in the majority of cases they would
make a poor show. Could you, a great journal, not insure the
appearance of only accurate reports of public speeches in your
columns?
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 13-8-1918
