301. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 6, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter.
My progress is steady.
I am now over 98 lb., food con-
tinuing as before. I am able to walk three times daily taking
altogether one hour 20 minutes-not bad! This gives me no fati-
gue. I hope you will beat me in competing for good health.
No doubt the heat there is against you. But you must have the
rains now. And in any case, if you will take the wet-sheet pack
when the heat is oppressive, you will at once be cool. You know
how the pack is taken. Take your bed-sheet. Dip it in cold
water. Wring it well so that no water is left. Spread it on a
blanket. Lie naked on the sheet, wrap yourself in the pack.
The blanket will cover you from neck to foot. Remain in it for
five minutes or longer if you feel comfortable. There should be no
chill felt. If there is, you should get out of it at once. This
is most refreshing and cooling. You can take this pack frequently
if necessary. Try and test it for yourself.
As for the notes suggested by me, it is not so difficult as you
seem to imagine. When it becomes a habit, it becomes quite simple
and deeply interesting. Do not forget to take down references
as you proceed so that through your index and notes you can
find out in a moment where a particular name occurs. These
notes may prove of great general use, if they are brief and yet
to the point.
Your description of the monkeys is entertaining. Have they
not yet snatched your food from you? Of course you know that
when they are enraged, they can inflict great injury on you.
Purushottam is here and is learning nature-cure methods
und[er] Mehta who has been nursing me with exquisite devotion.
Mahadev is down with fever. He will be all right in a day or
two.
Gangabehn Jhaveri and Nanibehn Jhaveri are here for the
sake of the former's health. Gangabehn elder is at the Ashram.
She reached there only two days ago.
Lakshmi seems to be supremely happy with Devdas. Keshu
is still here and will be for some time. He will then go to
Wardha and work in Jamnalalji's gin. Prabhavati insists on send-
ing special love.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6283. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9749
