206. LETTER TO AMEER ALI
[LONDON,]
August 7, 1909
DEAR MR. AMEER ALI,
Mr. Abdul Caadir has shown me your letter of the 2nd instant.
So far as the Transvaal question is concerned, negotiations are still going
forward. We have privately seen Lord Morley and we are to see Lord
Crewe, also, privately on Tuesday. It is yet too early to say what the
result will be. We have a statement ready for publication and circula-
tion, if necessary. No public activity has been undertaken on account
of the negotiations. I think that a private note from you to Sir Richard
reminding him about the question will keep the matter fresh in his mind
and will show him that, even in your holidays, you do not forget the
question. This will emphasise the belief that is gaining ground that
India is not going to sit still over this question.
I hope that change and the bracing climate of the Swiss mountains
have been doing you and Mrs. Ameer Ali a great deal of good.
Mr. Abdul Caadir asks me to thank you for your letter and to say
that whatever he and Mr. Hajee Habib have given for the two insti-
tutions1, has been given as a matter of duty, and may I express my
concurrence in your statement that the activity of the two Associations
should receive the support of all Indians.
As you may recall the fact, Mr. Abdul Caadir is one of the delegates
for Natal. The Natal delegation is now complete, the other three members
having arrived last Saturday. They have been specially commission[ed]
to wait on you and seek your advice and be guided by it. They even
telegraphed for your address and received it from Mr. Ahmed. They
then went to Thos. Cook and Sons to find out how they could reach
you, but, on learning that it was nearly three days' journey, they were
reluctantly obliged to drop the idea of seeking an interview with you
there. A statement for the Natal delegates has now been prepared,
which I enclose herewith. If you have any suggestions to make, will you
kindly telegraph? The Natal delegates have sought an interview with
Lords Crewe and Morley; the former has appointed Thursday next for
receiving the deputation. They are extremely disappointed that they
will not have the benefit of your presence and guidance at the time. If,
however, you could write a letter to be read before Lord Crewe, it will
be valuable. They approached Sir Charles Bruce, inquiring whether he
would lead the deputation. Sir Charles Bruce has sent a telegram saying
he is not able to do so. Probably, now, Sir Mancherjee will lead it.
I remain,
Yours truly,
JUSTICE AMEER ALI, C. I. E.
ENGADIN
SWITZERLAND
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4987
