184. LETTER TO W. S. CAINE
RAJKOT,
March 26, 1902
TO
W. S. CAINE2, ESQ.
DEAR SIR,
I have just received your letter of the 14th instant. At the
request of the Editor, India, I have already prepared a brief
statement 1 of the position up to date of the British Indians in
South Africa. I enclose a copy thereof. Though, I presume,
the request made by the Editor was on your behalf, I feel that
to force a debate on the whole question on the treatment of
the British Indians in various Colonies is likely to do more harm
than good, for the situation in the different Colonies is not the
same. In Natal, for instance, the Immigration Restriction Act,
the Dealers' Licenses Act and such other Acts, of which copies
have been supplied from time to time to the British Commit-
tee, are already in force. The Natal model is being followed
both in Australia and Canada.
Under the circumstances, it
would be very difficult if not impossible to obtain repeal in
Natal or altogether to frustrate the attempt of Australia and
Canada to copy Natal. The key to this is to be found in Mr.
Chamberlain's address to the Conference of Premiers at the time
of the Diamond Jubilee. I enclose a copy of an extract there-
from for your perusal. He has met the Colonies half way, but
the half way is probably more dangerous than the whole, for
his sanction of indirect legislation has opened up possibilities
for mischief which were never dreamt of, as you will see from
my statement. Mr. Chamberlain's latest utterances are hardly
reassuring. They will simply strengthen the Colonial Governments
in their anti-Indian attitude. The remedy, therefore, so far as
Natal is concerned, is for the Indian residents in that Colony
to induce the Colonial Government to accord fair treatment,
which is now more or less a matter of administration of the old
laws, and where they may attempt to pass fresh restrictive mea-
sures, to appeal to the Home Government and for the friends to
help them. Continued pressure from the Colonial Office and
a sympathetic discussion of the Natal [question] in the Home
newspapers are the chief influences that are calculated to soften
the Ministers in Natal. In a measure, I think, by the aid of
friends in England and India, we have succeeded there. As to
Australia and Canada, the remedy is to take up the proposed
measures, the text of which, unfortunately, I have not seen, and
to attack the details so as to make them as lenient as possible.
On the main points Mr. Chamberlain simply will not help and,
if the debate is forced, he will make a speech which would
embolden the Colonists in their anti-Indian attitude.
For the new Colonies in South Africa, our position is and
ought to be infinitely stronger than elsewhere. The Colonial
Office has a much freer hand. The past remonstrances to Mr.
Kruger on the very anti-Indian legislation which is now being
enforced will, for very shame, make Mr. Chamberlain take up
an entirely different attitude. I enclose herewith an extract from
his reply to our memorial on the Transvaal legislation. He then
did not help because he was powerless. Now that he is all-power-
ful, how can he help granting relief, and yet, unfair as it may appear
to draw an inference not creditable to him, we are very much
afraid that he has gone back upon his old love and may, if not
properly watched, give away our position in the two new Colonies.
In anything that the friends may do in England, I think
all the efforts ought, for the present, to be concentrated on get-
ting redress in the Transvaal and the Orange River Colonies. In
Natal, relief for the present is unobtainable. In Australia and
Canada, there is no resident Indian population which has to
suffer. There it is a matter of principle which certainly is a
great one. In the Transvaal, the principle is there, the grievance
is present, tangible and real because of the very large vested
Indian interests, and relief is obtainable if only because Mr.
Chamberlain has not yet committed himself one way or the
other and, according to Lord Lansdowne, the treatment of British
Indians was one of the causes of the war.
In this matter there is no difference of opinion. The East
India Association has worked in our behalf, so has the London
Times and so also Sir Mancherji. I hope, therefore, that in
your crusade against the Colonial prejudice you will work in
co-operation with them.
If I may venture to make a suggestion, I would like our
friends to seek an interview with the Colonial Premiers who are
expected to attend the Coronation ceremony and to discuss the
situation with them.
The contributions of the local Indians in Natal to the present war
may be taken into account in dealing with the question. I enclose
herewith the cutting which would give you an idea of their work.
I have taken the liberty to write you fully and frankly for
which I trust you will be good enough to excuse me. If you
require any further information, I would be glad to place it at
your service.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 3945
