305. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, TRANSVAAL
Box 57,
PRETORIA,
August 1, 1903
TO
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 28th
ultimo, and I note that you will be pleased to take over the
Mosque property in your name in trust for the Mahomedan
community on the conditions mentioned therein.
My Committee is grateful to you for the proposal, but it is
regretfully obliged not to accept it for the reason that it is con-
trary to the Mahomedan religion to have any property for reli-
gious purposes held in the name of a non-Mahomedan.
My Committee ventures to draw your attention to the following:
(1) This matter of the transfer has been pending for several
years.
(2) The British Agent, prior to the war, assured my Commit-
tee that if the war came, there would be no difficulty about the
transfer after its termination.
(3) My Committee is advised that the Government have
power to authorize the transfer of the property by setting aside
that particular portion as one in which British Indians may hold
fixed property.
(4) Even if, strictly speaking, under the existing Law, the
Government think they have not the power, they could, as point-
ed out before, graciously relax the Law in this respect, as it
has been regarding licences.
(5) The matter is daily becoming serious owing to the old
age of the gentleman in whose name the property is at present
registered.
(6) The Government, in refusing the request of my Commit-
tee, are taking over a serious responsibility, in that the Maho-
medan community may, in the event of the death, before trans-
fer, of the registered owner, lose the property and thus suffer
heavy loss.
(7) The British Indians are, in the humble opinion of my
Committee, entitled to some consideration, if only in regard to
their religion, and when there can be no question of the Euro-
pean prejudice being in their way.
(8) It grieves my Committee to find that even the religious
scruples of the Indian community are disregarded by the Govern-
ment.
(9) My Committee had hope, in view of His Excellency
the Governor's assurance that new legislation would probably be
introduced during the session just closed, that relief would be
granted before long, but the non-passing of such legislation has
filled my Committee with disappointment.
For the reasons above mentioned, and as the matter is very
urgent, my Committee humbly ventures to trust the Government
would be pleased to grant the necessary relief.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
HAJEE HABIB
Indian Opinion, 27-8-1903, and India, 18-9-1903
