491. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
May 19, 1936
CHI. PRABHAVATI,
After many days I have your letter today. Apart from the
letters I wrote to you in April, I wrote on May 1, 121 and
18. Whose fault could it be if you got none of them? You
must take it that I do write in reply to yours and, in the absence
of any letter from you, would certainly write a reminder card.
I shall ask Kanti why he has not been writing.
You miscalculate the dates. Yours was [received] not on
the 17th but on the 19th and was written on the 14th, and on
that basis this should reach you on the 24th, and if you do not
get my letters by then wire receipt of this.
I shall await your
wire on the 24th and the 25th unless I hear from you in the
mean while. Yes, Jayaprakash saw me and spoke to me.
Patwardhan had accompanied him. He said nothing in reply
to the letter I had written. I understood that he did not want
to reply. He spoke to me only of your future, proposing that
you should undergo Montessorie training for three months at
Kashi and then he wants you to live in Patna.
He sought
my consent, which I readily gave. There can be no harm in
your learning the Montessorie method, though I don't fancy it.
You should, however, follow his wish and train yourself in the
Montessorie method. I expect you will then be staying in Patna
or some such place. I believe you will decide this point with
him in a personal talk. This is the substance of our talk. Your
things have gone with Jayaprakash.
How very foolish of you that you did not write to me to
say that you were unwell. Do you have the fainting fits now?
What about taking milk? Why did you have to go to Banaras?
And again why to Sitab Diyara?
What is your routine at
Srinagar?
I have already told you about our party. All are fine.
Sardar is daily having walks for four hours, Mani and Mahadev
accompanying. Kumarappa and Shanta have benefited much.
Kaka arrived the day before yesterday. Ba and I are well. Tari
and Kusum continue to be weak. Ramayana recitation and the
prayers go on as usual. I expect the Ayodhyakanda will be over
tomorrow. The address is given in my letter of the 1st or 12th.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3470
