245. LETTER TO J. B. KRIPALANI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 8, 1928
MY DEAR PROFESSOR,
You know perhaps that Krishnadas is not here at present.
He has however sent me your letter of the 25th March. Why do
you say that the Spinners' Register will mean purchasing yarn from
cottage to cottage? I have not suggested any such thing at all.
What I have suggested is that we should know the spinners with
whom the middle men deal. We do not want to do away with the
middle men altogether. We must not be at their mercy either,
nor must we be in the dark as to what is actually paid to the
spinners. The Register, therefore, has to be taken periodically.
Once we know who the spinners are, where they are, what they
get and what they do, you need not bother about them again, say
for six months. As a matter of fact there should be no difficulty
in your coming in touch with the middle men themselves and with
1 Gandhiji had called upon all units of the All-India Spinners' Association
to collect data regarding the spinners supplying yarn to the A.I.S.A. depots.
Vide "Letter to J. B. Kripalani", 12-3-1928 and "Notes", 15-3-1928, sub-title,
"Instructive Figures".
the spinners through them. I don't know whether I am even
now clear. Not knowing the practical working of these, there
may be difficulties of which I have no knowledge. You will then
write to me about those difficulties and I might be able to make
concrete suggestions for overcoming them.
About the want of capital, I am going to confer with Jamna-
lalji and Shankerlal. You do not say definitely how much you
require. Is Babu Shivaprasad Gupta ready to advance that sum
without interest if repayment is guaranteed and if he is, what will
be the period of such loan?
The last paragraph of your letter is bad. You can't afford to
give way to despair under any circumstances. You have to hold
on to the Ashram no matter what difficulties face you. You dare
not take up any other work. Please write regularly.
Are you now thoroughly restored, or is there still some diffi-
culty? If there is, you should now find Dr. Ansari comparatively free.
Yours sincerely,
PROF. KRIPALANI
GANDHI ASHRAM
BENARES CANTT.
From a photostat: S.N. 13177
