395. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
April 8, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,
I have your letter.
Read the accompanying letter to Sharda and give it to her.
You may not be able to provide Krishnamaiyadevi a job,
but you can certainly give her some work to do. You can give
her sewing and embroidery work, as you formerly used to do.
My point is that she must produce something and not feel that
she is living on charity.
Dharmakumar's education should consist in his upbringing
at home. That is the ideal of education in the Ashram. If child-
ren learn from their parents to be virtuous and to love bodily
labour, book-learning they will get afterwards. We know from
experience that book-learning does not always make a person vir-
tuous. I am sure that anybody who possesses a good character
will never starve, though he may not become rich. Misplaced
compassion is not non-violence; it is, on the contrary, a form
of subtle violence and one should, therefore, guard against it all
the more carefully. You should help both Krishnamaiya and
Mahavir, but in the right manner. They should shake off their
lethargy and work, and live contentedly. Pyare Ali says that he
can help Mahavir to earn up to Rs. 40 or 50. If he does not
get more than Rs. 25 at Sundardas's place and if he satisfies
Sundardas by his work, it would be better, provided of course
the latter can release him, to keep him with Pyare Ali. Think
over this. . . .'s whole family is leaving the Ashram. I have
still not been able to understand . . . He believes that he
was never fit to live in the Ashram, since he wants to become a
big engineer. . . .3 says that she cannot do without certain
pleasures and, therefore, she also was not fit to live in the Ash-
ram. If they leave, . . .4 certainly cannot live alone in
the Ashram. Thus the whole family will leave. This is no ordi-
nary event. But it is right that they should leave. We would
not like anybody to stay against his wishes. This is our reward
for having practically exempted the family from observing the
Ashram rules. . . .5 now wishes to take up an independent
job in some factory. It seems he wants to join . . . 6. There will
be no harm if he can do so. Of course his expenses will be high.
In Deolali itself the family will spend about Rs. 100. . . .7
himself will spend rather freely. I, therefore, think that their
expenses will come to Rs. 150. God's will be done. The Ashram,
of course, will stop giving them money. But I think we shall
have to give them a month's expenses.
You seem to be fairly occupied in solving family problems
there. Do try and solve them.
If Kaku and Lakshmi have developed such relations that
they even meet each other alone, I would advise that they should
be married off. After they are married, they may, if they wish,
live separately and may observe brahmacharya as much as they
wish. But, before they are married, if they constantly think ab-
out each other, feel physical attraction towards each other and
even occasionally touch each other with such feelings, that would
definitely be against dharma. An engagement may be broken off,
but a marriage cannot be dissolved. If, therefore, there are occa-
sions for them to go out together, it is desirable that they should
get married. Discuss this with Kaku and Lakshmi, and also
with Nath.
How much would your sister need?
Meet Jamnalalji and
have a talk with him and afterwards take your sister to meet him.
If she is not eager to earn money, if she wants to live a life dedi-
cated to service and has no responsibility for supporting anybody,
and if she is ready to follow the Ashram way of life, I think she
can live in the Ashram. But this may not perhaps be possible
for her at this age.
Ask Gomati why she has stopped writing to me. I have
not heard from Kishorelal of late.
If Manju wants to be a doctor and if you can meet her
expenses, encourage her in her ambition. I don't think it is a
great achievement to be a doctor. All the same it is a form of
education and one acquires knowledge. If she loves it, by all
means let her have it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8800. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya
