73. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 24, 1929
CHI. MIRA1,
It is well you do not want me to speak to you tomorrow on
the incident. But I did want, after witnessing the exhibition, to
reduce to writing my thoughts. I do that now.
The exhibition is proof of the correctness of my statement.
None else would have felt like committing suicide over a simple
innocent remark of mine. You want to be with me in my tours
occasionally, it is true; you want to come to the Ashram leaving
your work at least every four months. You recognize these desires
as limitations. I make allowance for them. But why feel disturbed
when I tell you what I feel to be the truth that they are not
themselves the disease, but they are symptoms of a deep-seated
disease which has not been touched. If you were not what I have
described you to be, you would rejoice over my drawing attention
to the disease and courageously strive to overcome it. Instead,
you simply collapsed, much to my grief and anxiety.
This disease is idolatry. If it is not, why hanker after my
company! Why touch or kiss the feet that must one day be dead
cold? There is nothing in the body. The truth I represent is
before you. Experience and effort will unravel it before you, never
my association in the manner you wish. When it comes in the
course of business you will, like others, gain from it and more
because of your devotion. Why so helplessly rely on me? Why
do everything to please me? Why not independently of me and
even in spite of me? I have put no restrictions on your liberty,
save those you have welcomed. Break the idol to pieces if you
can and will. If you cannot, I am prepared to suffer with you.
But you must give me the liberty to issue warnings.
My diagnosis may be wrong. If so, it is well. Strive with
me cheerfully instead of being nerve-broken. Everyone but you
takes my blows without being unstrung.
If your effort has hitherto failed, what does it matter? You
have hitherto dealt mechanically with symptoms. There you have
had considerable success. But if I say you have not been able
to touch the root, why weep over it? I do not mind your
failures. They are but stepping-stones to success. You must rise
from this torpor never to fall into it again.
I have done. May God be with you.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5378. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9434
