297. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 22, 1928
You will be perhaps sorry to hear that I have decided not to
go to Europe this year. There was no call for me to go in answer
to the various invitations, but I felt that, if Rolland considered it
worth while my going to meet him in furtherance of the common
cause, I would go and incidentally respond to invitations from
Europe. Now there is the expected letter from him. I send you a
copy so that you can better understand my decision. Rolland's
hesitation to let me go to Europe principally for the sake of meet-
ing him shows that as an artist and as the interpreter of my mes-
sage he does not regard it as necessary that I should leave all
my important work here and go to Europe to meet him. And as
there is no call in him to ask me to go or to accept my offer to
go, I feel that if my letter to him was truthful, that is to say, if
the deciding motive was to see him, I should consider his letter to
be God's guidance in answer to my prayer. As days went by I was
hardening my heart feeling more and more reluctant to go to
Europe at the present moment and was feeling also that I had
nothing to give to Europe, whereas my hands were absolutely
full here. The call of the Ashram is incessant. It is becoming clearer
day by day that if I am to do justice to the Ashram, which I
claim to be my best creation, and if I cannot give it the whole
of my time, I must at least give to it the major part of my time.
I had Burma in my mind if I did not go to Europe. But now
I feel that I don't want to go to Burma either and I shall pass
the summer in the Ashram, if Burma does not want me.
The heat does not trouble me. I am getting on quite well.
And, of course, there are many other things which I can attend to
if I am here. On the whole, therefore, I think that I must not go.
But I can make this provisional decision that if everything goes
well, I would go next year giving myself ample time from now to
make all my preparations and dispositions so that I can go with-
out difficulty, and then, perhaps, if I could do so and if the way is
clear, taking America also to save time.
I had a long chat with Ambalal. He said that he had sent his
own subscription but that he could not move further unless there
was a proper balance-sheet published. He was dissatisfied with
the account-keeping and he seemed to be keen on a Gujarati com-
mittee because he said that the bulk of the money was found by
the Gujaratis. So far as I could see I could not move him in his
decision. But he said that in giving his opinion he was more
guided by other donors than by his own instinct.
Marichi described to me the condition of your teeth or rather
your toothlessness. To be toothless is by no means a great depri-
vation and it is decidedly a gain when one's teeth are a source of
disease rather than of health.
Remember that you have to finish the Shraddhanand series.
You should write something on Gregg's book.
I hope Gurudev is much better now.
From a photostat: S.N. 14958
