241. LETTER TO SIR REGINALD MAXWELL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
December 2, 1940
DEAR SIR REGINALD,
Mahadev Desai gave me your kind message which he has
embodied in the full notes he prepared for me of his doings in
Delhi. The portion of the notes containing the message reads
as follows:
Well, well, I should have thought that the correct position for
a man like Mr. Gandhi to take would have been to address a manifesto
to the people of India stating his own position as he did in his appeal
to every Briton and then be quiet. Give this message from me to Mr.
Gandhi.
I have been fagged out and for some days cutting down the
daily work to the minimum. Hence the delay in reply. Even so,
I enter into a discussion of your message for the sake of elucidat-
ing truth. I know how busy you are and care-worn. But the
only way satyagraha works is by a continuous discovery of truth
and action based on it. In the progress towards full discovery the
satyagrahi has to show that he is ever ready and even eager to
learn and appreciate the opponent's side. It is in that spirit that I
approach your message.
You would be wholly right in the advice you have sent me if
I was a preacher. But I have never adopted that role. I am essen-
tially a man of action and a reformer carrying on an experiment
never before tried in the political field. Hence at the risk of mak-
ing mistakes even big I must continue to tread the chosen path
so long as I have no sense of mistake or distrust of my action.
My desire is to cause the least embarrassment to the Government
consistently with the prosecution of my mission. If it is successful,
it cannot fail to benefit the British side by side with India and
ultimately the world. If it fails, the Government cannot be hurt.
I cannot carry the argument any further. Perhaps what I have
said is no argument but a bare recital of the motive behind my
action and its interpretation in the light of the motive. The rest
must be left to time.
Mahadev Desai told me about your dear ones being in the
thick of the fight. I am conscious of the fact that what applies
to you applies to almost all the known British families. How I
wish I could have stood side by side with them. But duty has
enjoined upon me a seemingly opposite course. I take comfort
in the fact that though seeming to be in the opposite camp, I work
for the same end as is declared by the British Government, only
with the certain conviction that their method can never defeat
Hitlerism and mine alone can, if any at all.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7858. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
