242. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
While observing silence
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
4 a.m., Sunday [June 18, 1933]
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Soon after I wrote that letter to you, I had to stop writing
letters with my own hand. I saw that I had not regained
enough strength for that. I feel like trying whether I have it now,
and I think I can't do better than try to write a letter to you
to find that out.
Please do not get frightened by the doctors' reports or by
the delay in the recovery of strength.
"God's will prevails",
as the poet says. I had thought that I would be on my feet
in three weeks' time.
But my expectation has been belied.
However, there is no cause at all for worry. Except for the delay in
regaining strength, there is nothing else. Really speaking, what
else could I have expected at the age of sixty-four? Please rest as-
sured that I am perfectly all right. I am bathing in Premlila-
behn's love. I have turned her home into a dharmashala. She
herself made arrangements for the marriage of Devdas and
Lakshmi, and with what love she did that! God's kindness is
boundless. Do we deserve it? May He make us worthy of it.
What has been done regarding your nose?
Tell Joshi that I have given instructions that the operation on
Ramabehn should be performed. But Dr. Patel himself has asked
her to wait till the rains come and the weather is cooler. It is he
who has been insisting on the operation and he is positive that it
involves no risk at all. He thinks the operation is absolutely
necessary. Chhaganlal should not worry. The matter has not
been out of my mind even for a moment.
Writing this much has not tired me. All the same, I don't
wish to uproot a tree which bears sweet fruit and will not,
therefore, write any other letter today.
Prabhavati has arrived here today. I suppose somebody must
have written to you about that.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA JAIL, POONA
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 17-
