73. LETTER TO MAJOR W. JONES
February 10 [1923]
DEAR MAJOR JONES,
This is a personal letter because it embraces sentiment and
travels beyond my province as a prisoner. At the same time, if
your official position demands that you cannot help taking official
notice of it, of course you are at liberty to do so.
Yesterday morning I heard screaming and some of the men
about shouted out: "There goes flogging." I wondered. A short
while after, I saw four or five young men in gunny clothing being
marched. One had a bare back. They were all walking very slowly
and with bent backs. I observed that they were in pain. They
bowed to me. I returned the bow. I concluded that they must
have been flogged. During the day I saw a respectable man in
irons and gunny clothing pass by. He too bowed. Contrary to
my custom, I asked him who he was. He told me he was a Mulshi
Peta man. I asked him whether he knew the flogged men. He
said he knew them all, as they were also Mulshi Peta men.
The object in writing this is to know whether I could be per-
mitted to see these men who are refusing to work. If I find them
to be acting foolishly or thoughtlessly, I might be able to persuade
them to reconsider their position. Satyagraha requires a prisoner
to obey all reasonable prison regulations, and certainly to do the
work given. In fact, his resistance ceases once a satyagrahi is in
prison. It can be revived for extraordinary reasons, e.g., studied
humiliation. If these men claim to be satyagrahis, I should like
to explain all this to them.
I know that a prisoner cannot ordinarily be permitted to as-
sist or intervene in prison administration. My only ground for ex-
pecting response to my suggestion is that of common humanity.
You, I am sure, will want to leave no stone unturned to avoid
flogging, if it is at all possible. I have suggested a possibility in all
humility. I wish you would and could be permitted to avail
yourself of my offer.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 8019; also Young India, 6-3-1924
