343. LETTER TO B. GOPALACHAR
CHIKMAGALUR,
August 19, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
Here are the answers to your questions:
1. In my opinion State aid should not be asked and should not
be given except on the following conditions:
Every school in which the head master is or teachers are pre-
pared to learn carding and spinning and submit to an examina-
tion should receive Rs. 5 per month as an increase in the exist-
ing salary of the head master or the teacher in question, provided
that he guarantees manufacture of five tolas of yarn of at least
6 counts per boy or girl per month, the increase to be drawn
only upon certificates by the inspector of the required amount
of yarn and a capital expense of annas four per boy or girl for
spinning outfit.
Note: Unless some such provision is made, my experience is
that expense incurred over the introduction of hand-spinning in
schools becomes a mere waste. And it would be wrong to intro-
duce spinning in schools unless there is a staff of qualified in-
spectors and itinerant teachers for teaching these school-masters,
and, if necessary, in the preliminary stages even the boys and
girls.
2. Spinning should be made compulsory only in such primary
and middle schools where the majority of municipal or local
board voters consent. Compulsion would be useless where there
is no public opinion in favour of hand-spinning.
3. The unfortunate experience just now is that boys take
to spinning more quickly than girls. Therefore, I would make
no distinction, and it is wrong to introduce the idea amongst boys
and girls that spinning is essentially meant for girls and not for
boys. It is to be treated as a national duty and it is to be
prized for its cultural advantages so far as the boys and girls are
concerned.
4. The question of cotton-growing tracts is irrelevant to the
consideration of introducing spinning in schools and cotton trees
(that is, the devkapas variety) can be planted anywhere.
5. As I do not know the incidence of the education cess in
Mysore, I am unable to answer the question.
6. Public sympathy and support can only be obtained by
propaganda on behalf of the Industrial Department just as was
done and is still being done in the matter of co-operation. Hand-
spinning is really the greatest aid to co-operation.
7. As there are weaving sheds in the Adi Karnataka work-
shops conducted by the Government, all yarn manufactured in the
schools should be sent to these sheds for weaving and a stipulated
price should be paid by these institutions to the schools manufac-
turing yarn.
If you are serious about this matter and are convinced as to
the absolute necessity of spinning becoming universal, you should
give some attention to the study of the technique of hand-spinning,
which you can easily do in a month's time if you devote a
whole month to it, or in three months' time if you devote at least
one hour per day before taking up questions. Merely putting
questions in the Assembly and throwing the blame or the burden
upon the Government is to damage the cause. For, after all
the Government can only respond to the atmosphere around
it. And Government after all is what the people make it. It has
no power or capacity apart from the people.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. B. GOPALACHAR
R. A. MEMBER
TIRTHAHALLI
SHIMOGA DISTRICT
From a microfilm: S.N. 19805
