239. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 20, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Your letter, posted on the 18th, reached me on the 20th.
But I don't know what will happen to mine. The officials here
tell me that the packet which I had handed over on the 4th
was dispatched on the 16th. All the letters are sent to the Secre-
tariat for censoring, and are posted when received back here
after being passed. I simply cannot understand why they should
do this. I have been trying to find out, of course. I don't know
if I shall succeed. We should go on writing to each other as
usual and not worry when the letters will reach their destination.
We should not think about the matter at all. We should be ready
in our minds to face the possibility of the correspondence stop-
ping altogether and be sure that we shall not feel upset even then.
Ask Prabhudas to write to me. Two days ago the doctor per-
mitted me to rotate the Gandiva wheel with the left hand, and
so I have started spinning on the Gandiva. I appreciate it all the
more after my experience with the Magan spinning-wheel.
My
yarn became fine immediately and the threads also snapped
rarely. I still draw the thread with the right hand. There are
some defects in the spinning-wheel, and when I have removed
them it will work still more smoothly. Comparing it with the
Magan spinning-wheel, I see that I cannot acquire speed on the
latter. Hence I think that for spinning with one spindle only, the
Gandiva or the ordinary spinning-wheel is better. For anybody
who cannot use either of his hands for drawing the thread or for
rotating the wheel, the Magan spinning-wheel is an invaluable
invention. Obviously, anyone who can use both his hands can spin
more. But we cannot spin yarn of the highest count on it. A few
changes may perhaps help us to do it. It is also possible that our
speed on it may increase if we make some modifications so that
we can spin on it with one spindle only. But all this requires ex-
perimentation. My experience of it in its present form is what I
have described it to be. I can say that I have now acquired excel-
lent control over the pedals.
I have been permitted to spin on the Gandiva wheel not be-
cause there is any improvement in the condition of my elbow
264
but because complete rest has not benefited it in any way. The
assumption behind this is that the pain may not have been caused
by the strain of [rotating] the wheel when spinning. I shall know
for certain in a few days.
I am happy that Dr. Talwalkar charges two rupees for con-
veyance and gives a bill for the medicines. If we call him only
once or twice in a year, he can afford to charge us nothing,
but he cannot afford to do so when he gives us medicines as fre-
quently as he does. He is not so rich. As for conveyance, I think
we have been paying it for a long time. Dr. Talwalkar's sending
us bills for medicines is likely to have one result. Through laxity
we may have been calling him during all this time even when it
might not be necessary. If that is so, our laxity should go now.
In any case, if we are scrupulous in following dharma, we should
feel extremely reluctant to accept anybody's free services. But most
people certainly do not behave in that way. Because water costs
nothing, we use it freely and do not feel ashamed in doing so. On
the contrary, we ask why we should not use it freely when it costs
nothing. And as we are careless about using water because it
costs nothing, we feel in the same way about other services or
things which we get free. This is a violation of our vow of non-
stealing, besides being a violation of the vow of ahimsa too.
I have had no letter from Ba. I wrote one letter to her
many days ago, to which I got no reply. And so I have not
written to her recently. I simply do not understand what hap-
pens to these letters. I will write once again to her, and put the
letter with this. If you get it, show it to the Jail Superinten-
dent there and give it to Ba. I hope all those who had got cold
have recovered now. There is a wire from Devdas informing me
that he had a mild relapse of fever. If you get this letter and
if Shanti is there at the time, give him and his wife my blessings
and tell him that I was happy that he had gone there. Did he
get my letter? I wrote it to him at Rajkot.
It will be enough if you send the slivers, given by Chhakkad-
das, to Dahyabhai with anybody who may be going to that
side. I have a stock of other slivers with me. It will not matter,
therefore, if Chhakkaddas's arrive a little late.
Is Parnerkar's health all right? I am sure Prithuraj is quite well.
It seems to me from your description that Shankarbhai had
a narrow escape. Anyone falling from the roof of the kitchen is
hardly likely to survive, as the roof is at a fairly good height. I
hope his arm is all right now.
I have fully explained my views regarding Sitala Sahay in a
previous letter. 1 You will know what they are if you get it. I
have also written about Parnerkar's mother, as also about Nar-
mada.
The Jailor informed us that Mahadev's letter to Durga, written
on the 11th, was posted on the 14th. But you had not got it till
the 18th, from which it seems that the letters are being tampered
with there too.
You should assume that for some time now you cannot be
certain of getting my letters-as for the future, let us wait and see
what happens. You will find more about this in my letter to
Premabehn.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8240.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
