665. LETTER TO P. C. GHOSH
POONA,
October 18, 1945
BHAI PROFULLA,
I have your letter and telegram about Jawaharlalji. I have
understood the matter.
Sudhir came yesterday. I have had long talks with Sudhir
yesterday and today. I could not send a telegram about my
decision. It would have been too long. So I am sending this letter.
Sudhir must have sent you a brief telegram.
Taking everything into consideration I feel that at this stage
you may announce this much: 'Owing to unavoidable circum-
stances Gandhiji cannot come to Calcutta on the 2nd November.
As soon as the date is decided it will be announced. It is
likely that he will come in the last week of November or there-
abouts. His tour programme which has been published in the
newspapers is also cancelled. But wherever he is likely to go, the
organizers will be informed so that they can make some arrange-
ments. No expenditure of any kind should be incurred at this stage.
Wherever he goes, his transport will have to be paid for, but that
can be seen at that time only. Gandhiji has made it clear that,
health permitting, he will try his best to go to all the places he
wanted to visit. But considering his age and health, it is obvious
that in spite of his desire to visit as many places as possible he will
be able to visit only a few of them.'
You may publish this much. Now I shall tell you what I
want to do. If possible I want to visit Midnapore, Chittagong,
Dacca, Borkamta, Santiniketan and Assam. If any other place is
left out, like Feni, I would like to visit that also. You can inform
the local organizers about my programme which all of you there
may decide for me. Transport also would have to be arranged.
Do not give anything to the Press yet. That can be done on
my arrival. It takes a little time to make the preliminary
arrangements. That is why I have suggested this. It is for you
to work out what places I can easily visit.
I don't feel that it is necessary for me to let you know just
now who will be with me. If you want to suggest anything
about this, you may do so.
I would certainly like to meet the people who have already
been to see me. If you want any more persons to meet me you
may send for them. Maulana Saheb is there in Calcutta at
present. You should not trouble him; but if he wants to suggest
anything you should go to him and ask him about it.
I do not want to get involved in addresses of welcome. Gift of
any amount of self-spun yarn, or yarn spun by friends, will not
be too much. My aim will be to convert it into khadi and dis-
tribute it there at the cheapest possible price. Any gift of money
will be welcome, but no special effort should be made for it. It
should be voluntary. The money will be used for some construc-
tive work in Bengal. But please remember that this tour is not
for the collection of either yarn or money.
I would of course like to meet Mr. Casey and try to secure
from him whatever assistance can be had for the people. It has
been my experience so far that wherever I go and settle down,
my presence gives the poor and destitute a sense of comfort. If I
can do even this much, I shall be satisfied.
I do not want to get involved in the politics of Bengal. I
have neither the desire nor the knowledge.
Whatever you decide in this matter should be decided unani-
mously by all of you, rather than by majority opinion. This is
not the kind of thing which should be settled by the majority. If
anyone interested in my proposed visit does not like a particular
thing, I do not want to do that. There must be no quarrel over
my visit. My dharma is to settle quarrels. Please give this letter
or a copy of it to Satis Babu. My earnest wish is that even though
you are two separate bodies, you should become of one mind
before my arrival. You are both eminent disciples of the same
guru, a great guru like P. C. Ray. What I want is to see you
both truly united in heart. Both of you are doing my work.
Then why should there be any difference between the two of you?
But in all this God's grace is the main thing.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Sudhir Ghosh Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
