331. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Kartak Vad 10 [November 26, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I am not surprised at Kanaiyalal's disappointment. But there is
no reason to believe that associations among the English people are
run better, though it is true that they appear to be doing well. The
reason is that these associations are the product of modern civiliza-
tion. The English are more adept in that civilization and can there-
fore conduct these associations better. Our Arya Samaj is not for the
general public. It is meant only for the educated. The English institu-
tions can be said to be for the masses to some extent, because even the
masses there have come within the purview of that civilization. There-
fore their institutions are governed by some discipline. Moreover, the
people there consider honesty as the best policy and are honest as a
matter of policy.
We, on the other hand, are honest for honesty's
sake; we do not know how to be honest for the sake of policy. The
general tendency amongst our educated is that if one holds a position
where one can serve one's selfish ends quickly, one is at once led to do
so. Moreover, those who are born and bred in diplomatic surroundings
take to dishonest ways even if they are not educated. If we think of
our own family, we shall be able to see that the people of whom Kanaiya-
lal has lost all hopes are a mere drop in the ocean of Indian humanity.
Please think of the hypocrisy, the corruption and the immorality of
the members of our family who are occupying posts of executive
officers.
You have rightly pointed out the discrepancy about mentioning
the names of some persons who have gone to gaol and not mentioning
those of others under the different dates. You may therefore delete them
all as I am not in a position to supply the dates of the others from here.
Please retain the names of Mrs. Sodha, Narayansamy and Nagappen.
I have a wire from Hosken saying that Smuts has told him that the
new Act will be such as to satisfy the Indian community.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
