515. LETTER TO KIRLOSKAR BROTHERS
December 10, 1934
GENTLEMEN,
I got your letter yesterday afternoon in the midst of an
important interview. I was able to read it only at 3 a.m. to-
day. I have taken the deepest interest in your invention. I have
great regard for Mr. Kale both as a mechanic and a man. I
felt drawn to him when he was at the Ashram. Being a fairly
busy man, I had not much time to give to the examination of
the machine, but I have kept myself in touch with the progress
of the examination by the Judges . When you offered to send it
to me I told you of my own difficulty. But I was pressed by
a friend to give the machine a trial myself. I, therefore, wrote
to you again asking you to send the machine with Mr. Kale
and another who might know all about tools in general. I had
intended to keep the machine here for some time so that the
Director of the Ashram Shri Vinoba might also try it. The prize
of Rs. 1,00,000 is at the disposal of him who would earn it. I
am personally anxious to give it, if the machine of my dream
can be had. The highest speed attained on the ordinary wheel
is over 700 yards per hour. Besides yours, there are two machines
of promise. They are also undergoing improvements.
I expect to leave for Delhi on or about the 18th inst. My
movement becomes uncertain thereafter. I shall gladly try the
machine myself if I succeed in returning to Wardha and if
you will then entertain my request to send your machine. I
intend to interest you in the Village Industries scheme and help
it through your organization by suggesting or making improve-
ments in the village tools, especially the indigenous village chakki
for grinding wheat, etc., the rice-pounder, the oil-press and the
cane-crusher.
If, however, you will entertain my request, I would like
you to do so as comrades in a common humanitarian cause and
not as commercial men suspecting the bona fides of public men
who seek to tempt houses like yours to interest yourselves in
inventions of benefit to millions of starving villagers.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
