200. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON,
July 1, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
I did not like your wire. How can we stand between Saras-
wati and her parents?
How can we insist that she should never
visit them at all? But now your wire has no meaning. The
latest position is this. I had a talk with her about a great many
things. I joked with her and I even assumed a stern tone, but
Saraswati did not give up her obstinacy. Firmly she told me:
"Get me married." I said: "I will never agree to that. I can-
not attend such a marriage nor can I give my blessings. I do not
approve of a girl of your age marrying. I am a reformer and
therefore cannot give my consent to a thing which I don't
approve of Moreover, I have every fear that Kanti's studies
will suffer as a result of the marriage, and that is another reason
why I cannot give my consent. But if your parents agree and
Kanti also is willing, then I will not stand in your way and in
that case you will not need my blessings." Saraswati was pleased
and said at once: "Then I am ready to go to Trivandrum.
You can arrange for that." I then asked: "Shouldn't we first
ascertain your parents' and Kanti's views?" So she asked me to
write immediately. This conversation took place yesterday during
my walk. There was no question of writing a letter then. In the
morning I got your wire. I showed it to her and asked her how
she could go to Trivandrum now and also how the marriage could
take place. But she said: "Kantibhai is definitely ready for
marriage. My parents also will not object. You should write a
67-10
letter and after getting his consent send me to Trivandrum."
When during our talk yesterday I agreed not to oppose the mar-
riage to the extent of preventing it, she agreed even to study during
the time she had to stay here.
She has started learning English
from Mr. Kallenbach's niece.
Today she must have started even
the Hindi lessons. This is the position.
The idea of Nagpur is absolutely useless. Mahadev has
already written to you about that. I also have already given you
my opinion.
I had given my consent only with the hope that
your relationship would be an ideal one. At the moment, I
do not see any sign of that hope being realized. I said to Saraswati:
"Kanti wants that you should be treated as Kanam."
She vehe-
mently protested: "I am not Kanam. I know my interests. I
will not stay here without Kantibhai. Please call him for fifteen
days." I cannot make Saraswati obey my orders as you think. I
ought not to do that either. The key is solely in your hands.
My advice is that you should let Saraswati go to Trivandrum, should
flatly refuse to marry just now and should not go to Trivandrum
yourself. You should sacrifice everything else for the sake of
your studies. You should write all this to Saraswati very frankly.
You ought not to leave your studies and come here. But this
is, of course, my opinion. If it does not appeal to you and if you
are ready to marry, you may by all means do so. You need not
bother if I do not think that it will be for your good. Who can
foresee the future? My fear may be unjustified and my reason-
ing may be wrong. You know best what is good for you. You
should, therefore, decide as you think best without taking into
consideration my opinion and inform me accordingly.
In the
mean time, I will do whatever may be necessary to humour
Saraswati. Yesterday I spared four hours for that girl. Vasu-
mati is devoting a good deal of her time to her, but she frankly
confesses: "The task is beyond me. How would a girl who does
not listen to you listen to me?" Over and above this Kanu also
gives some time to her. Lilavati, Sharda, etc., try their level
best to make friends with her. But she is not easy to make
friends with. It seems she feels somewhat at home with Vasu-
mati, though. I still think that Amtul Salaam might be able to
influence her.
Now do as God prompts you and write to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7338. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
