282. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
CAPE TOWN,
Phagan Sud 4 [March 1, 1914]
DEAR RAOJIBHAI,
I have your letter. It has indeed been a deliverance for
Nepal. I have known his wife to be a hard-hearted woman. Death
should make us think of our duty and fill us with contempt for
the body, but inspire no fear. It seems that a man does not
suffer excessively even when he is burnt to death. When the pain
becomes unbearable, he loses consciousness. Those who cling to
the body so very tenaciously only suffer the more. One who
knows the truth about the atman will have no fear of death.
Thousands of men, thousands of creatures, are burnt to death,
like Nepal, every moment now. In the universe, Nepal is an infi-
nitely smaller creature than even an ant. How many creatures,
relatively bigger than Nepal, do we not burn away, knowingly or
otherwise, in making fires or using lights at night?
Imagine a being of immense size like Brahma. To him, we
must be smaller than ants. The very size of his eyes must be so
large that we would look like fleas. What if Nepal has been burnt
to death by a creature like this? He might have even believed
that he might burn away a creature like Nepal for the happiness
of a great being such as he was. To us, Nepal is a creature of our
size, so that we pity him, afraid of what we might suffer in similar
circumstances. But the argument we use in our wisdom about
creatures like the ant, the bug, the flea and other countless insects
invisible to our naked eye, must be the very argument applied to
us by the much wiser Brahma. If we can understand this, we
may learn the following lessons from the case of Nepal and others
of the kind:
1 . We should have compassion on ourselves as on all creatures,
looking on them as one, and draw back in alarm from destruction
of life for any purpose of ours.
2. We should cherish no fond attachment for the body and have
no fear whatever of death.
3. We should strive for moksha right now, knowing that the body
is all too apt to let us down.
It is very easy to utter these three maxims but it is difficult
to ponder over them and, after pondering, it is like walking on a
sword blade to put them into practice.
It is morning now. My ideas flow in this direction, for Ba is
in pain again and I am trying to free her from the fear of death.
With due regards
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Jivannu Parodh
