102. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 5, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. Sardar has really given up tea. I knew
that he had given up the morning tea. He used to have a cup
at ten. Now he has given up that too. I knew this after he had
done so. I didn't say a single word to him. He has acted of his
own free will.
It was not my intention to state that I had sent English toys
for the children. If that is what I did, I made a slip. What I
wished to say was that I had brought some toys. Now I don't
know when I would be able to give them. They were in Mira-
behn's custody. Perhaps she will remember where they are kept.
The books were in a trunk. Either Mirabehn or Pyarelal
would know about them. If you lift and feel the weight of the
trunk which has not been opened, you will know whether it con-
tains books or something else. Perhaps Mahadev knows about it.
This is what is meant by seeming inconsistency. An apparent
inconsistency either in my life or in the affairs of the Ashram
can be explained. There is only an appearance of inconsistency in
66
the action of a person who wraps up his body in winter and keeps
it uncovered in summer. He obeys the same principle both when
he covers the body and when he leaves it uncovered. Many such
seeming inconsistencies can be properly explained. Other incon-
sistencies are such in fact. They are due to my or Ashram's
weaknesses. They should be regarded as moral deficiencies and
every effort should be made to overcome them. Which inconsis-
tencies are really such and which are only apparent ones can be
decided only when we examine all of them one by one. If you
wish to ask me about any inconsistencies which you may have
noticed, please do.
No one hates another without a cause. Hence, non-violence
lies in loving a person, feeling compassion for him and serving
him even when he has given us cause for hating him. There
is no non-violence in loving a person who loves us; that is but
the law of the world. Non-violence may be described as making
a gift. Giving love in return for love is no more than doing one's
duty.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10271. Also C.W. 6719. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
