146. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 28, 1913
DEAR MR. GORGES,
I do not know that I am justified in writing this letter to you,
but, as you have been personally solicitous about the non-revival
of passive resistance, and as, in the course of my conversations
with you, I have so often told you that I have nothing to withhold
from the Government, I may as well inform you of what is now going
on.
I wrote to you from Phoenix in reply to your last letter, and
if you have not yet replied to my communication but intend to do
so, I would suggest your sending your reply to my Johannesburg
address, as I shall be here for some time at least.
The campaign has started in earnest. As you know, sixteen
passive resisters, including four women, are already serving three
months' imprisonment with hard labour. The resisters here were
awaiting my arrival and the activity here will commence almost
immediately.
I cannot help saying that the points on which the struggle has
re-started are such that the Government might gracefully grant them
to the community. But what I would like to impress upon the
Government is the gravity of the step we are about to take. I
know that it is fraught with danger. I know also that, once taken,
it may be difficult to control the spread of the movement beyond
the limits one may set. I know also what responsibility lies on my
shoulders in advising such a momentous step, but I feel that it is
not possible for me to refrain from advising a step which I consider
to be necessary, to be of educational value and, in the end, to be
valuable both to the Indian community and to the State. This
step consists in actively, persistently and continuously asking those
who are liable to pay the £3 tax to decline to do so and to suffer
the penalties for non-payment and, what is more important, in
asking those who are now serving indenture and who will, there-
fore, be liable to pay the £3 tax on completion of their indenture
to strike work until the tax is withdrawn. I feel that, in view
of Lord Ampthill's declaration in the House of Lords, evidently
with the approval of Mr. Gokhale, as to the definite promise made
by the Government and repeated to Lord Gladstone, this advice
to indentured Indians would be fully justified. That the tax has
weighed most heavily upon the men I know from personal experi-
ence, that the men resent it bitterly I also know from personal
knowledge. But they have submitted to it more or less with quiet
resignation, and I am loth to disturb their minds by any step that
I might take or advise. Can I not even now, whilst in the midst
of the struggle, appeal to General Smuts and ask him to reconsider
his decision on the points already submitted and on the question
of the £3 tax and, whether this letter is favourably considered or
not, may I anticipate the assurance that it will in no wise be taken
to be a threat?
[I have, etc.,]
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913
