181. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
RAJKOT,
March 4, 1902
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
Having passed five nights in the train, I reached here on
Wednesday last, i.e., only a day later than I would have, had
I not stopped at the intermediate stations.
It was with very great difficulty that I found a seat in one
of the intermediate carriages and that after I offered to stand
the whole night if necessary. As it was, it was merely a trick on
the part of the friends of some of the passengers. The former
had occupied all the spare room with a view to prevent any
more passengers from getting in. They got out as soon [as]
the guard blew the whistle for the train to go. There was abso-
lutely no room in the 3rd class carriages. You cannot adopt
gentlemen's time and travel 3rd. From Benares, however, I tra-
velled 3rd only. In your words, it was only the first plunge that
was difficult, the after-effect was all pleasure. The other passen-
gers and I talked freely and at times became even chummy.
Benares is probably the worst station for the poor passengers.
Corruption is rampant. Unless you are prepared to bribe the
police, it is very difficult to get your ticket. They approached
me as they approached others several times and offered to buy
our tickets if we would pay them a gratuity (or bribe?). Many
availed themselves of the offer. Those of us who would not, had
to wait nearly one hour after the window was opened, before we
could get our tickets and we would be fortunate at that if we
did so without being presented with a kick or two from the
guardians of law. At Moghalsarai, on the other hand, the ticket
master was a very nice man. He said he knew no distinction
between a prince and a peasant.
In the carriages we were packed anyhow. There was no
restriction as to numbers, though there were notices in the com-
partments. Night travelling under such circumstances does become
rather inconvenient even for the poor 3rd class passengers.
There was plague inspection at three different places, but I
cannot say it was carried on with any harshness. My experience
is yet very little, but the picture that the imagination had
drawn of the terrible lot of these passengers has become some-
what toned down. Five days can hardly afford sufficient data
for drawing a fair conclusion. I feel all the richer and stronger
in spirit for the experience which I would resume at the very
first opportunity.
I alighted at Benares, Agra, Jeypore and Palanpur. The
Central Hindoo College is not a bad institution though it is
difficult to speak with confidence on a hurried visit. "The dream
in marble" is certainly worth a visit. Jeypore is a wonderful
place. The Albert Museum is a far better building than the
Calcutta one and the art section is by itself a study. The Jey-
pore school of arts appeared to be flourishing under its Ben-
galee Superintendent.
I now come to the most important part of my letter. To
Palanpore I went to see merely the State Karbhary who is a
personal friend of mine. I casually mentioned to him that I
might join you in collecting subscriptions for the Ranade
memorial fund in April next. The State Karbhary, Mr. Patwari,
who is a sincere man, says that it will be a great mistake to
start it in April next, especially if we want to do Gujarat. He
thinks that we would lose at least Rs. 10,000 thereby. All the
States are more or less groaning under the effects of famine and
he is strongly of opinion that the collection should be undertaken
in December or January next. I place his views before you for
what they may be worth.
Plague is raging in several parts of Kattywar.
Please remember me to Professor Ray.
Please excuse the dirty typing. The typewriter is quite
different from the excellent one I had there. My things have
not yet arrived from Calcutta.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original : C.W. 3722
