330. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Not revised
August 16, 1934
CHI. MIRA,
I wrote to you on Tuesday, 7th, after commencing the fast.
Today is Thursday, the third day of the breaking of the fast. The
last day was one of physical torture. It was well perhaps it was
so. What was the penance worth, if it did not cause me any phy-
sical suffering? The phrase joy of suffering has no meaning if
there is no suffering felt. I knew on Monday more fully than be-
fore the meaning of the phrase joy of suffering. I am the richer
for the treasure which I would not have missed for a kingdom.
There it was. As I am writing this, I feel the strength slowly
coming. I have settled down to this after having walked a few
paces on the terrace with Vasumati's help. She and Amtul Salaam
and Amala have been with me all the time. Prabhavati is of course
there. She has slaved during these days. I cannot understand where
she gets all the strength from. She seems never tired. Amala is as
mad as ever. But she is better with me than elsewhere.
Don't be sorry or angry that I have not yet written to Mr.
Maxwell about the prisoners. The thing has never been out of
my mind but want of time has prevented me from doing it.
You remember the green canvas bag which contained my
dictionary, Gita, Bhajanavali and such other things. That and the
green khadi bag I can't trace anywhere. I thought that you had
put them together with the other things in Wardha. The bundle
of khadi too which you put at Lady Thakersey's is missing.
It is strange you have not been keeping quite fit there. I do
hope you are not denying yourself the fresh fruit and salad which
are necessary there to keep oneself in a fit condition for strenuous
work.
Your account of your visit to your Oxford cousin is entertain-
ing. Somehow or other the oval Italian face is very attractive
to me. Your beautiful description of the baby therefore does not
surprise me.
Jamnalalji will be having an operation for his ear trouble to-
day in Bombay. Janakibehn, Om and Mahadev have gone to
Bombay for the purpose.
This letter will probably contain the
result of the operation.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6295. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9761
