75. LETTER TO DURGA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
January 4, 1931
CHI. DURGA,
It is 7 o'clock on Sunday morning just now. It is extre-
mely cold. The hands shake, but I cannot give myself a holiday
from writing. After I have finished this letter, I will start the
spinning yajna. You have done well in starting the experiment
of eating oranges. While it continues, write to me regularly.
Tell me in detail the effect which it has. Weigh yourself from
time to time. Enemas will also have to be continued. I suppose
you take sun-baths too. If you have enough strength, you should
slowly walk about a little.
Now for Mahadev:
I don't hope at all to leave this place with any new discovery
about the spinning-wheel. Along with enthusiasm, one must have
knowledge of the craft, too, which I don't possess. I shall be
satisfied if I can make sufficient changes which will enable me to
increase my speed. I do feel that one can acquire good speed
despite one's age. If, however, the nerves of my hands have be-
come weak, the speed will not increase. But I do make changes
from time to time to see if they help me to increase my speed.
I see that I displayed great wisdom in not going to England des-
pite Sastri's view that I should go. Really speaking, it required
no wisdom to come to that decision. My heart simply did not
consent, however much I tried to persuade myself. The reins are
held by that Master of the Play. Why, then, need we worry at
all? On the contrary, we should daily leave the reins more and
more in His hands and strengthen His hands.
If any trace of fissure is noticed, [he] should immediately take
steps to cure it. And [he] should not give up milk or ghee. It
is our duty to obtain whatever facilities we can get and which
are essential for our health. If we clearly see that we hold the
body as a trust, that it is not our own, we shall think no more
about the problem. It is good that Devdas has been working at
Sanskrit to increase his proficiency in it. Mahadev will be able to
help him in that. My blessings to all prisoners. Pyarelal spins
daily 375 rounds on the spinning-wheel and 100 on the takli,
and the work takes up the whole of the morning and an hour and
a half in the afternoon.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16900
