433. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
DIBRUGARH,
[On or after April 19, 1934]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have all your letters. What reply can we make to
Amrita Bazar Patrika? The articles it carries are heavily spiced.
And it is not that one always writes what one believes.
If you
want to write in order to explain things to friends it can be done in
some other way.
The Award problem is very tough indeed. Something is
possible if the Mussalmans accept the way I have shown.
Even
if they do not, the path is quite straight.
But I am afraid the
Swarajists will not approve of it. I do not find today an atmo-
sphere conducive to the achieving of Hindu-Muslim-Sikh unity.
I have independently examined the question of Council-entry.
I feel that the Congress will always have in it a group favouring
Council-entry. It is this group which should have the reins of the
Congress, for it alone needs the label of the Congress. This fact I
have accepted for all time. Those very people will boycott the
Councils when they find it necessary.
There are many difficulties connected with Council-entry.
Decisions on these will be taken when the time comes, mistakes
will be committed, some will be rectified, some will not be and
things will go on like that.
I for one prefer Ranchi to Calcutta. That it is not convenient
for other people is another matter. The peace Ranchi offers is an
impossibility in Calcutta. But I have left it to Rajendrababu.
I shall read your address to the Federation and communicate
to you my opinion.
If the meeting is held in Ranchi and if you can come, do.
It might be for the good though I cannot say definitely. I hope
Gopi and Gajanan are getting along well.
Blessings from
BAPU
1 Gandhiji was in Dibrugarh on April 19 and 20.
[PS.]
Babu Raghavdas gave the enclosed. There is certainly need
for training Hindi instructors. The scheme seems good on the
face of it.
If with the expenditure suggested Hindi-Prachar
workers can be trained it is all to the good.
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 6120. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
