100. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
MAHABALESHWAR,
May 3, 1945
CHI. MANI,
I got your letter. It is clear.
As regards your fasts, I suggest that you should undertake
them only for reasons of health. You will then come to know about
yourself, profit from it spiritually too and be emancipated from
superstition or insincerity. It is quite absurd to think that we
should at least fast in memory of Ba or Mahadev if we cannot do
anything more. They would surely be distressed at this if they
could know about it. When we lose a dear one, we should do
something difficult and at the same time dear to them. We might
cultivate a sweetness of temper like Mahadev's or faith like Ba's.
I have cited these as two illustrations which readily come to my
mind. We can think of more. If only we realize that the body
is the temple of God, or rather the instrument of God-realization,
all will be well with us. Then the fraud which now passes for
religion will cease. I take all this trouble to explain things to you
because you are simple in habits and have resisted many tempta-
tions. I know that you would be able to achieve much more if
you could rise higher in all respects.
And that is why I wish to draw you here or to the Ashram.
Father too feels that way, and that makes me all the more eager
to attract you. If Father was out of prison neither you nor I
would desire that even for a single moment you should be any-
where else but by his side. If you are near me, you will grow
in tolerance, for this is a place where one has to cultivate detach-
ment in spite of having to adjust oneself to different tempera-
ments. This means that we should always be ready to learn
from others. We should observe people, emulate their virtues and
bear with their weaknesses for that is the best way of curing them.
And, therefore, come soon.
You did well to give me news of Nandubehn, Diwan Master
and [Dr.] Kanuga.
It is nearly morning now and I am about to put out the
light. I will, therefore, stop here.
Blessings to everybody there.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. MANIBEHN PATEL
C/O SHRI DAHYABHAI PATEL
MARINE LINES, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 134-
