44. LETTER TO D. HANUMANTHARAO
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 21, 1926
MY DEAR HANUMANTHARAO,
I have now been given some of the old correspondence for
disposal. In this file I find two letters from you which came in
January. All these letters have been hitherto withheld from me
owing to my illness and convalescence.
I have written to Krishna yesterday regarding the Ashram.
Mr. Rustomjee being dead there is nothing coming to us from
that source. The fund at the disposal of the All-India Spinners
Association has also practically run out. Not therefore until further
funds are collected will it be possible to send anything to Krishna.
It is a pity but there is no help for it at the present moment.
You have written to me about two friends. I do not know
what can be done for them just now. The Ashram is over-crowded
at the present moment and I almost fear it will remain so
whilst I am here. I am seriously thinking of putting up some more
buildings and yet it is a matter for consideration whether it is worth
while doing so if I am to remain a fixture at the Ashram only
during this year. What is the use of building new rooms just for
a temporary purpose? For immediately I am on the move, pro-
bably, the new-corners will go away. Will the friends then wait
for this year? I know it is a long time but I do not [ see] what
else I can do. Do you suggest anything? I am not writing any-
thing directly to them but leave you to do what is necessary.
Now about the diet. We, food reformers, have a way of argu-
ing somewhat loosely. I do not think our observations about the
of salt on the system are really accurate or in any way
complete. Not that doctors are much better but there are scien-
tists amongst them who have undoubtedly made great researches
and the testimony in favour of salt as a necessary article of diet
is overwhelming. As it is not producing an evil effect on me, I
do not feel justified in revising the advice of those doctors for
whom I have very high regard. The spiritual value of abstaining
from salt is undoubtedly great and on that account I do not feel
inclined to write anything to correct what I had written in my
booklet on diet. But as to its effect on the body, my view is shaken.
If I was young,
I would enforce the desire, such as never
thought out in me [sic] to study medical science and then support
the conclusions that we hold through that science. That, how-
ever, must be left to the future reformer. Even as it is, I omit
salt very often. But for religious abstention, you will have to
give me more convincing arguments than you have done.
Your argument about the sea is surely wrong only because
more than three-fourth of the globe is covered over with the un-
fathomable ocean and you will not gainsay the testimony of
science that if we had no sea-water this globe would be uninha-
bitable. Take Africa-the whole of the belt near the sea which
surrounds it on three sides is inhabited and the people are strong,
healthy and robust.
I am glad you have silenced the Christian friend. It is sad to
think that people unconsciously imagine things to have happened
that suit their purpose. When are you going to become strong
yourself?
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14113
