176. LETTER TO NANABHAI BHATT
THE ASHRAM,
Monday, July 19, 1926
BHAI NANABHAI,
Your letter is an exercise for me. Narahari has quoted to
you from Shri Mahadev's reply to his letter. Narahari had said
that neither pupils nor parents cared for our education and that
by and by all of them would join Government schools, that they
did not seem keen on wearing khadi or enthusiastic about our
aims. My reply to this argument was that, if in any school
pupils refused to abide by our rules, they should leave it. The rules
include wearing of khadi, non-observance of the practice of un-
touchability, etc. I had these circumstances in mind when I asked
Mahadev to write and say that Narahari had remained in Surat
of his own free will. I had asked for his services for only three
or four months. I know Narahari's unsteady nature. Following
the principle that one's own sphere of work, though small, is good
for one's spiritual development, I said that Sarbhon was the
right place for him, but that, if he preferred, he could remain in
Surat. After this, my responsibility was over. I do not order, I
only advise. I have left it to you to order. I explained what
I would do if I were a teacher. Others may follow that course and
do the best they can, or do nothing if they can do no more. I
have done my duty in offering the bride to the groom at the
wedding; it is none of my business to run the house for her. As
the bride's father, however, I may certainly advise her from time
to time. But I have understood the difference between your point
of view and mine. You believe in national education plus khadi,
etc. I say that national education itself means khadi and the other
things. This is for the first time that you have mentioned this
difference. What you understand by national education, apart
from these three things, you may explain to me when you are
here. Or you may write to me about it.
I would not adopt the method of the missionaries nor that
which is supposed to be followed in Islam. Our religion teaches
me a third way. I would show the article I offered and state its
price, leaving it to the people to buy it at that price. This
course decides the question of fitness, and the foundation remains
firmly that of truth. The measure of my right angle does not vary
according to circumstances; if, however, people cannot fit them-
selves in it, the fault is not mine, nor with the right angle nor
with those people. But all this is neither here nor there. Consi-
der my views, but decide for yourself and act accordingly. If
Narahari wishes, he can remain in Sur at. You may insist on khadi
to the limit you and he think best. My views will remain what
they are, till you can change them.
Mama is wonderful. Write and explain to him that in a
sense the issue is, and in a sense it is not, one between agriculture
and other work. I can have no prejudice against agriculture. But
I do not look upon agriculture as a necessary part of our service
of the Antyajas, and so I cannot but feel when even one pice has
to be spent on agriculture, since in spending it we leave our
sphere of work.
BAPU
[PS.]
If the handwriting is illegible, send for me to help you
read it when airplanes come into use. You can send this letter
to Narahari. To Mama, only this paragraph.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19933
