503. LETTER TO MADELEINE ROLLAND
January 6, 1933
MY DEAR MADELEINE,
It was a great joy to receive your brief letter, especially as it
recalled the precious days of communion with you all. It was
like meeting members of one's family.
If the events at the time of the late fast were a miracle, as
they were, it was purely God's work. I was but a very humble
instrument in His hands. At no stage did I feel that I was do-
ing anything. I simply could not do it, but when I said that it
was God working through me, it was literally true, as far as my
knowledge went.
But I observe from your great and good brother's telegram
to Devdas that people on the Continent had not understood the
contemplated second fast. I don't wonder at it. The whole con-
ception seems to be so new, and yet it appears to me to be the
logical outcome of a prayerful search after truth. There is no
prayer without fasting, and fasting which is not an integral part
of prayer is mere torture of the flesh doing no good to anyone.
Such fasting is an intense spiritual effort, a spiritual striving. It
is a penance and a process of self-purification. True fast gene-
rates a silent unseen force which may, if it is of requisite strength
and purity, pervade all mankind. I have seen its unseen pervasive
effect on a small scale but sufficiently large to know that it is a
mighty force. It was in this instance an inevitable step in the pro-
secution of the campaign against untouchability. I would have
been false to myself, to my companion Kelappan, and to the
1 A copy of this letter was sent to Mirabehn.
2 Gandhiji's fast of September 1932; vide Vol. LI.
3 Romain Rolland
cause of the Harijans, if I had faltered. At the present moment,
however, it stands indefinitely postponed. Even now, perhaps,
I have not made myself clear. It is difficult to do so. But I
have no hesitation in saying that time will prove the correctness
of the step, and in any case for me it was a call from God which
I could not resist. If a further explanation is necessary, please
do not hesitate to write to me.
I have been trying to find out a suitable adjective for your
brother. To write of him to you as 'Mons. Rolland' or as 'your
brother' sounds too prosaic and distant. To describe him as
simple 'brother' is too familiar and does not convey adequately
the existing relationship. The two words that come to me are
'rishi' or 'the sage'. They are almost synonymous terms but not
identical in meaning. Subject therefore to his and your approval,
I am going henceforth to describe him as 'the Rishi'. I hope
that this letter will find him in full possession of his normal health.
I am afraid one dare not hope for perfect health for him. He will
not give it all that chance. It would mean concentration on
physical health at the expense of concentration on his historical
researches, and with him historical is also spiritual, or else he would
not be a rishi. Please tell the Rishi that some months ago I had
for the first time his volumes on Ramakrishna and Vivekananda.
The reading gave me great joy and enabled me more fully than
before to get a measure of his love for India.
Mira and I exchange weekly letters. She is quite happy in her
rest house. She is studying Hindi, reading the Mahabharata and
the Ramayana, and at the present moment she is reading Dr.
Gour's work on Buddhism. She is keeping her health and making
dietetic experiments. There is no restriction about her diet. She
is therefore able to get what she requires. She gets also one or
two papers and whatever non-political books she may need.
Mahadev Desai is with me. The two others you do not
know personally. Love to you both from us both.
From a copy: C.W. 6258. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9724
