381. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
December 25, 1932
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter for which I have been waiting all this time.
I hope you have passed on the result of your examination of the
Kirloskar Wheel to Shankarlal. I have already told you what
passed between Dr. Bidhan and myself. I saw that, contrary to
expectations, he resented what he regarded as my interference. I
therefore unhesitatingly withdrew my letter and apologized.
That was the only thing open to me to do. I had no business to
interfere except on the assumption that anything I said would be
welcomed as a friendly suggestion. When therefore it was not,
I had to tender apology and withdraw. You will now do exact-
ly as your conscience leads you. Let me not guide you in such
a delicate matter from this distance.
I do not mind the uttermost renunciation from you, but it
must be from perfect assimilation, and the test of assimilation
would be that it would give you perennial joy, there would be not
a trace of anxiety in your face, and therefore in your mind. What
is more, Hemprabha should go with you heart and soul and the
result of such life should be freedom from illness. With you two,
illness cannot be the result of dietetic error. It can only be the
result of unconscious anxiety, if not even conscious. Mental worry
and anxiety are as responsible for human illnesses as wrong air,
wrong water, and wrong diet; but a life of natural, joyful renuncia-
tion has been known even to overcome compulsory limitations
about air, water and food. Men of God have been found in
utter destitution, in swamps with pestilential air, dirty water and
wretched food to sustain them, and yet they have kept their health
for prolonged periods and carried on their work. It is related of
Mahomed that when a disciple questioned him about his own pro-
longed fasts and his prohibition to his followers against under-
taking more than the regulation fasts, he said he was fed by God
when he was fasting and therefore did not even know the privation,
but such was not the case with the followers. Whether the tradi-
1 Vide "Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta", p. 227.
2 Vide "Letter to Dr. B. C. Roy", pp. 201-.
282
tion has a historical basis or not, what has been related is a perma-
nent truth, verifiable by anybody, subject of course to the condi-
tions laid down. Not having the capacity myself for such utter-
most renunciation and being still dependent upon pure air, pure
water and suitable food for retaining my health, I am incompe-
tent to advise you. I can therefore only warn you against a
hasty leap in the dark. I take it that you will not refuse mone-
tary help if it comes in due course and without door-to-door beg-
ging. Will it not be wise of Hemprabha to do what was done
for you, to come down to Poona and take rest, if necessary, for
full one month if the climate is found suitable for her constitu-
tion? I dread the prospect of her developing beriberi. Let her not
give up writing to me because you are there.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1620
