442. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
SEGAON, WARDHA,
February 3, 1938
DEAR MR. JINNAH,
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru told me yesterday that you were
complaining to the Maulana Sahib about the absence of any
reply from me to your letter of 5th November in reply to one
of 19th October.
The letter was received by me when I was
pronounced by the doctors to be seriously ill in Calcutta. The
letter was shown to me three days after its receipt. Had I
thought it necessarily called for a reply, even though I was ill
I would have sent one. I have re-read the letter. I still think
that there was nothing useful that I could have said in reply.
But, in a way, I am glad that you awaited a reply. Here it is.
Mr. Kher told me definitely that he had a private message
from you. He delivered it to me when I was alone. I could
have sent you a verbal message in reply, but in order to give
you a true picture of my mental state I sent you the short note.
There was nothing to hide in it. But I did feel, as I still do,
that the way in which you used it came upon me as a painful
surprise.
You complain of my silence. The reason for my silence is
literally and truly in my note. Believe me, the moment I can
do something that can bring the two communities together no-
thing in the world can prevent me from so doing.
You seem to deny that your speech was a declaration of war,
but your latter pronouncements too confirm the first impression.
How can I prove what is a matter of feeling? In your speeches
I miss the old nationalist. When in 1915 I returned from the
self-imposed exile in South Africa, everybody spoke of you as
one of the staunchest of nationalists and the hope of both Hin-
dus and Mussalmans. Are you still the same Mr. Jinnah? If
you say you are, in spite of your speeches I shall accept your
word.
Lastly, you want me to come forward with some proposal.
What proposal can I make except to ask you on bended knees
to be what I had thought you were. But the proposal to form a
basis of unity between the two communities has surely got to come
from you.
This is again not for publication but for your eyes. It is
the cry of a friend, not of an opponent.
Yours sincerely,
M . K . GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1938
