534. LETTER TO PARMANANDA K. KAPADIA
January 8, 1933
The explanation about Guruvayur is contained in your own
statement. It is literally true that the issue is an offshoot of the
withdrawal of the Cabinet decision. Ever since I came to
India, I have been impressing on people the importance of a
pledge, but I see that it is not readily accepted even by persons
like you. At the time of the withdrawal of the decision, a
pledge was taken in the name of the people under the leadership
of a great man like Malaviyaji. Can we now forget the pledge even
for a moment and still hope to win swaraj? People should now act
with a greater sense of urgency for the removal of untouchability
than they thought it necessary to do for the withdrawal of the
decision. It would not matter if they do not succeed imme-
diately. But the tempo of this campaign should be faster than that
of the movement for the withdrawal of the decision. Why do
you believe that swaraj is something apart from the eradication
of untouchability? Swaraj is not like a straight rod. It is rather
like a banyan tree. The latter has innumerable branches each of
which is as important for the tree as the original trunk. Feeding
any of them means feeding the tree. Nobody can lay down a rule
as to which of the branches should be fed when. Circumstances
determine that.
Kelappan's mistake was a very small one. If, after having
persuaded him to give up his fast, I had abandoned him, I am
sure all of you would have left me in the end. Anybody who for-
sakes an humble co-worker at a difficult hour is a man of straw.
Your other questions can be convincingly answered, but
they lie outside the limits of my present freedom. If I am alive,
I will explain them some other time. My fasts never spring from
despair or frustration. They have their source in my undying opti-
mism and intense faith. Nor are they as cheap as you think. If
the last fast had not been postponed, I would have violated
dharma. But I cannot explain all this fully just now. The fact is
that I am making my experiment in the quest of truth along a
new line altogether. New ideas, therefore, occur to me at every
step-they are new even to me-and are placed before the nation.
How can all of them be understood by the people immediately?
399
And I also cannot explain them freely. But truth does not
require many words to explain it-if in fact it requires any. It
has the power of spreading by itself, like the fragrance of a flower.
The difference between the two is that fragrance disappears as
quickly as it spreads, whereas truth continues to spread indefi-
nitely and with even greater speed. Since we cannot measure
that speed, we make the mistake of believing that truth does not
spread. You should, therefore, have patience and faith and never
give way to despair.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 27-
