230. LETTER TO ANANDSHANKAR B. DHRUVA
July 30, 1936
SUJNA BHAISHRI (PROF. DHRUVA)4,
I have carefully gone through both your letters to Maha-
dev. What I want is not something for the learned but some-
thing which Harijans and workers can understand and put into
practice. I do not want you to make a fresh study, but only
that from your wide knowledge you should send me something
which you can write in . . .5 hours or at the most in eight
hours.
I had already written to you that I liked your book on
Hindu religion very much. I will certainly read it again. But
I do not want extracts from anything. For a moment imagine
yourself among Harijans in a village, converse with the old men,
women and children and teach them religion. I want whatever
is available in this way and it should have your stamp. Mahadev
won't even translate it into English. The testimonial you give him
is deserved, but first he hasn't the time and then I want your lang-
uage. It is not beyond you to write simple English and finally
you will grant the two of us the right to make some suggestions.
Won't you? The suggestions will be put into the writing only
if you approve of them.
Now about your programme. Going through it I am
scared. At the moment Gujarat or Hindu religion does not
require scholarship. That will not save either religion or India
or Gujarat. I do not mean to say that there is absolutely no
need for scholarship. There are many who will give us scho-
larly writings. But there are very few religious enthusiasts who
would make themselves one with the people. I have believed
that you are one of them. You have given quite a big share
of your scholarship to the scholars and the educated. But
what have you given to the villagers and persons like me? A
person like me would steal something from what you have given
to the educated. But that does not amount to giving. Do what
Tolstoy did. In his old age he had before his eyes the un-
known peasants of Russia and the literature he produced for
them will live for ever. Can't I expect something like that from
you?
Be that as it may. I have said whatever I wanted to. I did
not want to write so much. Accept whatever appeals to you
and throwaway the rest. I won't feel unhappy. Why should
a beggar feel shy? Donors will only give according to their
wishes and means.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
