34. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
Wednesday [On or before December 29, 1909]
DEAR MR. WEST,
Without going into the argument, the following is my opinion.
Health — As to sanitation, I will say nothing. I have already
given my opinion as to medical expenses. Reasonable medical expenses
of all should come out of the business. What is reasonable should be
decided in each case separately in consultation with the patient. The
scheme is based on mutual trust and we must expect everyone not to
wilfully fall ill or to wilfully ask us to incur expenses. If I do not want
a doctor, I cannot impose the idea on others. In coming to this con-
clusion, I fancy that the ordinary law of human life is health and not
sickness. If Dr. Nanji will not come to Phoenix, another doctor may be
consulted.
The School — The school should vegetate and as to the material,
Mr. Gora may be asked as to what he proposes to do with it. I suggest
1 The letter seems to have been written after Gandhiji's return from England
and before the size of Indian Opinion was changed, which was done on January 1, 1910.
2 Vide "Letter to A. H. West", pp. 80-.
3 An Indian physician of Durban, who often treated those at Phoenix including
Mrs. Gandhi
4Ismail Gora, Acting President, Anjuman Islam Society, Durban
your personally seeing him. For the present, Purshotamdas alone may
do what he can for the school.
Indian Opinion — The size should be changed as suggested. No
apology need be offered in the paper for it. The English columns should
be reduced. No leading matter of opinion [be] given for the present
except explanatory notes. All matter should be severely condensed.
Energy should be devoted to the art of condensing. It may be divided
into Passive Resistance, Natal notes, Cape notes, etc. Reports of Bombay
and other meetings may be considerably shortened. Original papers from
which condensation is made should, if possible, be kept pasted in book
form. The English columns then should simply give news on the dis-
abilities throughout South Africa and about matters we are interested
in. When Mr. Polak returns, he may enlarge the scope and size if funds
then permit. Mr. Kallenbach should be advised as to how much will
be required monthly under this heading, the ideal being not to ask
for any support at all. The Gujarati columns ought not to be reduced,
but if the Gujarati subscribers fall off, even that may be reduced al-
most to any extent, you there, in Mr. Polak's and my absence, being
the sole judge.
You may put a limit to the credit for subscribers. Mr. Dawd
Mahomed and such others foreign or local may be placed on the com-
plimentary or separate list, so that we know that we have to collect
from them. You may cut about the complimentary list as you think
fit.
As to libels, you need not fear or bother. All facts, you cannot vouch
for, should be signed by those who give them—no law need be read
on it just now. If I find a simple book, I shall send it. No legal adviser
is necessary. But in emergency, Mr. Khan will advise.
Scheme —All except Kababhai and Mrs. West should be invited
to join the scheme or leave. I am so firmly of this opinion that I would
do away with the Kaffir labour. We would simply do what we can
with the schemers and no more. All should be voters. They should
appoint a sub[com]mittee or managers—the final veto being retained
to me. Personally I feel inclined to treat Mrs. West and Kababhai
too as schemers with full rights except as to the drawings. All decisions
to be by votes of majority, pure and simple. You may frame rules for
guiding deliberations and defining the duties of the sub-committee and
managers.
A wife working in the Press does not forfeit the privileges of a
schemer's wife.
I send herewith draft for £75 which please place to my credit.
Mr. Kallenbach has seen this letter.
Mr. Sam's papers will be returned to him with the cession of the
bond cancelled.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[P.S.]
There is no one now in Johannesburg who can go out collecting.
I suggest Mr. Cordes coming out for collections. Periodical visits should
be paid. No reliance should be placed on the Johannesburg office as to
collections. I shall endeavour to bring up the deficit in the capital
a/c as quickly as possible.
M.K.G.
[PP.S.]
I have endorsed the draft.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4410
Courtesy: A. H. West
