384. LETTER TO T. S. KALYANA RAMA IYER
December 25, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your long letter. You are at liberty to pub-
lish your own letter and this reply.
In the first place, it seems to me that you have misconstrued
the proposed Bill. It is not sought to impose the views of a mino-
rity on the majority, but it is sought to restore the condition as it
was before the decisions of Courts gave a permanent legal effect
to a custom. Whilst a particular custom is in vogue without at
any stage being made permanent by decisions of a Court or by
legislation, it becomes stagnant and is not liable to the gradual
and imperceptible change that every healthy custom undergoes
in process of time and under pressure of the demand of the public
governed by that particular custom. The proposed Bill will so
alter the Court-made Law as to make it possible for the public
interested by a majority to change the then existing custom. Ins-
tances are not wanting in Hinduism to prove that even the inter-
pretations of accepted Shastras have suffered evolution, so much
so that in some cases the original meaning has completely gone into
disuse. All the fears that you have described in your letter are in
my opinion groundless for the reason I have stated.
You will admit that there are rival schools of interpretation
of the Agamas, as also there are Shastris who question the authenti-
city of certain Agamas. If Hinduism was not in a decaying condi-
tion, we would not find those versed in Vedic lore supine, whilst
gross superstition is defiling a religion that was once pure and had
inherent capacity for continually throwing out impurities and res-
ponding to the call of the age. I can only give you my assu-
rance that I have no desire whatsoever to do violence to Hindu
public feeling or to ignore the Shastras on which Hinduism is
based. I have, however, reserved to myself the right to deter-
mine according to my light the choice of interpretation in the
midst of a variety, or even in all humility to give a new inter-
pretation where in rare instances I feel the capacity for it, and this
practice is quite consistent with the spirit of Hinduism. We would
not have a variety of interpretations and make them acceptable
to a large number of Hindus, not always ignorant of Shastras.
You say that whenever an idol is polluted, all that is needed
to restore its purity is to do so by authorized purification. Since
there is no method of guarding an idol against pollution by the
surreptitious entry of an untouchable or others who are prohi-
bited from entering a particular temple, and since there is no in-
fallible method of detecting intruders before they come within
the pollution distance, does it not follow that the ceremony of
purification has to be gone through every day in order to retain
the efficacy of the idol?
Again, how would you guard against the so-called untouch-
ables declining to be classed as such and insisting upon being classi-
fied as savarna Hindus at the next census? Do you contemplate
courts of inquisition for determining the birth-status of tens
of thousands of Hindus? If the Agamas, or rather the custo-
dians of the Agamas, were at all alive to their trust, they would
recognize the spirit of the age and draw from the very Shastras
a meaning consistent with it.
From a copy: S.N. 18815
