32. LETTER TO A VILLAGE WORKER
[Before October 12, 1935]
You will borrow cotton this season, but next year you must
grow your own cotton. Anyone will permit you to grow a few
cotton trees in his field. The seed should be the tree cotton or
devakapas. It lasts for ten to fifteen years and the cotton, I am
told, does not need to be carded. I have not used the cotton
myself but propose to do so.
You are right that I did not like your leaving your place
even for a couple of days. I did not like it because it is a pas-
time with you, and the best discipline for you is to settle down
quietly and work away uninterruptedly for a year. A villager
absorbed in his work has no time to go on friendly visits. We must
try to emulate him. You must therefore make it a rule not
to move out beyond a radius of ten miles. It is impossible to get
under the skin of the villagers until one lives in their midst all
the twenty-four hours for an unbroken period. The moment you
relax the rule, you will find excuses for going.
To be free from filth and the dog nuisance is certainly neces-
sary, but one may not run away from them. Everyone cannot
go out of his house and find conveniences for himself. One has
also to cultivate that sense of cleanliness in others. One must not
therefore shun people.
One cannot serve them from a safe dis-
tance. I know this is easier said than done, and if you cannot
sleep in the midst of these nuisances you will continue to repair
to the fields. I do not want you to do anything at the risk of
your health.
Yes, you may have in course of time a grass hut, but it
should not be far from the village. The people must be free to
call upon us at all hours of the day and night. We must always
be within easy call. The fact that you leave the village at 7 p.m.
every day means that you deprive the villagers of the chance of
talking to you and seeking your advice after supper, and that
you will not hold even an hour's night-school. You see the diffi-
culty of Ashram inmates serving in the villages. The Ashram life
and rules might easily become a luxury. We must realize that the
villagers do not enjoy most of the amenities we enjoy with all
our much-talked-of simplicity and renunciation. Man is natu-
rally apt to turn every renunciation into a joy. Sannyasa which
connotes the highest renunciation has become today the biggest
source of laziness and indulgence for many!
The scavengers will slowly understand your work of love. You
must make them understand that you do not want to oust them,
but to improve their efficiency. You must also find out for them
more sources of income.
Because my recent renunciation was a source of pang, it need
not have grieved you. The pang was a source of joy, and such
pangs are inevitable.
Harijan, 12-10-1935
