158. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
February 20, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS1,
I am glad that you have gone to the Ashram. I wrote that
to Kamu many years ago. Doctors are now gradually coming
to the conclusion that all diseases have one common cause and
that, therefore, their main remedy also should be one. If any-
body disregards modifications of that one remedy, that would not
do him much or any harm. It might be said that the disease was
not cured. But what even if the disease is cured? Surely the body
does not become immune to death. Hence, if anybody sticks to
only one remedy with faith, he commits no sin.
This is also true about spiritual maladies. The cause is al-
ways one, and that is the ego. The remedy also is one-giving up
the ego, that is, reducing oneself to a cipher. How will one who
is a cipher steal? How will he tell a lie or commit adultery?
The very questions you have asked spring from ignorance. Let
us take just one example. Of course you do not steal in the ordi-
nary sense, but you are right in thinking that your lack of con-
trol in eating is a form of stealing. The remedy for this kind
of stealing and the ordinary kind must be the same, that is, to
give up the habit, to stop eating what you should not. But who is
it that eats such food? The ego-self. Once that has vanished, the
other self, though eating, will not be eating and will only give
the body its wages. There will be no more question, then, of in-
dulging the palate. Probably you will accept all this with your
reason, but it will have meaning only if it sinks into the heart.
We live in the Ashram and seek good company, sing bhajans, etc.,
daily, in order that this truth may sink into the heart. Some
day we shall find what we are seeking. In other words, our malady
in the form of the ego will be cured. From this you should be able
to deduce all the answers, and if you cannot, no matter how much
I write and explain, you will not feel satisfied. Ask me again
and again till your doubts are resolved.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3753
