320. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
NADIAD,
June 30, 1918
MY DEAR ESTHER,
I had no time to write to you ere this. I wonder if you have
read all I have been writing and saying just now. What am I
to advise a man to do who wants to kill but is unable owing to his
being maimed? Before I can make him feel the virtue of not kill-
ing, I must restore to him the arm he has lost. I have always ad-
vised young Indians to join the army, but have hitherto refrained
from actively asking them to do so, because I did not feel suffi-
ciently interested in the purely political life of the country or in
the war itself. But a different and difficult situation faced me in
Delhi. I felt at once that I was playing with the greatest problem
of life in not tackling the question of joining the army seriously.
Either we must renounce the benefits of the State or help it to
the best of our ability to prosecute the war. We are not ready to
renounce. Indians have a double duty to perform. If they are to
preach the mission of peace, they must first prove their ability in
war. This is a terrible discovery but it is true. A nation that is
unfit to fight cannot from experience prove the virtue of not fight-
ing. I do not infer from this that India must fight. But I do say
that India must know how to fight. Ahimsa is the eradication of the
desire to injure or to kill. Ahimsa can be practised only towards
those that are inferior to you in every way. It follows therefore
that to become a full ahimsaist you have to attain absolute per-
fection. Must we all then first try to become Sandows before we
can love perfectly? This seems to be unnecessary. It is enough if
we can face the world without flinching. It is personal courage
that is an absolute necessity. And some will acquire that courage
only after they have been trained to fight. I know I have put the
argument most clumsily. I am passing through new experiences.
I am struggling to express myself. Some things are still obscure to
me. And I am trying to find words for others which are plain to
me. I am praying for light and guidance and am acting with the
greatest deliberation. Do please write and fight every inch of the
ground that to you may appear untenable. That will enable me
to find the way.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
Devdas is in Madras now and, if you are in Madras, you
should meet him. His address is. . . . He is taking Hindi classes.
My Dear Child, pp. 28-
