42. LETTER TO P. S. TO GOVERNOR, BOMBAY
As AT LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
August 25, 1919
DEAR MR. COWIE,
I see that I may not get an interview with H. E. for some
time. I am however anxious to get some pronouncement on swade-
shi from H. E. as early as possible. I, therefore, propose to present
for H. E.'s consideration my conception of and arguments on
swadeshi. I do hope he will make time for reading it and, if possible,
be pleased to comply with my request made at the end of the
argument.
SWADESHI
Swadeshi as conceived by me consists in producing cloth
enough for the wants of India and in distributing it; and for the
purpose of stimulating home production, it consists in inducing
people to pledge themselves to the use of swadeshi cloth only, the
right being retained where necessary to continue the use of foreign
cloth at present in possession of the pledgee/votary. The swadeshi
is conceived only as a religious and an economic necessity; and
although it is fraught with political consequences of a lofty, moral
type in order that all may take part in it, the swadeshi propa-
ganda is restricted to the religious and economic aspects only.
Swadeshi goods can be produced either through spinning and
weaving mills or by hand-spinning and hand-weaving. At the
present moment, we are concentrating on hand-spinning and
hand-weaving.
ARGUMENT
We are so doing because the need of the peasantry, i.e., 73
p.c. of the population, is an industry supplementary to agriculture.
This population has nearly four months in the year practically
idle on its hands. A hundred years ago, the majority of the
women of India spun yarn either for profit or for pleasure and
1 Gandhiji had asked for an appointment; vide "Letter to P. S. to
Governor, Bombay", 19-8-1919.
thousands upon thousands of professional weavers wove cloth enough
for home consumption. Whether the same can be done today,
or not, it is unnecessary to inquire. It is beyond question that
if these millions of peasants can be induced to take to spinning and
weaving, it will materially decrease the economic drain and en-
able them to supplement their earnings. My own experience in
several centres and among hundreds of women tells me that they
are glad enough to revive the occupation of spinning and to
get a few coppers. I know that they were a blessing to many poor
women of Vijapur during the late famine. About 150 women,
in that village alone, are today spinning about half a maund of
yarn per day and getting on an average three pice each, enough
for them to buy milk for their children. I consider hand-spinning
and hand-weaving as an automatic famine insurance. Only last
Friday I was surprised to find Miss Latham of East Khandesh tell-
ing me that the women of that district were pining for some home
occupation that would enable them to turn a few honest coppers.
All that is necessary is to provide them with cheap spinning-wheels
and with dressed cotton. Arrangements have already been made
on a limited scale to supply both these things. Both men and
women are taking up the idea eagerly, but the thing can move far
more rapidly if the movement receives patronage from high
places.
REQUEST
I, therefore, request as follows :
1. H. E. may be pleased to give us a letter for publication
approving of the swadeshi movement and especially of the intro-
duction of hand-spinning and hand-weaving.
2. The Registrar of Co-operative Societies may be authorized
to encourage hand-spinning and hand-weaving and devise means
therefor.
3. Collectors and other officials may be advised to encourage
the movement and especially to encourage the cultivators to take
up hand-spinning and hand-weaving.
4. And if it is not a presumption, I would respectfully ask
H. E. on my behalf to secure Lady George Lloyd's patronage for my
spinning classes. Several titled ladies are, with a view to en-
couraging the industry among the poor classes, taking spinning les-
sons. I would consider it an honour to be allowed to present a
spinning-wheel to Her Excellency and to send her a lady teacher
or to give her the lessons myself. I may mention that the art of
spinning is incredibly simple to learn.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten copy : S. N. 6826
