356. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 17, 1928
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I must dictate and save time and give rest to my aching
shoulder. I wrote to you on Sunday about Fenner Brockway.
I hope you got that letter in due time.
Do you know that it was because you were the chief partner
in the transactions referred to that I wrote the articles you have
criticized, except of course about the so-called 'All-India Exhibition'?
I felt a kind of safety that, in view of the relations between you
and me, my writings would be taken in the spirit in which they
were written. However, I see that they were a misfire all round.
I do not mind it. For, it is evident that the articles alone could
deliver you from the self-suppression under which you have been
labouring apparently for so many years. Though I was beginning
to detect some differences in viewpoint between you and me, I
had no notion whatsoever of the terrible extent of these differences.
Whilst you were heroically suppressing yourself for the sake of
the nation and in the belief that by working with and under me
in spite of yourself, you would serve the nation and come out
scatheless, you were chafing under the burden of this unnatural
self-suppression. And, while you were in that state, you over-
looked the very things which appear to you now as my serious
blemishes. I could show you from the pages of Young India
equally strong articles written by me, when I was actively guiding
the Congress with reference to the doings of the All-India Congress
Committee. I have spoken similarly at the All-India Congress
Committee meetings whenever there has been irresponsible and
hasty talk or action. But whilst you were under stupefaction
these things did not jar on you as they do now. And it seems to
me, therefore, useless to show you the discrepancies in your letter.
What I am now concerned with is future action.
1 In reply to the addressee's letter, dated 11-1-1928; vide Appendix X.
2 Vide Addenda-2, pp. 545-.
3 Vide "The National Congress", 5-1-1928 and "Independence v. Swaraj",
12-1-1928.
If any freedom is required from me, I give you all the free-
dom you may need from the humble, unquestioning allegiance
that you have given to me for all these years and which I value
all the more for the knowledge I have now gained of your state.
I see quite clearly that you must carry on open warfare against
me and my views. For, if I am wrong I am evidently doing
irreparable harm to the country and it is your duty after having
known it to rise in revolt against me. Or, if you have any doubt
as to the correctness of your conclusion, I shall gladly discuss them
with you personally. The differences between you and me ap-
pear to me to be so vast and radical that there seems to be no
meeting-ground between us. I can't conceal from you my grief
that I should lose a comrade so valiant, so faithful, so able and
so honest as you have always been; but in serving a cause, com-
radeships have got to be sacrificed. The cause must be held
superior to all such considerations. But this dissolution of com-
radeship-if dissolution must come-in no way affects our per-
sonal intimacy. We have long become members of the same
family, and we remain such in spite of grave political differences.
I have the good fortune to enjoy such relations with several
people. To take Sastri for instance, he and I differ in the poli-
tical outlook as poles asunder, but the bond between him and me
that sprung up before we knew the political differences has per-
sisted and survived the fiery ordeals it had to go through.
I suggest a dignified way of unfurling your banner. Write
to me a letter for publication showing your differences. I will
print it in Young India and write a brief reply. Your first letter I
destroyed after reading and replying to it, the second I am keep-
ing, and if you do not want to take the trouble of writing another
letter, I am prepared to publish the letter that is before me. I
am not aware of any offensive passage in it. But if I find any,
you may depend upon my removing every such passage. I con-
sider that letter to be a frank and honest document.
With love,
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 13040; also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 56-
