625. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
February 22, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill was with me yesterday having returned
from Bihar. He has prepared a memorandum which I have glanced
through. I suggested that he should submit it to you. As it was he
had not shown it to the Prime Minister of Bihar. I told him that the
memorandum was incomplete without its being seen by the Prime
Minister. He perceived the appositeness of my remark and said that
he was going to send a copy to the Prime Minister. If he feels that
any of his inferences require correction he would make the correction
and pass it on to you.
1 Vide Vol. LXXXVI, p. 483.
2 Prime Minister of Assam
3 An extract from this letter has been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVII, P..
4 Of the Indian National Army, under whom a group of I. N. A. men
were working in Noakhali
There is one thing which he has recommended, namely, that I should
go to Bihar if only for a few days. As you will see Dr. Mahmud also,
if his report is correct, thinks likewise. I am in constant correspondence
with Dr. Mahmud. I want to check up the statement with him. I am
also writing to the Prime Minister. If he also thinks likewise I will then
interrupt my work here to go to Bihar.
I have seen in the newspapers a statement attributed to you which
reads like a jibe at me. I would not expect that from you. Therefore,
I give you the credit for believing that I have the "Inner Voice" to
which I listen. My belief is that all mankind has it. But the outside
din and noise have practically deadened it for the vast majority of people.
When that voice speaks I shall find myself in Bihar without any further
prompting.
While I am sending this to you I feel I ought not to omit mention
of the fact that things are not as good as they might be and ought
to be. I continue with some caution to worry the officials immediately
concerned.
BENGAL PREMIER
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
