497. LETTER TO SECRETARY, A.I.S.A.
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 15, 1927
I have your letter. I have gone through the agenda. I cannot
think of any addition. The agenda seems to me to be exhaustive.
The draft rules for agencies seem to me to be quite good. I
cannot think of any improvement just now. I do not want to
concentrate upon the work and tax my brain. But they read all
right. If anything arising out of them is referred to me at the
meeting in any definite form, I shall be able to give my opinion.
It will be premature to ask the several khadi centres to communi-
cate with the Central office only through the respective agencies.
That would be an ideal to be reached but after we are better
organized and the necessity for acting through agencies is generally
recognized.
At the present moment we are trying to evolve organized order
out of disorganized work. We have therefore to act after the
style of a family in which the paterfamilias is referred to by the
respective members without any intervention. But in order to
establish the custom of dealing through agencies, we may refer
all the communications we received to the agents wherever
necessary and we may also refer all new correspondence to the
agents. And thirdly we may ask the agents to interest themselves
in the several centres in their jurisdiction even though they may
not be invited by respective centres. The agents may thus create
between the centres and themselves a living bond so that instead
of referring to head office, the centres will of their own accord refer
to the agents. We may for the moment frustrate the end we have
in view, if we impose the condition from above. Also wherever
any centre is recalcitrant and is causing trouble and insists upon
dealing with the head office or not at all, we may impose the
condition of coming through the agent.
As to the Council, I suggest the following without having
given much thought to the thing:
The Council should meet quarterly. At least a week's clear
notice should be received by every member. The week to count
from the date of each member receiving notice at his registered
address. The agenda should contain just the items to be con-
sidered and where, in the opinion of the Secretary, papers are
necessary to be sent, he may do so, and at the foot of the agenda
he may have a general notice to the effect that any member who
wants to have any information about any item on the agenda
will be supplied with the information by the Secretary upon request.
In extraordinary emergencies the sanction of the members may
be ascertained by correspondence whether telegraphic or postal.
Any such decision should be brought before the next ordinary
meeting of the Council. Where even this is not possible the
Secretary and the Chairman may on their own responsibility dis-
pose of matters and in those involving financial obligation, disburse
not more than, say, Rs. 5,000.
It would be certainly convenient for you to come a day or
two before the meeting. There should be however enough time to
give also in the meeting and after the meeting. In any event, all
the members will be in Bangalore up to the third of July at least.
I am assuming that I shall not be asked to be present at the
meeting more than it is absolutely necessary. Though even now
I do considerable amount of work which is all done at my con-
venience with considerable rest during intervals, I am making
steady progress. I note and doctors advise also that the less con-
centrated the work the better it is for me, and in no case should
there be concentrated work.
The Madras Flood Relief money can now be transferred.
Chhaganlal and Swami are being advised. I suggest that the
deposits should not be disturbed but should be adjusted on
maturity so as not to forfeit the interest.
About Mithubehn's letter, I am asking Rajagopalachari about
it. In my opinion, she should be paid as from the Exhibition
Committee. For, the Committee should be the best judge as to
who should come and who should not come. In this instance, the
Committee having invited Mithubehn will most probably tell her
that her expenses will be defrayed by them.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19781
