108. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 3, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I hope you will get without delay the big
packet of letters which I dispatched yesterday.
Read the letter that I have written to Prema. In view of
what I have written in it I will not say anything about the
matter in this letter.
Just now I am thinking about the changes which I suggested
in my letter yesterday.
I have discussed them with Panditji.
Even apart from the question whether the Ashram has the capa-
city or is fit to keep up a chain of fasts, my view expressed in
yesterday's letter remains unchanged. The burden on you must
be lightened. If that is not done, we shall not be able to culti-
vate even the fitness that we hope to do. You should, therefore,
stop admitting newcomers, ask those who cannot observe the
rules to leave the Ashram if they are recent entrants or to cook
in their own kitchens if they are old inmates. I don't like separate
kitchens at all. But I feel that we have no option but to tole-
rate the old families.
The view which I have expressed about Keshu also remains
unchanged. If you feel that it is your duty, as his guardian-
father, to help him from your personal money, I think that
that money should not be treated as part of Ashram funds just
now. I feel, too, that the money which you possess should be
treated as reserved for one single purpose, namely, for the sup-
port of your parents, and should be earmarked as gift to the
Ashram after their death. It should not become the property either
of Jamna or Purushottam and others. If you have not made
this resolution till now, you should do so at the commence-
ment of the yajna of purification that is about to begin. You
should discuss the matter with Jamna. You may consult Puru-
shottam, too, if you think it necessary. But the chief thing is
that you yourself should sincerely desire this. Your ability to
give private help to any relation of yours will be harmful to
the Ashram, to you and to the person whom you may help. I
don't see anybody else in the Ashram, besides you, who pos-
sesses all the other requisite qualities in the degree required.
The fact that, though you have money of your own, you have
not misused it and have remained unaffected by it shows your
fine sense of justice and your impartiality. But even God will
fall if He regards anything as His personal possession. The vows
of non-possession and non-stealing seem trivial outwardly but
they are as important as the other three vows. The entire plan
of [Patanjali'sJ Yogasutras seems wonderful to me.
I do not
understand its later portion. But it seems likely that every
aphorism of his is based on long experience. If God had not
ordained my duty in another field, I would have closely studied
and memorized such holy books of Hinduism. But who can say
what would have been better for me? Even such a thought be-
trays lack of faith in God. I must be perfectly contented with
the ability that God has given me. But all this is beside the
point. I am convinced that Keshu's good does not lie in start-
ing an independent factory just now with the help from the Ashram.
What can be done about Kusum? How can I call her over
here? If she is eager let her go to Almora. I have stated my
own view, and I cling to it. Dr. Spiegel may come there. I am
watching her. She is very sincere, but has strong likes and
dislikes. We should, however, support her as long as she observes
the rules. If she shapes well, she will do very well indeed. Both
these ladies are certainly instrumental in persuading me to
undertake the proposed fast. Among them N.'s share is probably
greater. But all this is my fancy. Who can know beyond doubt
whether a certain step is inspired by God or the Devil? I only
give probable causes of what is past and over.
I expect Parashuram to arrive here today.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8370. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
