65. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
SABARMATI,
AHMEDABAD,
October 20, 1918
DEAR MR. SASTRIAR,
Though being on sick-bed, I cannot restrain myself from adding
my own humble tribute to your own and other friends' to
Dr. Deva's memory. Both the society and the country have lost a
true servant. Of all the members of the Society, it was with
Dr. Deva that I came in closest touch and the more I knew him
the more I loved him. If I may say so, Dr. Deva found fuller
scope in Champaran for self-expression. There he was placed amid
surroundings which tested all his great qualities including his
medical knowledge. He never flinched and never failed. Though
he started his relations with the authorities and the planters with
suspicion, he disarmed them at the end of his stay. The Sub-
Divisional Officer at Bettiah with whom he came in close contact
1 Vide "Speech at Surat", 1-8-1918.
2 Dr. Hari Shrikrishna Deva (died October 8, 1918); a Durbar surgeon of
Sangli, he joined the Servants of India Society in 1914 and worked with
Gandhiji in the Champaran campaign.
often told me that he liked Dr. Deva for his selflessness and his
devotion to his work. How could he do otherwise? For he was
not only medical adviser to the helpless villagers but was his own
dispenser. He took medicines to their homes. He attended to their
sanitation. He bent his own body to clean the village wells, to
fix up the village road. With Messrs Soman and Randive, in place
of the burnt down grass-hut, which was used as school at Bhiti-
harwa, he raised in a few days' time, to the marvel of everybody,
a pucca school building and, comparatively delicate though he was
in body, he worked side by side with able-bodied villagers who,
touched by his enthusiasm, responded to his call for help in build-
ing the school which was designed for their sake. What, however,
is the pleasantest of all my experiences of Dr. Deva is the tribute
Mr. Soman, a B.A., LL.B. of Belgaum, pays to his memory in a
letter just received from him. He belongs to the Nationalists'
school. He was one of the volunteers in Champaran. He is himself
a staunch and true worker. He says in the letter that he approached
Dr. Deva with a great deal of suspicion and distrust to his attitude
towards the Nationalists, but he adds that "it did not take
many days before the suspicion and mistrust gave place to perfect
confidence and respect." Indeed they, retaining their own views
to the end, became fast friends. Dr. Deva was never a fanatic.
He had boundless charity in him, and therefore both had the rare
gift of seeing the bright side of his opponent's case. The Society
has certainly lost in him a fine collector and advertiser. He was a
true man.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Servant of India, 31-10-1918
