314. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 9, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter and the pile of other mail sent by you. I
will write to Jagjivandas. I think it best to send him your letter.
Truth may be bitter like poison in the beginning, but in the end it
proves to be as sweet as amrit. We should not, therefore, feel wor-
ried. We have got into the wrong habit of saying nice things to
one another, and we must overcome it.
You should indulge in self-depreciation less often now. Hold
firmly to the thought that the man of faith always succeeds and
offer up your very thoughts in the yajna of duty. Self-examination
is good, but there are limits to the utility of self-depreciation.
We must become perfect in making the bread on which depends
the health of so many. The person in charge of the job should not,
therefore, be changed.
I approve of the changes you have made in regard to keep-
ing of accounts. We should become perfect in this sphere too. The
truth is that a secretary should have a thousand eyes and a
thousand hands. He should be attentive to the smallest detail.
I suppose I told you about Perrins of Jamshedpur. Sitting
in his room, he used to be in contact with all departments with the
help of the telephone, get reports from them day and night and
give whatever instructions he wanted to give. This was vigi-
lance of a demoniac character. We do not go to the length of
installing a telephone but our vigilance should be greater even
than that of Perrins. If the disinterested attitude really develops
in us, though occupied with our daily work we would be enjoying
infinite peace and also would not appear worn out in body. The
inert machine wears out through use, whereas the atman shines
the brighter through the exercise of its powers and seems to grow
ever new, and, therefore, the body which is its habitation also
seems even fresh. I have written about the ideal state. I know
that I myself am far away from that state, and I have, therefore,
little right to write about it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5431; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 124-
