353. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
July 26, 1933
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,
I have your two letters.
I must not make the declaration that you suggest. No decla-
rations unaccompanied by immediate action are of any value at
the present moment. Even action taken under a sense of duty
and with the purest of motives is wholly misinterpreted. But I
can repeat my conviction to you that I would not care to go
to heaven without taking the Mussalman friends with me. The
fact is, the more I examine myself the more I feel that deep down
in me there is no distinction between Hindus, Mussalmans, Chris-
tians and others. I would disdain to thrive at their expense.
As to your other suggestion about the Benares Hindu Univer-
sity, whilst Malaviyaji is capable of immense sacrifice, he will
not sacrifice the University. He is philosophic enough to let it go,
if he could not retain it, consistently with his notion of self-respect.
But, if I know him rightly, he would consider it a great mistake
deliberately to sacrifice the University. What is more, those who
are its co-trustees would never allow him to take that step and
305
55-20
what is still more is that the students have no desire whatsoever
to suspend their training. Whatever, therefore, you and I may
desire, the step suggested by you seems to me to be incapable of
being taken.
With reference to your second letter, what you say may be
half true, namely that I want some individuals to go to prison
in order to keep up the attitude of defiance. But I want them to
go to prison in order that out of the imprisonment of a few pure
civil resisters may rise a manifestation which would be unmis-
takable and irresistible.
I am glad Begum Mahmud is better and I hope she will be
thoroughly restored. For your own health, how I wish you
could take nature cure at Dr. Mehta's sanatorium. I have no
doubt that you can be thoroughly restored.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Salaams from Mahadev.
DR. SYED MAHMUD
FARIDI MANZIL
DARGAHASHARIF
AJMER
From a photostat: G.N. 5090; also S.N. 19124
