14. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
July 7, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
What does Bhansali write about Lilabehn ? Has she left
the Ashram?
This time I got your letter of July 2 soon after it was received
here. I had received the wire about Revashankerbhai and rep-
lied to him direct.
I suppose Ratilal is quiet now.
Some portions of my letters can certainly be published. I
have suggested the limits in my letter to Mirabehn.
Amina, I hope, is all right now. If necessary, you can write to
me at any time. Most probably I shall get the letter immediately.
Where was Shambhu beaten up?
You are being put to a good test. You had no choice but to
endure the wild behaviour of the sadhu; not because he was
a sadhu, for to us a sadhu and an emperor are the same. Would
we not treat an emperor in the same manner if he created simi-
lar nuisance? If we could and had the time to do so, we would
try to come into closer contact with the mischief-makers and to
teach them to be civil. We would go and see them at their places
and plead with them. We would try to discover their disease and
observe their way of living. I know that all this is difficult. But
that is the only way. What would we do if such a sadhu were our
own brother? Would we not spend on him as much time as we
could spare and plead with him? The next thing is that we
should learn from such experiences to reduce our possessions. This
of course cannot be done in regard to milk, for we have regarded
running the dairy as our duty and done that duty. We cannot,
therefore, stop it. The only thing for us to do is to think out
methods of protecting it which would be worthy of the Ashram.
I have written this only by way of discussion. You may take from
it what is practicable.
The problem of the thieves, whom you are not able to catch,
is more difficult than that of the mendicant. Its only solution is
that we should mix with the people of the villages in our neigh-
bourhood. These are external remedies, and necessary ones. In
the last resort, and even as the first, we have prayer. "So long as
the elephant depended on his own strength, nothing availed him;
if a weak person cries out for help to Rama, He will come the mo-
ment His name is uttered." This is a great truth. It is realized
in experience in the measure we have faith in it.
Do write and inform me about every harassment. Such things
give me spiritual exercise. I get an opportunity to think what my
mind would prompt me to do in such circumstances.
Keep me informed about the results of Prabhudas's experi-
ments with the spinning-wheel.
If they want to translate the Anasaktiyoga into Urdu, permit
them to do so.
The article on brahmacharya is kept in a safe place—only
Pyarelal or Kusum can say where. You will find it nowhere but
among the papers which are kept duly arranged.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 47 letters today. I don't see Kanu's and Sharja's
letters which you have mentioned in your list.
If you have not sent cotton, send it by return of post. Today I
am short of time and, therefore, a few things are left out.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
