205. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 3, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I am very late this time in replying to your letter.
I get
no time at all.
I have been writing so much today that the right hand feels
tired and I am now writing with the left hand.
The body must have lost some strength but I have no such
feeling. The fast has not in the least led to an increase of weak-
ness. Fasting never does if one knows how to return to normal
diet afterwards.
I believe that the effect of my diet on my health has been
nothing but beneficial. But I cannot give reasons for this belief.
I am very glad that Father, Mother and others came and saw
you.
There is certainly a remedy for the frequent pimples which
you get. For a few days live only on fruit and uncooked bhaji.
Take steam treatment and the pimples will then immediately
1 From August 7 to 13, 1934, undertaken to atone for the beating up
of Lalnath, an opponent of Gandhiji's Harijan activities; vide Vol. LVIII.
163
shrink. Having done this, bathe in cold water. The skin will
probably clear up in three or four days. Then start taking milk
or curd which is not sour along with fruit and uncooked bhaji.
Among the different bhajis, fenugreek leaves, spinach, luni and
lettuce are the best. I eat even the leaves and twigs of mustard.
To pray to God for anything means to aspire for it intensely.
God is both different and not different from us. He is different be-
cause He is perfect, and He is not different because we are a
portion of Him. If a drop of water separated from the sea may
not pray to the sea, to whom else may it pray? But does the sea
have to do anything to answer the prayer? Prayer is the an-
guished cry of one who cannot bear separation. The embodied
soul cannot help uttering such a cry.
The key to the nation's progress both is and is not in our
hands. We can help in its progress if we reduce ourselves to a
cipher. It is in our hands to do that. But the progress itself is
not in our hands, because our reducing ourselves to a cipher
means leaving ourselves entirely in the hands of God who alone
is the digit of unity.
"O Udho, the secret of karma is beyond human under-
standing" is an absolute truth. We can know that there is a law
of karma, but we do not know how it works. That is God's
mercy. We do not know the laws of even an earthly king. How
then can we know the laws of God who is Law personified?
The appearance of victory in the early part of this struggle
was an illusion, and the appearance of defeat also is nothing
but an illusion. In the lexicon of one who has unshakable
faith in the ultimate victory of truth, there is no such word as
"defeat".
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10366
