9. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
November 3, 1928
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,
I have your letter. I had a chat about the Exhibition with
Pandit Motilalji when he was here last Sunday. He showed me
too your telegram. I shall repeat what I told him in the course
of my conversation. I am sorry that you find my letter to be
"vague and guarded". I tried to be as clear as I could with the
facts before me. Guarded I should never have to be in writing
to friends like you. But my letter was certainly concise and neces-
sarily so.
Now for the purport of the conversation. Whilst your offer
to Panditji and repeated in your letter flatters my pride, I would
not like you, an esteemed co-worker, to give up your views or
principles in order to please me. Such things can only be done
once in a lifetime, and even when such personal concessions are
accepted, they harm the acceptor, harm the giver and damage the
national cause in question. And let me put you absolutely at
ease by telling you that I have before Panditji undertaken, all be-
ing well, to attend the Congress unconditionally.
I am sorry I cannot say so with reference to the representation
of the All-India Spinners' Association at the Exhibition. My
argument is this: whilst it is wrong to think that I dislike all
machinery as such, I do feel that we are not competent judges of
the usefulness or otherwise of machinery however small it may be
for the toiling millions. We shall acquire that faculty for judg-
ment when we draw to the Congress stout-hearted and knowing
farmers and other business men. Let me tell you that in the
Ashram we have a variety of simple machinery in the way of
ploughs, grass-cutting machines, grinding-mills, etc. But I am
sorry to have to inform you that not much of our investment in
this line has proved profitable or promising. This has happened
because we are all amateur farmers. And this is a judgment
which I give you after an experience extending over a period of
13 years. Therefore I would say, if you have got the courage,
you will scrap every bit of machinery for the time being, especially
foreign, and you will concentrate your energy upon having your
Exhibition with khaddar as the centre-piece and a small but a
sufficient number of genuine swadeshi articles of a useful nature.
I have an irreconcilable opposition to the Indian textiles being
exhibited in any shape or form. My reason is absolutely simple.
The textile manufacturers refuse to come to terms with us. I
do not blame them because if they come to terms with us, they
have to sacrifice all prospects of Government assistance save what is
forced from it by an active public opinion. Moreover these textiles
need no advertisement from us. They have got an army of
advertisers, inspectors, selling agents and what not. And, lastly,
to put mill textiles side by side with khadi is deliberately to put
khadi in the shade by inviting undesirable comparisons.
I remind you that the very first exhibition of this type was
undertaken at the Ahmedabad Congress in 1921. It drew huge
audiences. The entrance fee, a paltry sum, left a good surplus.
Wherever there is good and efficient management of exhibitions
of an educative character, they are not only useful and instructive
but they are remunerative. Such was the case in Bihar. One
indispensable condition of Congress Exhibitions should be that we
should never undertake them for finding our expenses and leaving
besides a handsome sum for conducting the business of the year to
come. Unfortunately this very undesirable thing was done in
Madras exposing us to an evil temptation. I wish that Bengal
which has abundant patriotism, self-sacrifice and fine sentiment
will rise superior to such temptations.
If this letter seems to you to be lacking in detail, do write to
me again. Let there be no mistake about it. I want to take
part in the Exhibition. But I can only take part in it consistently
with the national interest as I understand it. But I have said to
myself that if I cannot take part in the Exhibition, I am not going
to say one word of criticism either during the Exhibition or after.
I did not feel called upon to impose any such silence on myself
in Madras, because the circumstances were different and so I ex-
1 Vide Vol. XXII, pp. 132-.
pressed my views freely at the time of opening the Exhibition and
still more freely in a leading article in Young India after opening it.
I have a string of letters asking me to give my views freely
and now about the forthcoming Exhibition. I have hitherto resist-
ed all these correspondents as I hope to the end. I therefore plead
with you not to be deterred from your purpose which you may
hold to be based on an inviolable principle in the interest of the
nation. I assure you that I shall tender the same respect for
your principles as I would crave from you and all for mine, how-
ever erring they may appear to others.
With reference to the Hospital3, I am glad it is flourishing. I
shall certainly perform the opening ceremony of the new ward,
and so far as possible make time for it.
Yours sincerely,
DR. BIDHAN CHANDRA ROY
32 WELLINGTON STREET, CALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 14853
