130. LETTER TO J. W. PETAVEL
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 12, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have carefully gone through the nine sides of your bank-
note-size paper and I am not only none the wiser for it, but it has
made confusion worse confounded. I do not yet know what Bel-
gium and Switzerland are doing. I never told you that the two
colonies that I established in South Africa have failed. On the con-
trary, they succeeded as far as they went. I simply gave you the
information in order to tell you that because those colonies succeed-
ed to an extent, I could not draw the large deductions that you
did from your untried plan.
For the Ashram, you have told me nothing new. And when
you tell me that I must present something that will give in an
hour what I promise in eight hours, we come to a standstill. I know
no scheme that will give 300 millions of people two annas per
hour. I have worked out your scheme to the best of my ability
and it has failed me. Nor am I in a position to agree with you
that it is possible to make something out of the modern craze for
accumulation of wealth and destroying time and distance. Where,
therefore, you see meeting-ground, I see absolutely none. Both your
non-co-operation scheme and co-operation scheme appear to me
to be unworkable and unintelligible. I cannot therefore give you
room in the pages of Young India.
The certificates that you have secured from Sir Ashutosh and
others make no impression upon me because I have always fought
shy of certificates so much so that I destroyed what I used to
hold myself. And as I feel that I have got the ability of testing
schemes on their own merits, certificates are to me sometimes a
hindrance and every time a superfluity.
Before you can draw me to your scheme, two things are neces-
sary. Show me something actually at work, and show me that
it is capable of indefinite multiplication and yet producing the same
results as I am doing for mine. I am showing my scheme at work
in 1,500 villages and I can only wish that it was multiplied so as
to reach 700 thousand and still the result will be constant. I want
you to bear in mind that in corresponding with me you are cor-
responding with a practical man who has a horror of chimeras
and who will not be dazzled by specious-looking things written
or printed on paper.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14181
