7. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
UNION CASTLE LINE,
R. M. S. KILDONAN CASTLE,
November 26, 1909
MY DEAR WEST,
This is an official letter. I knew nothing about the financial diffi-
culty with the exception of a letter Mr. Cordes sent me as from
Mr. Kallenbach . As my movements will be uncertain, I have written
to Mr. Kallenbach. I am sorry for the position. I made all the arrange-
ments I was capable of making. My instructions about printing seve-
ral things are to be read together with this except the order from
Dr. Mehta.
Miss Smith has of her own accord advised me that henceforth
she does not want to charge for her monthly letter but that she would
continue to send her contributions all the same. I have told her what
she may write upon. I suggest your writing to her a letter of thanks.
You may make any other changes you may consider necessary in
order to put the financial position on a satisfactory footing. I would
plead, however, for Kababhai. I suggest that he be not touched. As
to the closing of the Durban Office, the matter requires very careful
thinking. But if you think that it had better be closed, by all means do
so. You may cut about the exchange and complimentary list as you
may think fit and may reduce the size of the English columns. I suggest
that all this should be done in consultation with Mr. Kallenbach. I am
likely to meet him before I am gaoled. In that case, I shall discuss
things fully with him.
With reference to Chhaganlal, Dr. Mehta offered to send one of
my boys. I then suggested that he should not restrict me. He was pre-
pared to send another also of my selection. I was disinclined to accept
the double offer. So I asked him to let me send Chhaganlal or
Maganlal to London in lieu of my boys. It was not a scholarship for
competition. I felt that I could decide as to who should go to London
in place of my boys but that I should ask for your permission to free the
one I may select. I have not been able to discuss the reasons for com-
ing to the decision I have. That, of course, I would as soon as we meet.
They are too elaborate for me to reduce to writing and that now when
I have not a minute to spare.
The scholarship for the school still stands. Several have been
offered from India also. But I have not seen my way to accept them
whilst we are in a state of uncertainty. Nor have the scholarships been
rejected. The Indian scholarships have been offered through Mr. Polak.
I asked him to invite these scholarships when I discussed the matter
with Dr. Mehta.
I look to you all to see that Manilal is not disturbed. As a
father, I have felt [it] to be in his interest that he should not yet go to
England. Further progress depends entirely on what Chhaganlal can
do. I suppose everybody realizes that the conditions of these donations
are stiff. Acceptance of poverty and continuance of Phoenix work, no
matter where, are indispensable.
Mr. Cordes asked me a question as to what should be done for pay-
ment of schemers who may be laid up with sickness for a long time.
1 A compositor in the press
2 Founder-members of the scheme of the Phoenix Settlement; vide "Letter to
A. H. West", pp. 106-.
My answer is that we are a family and that we are bound to support
them and even find what medical help as poor people we are capable
of finding. I am quite willing that my guarantee should stand for such
cases. I would add that the same condition should apply within reason-
able limits to the non-schemers. It is in such matters that in my opi-
nion we best realize our ideals. We are trying to live a life of perpetual
self-sacrifice and find joy in it. But the latter suggestion is for you to
accept or reject, as you may think best.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4412
Courtesy: A. H. West
