75. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
January 16, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
I hope that you have now overtaken the Christmas week
arrears and are comparatively free to devote a little attention to
an important matter which we have often talked about but never
thoroughly thrashed out.
I refer to the question of hand-
carding and hand-spinning in the prisons. I have told you that
as early as 1922 these two things were first introduced at my request
in this prison. At first Sjt. Shankerlal Banker and I were per-
mitted to do this work on our own bows and wheels with our
own cotton. Then cotton was brought by Col. Dalziel from Dhar-
war. The result of our work was liked by Major Jones who follow-
ed Col. Dalziel and he allowed all Civil Disobedience prisoners
who volunteered to do this work regularly. I was permitted to
regulate and examine the daily work and issue the necessary ins-
tructions for improvement. A record was kept of the work.
Spinning-wheels and bows were manufactured in the prison, spin-
dles were made and the yarn was used as welt, and, if I am not
mistaken, also for tapes. I was allowed to train convict warders
as carders, and a considerable quantity of yarn was thus produced.
On the resumption of Civil Disobedience in 1930 the ques-
tion was raised by me and several prisoners and permission was
granted in some cases and not in others. There was no fixed policy
evolved when peace was declared and the C. D. prisoners were
discharged.
The matter this time is also in the same uncertain state. In
Dhulia for instance Seth Jamnalal Bajaj tells me hand-spinning
is universal among the C. D. prisoners, so much so that much khadi
has been manufactured out of the yarn so spun. I know that
in some other jails too it is freely allowed. It is only here that
almost complete prohibition reigns except with me, my companions
and certain other prisoners and the female Civil Disobedience
prisoners.
I have told you that many Civil Disobedience prisoners have
been under vows to spin regularly as a sacrifice. It is only after
much effort that I have succeeded generally in persuading the
Civil Disobedience prisoners not to regard the vow as binding
62
in prisons. They know that I am trying to persuade you to
give the permission to spin to those who regard it as a sacred
duty, either as part of their task or as extra work to be kept by
them for their use.
To carding and spinning by itself I am sure the Government
can have no objection. It has no connection with the Civil Dis-
obedience campaign. Spinning organizations have not been de-
clared unlawful nor spinning an unlawful activity. From the
State point of view I can demonstrate, as I did in 1922 by actual
results, that it is a more remunerative occupation than several
others followed in the prisons. Indeed I endeavoured to show
to one of your predecessors, viz., Col. Mel, that it was possible
even to make prisons self-supporting by a universal introduction
of all cotton processes in the prisons. But whilst I was carrying
on these conversations, he retired. Inspectors-General and
Superintendents change rapidly and I was discharged all too pre-
maturely owing to the attack of appendicitis. If I can but get
a little encouragement from you, I have the same confidence as
in 1922 and could show you startling results.
But that may be a far cry. My present purpose is to ask you
please to regularize the practice, which is now followed hapha-
zard, of allowing volunteers to do hand-carding and hand-
spinning with such restrictions as may be considered necessary
in the interest of the administration.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9
