490. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
October 26, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter comes with unfailing regularity.
You will find many more gems in the Quran. Some of them
are penetrating. The quotation about Christianity is of a different
order. It hardly does justice to the Christian doctrine. Sonship has
no literal meaning. Nor does trinity mean three gods. Here 'Letter
killeth' applies. Whose translation are you reading?
My weight and health keep steady. I tried bread for two
days and then fell back on fruit, milk and a vegetable. I pour my
milk over the vegetable which is just now alternatively marrow and
pumpkin. These are the only two vegetables to be had just now
in the prison garden. And I try to restrict myself just to the vege-
tables grown there. They seem to suit the body quite well. The
monotony does not worry me.
I see with the comparative coolness of weather you are im-
proving. I hope the improvement will be steady.
The seven years seem like a dream. As I recall the terrible
scoldings I tremble. And I derive such comfort as is possible from
the fact that it was love that was scolding; but I know that there
was a better way. As I look back upon the past I realize that
my love was impatient. To that extent it was ignorant. En-
lightened love is ever patient. Ignorant love is a crude transla-
tion of the word moha in Sanskrit. I shall learn to be patient.
As I watch myself in little things, I know that I have not yet ac-
quired that measure of patience which true love demands. That
patience shall come.
You remember Shanti, the Chinese young man? I had a
wire from him during the fast and now I have a penitent letter from
him. Poor boy! He could not keep his vows and so kept silent.
He is father of many children. He gives a desolate picture of
China and is impatient to come back to India by way of penance
for the past. His English has improved wonderfully.
Devdas was here yesterday. He is much better. Pyarelal obsti-
nately refuses to take milk and butter and confines himself to oil.
Fruit too he will not take. The result is that he has a sore throat.
I have asked him not to be so obstinate.
Sivaprasad is better. Sushila is also better. And Ba will be
going to the Ashram. She was anxious to see you. But I weaned her.
If Kisen is there, love to you both.
BAPU
[PS.]
This is going in a special envelope which I hope you will get.
From the original: C.W. 6247. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9713
