363. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Maha Shud 10 [February 8, 1911]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Received your letter of Magsar Vad 7 . You have asked me good
questions about the plague . When rats began to die in Rajkot I ad-
vised all to leave the house or the town. These were my ideas then. I
now feel that it was a mistake on my part. Many of my ideas have
undergone a similar change. Every time the objective was the same—
the search for truth. Now I see that it is ignorance of the soul's virtue
to run away from houses. This does not mean that one's house cannot
be changed whatever may happen. We must leave the house if it is on
fire. If snakes and scorpions are so rife as to cause instantaneous death,
then also we may leave the house. I, however, do not mean to say that
there is nothing wrong in doing so. For him who has completely known
and realized the self the sky above is the only roof; he would live in a
jungle and look upon snakes and scorpions as his friends. We who have
not attained such a state live in houses for fear of cold, heat, etc., and we
are ready to leave the house when dangers creep in there. Despite all
this, we should aspire to realize the self as soon as may be. At any rate
this is what I think.
At the time of the plague Motilal Odhavji left [Rajkot] and posted
his steward to look after his house. It is improper for one to do so. Had
the house caught fire, the steward too would have run away. From
this example you will be able to make out the distinction. The danger
from plague, etc., I consider an ordinary one. The Mussalmans do not
leave their houses, but stay on there with faith in God. If, however, they
took the necessary measures [to fight the plague], they would be doing
better. There is hardly any likelihood of the plague disappearing so
long as we get panicky and run hither and thither. It is sheer cowardice
if, instead of trying to find out the cause of the plague, we run away from
the place where it breaks out. But when I myself am not satisfied with
this answer, how could you be?
You will be able to know what passes in my mind only when we
meet personally and questions come up incidentally. There are two
reasons why I cannot explain things fully to your satisfaction. One is
that I am so engrossed in other activities that I have no time to think over
the matter and put my ideas on paper; the other is that there is no accord
between my preaching and practice. If there were that accord which I
would like to achieve, I would get the right words to make the thing
instantly clear to you.
When respected Khushalbhai asks you to leave the house or the
town for fear of the plague, it is but proper for you to do so. It is our
duty to obey our elders so long as their orders do not conflict with our
moral life. Therein lies our ultimate good. If you leave the plague-
infested house not from fear of death but to please your parents, your
behaviour will be quite blameless. However, the conditions are so
difficult in some places and for some people that we have to think before
obeying the orders of elders. I personally feel that the love of parents is
so mysterious that one should not offend them without very strong reason.
But my mind is not prepared to go to the same extent in respect of the
other elders. When we have any doubt concerning problems of morality,
we may disregard the orders of other elders; nay, it would be our duty
to disobey them. But when there is no doubt about the morality of a
question, even parents' orders can be disregarded; nay, it will be our
duty to do so. If my father asks me to steal, I must not. If I want
to observe brahmacharya and my parents' orders are to the contrary,
I must politely disobey them. I consider it to be a duty not to betrothe
Ramdas and Devdas till they come to their own. Were my parents
alive and held a contrary opinion, I would have very politely opposed
them. At the same time I believe that my mind is so free from prejudice
in these matters that they would have accepted my views.
This is enough. You may question me, if further doubts arise. I
have written the foregoing, knowing that you, being virtuous, will not
misinterpret my words. A hypocrite, on the other hand, would, because
of what I have written, either consider me to be arrogant or, putting
blind faith in my words, misinterpret me and disobey elders for the wrong
reasons and would interpret what I have written about the plague to
mean that as a proper remedy for plague even liquor, meat, etc., could
be taken.
I see from Chi. Chhaganlal's letter that he will reach there in a few
days. Please tell Kalyandas that I shall feel satisfied if he writes even a
post card to me. Also tell him that he has not kept any of the promises
he gave me.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5077
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
