196. LETTER TO "PRAJABANDHU"
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
AHMEDABAD,
Chaitra Vad 2, Thursday, April 20, 1916
THE EDITOR
PRAJABANDHU
SIR,
I write this hoping that you will permit me to place before
your readers some of the many reflections which have occurred to
me, and still occur, by reason of Bhai Govindrao Appaji Patil's
death at a premature age.
I have purposely used the adjective 'premature' to denote the
age of the deceased. Any age below 50 should be considered
premature, and Bhai Govindrao died before he was 50. It is a mat-
ter of no small grief that the untimely death of our best leaders
deprives us of the benefit of their ripest years. It seems we suffer
from a kind of vanity. We and our leaders seem to believe that
there is some virtue in remaining more or less ailing and, accord-
ingly, if the leaders leave us in their premature age, we see an
especial virtue in the fact. I think our leaders, and others too,
but particularly our leaders, should consider it a sin to be taken ill
or to remain ill, even if illness should come to them while serving
the public. If we go over all such cases among the leaders, right
from the late Justice Telang down to Bhai Govindrao, we shall
find that the illness of many of them was such as could have
been prevented. It is the duty of everyone of us, especially of our
leaders, to know how to maintain sound health.
I know from experience that we ourselves, in many cases,
sow the seeds of premature death in our very childhood and, in
some measure, our parents do this for us out of their ignorance
and inordinate affection. We generally depart from physical
brahmacharya, through marriage, or even otherwise, right in our
childhood. We choose many articles of food merely for their
taste or only for the purpose of putting on fat. The diet of
those who have to use mental energy and who lead a sedentary
life should differ in its composition from that of others. As a
matter of fact, the diet of such people is seldom chosen in the
light of this consideration. I believe that, in a climate like that
of Ahmedabad, excessive use of ghee is sure to damage the
health of those who work only with the brain. They should use
pulses in very small quantities. Those who have to do physical
labour cannot do without a liberal use of pulses, but to others who
do little physical work, too much of pulses will be like poison.
Almost all students complain of constipation, the reason being
that they have in their diet an excessive quantity of spices, pulses
and such other things, which are bound to lead to constipation.
They then damage their stomach by taking castor oil, Epsom salt
or fruit salt, and ultimately fall a prey to death. Our normal diet
does not contain the vitamins which fresh fruits provide. If we regu-
larly ate fresh fruits in place of the usual diet, on a particular day
of the week, constipation would disappear and our blood would
become pure. I do not suggest that a major change should be
introduced in our diet at once. I realize that our people would
not agree to do so. But they can, in order to ensure good health,
reduce the quantity of spices, make a cautious use of pulses and
begin taking fruits, etc. It cannot be argued that this will
require any very strenuous efforts. The habit of taking tea or
cocoa is really very dangerous. I think those who insist on
having tea would do well to study what the people of the tea-
drinking countries do and how they prepare tea. But we have
made no such study. I do not know if people elsewhere consume
all the tannin in tea, as we do here. The Chinese do not allow
tea leaves to remain in boiling water for more than half a
minute; they strain the tea soon after adding the leaves. The
colour of the mixture would show that very little tannin had
been absorbed in the water. It should not be allowed to become
more yellow than blades of hay, and never reddish in any case.
This is the kind of tea which millions of Chinese drink. They
never use milk in their tea. They do not know what it is to
milk cows. They rarely use sugar in their tea. If at all tea can be
prepared so as to cause no harm, this is the way. Here is what
a man, highly experienced and famous, Doctor Cantlie by name,
has to say. He believes that the Chinese take tea because it is the
easiest way of drinking pure water. Below the boiling point, water
cannot absorb the colour of tea, and so they take tea in place of
simple water; that is, they use water which has been tested [for its
temperature].
We are as careless about exercise as about diet. To stroll
one or two miles at a leisurely pace is no exercise. To hit a bil-
liard ball one or two hundred times with a cue is also no exercise.
When exercise is taken in this manner in a room with foul-smelling
air, the effect is bound to be harmful. In our predicament, when
no other form of exercise is convenient, walking is the best exer-
cise. But exercise is worth the name only if one can walk six
miles at a stretch in the morning and again in the evening. The
walking should be done briskly, at a speed of four miles an hour.
Thoreau used to walk for eight hours daily when he wrote his best
book. Tolstoy testifies to the fact that while writing his best books
he never used to sit at his desk before he had had plenty of exercise.
He always used to work on a farm. [Some people say:] "I cannot
spare a minute from the clients' work or from public work, and take
exercise." Such talk is sheer vanity. It would seem to proceed
from a belief that but for us public work would go to the dogs.
The Grand Old Man of India, Dadabhai has been observing all
the general rules of hygiene and has never departed from his routine
of exercise, etc. Hence, we see him alive to this day, and it would
be in no way surprising if this rishi were to live a hundred years
like those of old times. We violate one of the precepts of the Gita
and suffer dire consequences. It says that a person who eats without
performing yajna is a thief; the true meaning of yajna here is
physical labour on a farm. If we would make it a rule to work hard,
to work, that is, with a shovel for four hours every day in a field,
for the purpose of digesting our food, and would observe other
rules [of hygiene], premature deaths might be far fewer among us.
When we begin to feel ashamed of falling ill, we shall un-
doubtedly acquire good health. In my humble opinion it is the
person, whether man or woman, that has discovered, by experi-
ments, the rules to be followed in order to preserve his or her
health even while engaged in public work, who can render any
great service to the country.
Yours
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Prajabandhu, 23-4-1916
