186. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
March 23, 1933
TO
THE HOME SECRETARY TO
THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DEAR SIR,
I have just had the Government's reply to my letter of the
18th instant. I fear that the reply raises a vital issue which I
thought the Government had decided once for all in 1922 3. The
very principle that the Government have now communicated was
departed from in that year. Then too it was a question of fasting
by the fellow prisoners. Major Jones was then the Superintendent.
When the fasting became known to me, I sought an interview
with the prisoners so that I could advise them. Major Jones
would not listen to my proposal. I had to approach H.E. the then
Governor, and I was permitted to see the prisoners with the happi-
est of results. Exactly the same question arose in 1930 when I
was incarcerated for the second time. Major Martin was the
Superintendent and he would not listen to my request to see a fast-
ing prisoner.
There was correspondence with Government in
which I suggested that I was humanitarian above everything else
and that I could not exist without being able to make use of my
influence as such, wherever it was possible to do so. Here there
was not the slightest intention of disturbing the prison discipline
and at last my contention was allowed by Government and I
was permitted to see prisoners every week, so as to understand
their position, and wherever necessary offer helpful suggestions.
So far as I am aware Major Martin never had any occasion to
deplore the Government's decision to allow me the liberty. That
liberty has been continued during this incarceration, with res-
triction as to the number of prisoners I may see during any single
fortnight. And I am not aware of any inconvenience having
been thereby caused to Major Bhandari. The Superintendents
under whom I have been a prisoner and the Inspector-General of
Prisons will perhaps testify that my intervention, wherever it was
found necessary, has been helpful.
My present request has no connection whatsoever with spe-
cial orders passed by the Government of India regarding matters
arising out of untouchability.
I would request Government not
to disturb a decision they arrived at as long as 1922, which was
after full deliberation confirmed in 1930, and which has been
carried out during the present incarceration. I venture to suggest
that no new circumstance has arisen for the revision of that deci-
sion. I have raised no new point. Indeed I was painfully surpris-
ed when my telegram about the reported fast of Seth Poonamchand
Ranka was stopped. I therefore renew my request that the tele-
gram to Bajaj (Wardha) may be sent without delay and that the
decisions of 1922 and 1930 that I have referred to may be con-
firmed so as to set my mind at ease.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3883; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), A, p. 73
