72. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
November 11, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
If you still think that you should send my letter about Aylmer
Maude 1 to him, you may do so.
I can fully appreciate your difficulties about even keeping to two
meals and a saltless and vegetableless diet 2 .
Your experience about your cousin is disconcerting. Your description
of it does credit to your heart. You are there in the midst of the subtlest
temptation. The people you want to serve may unconsciously be your
death-traps. Your very abstemiousness - the leaving off of salt, etc.,
may surround your life with romance and a halo and may then be itself
a temptation. Yes, the path of those who want to think and live right
is narrow like the edge of a sword. They may not only not swerve
an inch from the path, they may not even lift their fixed gaze from
their goal. I have seen acrobats - rope-walkers - in India. They
walk on a rope fixed to poles in mid-air quite twenty feet or more
from the ground. They walk with a bamboo stretched along their
outstretched arms and their gaze steadily in front of the other end.
They may not go away a hair's breadth from their path. Well, that
of spiritual rope-walkers is a millionfold more difficult. Happily, they
have also correspondingly greater strength. You are one of those
spiritual rope-walkers. In The Song Celestial, Krishna says : "A good
man must think of ME (God) performing every function of life." It
is too true. When there is no witness, He is the most vigilant and active
in noting our lapses if also our merits. Our merits count for nothing.
For that is what we owe. Our lapses simply swell the heavy debit
side. Beware then; think of the articles of our agreement, and God
willing you will be safe. I know that I am addressing myself to a condition
which existed one month ago and which, if it is existent at the time I
am writing this, may have made a big alteration in your life. But I have
very great faith in you - enough to know that you cannot fall.
Stewarts and Lloyds have not yet sent the material. They will next
1 Vide p.80.
2 Vide also Satyagraha in South Africa. Vol. XXIX, p. 206.
90
week. Fencing is steadily progressing. Desai and Albrecht attend to
it chiefly. Ramdas and another young man go to help. I am engaged
in making sandals for the coming Bazaar 1 .
The money for the bore-holes is being paid from your account at
the Natal Bank. I have paid in all £85 yet. They have not served the
final account.
The school is going forward but not forward enough to satisfy me
- chiefly owing to my defects. I am learning. I have not succeeded
in drawing the best out of the boys.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
