181. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 22, 1938
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Replies tend to get delayed.
The reasons which you have mentioned also may be respon-
sible for the scene on the 14th. But a great experiment can be
carried out only by enlisting the support of those who are most
likely to respond, and only thus can one discover truth. I can
now clearly see that it was a fundamental error on my part to
have deliberately excluded other co-workers from my experiment.
I should have tried to get a class of workers who would be able
to carry on the experiment in accordance with conditions laid
down by me. My taking it upon myself, instead of finding such
a class of workers, was the result of abysmal ignorance and cer-
tainly of conceit, too. In consequence, while I would not tolerate
even the most trivial departure from the conditions by my co-work-
ers, I myself committed the most serious blunders. This was the
limit of intolerance. The small-mindedness implied in this atti-
tude fills me with disgust for myself; but on the other hand the
generosity displayed by all of you co-workers delights me with its
sweet fragrance. This, in brief, is the truth.
The new experiment started on the 2nd. But it is only the
beginning as yet. The ship has set sail and is slowly leaving
port. It is not easy for one who has been used to sailing in
one kind of weather continuously for 40 years to try to sail in
weather of another kind. Hence the slowness of speed.
I am not in a position to advise you much in regard to
Gijubhai. But I should certainly like you to consider one point.
Gijubhai is a devoted follower of the Montessori system. I know
its basic principle. We do not even make an attempt to follow it
here. Narandas and you have understood the principles of the
Wardha scheme and are convinced of the soundness of the scheme.
Probably Gijubhai will not be able to co-operate with you. For,
as far as I know him, he will not be able to co-operate unreserved-
ly in implementing the Wardha scheme.
Show this letter to Narandas. You may write to me or come
here whenever you wish.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5544. Also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 267-
