262. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
By Air Mail
February 10, 1935
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have just received and read your letter of 29th ultimo.
Please send the enclosed to Mr. Heath. I am sending it under
the same cover to save a few good annas. This letter will be
airmailed to you.
One part of your letter, therefore, is answered in my letter to
Mr. Heath.
Now for the non-attendance at Mr. Raza Ali's tea party.
Whenever such invitations have come to me by design, there has
been intimation given to me of it. Here it was a most casual
invitation. Two days before the receipt of it, Raza Ali himself had
seen me and engaged me in a heart-to-heart conversation about
his mission in South Africa. He had arranged for the party already
before he came to me. But he did not even inquire whether I
would attend it. If I had received the invitation when he came, I
would have opened the conversation myself. But I knew nothing
of the party then, naturally nothing therefore of the invitation.
The invitation card was buried in a heap of papers unacknowl-
edged. Suddenly, the evening previous to the function, I thought
that I must at least acknowledge it. And so, early in the morning
(it was bitterly cold) I sent the note of which you have a copy.
It was delivered by Pyarelal personally to Raza Ali. It was so
delivered and sent so early in order that if there was any mean-
ing behind the invitation I should know. Pyarelal saw Raza Ali.
The latter beyond expressing his regret that I was not going said
nothing. I concluded that there was no meaning behind it, and I
had no time to waste in going to a function in which I could have
no interest, and the like of which I never attend except [ those]
with some honourable purpose behind them. Here there was none.
Indeed I felt that the Viceroy and everybody might even be
embarrassed if I responded to a courteous invitation which the
sender felt bound to send but would be glad if it was not accept-
ed. This is the whole of the reason behind my non-acceptance.
At the time I wrote the letter, so far as I can now recall,
I knew nothing of the invitations to Congress M. L. A. s. In any
case, my non-acceptance had no connection with their non-accept-
ance. For them there was no other way. I was consulted about
their attitude and I had given the opinion that they could not
accept the invitation. But had I known that I was wanted at the
meeting for the purpose of breaking the ice, I would unhesitating-
ly have gone. I am no longer a Congress member; and whilst
I do nothing that would compromise the Congress because of my
past connection with it, I would not hesitate to take action that
Congressmen could not possibly take without diminishing the pres-
tige of the Congress. I hope this explains to you the whole of
my position. I have since learnt that the Viceroy would have
been glad if I had gone. But I do not know whether that was a
thought after the event or before. If it was before, a mere hint
would have sufficed to send me to the tea party. And previous
hints have invariably been given to me on such occasions.
I have C. F. Andrew's letter. If he is still there, you will tell
him, if not there, you will write to him saying that I shall not
act hastily in whatever I may do and that ought to free him
from all anxiety complex.
Love.
BAPU
Encl. 1
Miss AGATHA HARRISON
2 CRANBOURNE COURT
ALBERT BRIDGE ROAD, LONDON, S.W. 11
From a photostat: G.N. 1484
