87. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Monday [September 15, 1919] 1
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
I have your letter. We do not get the Social Reformer and so I
do not read the criticism in it. Write to Natarajan and tell him that
he should arrange, without fail, to send a copy to the Ashram.
This time, please send the copy yourself.
Herewith the Director's note. I have sent a telegram about
publishing the letters. You ought to have sent the criticism on
Navajivan. You should send the comments which appear in every
issue. Whether I am ill or well, so long as I busy myself with
Navajivan's editorship, I cannot do otherwise, can I, than ask to see
comments on it.
We can get Young India printed here in some other press. I
feel every moment how necessary it is to bring out both papers
from the same place. I am trying to see if this can be done.
You should translate Gomati's article. I think it is wonderful.
"A Dialogue" is on a lower level, but it is an important piece.
It is a salutary thing for sadhus. Goddess India's picture especial-
ly, simply refuses to disappear from before my eyes. The printing
errors are so insignificant as to be readily pardoned. The workers
did not have an hour's rest.
Take care of your health. Nanalal's article applies to you.
His ideas also deserve to be presented in English.
Nanalal has not understood me at all. He simply does not
comprehend satyagraha. My tapascharya has been inordinately
praised and my brahmacharya extolled to the skies. I myself feel
that both are imperfect. One who started sex gratification with
his wife at the age of 15 and continued to indulge in it fairly
often for 30 years, what praise does such a one's brahmacharya
merit? It is like the cat which, after having killed several hundreds
of mice, decided to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca. It is Devdas,
rather, who seems to be observing brahmacharya worth speaking of.
I set no great store at all by my tapascharya. It seems to come easily
to me. My truthfulness, I feel, is peculiarly my own. My ahimsa
is an intense feeling and the satyagraha born of a blending of the
two is indeed indescribable. How can Nanalal understand it?
You have been trying to understand it. Both these things in me
are growing stronger every day. I do not know how far they will
take me. Nanalal's poem gives no idea of this at all. It shines
with his love, but gives no evidence of spiritual understanding.
Tapascharya, brahmacharya and so on are the means and satyagraha
is the end. Truth is the same thing as moksha Anyone who does
not display agraha 3 for moksha is no man; he is only a brute.
You have had more than you bargained for and so let us stop
here.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am in agony without Sorabji's will. Kindly free me from it.
Where can it be? There is another telegram from Rustomjee
Sheth.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11406
