283. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
January 17, 1937
CHI. KANTI,
Half an hour's trip in a boat has become protracted into
one of three or four hours. I am therefore writing this on what-
ever paper I could lay my hands on. When would I get again so
much time to write to you if I insist on using hand-made paper?
Saraswati went about with me for three days. We spent one
afternoon at Ramachandran's father's place. I have talked over
the matter with Saraswati and Ramachandran. We have fully
discussed about Santiniketan. Ramachandran is not at present
willing to send Saraswati to Santiniketan and he never was. If
Saraswati had continued in the Mahila Ashram, then after her
course there was finished he would have agreed to send her to
Santiniketan. Now Ramachandran wishes that she should not go
anywhere till she has finished her matriculation. He told me that
Saraswati was no more keen about Santiniketan. I told both of
them that if they desired that she should go to Santiniketan, I
would not oppose the plan.
Ba desired that the betrothal should take place while I
was here. But Ramachandran and I felt that so long as you two
were staying apart and occupied with your studies, there was no
need for betrothal. The idea, therefore, has been dropped for
the present. I see from what Ramachandran said and from my
talk with Saraswati that though she is not very intelligent, she is
not likely to weaken in her resolve regarding you. The attitude
of Ramachandran's parents is the same. I had a talk with
Saraswati's father also and saw that he was no more opposed to
the proposal. I had asked Mahadev also to talk with him. He
has already done so. He will write to you. He did tell me one
thing, however, that you were sensitive about every little thing,
take offence even when there is no cause for any offence and
hurt those who love you.
It is my complaint against you that you don't take care
of your health. I repeatedly advise you that you should not
study at the cost of your health. Do study as much as you can
but remember that good health is the first condition of happiness.
268
Please write to me so that I get your letter on the 24th at
Wardha. I expect to reach there on that day.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7312. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
