273. LETTER TO MARWARIS
DEAR BROTHERS AND SISTERS,
Urged by your love for me, I make bold to bring out the
Hindi Navajivan.
Ever since I returned to India, I have been
coming closer and closer to you. You have been indulgent towards
my activities and you have helped me a lot. You have effectively
supported the movement for spreading Hindi. It is largely owing
to the assistance given by you that the work for the furtherance of
Hindi goes on so well in the Dravidian provinces. You brothers
and sisters are votaries of non-co-operation. You take interest in
national life. You have realized that wealthy men and women
cannot keep aloof from national life.
You have love for religion. You give away lakhs in the cause
of religion. You have courage too. Yours is the first place in amassing
wealth. The chances of victory in the righteous warfare that is
going on in India today are slender if the rich keep away from it.
The full success of the step that the all-India Congress Com-
mittee has taken for the achievement of swaraj depends only on
help coming from you. The Congress has decided that by
September 30 the boycott of foreign cloth should be complete. I
was relying on you when I suggested that the date be September
30. It is but proper that the Hindi Navajivan be brought out to
intensify this national campaign.
What we see in national life today is the commercial outlook
and the slave outlook. Wisdom and valour seem to be lacking.
It is necessary now for our commercial society and our slave society
to acquire wisdom and valour.
We should realize that our
country lies crushed because of the trade in foreign cloth. And we
should have the courage to give up that trade. If we do not
have even the little courage needed for giving up this trade, we
cannot pursue our dharma. It is no punya if, having piled up crores
by harming our brothers and sisters, we give away a few lakhs in
charity. It is therefore my prayer to you, brothers and sisters, that
you add to your past service by now showing courage in boycotting
foreign cloth and making khaddar.
Yours,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Hindi]
Hindi Navajivan, 19-8-1921
