121. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD ELGIN
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 7, 1906
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE THE EARL OF ELGIN
HIS MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES
COLONIAL OFFICE
LONDON
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 6th instant,
with reference to my request for an interview with Lord Elgin on the
position of British Indians in Natal. I have no desire to open the whole
position, but if His Lordship would be graciously pleased to grant me an
interview, I shall be able to show the inner working of the Natal legis-
lation. I was privileged to come into very close contact with the late
Sir John Robinson and the late Mr. Harry Escombe, who were the
joint authors of the Immigration Restriction Act and the Dealers'
Licenses Act. These two, and especially the latter, are the cause of
very great and constant irritation. Very serious injustice, in my humble
opinion, has often been done in the administration of the Licenses Act.
I invite His Lordship's attention to the fact that even after the Act
was passed, there was a confidential despatch from Mr. Chamberlain
to the Natal Ministry as to the operation of the Act. The despatch was
partly published, and it stated that unless the municipal bodies exer-
cised the arbitrary powers given to them in virtue of the Licenses Act in
a reasonable manner, it might become necessary to amend the Act. I
am aware that His Lordship's intervention as to these Acts can only be
diplomatic, and it is such intervention I would like to invoke. The
object of the interview is to the best of my ability to place the position so
before His Lordship as to enlist His Lordship's active intervention so
far as it may be consistent with the traditional policy of the Colonial
Office. The new Bill introduced by Mr. Ralph Tatham in the
Legislative Assembly makes it all the more imperative for me to approach
His Lordship.
1 (1839-1903); first Prime Minister, and Colonial Secretary of Natal, 1893-7;
vide Vol. I, p. 385.
2 Vide "Interview to South Africa", p. 60.
I regret exceedingly that the Authority referred to in my letter
was not enclosed with it: it was an oversight, for which I beg to be
excused. I have now sent it through Mr. Ritch, the Secretary to the
Transvaal Deputation. As I have not kept a copy of the Authority, may
I ask you to let me have one.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: C. O. 179, Vol. 239/Ind.; also a photostat of the
office copy: S.N. 4506
