239. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 21/23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
Where is Kamala Gandhi at present? I feel worried about
her because I have had no letter from her for a long time. Where is
Haridas? What is he doing? Prabhavati complains, in her letters
of the last two weeks, that she gets no letters from me. I have
been writing to her regularly. Has she given her correct address
to you? The name of the place is Sitaldiara. As regards Harilal
Desai, read the letter I have written to him. He is likely to be
an asset to us. Pay him between Rs. 60 and Rs. 65 for his family
and Rs. 40 for his own expenses. In all, the amount may come to
Rs. 100 a month. As for the training, it will be best to adopt the
method I have suggested. During the time that he is in the
Ashram, I think his expenses will be less. They will, I believe, go up
to Rs. 40 when he goes outside the Ashram for studying. Explain
further details and make the position clear as you may think fit.
Is my suggestion all right? I suppose Valjibhai knows all this.
If Giriraj does not recover his calm there, I think it would
be best to let him go to Wardha. However, do what you think
proper.
Read the letter to Nanibehn (Budhabhai's). Read the letter
to Budhabhai, too, and, if Nanibehn agrees, make the arrangements
suggested by him. If however, she feels hurt, do not interfere.
Read the letter to Manibehn before you give it to her to read.
Let Gangabehn, too, read it. And also read the letter to Zainu.
If he does not understand the position even after this explanation,
remember that he is a guest and tolerate his absence. Read the
letter to Bhagwanji, too. I think the only medicine for him is the
one I have suggested. You have done quite right in sending Bal-
krishna to Vinoba. You also did well in offering to send others.
It fills me with great joy to know that the boys and girls have
taken charge of the prayers. And, moreover, no light is re-
quired ! My effort to memorize [the Gita verses] is in abeyance for
the time being. I simply do not get the necessary time. What work
can a prisoner have to keep him so busy? But that is how it is. I
have to be careful about every minute. I read a little by snatching
a few minutes from other work. I agree with your opinion about
165
mixed picketing. Read the letter to Joshi. I got the cotton and the
leather, and Kakasaheb his sandals. I got mine repaired and they
should now last me for at least two or three months. I accept your
namaskars on your birthday. May God strengthen your soul and
grant you a long life.
Tuesday morning, September 23, 1930
EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS. This is the new name we have given
to the Ashram observance which we know as 'Tolerance'. 'Sahish-
nuta' is a translation of the English word 'Tolerance'. I did not
like that word, but could not think of a better one. Kakasaheb,
too, did not like that word. He suggested 'Respect for all religions'.
I didn't like that phrase either. Tolerance may imply a gratui-
tous assumption of the inferiority of other faiths to one's own and
respect suggests a sense of patronizing whereas ahimsa teaches us
to entertain the same respect for the religious faiths of others as
we accord to our own, thus admitting the imperfection of the latter.
This admission will be readily made by a seeker of Truth, who fol-
lows the law of Love. If we had attained the full vision of Truth,
we would no longer be mere seekers, but would have become one
with God, for Truth is God. But being only seekers, we prosecute
our quest, and are conscious of our imperfection. And if we are
imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us must also be im-
perfect. We have not realized religion in its perfection, even as
we have not realized God. Religion of our conception, being thus
imperfect, is always subject to a process of evolution and re-inter-
pretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God, is possible only
because of such evolution. And if all faiths outlined by men are
imperfect, the question of comparative merit does not arise. All
faiths constitute a revelation of Truth, but all are imperfect and
liable to error. Reverence for other faiths need not blind us to
their faults. We must be keenly alive to the defects of our own
faith also, yet not leave it on that account, but try to overcome
those defects. Looking at all religions with an equal eye, we would
not only not hesitate, but would think it our duty, to blend into
our faith every acceptable feature of other faiths.
The question then arises: why should there be so many differ-
ent faiths? The soul is one, but the bodies which she animates
are many. We cannot reduce the number of bodies; yet we recog-
nize the unity of the soul. Even as a tree has a single trunk,
but many branches and leaves, so is there one true and perfect
Religion, but it becomes many as it passes through the human
medium.
All religions are divinely inspired, but they are imperfect
because they are products of the human mind and taught by
human beings. The one Religion is beyond all speech. Im-
perfect men put it into such language as they can command and
their words are interpreted by other men equally imperfect. Whose
interpretation is to be held to be the right one? Everybody is right
from his own standpoint, but it is not impossible that everybody
may be wrong. Hence the necessity for tolerance, which does not
mean indifference towards one's own faith, but a more intelligent
and purer love for it. Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is
as far from fanaticism as the north pole is from the south. True
knowledge of religion breaks down the barriers between faith and
faith. Cultivation of tolerance for other faiths will impart to us a
truer understanding of our own.
Tolerance obviously does not disturb the distinction between
right and wrong, or good and evil. The reference here throughout
is naturally to the principal faiths of the world. They are all based
on common fundamentals. They have all produced great saints.
There is some difference between tolerance towards other religions
and tolerance towards their followers. We should have equal re-
gard for all human beings—for the wicked as for the saintly, for the
impious as for the pious—but we should never tolerate irreligion.
This idea may need elaboration. If you do not follow it easily,
ask me.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
If you have not followed the discourse fully, it would be best
not to translate it. I will certainly try myself to translate it.
There are 86 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
