21. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
PESHAWAR,
October 17, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
I got all your three letters. I can see no flaw in your argu-
ments. They are well set out, too. I am sure it is not your view
that, in case there is war, we should come to no compromise with
the British. Moreover, our refusal to take part in the war on
any terms would in itself be a harassment to them. We can, how-
ever, adopt no other course, that is, if the Congress listens to
me.
But I do not think it desirable that you should divert your
mind even to this from your study. You will continue to reflect
on the matter of course, and you will come to definite conclu-
sions. But I think it desirable that you should not waste your
time in explaining your views to others.
Your health causes me worry. You may be certain that
there will be no harm at all if for the sake of your health you
take one more year. Health, once lost, will not return. You have
built up your body with exercise. Your constitution itself is strong.
Let it not be undermined. Come to Segaon. Stay there for
some time and build up your body there if you can with good
food and rest. Listen to me in this matter and do not be negli-
gent. Do not be over-confident and assume that you will some-
how be able to improve your health afterwards.
I have written to Saraswati's grandfather. I have written
to Prabha too. If she comes I will look after her. Do not be over-
eager about nursing. After she is trained up, we shall see about
other things. I hope that if she stays with me, her intellect will
improve and develop. You will admit that that has happened
to others who have stayed in the Ashram. It is true that the
information they gather in their minds is little, for the cur-
riculum is not planned with that end in view. But the intellects
of those boys and girls who have stayed there work well enough
in the subjects selected by them.
Write to me if this seems unconvincing to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
We shall be here up to November 9 at any rate.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7350. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
