172. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
As AT KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 20, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter about prayer. The letter is beautiful. I
like also the caution that you have uttered for yourself. Love
means infinite patience, and exactly in the measure that we be-
come impatient of our own weaknesses, we have to be patient with
regard to the weaknesses of our neighbours. We easily enough see
their weaknesses; but we have absolutely no knowledge of their
striving to overcome them. However, I have forwarded your letter
to the Ashram and asked Chhaganlal to read it to the Managing
Board and see what can be done. One thing must not be over-
looked. That the prayer meetings at the Ashram are not what
they should be-full of fragrance and reality-is really due to my
own shortcomings of which neither you nor anybody else can
have any notion whatsoever. The value of prayer dawned upon me
very late in life, and as I have a fair capacity for imposing dis-
cipline upon myself, I have by patient and painful striving been
able now for some years to conform to the outward form. But
do I conform to the spirit? My answer is: No. Whilst it is true
that life would be insipid for me without the prayer, I am not
absorbed in the message of the prayer at the prayer times. The
mind wanders whither it would in spite of incessant striving. If I
could but lose myself in the prayer like the great Ali, you will
not have to make the complaint that you have rightly registered
in your letter. You will not now wonder why I am patient
with those who are slack even in attending to the external form.
I therefore tremble to impose any iron rule upon the people.
Knowing my own weakness, I sympathize with theirs, and hope
that if I grow, they must grow with me. You will now understand
more than ever what I have so often said to so many people:
I must be measured not by what I appear personally, but by how I
appear in the lives of the people at the Ashram. The Ashram,
especially when I am withdrawn from it, is really the only in-
fallible guide to a knowledge of me.
It is time for me now to keep an appointment.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5252. Courtesy: Mirabehn
