154. LETTER TO O. S. GHATE
TRICHINOPOLY,
[March 25, 1919]
DEAR MR. GHATE,
I am very sorry I have not been able to reply to your letter
earlier than now. Upon reaching Madras, I was so much immersed
in satyagraha work that I could not attend to any correspondence
at all. I am ashamed of myself that I have taken so long to reply
to your important letter. You will forgive me for this delay. What
happened between Sir James Duboulay and myself was briefly
this: He said the Government were not able to come to any decision,
they were considering it. He would not let me see the Committee's
Report, but he himself was not satisfied with it. At the end of the
interview, I could see that our friends were being kept under intern-
ment for the very qualities I have described in my letter. As you
are aware, I was in Lucknow and after the conversation there, as
also with the friends in Delhi, I have come to the conclusion that
you should not fog people and confuse the issue by resorting to
separate satyagraha for the release of the Brothers. The present
movement impliedly includes this question also and I propose to
refer to it at a later stage of the struggle. I am still not without
hope that they may be released. Do not think that their proposals
to withdraw from India for the time being or actual withdrawal
would be helpful. When the time comes, if it ever does, my strong
advice would be that they should disregard the internment orders
and invite imprisonment. But that they will do with me. If their
step is decided, I would go over to Chhindwara myself, so that they
would break the law together with me. But now that the move-
ment about the Rowlatt legislation is going on, we should be doubly
patient about our friends. Do not think that the correspondence
between Government and myself can be published. It is in the
nature of a personal correspondence. When I have publicly to refer
to the question, I shall bring out all the facts, but without some
equally important consideration, that correspondence should, I
think, not be published. The Brothers may write whatever they
choose about the religious question. But I would like their repre-
sentation to be free from argument or hatred. A colourless repre-
sentation purely setting forth facts will be infinitely stronger than
an argumentative representation. I take it that our friends know
all about the discussion I had with Bari Saheb.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6478
