112. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
February 11, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
You have been slack in writing this time. Why should then I write to
you ?
You would have already known about the death of Rasik. I have been
constantly comparing the circumstances of his death to the calf's. We were
happy in the death of the calf. We rejoiced in having poisoned him. Rasik
passed away on his own. Why should we then be unhappy? If we are, it is
because of our selfishness. Moreover, for the last two months, he had immersed
himself in prayers and so he has risen high. The saying in the villages that the
candles return to their original form of wax after they are burnt up, is beautiful
and is worth pondering over. You must have seen that in Young India and
Navajivan 2 .
1 Son of Harilal Gandhi; he passed away at Delhi on February 8, 1929 after
prolonged illness.
2 The reference, presumably, is to the article referred to in the letter of even date
to Vasumati Pandit; vide Vol. XXXIX, p. 457. The article, however, could not be
traced.
90
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
91
I have given you full freedom as far as your coming to stay here is
concerned. So, do whatever you feel is proper.
I feel the same about Prabhudas as you do. I assume from his letter that
he is obliged to go and stay with Kaka whenever the latter is in difficulty.
Kaka no doubt needs help and he is also fond of Pra[bhudas]. Pra[bhudas]
had been writing to him that his health had improved and he was fit enough
to live in any condition. So Kaka wrote to him to which he replied that he
was not in any way bound to go to Tadikhet and could go wherever Kaka
wanted him to go. Under the circumstances, I also agree with P[rabhudas]. I
want to write to him that after taking into consideration everything, he should
do what his duty is. Let things take their own course.
Shantilal has not yet calmed down. He writes long letters to Prabhudas.
I have written to him a short but stern letter.
If Sakhi Gopal's lands are owned by trustees of the temple, then does it
also mean that the houses built on them also belong to them? If that is so,
who will pay for the repair of the houses? Do find out more about this and
write to me.
lt seems that Kashi's health would not be fully restored. I do feel like
recommending fasting as a treatment. It is possible she may not benefit by it
but what harm could it do? Fasting certainly cannot have any adverse effect.
See the details of a recent case which has been published in Young India.
I write this letter from Sakkar. My Sind tour will come to an end on the
15th. I was expected to reach N.W.F.P. on the 16th. Now Motilalji has called
me to Delhi. So I will have to go there for two days. Immediately after that,
I intend to leave for Andhra Desh. The temple [authorities] have been sounded,
and if they give me permission, I will go there. I do have to reach Morbi on
March 30.
My health has been all right during my travels. Even now, I live on
mother almond and have given rest to mother goat.
Perhaps you know that Krishnadas has stayed on in Delhi because of the
cold. Let me see when he moves further. From his letters, I learn that the
Delhi weather suits him. I hope you know about the changes in the Mandir.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Look after Govindbabu's Ashram and his work. Observe carefully who the
workers are, how they function, how they maintain the accounts, etc. I have
recommended that he should form a trust for the Ashram and have suggested
your name and that of Jivrambhai for that. I have been given the impression
that the report published by him is full of exaggeration. I have even told him
that. He wants you to stay there permanently. However, that is a different
92
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
thing. But do stay there for a few days so that you may observe the work
properly.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32863
