520. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 8, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,
Please read my letter to Hemprabha very carefully. It pro-
bably applies to you just as well as to her. I know your passion
for doing all that I am doing, but there must be a limit some-
where. If I am doing many things, the reason is that so many
forces combine to enable me to handle them. Not only so, I
merely seem to be doing them. In reality, it is Truth as God work-
ing through me. In that case, you are in no way called upon to
undertake all my activities unless there is a definite clear call,
and if there is such a call, you will not have to force your way to
the work. It will come to you; and the way will be clear in front
of you. But all this is by way of caution. You will do exactly
as you like.
Now, about the Mandali. I do not like the description of the
members. Instead of saying that they hold my views on religion
and politics in reverence, it would be much better to state exact-
ly the things that they approve. A general endorsement for a large
body of men and women has no value. If each were to be
examined separately as to what they hold in reverence and what
they will endeavour to put into practice, the answer would be
different. The first sentence is all-sufficing that the members want
to serve the Harijans and rouse a sense of self-respect in them.
You may define the scope of service beyond rousing a sense of self-
respect in them. You can say what they will exactly do, and if
they are to confine their work to the service of Harijans, then it is
better to say that, and nothing more. The field is vast enough to
occupy several thousand workers all the hours of the day for a
number of years.
Then, again, why form any Mandali at all ? You say that
after all it is a branch of the Pratishthan. If that be so, it is cum-
brous to have a new name and a constitution. The less pretentious-
ness there is, the better for the work in hand.
With love,
BAPU
SJT. SATISBABU
15 COLLEGE SQUARE, CALCUTTA
From a photostat: G.N. 1623; also S.N. 19192
