148. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
PATNA,
March 25, 1947
MY DEAR HORACE,
Gladys has given me your letter and I had a fairly long
discussion with her as a result of which she has written to you
a letter which I enclose herewith. She has gone to see the
Friends' Unit and she is expected to return tonight. I think
her presentation of my position is fairly correct. But let me
put it in my own language.
What I feel is that however much detached we may want
to be from our surroundings and the unseen atmosphere about
us, we cannot but be affected by it. Hence I am not sure
whether, whilst the British military forces are in India, we can
possibly be in real Indian atmosphere of peace and tranquillity,
if these are ever to be her lot during our generation. The
present distemper may continue beyond January next and if it
does not I am afraid it won't be because of sanity regained by
the communities but because of the fear of the military. What
is the use of our meeting under the protection of the bayonet,
whether it is British or Indian? May it not be wise therefore
for sincere peace-lovers to pray in their own homes, every
day if you like, even for five minutes at the same time through-
out the world? It will be easy enough for everyone to find out
the hour which should correspond with the time, say, in Calcutta
or any place in India. We can even make the calculations and
publish the different times for the different centres. The value
would lie in finding the exact time. If you still think that a
meeting should take place here, I suggest postponement till after
the withdrawal of British arms.
These are my random thoughts, not for you to act upon
unless they fully appeal to you, because in this matter I have
yielded to your judgment. If you propose to go on with your
idea and want to have the meeting at the time you have con-
ceived, send me the thirty names and I shall send you my sug-
gestions as to whether I want to add to the list.
With reference to milk distribution in Madras you have
another Ministry there now. I wonder if it will make any dif-
ference. I hold on to my suggestion.
About my own private affair I have done and am doing
all I can. I suppose you already know that Manu no longer
sleeps in the same bed with me. This departure was made by
her with my full approval in order to please Bapa who, though
he saw absolutely nothing wrong, would appeal to her not to
continue [it] whilst I was in Bihar and whilst I was engaged in
this important work. I do not agree with the conclusion. But
I did not wish to argue and therefore I promptly agreed.
Whilst I am dictating this letter I see that you could not
know this because the decision was made on the last day of my
stay in Haimchar. What, however, is the subject of examina-
tion is my mental attitude, whether it is correct or whether,
as Kishorelal and some other Indian friends consider, it is a rem-
nant of my sexuality however unconscious it might be. My whole
mental outlook will be changed immediately I saw this defect
in me. Only then, the weakness was coeval with the time when
I took the vow of brahmacharya which was probably in 1902.
It may be that their definition of brahmacharya is different from
mine.
I return the draft with very slight corrections if it is to go at all.
Love.
Yours,
BAPU
HORACE ALEXANDER, ESQ.
1 UPPER WOOD STREET
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: G. N. 1443
