49. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
[JOHANNESBURG,]
April 29, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
Referring to the conversation between us of this morning, we
had an overcrowded meeting at the Hamidia Hall on Thursday
last. Mr. Cachalia presided, and the meeting lasted four hours.
After some heated discussion, a resolution was carried, appro-
ving, as hereafter explained, of the provisional settlement set
forth in the letters of the 22nd instant exchanged between us.
There were several questions which were asked at this meet-
ing, and are still being asked. I think that it is right that I
should draw General Smuts' attention to the most important of
them. The acceptance by the meeting is based upon the inter-
pretation of the letters indicated by the following questions put
by the meeting:
(1) Will the legislation proposed and designed to meet the
objection of passive resisters take away existing rights either in
the Transvaal or in other parts of South Africa?
ANSWER: It will not, whether the proposed legislation affects
only the Transvaal or the whole of the Union.
(2) Will the passive resisters who are pre-war residents, but
who are at present outside the Transvaal, such as Mr. Dawad
Mahomed or Mr. Rustomjee be entitled to registration in spite
of their having failed to apply for their registration during the
statutory period?
ANSWER: Yes.
(3) Will the passive resisters who, although registered, have
been deported, be prohibited from entering the Transvaal?
ANSWER:
No.
(4) Will the passive resisters who hold Peace Preservation
Ordinance Permits but have been deported be similarly protected?
ANSWER:
Yes.
(5) Will the educated passive resisters who are to be allow-
ed to remain in the Transvaal under temporary certificates be
treated as immigrants for this year, and be free from liability to
registration under Act 36 of 1908?
ANSWER:
Yes.
(6) Will the standard of education possessed by the persons
referred to be set for future Asiatic immigrants?
ANSWER: No. It was explained that only those who are
highly educated will be allowed to pass the education test, and
that probably all but Mr. Joseph Royeppen out of the six would
be rejected if they were to seek admission as new immigrants
on merits.
(7) Will educated Asiatics who are registered residents be
compelled to give finger-prints or thumb-prints?
ANSWER:
No.
(8) Will conscientious objectors or well-known Asiatics be
similarly exempt?
ANSWER: Yes, from finger-prints and also from thumb-prints,
if they can give a well-formed signature.
The last two answers were given on the strength of previ-
ous correspondence in 1908 and the dispatches recently publi-
shed. The matter was not mentioned in the discussion between
us because it was quite plain to me.
I am sure General Smuts will not mind my troubling him
with the above, as I know he as well as I is most anxious to
avoid any misunderstanding.
I find that Mr. Sodha is not a pre-war resident of three
years' standing. He resided continuously for two years before
the war in the Transvaal, and actually left as a refugee. There
is, of course, no doubt as to the two facts. But a strict reading
of Act 36 of 1908 requires three years' pre-war residence. May
not the strict letter of the law be waived and Mr. Sodha be
allowed to register? If he is not, he falls under the category
of educated immigrants, as he possesses educational qualifications.
He will then, with Messrs Royeppen, Sorabjee, Medh, Desai
and Shelat be the sixth educated man. That leaves out a very
desirable and highly educated man, Mr. Samuel joseph, a
nephew of Mr. Royeppen and a schoolmaster. He was born
in South Africa, and is even now the organist in a Native Pro-
testant Christian Church, and is giving some private tuition.
telegram did was to safeguard the right of the Transvaal Government to take
thumb-impressions from resident Asiatic traders seeking licences if they were
not educated or even from conscientious objectors seeking registration. The
procedure for registration of uneducated persons could not have been at issue
because the bulk of these save perhaps for the thirty mentioned in Gandhiji's
letter of May 4, 1911 (pp. 59-60) had registered voluntarily, and it was agreed
between the satyagrahis and the Government that immigration of uneducated
persons must cease.
1 Vide Vol. VIII, pp. 41, 69, & 70-.
2 Umiashankar Manchharam Shelat; a sergeant in the Stretcher-bearer
Corps formed by Gandhiji in the Zulu "rebellion" of 1906; later, as a satyagrahi,
suffered imprisonment and deportation in 1908 and 1909; was one of the
"stokers" at the Mass Meeting in August 1908 when Indians burned their regis-
tration certificates; vide Vol. VIII, p. 473 and Vol. IX, pp. 251 & 264, also
Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XI.
May I ask for his protection, by waiving the strict interpreta-
tion in regard to Mr. Sodha? We might have thrown out one
of the six before named in favour of Mr. Samuel Joseph, but the
merits in point of suffering of the others are far greater than
Mr. Samuel Joseph's.
I have been asked to mention another case of extreme hard-
ship. That is Mr. Camay's. He was an Indian postmaster in
Johannesburg. He is well educated. I believe he had served for
nearly ten years in the above capacity when he had to leave
because he declined to register. Mr. Camay is a Parsee. He has
his family in Johannesburg. He has suffered a great deal during
the struggle. I believe that he was very popular as postmaster,
and enjoyed the complete confidence of his superiors. In my
opinion, he ought to be reinstated.
I have not yet before me a list of Indian passive resisters who
being pre-war residents are entitled to registration, but I am
getting the names together. I take it that their registration will
proceed immediately we agree on the points mentioned by me
herein.
You were somewhat surprised when I mentioned the Chinese
passive resisters. But they have continued to suffer to the end and
their Chairman, Mr. Quinn, was only recently discharged from
gaol. There are now, I think, more Chinese than Indian passive
resisters in gaol. I am quite sure that General Smuts will not
expect Indian passive resisters to desert their Chinese fellow
sufferers. They naturally ask for the same protection for the
Chinese passive resisters as for themselves. There are, I un-
derstand, only about twenty pre-war Chinese passive resisters
who were not registered when the struggle was revived in 1908.
But I introduced the question of the Chinese in order to men-
tion the somewhat delicate matter of four who are undergoing
terms of imprisonment for public violence among themselves.
When the struggle was revived, the Chinese became two factions
and fought with each other. As a result, some were convicted.
Now the two factions are united. They are even preparing a
petition to the Governor-General for the exercise of the clemency
of the Crown. Will not General Smuts recommend them for
favourable consideration?
I have written at great length. But I thought that I could
not be too precise or too frank.
If you will kindly place this letter before General Smuts, and
if he considers it necessary, appoint a day for an interview, I
shall come down, and the matter may be finally closed.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From Indian Opinion, 27-5-1911; also photostat of draft in Gandhiji's
hand: S.N. 5521
