228. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 26, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I got your beautiful letter. I hope you will always keep up
this attitude. Haven't I promised to preserve the yarn for you ?
I will keep my promise. You need not refuse it. You cer-
tainly have a right to ask anything from me. Your request for
the yarn was blameless. It was the manner in which you made it
that was wrong. You have now rectified your mistake, and so
I have nothing to say.
You see how my hopes are being reduced to ashes. How
much I thought of . . .1 and of . . .2?
I could never suspect
them. I had built high hopes on them, but they were like a hou-
se built on sand. What should we do to realize the ideal which
the Ashram has placed before itself? It can be done only if every-
body tries to do what he can independently of others. Do you
do that?
I hope you know my definition of brahmacharya. Do
you think you can observe such brahmacharya? Likes and dislikes
have no place in it at all. I don't wish to criticize you, nor to
lecture to you. I only beg. Till my begging bowl is filled, the
Ashram will never become a true Ashram.
I am glad that you wrote about your health. If you eat cru-
shed cabbage, uncooked, it may possibly do you no harm, but
it will certainly do no harm if you eat it boiled. It is not nece-
ssary to eat all vegetables uncooked. It will be enough if you eat
a few raw vegetables. But the main thing is that you should
speak as little as possible. The delay in following this rule may
lead to such serious consequences that subsequent self-control will
not avail you. Everything should be done at the right time. The
throat requires rest exactly when it is sensitive.
I am glad that you became acquainted with Maruti. Write
to the couple from time to time. Lakshmi wants a companion
from the Ashram. Is there anybody whom you can send? Also
write to Lakshmidas and find out if she can stay there.
Jamnalalji told me that there were many Maharashtrian ladies
in the Ashram whom he had sent there. It is his desire, which
he wanted me to convey to you, that you should train some of
them for the Mahila Ashram. Is there anybody whom you can
train? She should be a mature woman. Let me know if there
is any such. Jamnalalji wants this to be conveyed to Narandas
also. I will not mention this message separately in my letter to
him. I reserve for it some further explanation in connection with it.
I cannot say anything about the White Paper. Moreover,
the matter is out of my sphere while I am in jail, and so I have
not even read it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10331. Also C.W. 6771. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
