276. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
November 15, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
May I be allowed to bring to the notice of the public some very
painful facts which came to light during the course of Ram Sundar
Pundit's trial on Thursday?
The Registrar of Asiatics admitted that it was a rule of his Office to
issue temporary permits to priests, the tacit understanding being that, so
long as they only restricted themselves to the priestly vocation, the permits
should be extended, in the Registrar's words, "to the end of time".
He then stated that the Hindu priest had added something to the priestly
vocation, which in the Registrar's estimation, disqualified him for the
right to extension. It was with difficulty that I was able to ascertain that
that "some thing" included the priest's preaching against the Asiatic
Act. His other misdemeanour was darkly hinted at, but the Registrar
point-blank refused to disclose the nature of the complaints or the names
of the complainants. He admitted that the priest was never given the
opportunity of facing his unknown traducers or answering the compla-
ints; in other words, he was condemned unheard. I am not aware of any
precedent, except during war-time, of any such high-handed, unjust and
tyrannical action. One man, who, as he admitted in the witness-box,
has not the slightest knowledge of law, is utterly incapable of weighing
evidence, and who can scarcely distinguish between sedition and res-
pectful and manly opposition to a particular law touching personal
liberty, possesses under the Act extreme powers over the persons of free
and inoffensive British subjects. He can dictate terms on which he would
allow religious preachers to remain in the country, and, if he is displeased
with them, he has the power almost summarily to close temples and
deprive communities of religious consolation.
And yet, Asiatics are often asked why they should object to a very
simple law, whose only purpose is to identify those that are in the Colony!
Mr. Leung Quinn has brought to the public notice one tragedy.
The other that was enacted at Germiston on Thursday was great enough
for the Magistrate to remark that he could not withhold sympathy from
the accused, but the court was helpless, and an innocent man had to be
sacrificed on the altar of prejudice, ignorance, incompetence, and inso-
lence of office—attributes un-British enough, surely!
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 23-11-1907
