454. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
MAIN CAMP : SODEPUR,
CONTAI,
January 2, 1946
CHI. SHIVABHAI,
Your letter is good. Instead of replying 'Yes' or 'No' to
your questions, I think I shall be able to explain my point of
view more clearly if I state my own ideas. If any institution
has not become self-supporting on the lines suggested by me, the
fact can be interpreted in two ways; either that the workers
were not efficient enough, or that my calculations were erro-
neous. If any institution has not succeeded so far, I will begin to
doubt only my calculations. But probably you will be able to
see that both these inferences are irrelevant. I have advocated
self-reliance in three matters: (1) for the workers in villages, (2)
for basic education and (3) for institutions. In regard to the first,
my view is that any individual or family who settles in a village
must earn their subsistence by working in the village itself. For
instance, the person may start some industry—that is, without
entering into competition with anybody else engaged in a similar
industry—or may join an existing industry. If the person becomes
popular with the local population, the people themselves will meet
his needs. In either case I will describe the worker as self-sup-
porting. (2) As regards basic education, I am of the view that
the rent of the school building, the teacher's salary and the run-
ning expenses of the school should be met from the pupils' labour
during the seven years of their stay in school. I am doubtful
about including the expense incurred on the pupils' food in the
scheme of self-reliance. Third, any institution will be considered
to be self-supporting if the people for whose benefit it is run
provide its expenses. For instance, if the money for Indian
Christian institutions comes from America, then the Indian Chris-
tians will have proved their incapacity. Those institutions must
be supported by the local Christians. I think this should answer
all your doubts. But the three rules I have suggested should not
be interpreted to mean that any activities which do not conform
to them should be treated as useless and be wound up. I have
thought deeply and long about our institutions and formulated a
code on the basis of experience. We shall be able to render
better service to the extent we are able to live up to it, and will
not become a burden on others. I think it would be dangerous to
take the prevailing prices as the basis for any calculations. That
is, if you produce cotton, foodgrains, vegetables, fruits and milk
on your own land and consume them, need you concern your-
self with their market prices? I would exclude for the present the
expenditure on cows, seed and bullocks. I think on the basis of
this you will yourself be able to answer the questions you have
raised. If you have any more questions yet to ask, you may
do so.
Can Maharaj be said to be completely cured? I hope Ganga-
behn is doing well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 9522. Also C.W. 441. Cour-
tesy : Shivabhai G. Patel
