484. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS R. TAIRSEE
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Friday, Bhadra Vad 3 [September 24, 1926]
BHAISHRI LAKSHMIDAS,
I have to reply to two letters from you, one about the
boycott of British goods and the other concerning the deputation
from South Africa. On reading the pamphlet about boycott,
[I feel that] you have written it with a courage worthy of you.
But I have not been impressed by your argument. I may not,
on principle, agree with the idea of boycotting British goods, but
I would certainly understand it if it was feasible and of bene-
fit from a practical point of view. You have not been able to
prove either its feasibility or its practical utility. On the con-
trary, after reading your pamphlet I feel that the boycott of Bri-
tish goods will be of no benefit even from the practical point of
view. I am sure you will not want me to go into reasons. From
you I would expect suggestions which are practicable. You are
intelligent and would not, I believe, strike a blow which would
fail in its aim. This blow which you have struck, I am afraid, has
certainly failed in its aim.
We or the people wanted representatives from South Africa
to visit this country. The Indian residents in South Africa also
wanted that we should extend a welcome even to an enemy if
we have invited him to our tent. The Conference has been
arranged because of the agitation here, and these gentlemen are
here in connection with it. It is our clear duty to extend a wel-
come to them. By doing so, we strengthen our position so that
we should be able to tell them what we feel about their laws.
We cannot refuse to have anything to do with them by arguing
that they have been invited here only by the Government and
that we have nothing to do in the matter. We can certainly ad-
vance such an argument against anything done in defiance of
public opinion. I was, therefore, surprised to read your letter. I
had thought that you, at any rate, would not fail to understand
our clear duty of extending a welcome to the representatives.
SHRI LAKSHMIDAS TAIRSEE
BAZAAR GATE STREET
FORT
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12283
