193. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
January 28, 1932
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have your letter. I like the views of Krishnadas. I would like him to
stay with you. But the occasion is inopportune. The dissociation of Krishnadas
from Wardha is looked upon by official guests, viz., Jamnalal, Vinoba and
others as a betrayal of trust I believe that he cannot give up the work he has
undertaken unless he can do so in normal course. Ultimately, his inner self
will help him get peace of mind. He would not get that by change of work.
My advice therefore is let Krishnadas stick to his views, but he should not
put them in practice. It seldom happens that what we like is also good for
us. I feel it is true in the case of Krishnadas but such opportunity should be
welcomed when it comes in the normal course. I am of the opinion that at
present we cannot even ask Jamnalal and Vinoba and cause them inconvenience.
I have formed my opinion according to my understanding of the situation
based on the facts you have put before me. Let me know if there is a
misunderstanding on my part or some facts are left out. If there is no
misunderstanding, send this reply to Krishnadas. If the misunderstanding
persists, ask me again.
We can ask Jamnalal or Mathuradas for the money for Almora. We
should wind it up if we can. And if it is better to postpone it, you may do
that. I cannot give any definite decision from here. You will have to run
away when the summer comes. We will incur expenses but that cannot be
helped. You are rendering whatever service you can. We should put up with
it when the public malign us but have to be very cautious when our own
heart takes exception to it.
I understand about the other answers. You are disappointed with yourself,
I am not. I believe things have not gone out of our hands as long as you can
prevent yourself from putting your views into practice. There is no scope for
pessimism as long as we refuse to entertain such thoughts and keep on fighting
them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32943
148
