335. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
LAHORE,
December 26, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I have kept your letters for replying to them. Having some
free time now, I am dictating this. Your argument against my
suggestion regarding the use of Budhabhai's house appeals to me.
It is correct. You have done right in lodging Chandrakanta's
parents in the room adjoining Valjibhai's.
Our ideal, of course, is that a husband and wife should, having
overcome desire, live either separately or together for the sake of
service and adopt a mode of life which suits the nature of the work,
exactly as two friends may do. But so long as such relationship
has not been cultivated and the two can save themselves from
the power of passion only with great difficulty, it is best-and it
is a duty-to live separately. I think this answers all your ques-
tions. If you think, however, that any point is left out, please
write to me.
Bhansali's idea certainly seems erroneous. But we tolerate it
because he is a fine man, is frank of heart and says what he
believes. He lives as our co-worker, and, moreover, is at present
attacked by a disease. We should, therefore, tolerate him as long
as we can.
I am not bound to Budhabhai by any promise. But it was I
who drew him to the Ashram kitchen. I was happy when he
said that he had taken a vow to have his meals in the Ashram
kitchen for one year and told him that it was a good idea. This
is all the binding there is on my part. But I don't look upon the
thing in the nature of a binding. If he accepts my advice and
goes a step further in the same direction, I would welcome it.
This should not be interpreted to mean that I have bound myself
by any promise. If, therefore, you and the managing com-
mittee come to an independent decision, I will get it accepted.
The consideration in favour of my view is that I have re-
garded . . . bhai and . . . behn as innocent, and still regard
them so. Even if my belief is erroneous, I can discover my error
only by taking their innocence for granted. If, however, my action
has not produced a good effect on others in the Ashram, you
should do what they think proper. For, a group that harbours
suspicion about a person will not accept him. That is, they can-
not behave frankly towards him. But this raises another issue,
namely, if I believe a person to be innocent and you or others
do not agree with me, they should not respect my wishes in
regard to that person. It is morally wrong, untruthful, to respect
them. I, on the other hand, can keep aside my own view in the
matter and act upon the view of the group. I have done so in
the past, and that is what duty requires. This raises no question
of principle. It is a question of our experience, of our likes and
dislikes or of error of judgment. If all the others regard the two
as innocent, it becomes our duty as neighbours to accept both.
If you have not followed this whole argument, note it among the
points to be discussed with me.
It is very cold here. I believe that it would have been better
if some of those who have come had not done so. No one should
have come besides those whom duty required to come.
I believe that I shall be able to return there earlier than I
had expected. The necessity of having to stay here after the
Congress has disappeared by itself. Do not, therefore, be sur-
prised if I leave on the 30th.
According to me, we need do nothing about Mahadev. He
will live on the same terms with us as at present. I am trying
to arrange that he should live in the Ashram itself. I will write
about other things if I get time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4169
