357. LETTER TO R. RAMACHANDRA RAO
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 17, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
Your letter is proof of the fact that a leopard cannot change
his spots. I detected in it the old Collector parrying blows and
making out a plausible case out of indifferent material. Let me
take an analogy. The floor space that the English rulers occupy
in India is infinitesimal, their numbers still more infinitesimal
compared to the teeming millions. There are more "natives" in
the Government employ than Englishmen. According to your
reasoning, Englishmen will be able to call their rule therefore
swadeshi rule. And yet you and I would repudiate any such pre-
posterous claim. And it was certainly very clever of you to have
62 thousand square feet allotted to khadi part of the indigenous
thing. Whilst I was glad that khadi was outside the elephantine
court, it was disgraceful if what I was told by reliable men was
true, namely, that the Government had stipulated that khadi
should be outside that court. And, is it proper for you to say
that I 'permitted' the exhibition of foreign textiles? Do you not
recall the very great reluctance with which, when I heard of the
proposed exhibition of foreign textiles, I consented to hold the
Khadi Exhibition? Do you not remember that I did not care
to have the Khadi Exhibition at all during the Congress Week?
I yielded only because you, an old friend, were insistent that
I should hold the Khadi Exhibition and told me that you would
be embarrassed if I did not hold it. After I gave you my consent
to hold it, I received letters of protest, but having given my word,
I did not wish to withdraw.
If this does not satisfy you and if your letter was written for
the public eye, I would gladly print it and reply.
I need hardly assure you that in all I have written I had
nothing personal against you. You were but one of the parties
to the performance which in the present chaos is nothing extra-
ordinary. I would even have kept silent but for the fear of the
same thing being repeated at the next Congress. Of course, it may
be repeated in spite of my warning and protest. If it is, I shall
not accuse myself of cowardice.
Yours sincerely,
DEWAN BAHADUR R. RAMACHANDRA RAO, B. A., C.S.I.
SECRETARY, THE A.I.A.I.K. AND ARTS EXHIBITION
MADRAS CENTRAL URBAN BANK
MYLAPORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 13041
