98. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 5, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
I got the letter written by Kanu on behalf of you all.
By now you ought to have acquired a sense of duty. You
ought to follow all the rules laid down for you. No one should
resign the responsibility which he has undertaken.
The autho-
rity going with it should be for us a means for doing greater
service and learning greater self-control, and, therefore, no one
should resign his post of service in a hurry. The atonements
fixed by you for a breach of the various rules are good. See that
you now stick to them.
I will complete today the description of Miss Doris's school
by telling you something which I had left out in my previous
letter. Once the children had arranged a social gathering. In
England it is common for people to meet and have tea with some-
thing to eat. At this gathering there was an exhibition of things
made by the children. The children were to play the games for
the guests to see and were to serve tea to the gathering. And
they did all this without any confusion and without the least
noise. The items displayed included dances, physical exercises
and some dramatic pieces. It was a very fine sight to watch
these small children serving tea to the whole gathering. Remember
that all these children were under eight years of age. It was no
small thing for them to go round with tea-cups and bread, etc.,
in a tray and serve guests. And I did not notice any child
spilling anything. Excellent also were their drawings, their
sewing and knitting work, etc. They had made an album for
me, which I have of course brought for you. But all these things
remain with me. One of you should write a letter to these
children. He may write it in Gujarati or in Hindi, and somebody
may translate it for you into English and you may send the
original letter together with the translation.
The Address is:
C/O Miss Doris Lester
Children's House
London East
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8927. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
