352. LETTER TO RATHINDRANATH TAGORE
KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR,
December 22, 1945
CHI. RATHI,
It was a matter of pure delight for me to be in Santi-
niketan and to study all I could during my very brief stay. I
told you that I would put down in writing some of the things
I was unable to say there either to you personally or during
the conversation with the heads of departments.
1. Just as I do not like day-scholars, I do not like pre-
paring boys and girls for university examinations. Visva-Bharati
is its own university. It ought not to be in need of a charter
from any Government. As it is you are giving Visva-Bharati
degrees side by side with preparing students for the chartered
university. You have a high ideal to live for and live up to.
University degrees are a lure to which you cannot afford to
fall a prey. Concessions that Gurudev made to weakness with
impunity, Visva-Bharati without him cannot make. Concessions
to weakness began with the introduction of the orthodox
matriculation examination. I was unable even then to reconcile
myself to it and I do not know that we have gained anything
by it. I am not now thinking at all in terms of non-co-opera-
tion. I am just now anxious for Santiniketan to represent the
highest that Gurudev stood for.
2. Music in Santiniketan is charming, but has the professor
there come to the conclusion that Bengali music is the last word
in that direction? Has Hindustani music, i. e., music before and
after Muslim period, anything to give to the world of music?
If it has, it should have its due place at Santiniketan. Indeed,
I would go so far as to say that Western music which has made
immense strides should also blend with the Indian. Visva-
Bharati is conceived as a world university. This is merely a
passing thought of a layman to be transmitted to the music
master there.
One question about music. I have a suspicion that perhaps
there is more of music than warranted by life, or I will put the
thought in another way. The music of life is in danger of being
lost in the music of the voice. Why not the music of the walk,
of the march, of every movement of ours and of every activity?
It was not an idle remark which I made at the Mandir service
about the way in which boys and girls should know how to
walk, how to march, how to sit, how to eat, in short how to
perform every function of life. That is my idea of music. So
far as I know, Gurudev stood for all this in his own person.
3. You will not have real rural reconstruction unless you
begin with the basic craft, which is hand-spinning. Weaver's art
without hand-spinning is a dead art. You know that I pleaded
for it with Gurudev; at first in vain, later on he had begun
to see what I was driving at. If you think that I have inter-
preted Gurudev aright in the matter of spinning, you will not
hesitate to make Santiniketan hum with the music of the wheel.
The spinning-wheel and all it means lends itself to the
exhibition of all your skill. Do you know that the spinning-wheel
is considered to be the solace of the poor widow? And it is the
Annapurna of the hungry. When you adopt spinning by way of
a sacrificial rite you are immediately in tune with the dumb
masses.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI RATHINDRANATH TAGORE
SANTINIKETAN
From a copy: C.W. 10553. Courtesy: Visva-Bharati
