289. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
CAPE TOWN,
Phagan Sud 10 [March 7, 1914]
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,
I read and re-read your letter. Shankaracharya has a verse
which says that more patience and time are required for disci-
plining the mind, that is, attaining moksha, than is needed by a
man who, sitting on the shore, would empty the ocean of all its
water drop by drop with a blade of grass. You seem to be in too
great a hurry.
I have not got rid of the fear of death, despite much think-
ing. But I feel no impatience. I keep on trying and I am sure I
shall get rid of it one day. We should not let go a single occasion
when we may try. That is our duty. It is for God to produce
or will the result. Why worry then? When feeding her baby,
the mother has no thought of the result. The result does follow,
though. To get rid of the fear of death and to drive away desire,
make the effort and keep cheerful; and they will disappear.
Otherwise, it will be the same with you as with the man who,
resolving not to think about a monkey, kept on thinking of one.
We are born in sin, and we are enslaved in the body, be-
cause of our sinful deeds; how can you hope to cleanse yourself of
all the impurity just in a minute?
You may live as you like,
Realize God anyhow.
This is the teaching of Akha Bhagat. Tulsidasji says:
Whether in adversity or no, repeat over and over again
the name of Rama and you will achieve all there is to be
achieved.
This is the end we must aim at. Therefore, go on repeating
that name. Be clear in your mind who this Rama is. He is uncondi-
tioned, formless. Armed with the countless virtues that belong to the
godly nature, He destroys Ravana, representing a host of monstrous
desires. He practised penance for 12 years to earn this strength.
Finally, do not allow your body or mind to remain idle even for a
moment. Keep both cheerfully engaged; if you do this, all your
troubles are bound to vanish. For the rest, have faith in God;
your depending on me will be in vain. This faith will be to
some purpose only after you have done what I have advised.
If the heart is pure, the grosser impulses of the body will
have no scope. But what do we mean by the heart? And when
may we believe the heart to be pure? The heart is nothing else
but the atman or the seat of the atman. To imagine that it is pure
is to imply perfect realization of the atman and, in the presence of
such realization, the cravings of the senses are inconceivable. But
ordinarily we attribute purity to the heart when we are but striv-
ing after such purity. Say, I love you. This only means that I
try to cultivate such a feeling for you. If I have unceasing love,
I should be a perfectly enlightened man, which, indeed, I am
not. Anyone for whom I have true love will not misunderstand
my intentions or words, nor will such a one bear ill-will to me.
It follows from this that, when anyone looks upon us as his enemy,
the fault is primarily ours. This is also true of our relations with
the whites. Perfect purity of heart, therefore, is the final stage.
Before we have reached that stage, as we advance towards greater
and greater purity, the cravings of the senses will subside in cor-
responding measure. These cravings do not originate in the senses.
The mind alone is the cause of man's being bound or free.
The senses are the points at which the impulses in the mind
become manifest. Through them we come to recognize the impul-
ses as such.
And so, by destroying the senses, we do not do away with the
impulses in the mind. Eunuchs, as we observe, are full of desires.
Those who are such by birth are so full of them that they have
been known to be guilty of unnatural acts. I am deficient in the
sense of smell; even so, I feel the desire to enjoy fragrance, so much
so that, when I find anyone talking about the fragrance of the rose
or other flowers, the mind, like the donkey, immediately runs after
it and is held back with the greatest difficulty.
We have heard of men who, passionate in their convictions,
cut off their organs when they found it impossible to control their
minds. It may possibly be one's duty to do so in such circum-
stances. Supposing my mind becomes a prey to desire and I
cast an evil eye on my sister, I am burning with lust but have
not been totally blinded by it. In such a situation, I think cutting
off one's organ would be a sacred duty if there is no other remedy.
This will not happen to a man who advances gradually. It may
perhaps happen to one who has suddenly lost all desire but whose
past life was none too good. To want an instantaneously effective
method of ensuring freedom from desire and the urgency of the
senses is much the same as asking for a son of a barren woman.
Such a result can be achieved only with the utmost patience.
A mango tree created by magic is only meant for the eye; much
the same is true of mental purity brought about with complete
suddenness. Yes, it may happen sometimes, that the mind is
ready for purification and is merely looking for association with
holy men which is a kind of a philosopher's stone. On getting
this it becomes instantly aware of its purity and the absence of it
earlier becomes a dream. Surely, this [change] is no instantaneous
occurrence, but the simple and the shortest and, to that extent,
the quickest method is:
Withdrawal into solitude, seeking association with holy men,
singing the names of God and telling sacred stories, reading
edifying books, unremitting mortification of the body, a spare
diet, living on fruits, minimum of sleep, giving up of pleasures;
anyone who can practise these things will find control of the mind
quite easy as the amalak in the hand. Practise these and meditate
over the rest. Whenever the mind is disturbed with desire, one
should turn to observances such as fasting.
. . .'s work was like Ravana's activities. He practised penance
and acquired the nature of a demon. Rama did the same and
acquired the nature of a god. Thus, different fruits accrue from
similar acts according to the motives behind them.
If the work in the field does not progress well, and if you
really find that the fault is yours, shake it off with all your energy.
The pattern of life of the youngsters depends on that of you elders.
Remember that God comes to us in the form in which we long
to see Him. When Tulsidasji wanted [to see] Ramachandra,
Shri Krishna became Shri Rama and Lakshmi became Sita.
Cure Maganbhai's cough. Find out the cause.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahatma Gandhijina Patro and Jivanna Zarana
