544. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM,
August 4, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
What a long letter and what a test! Had you been here,
I would have caught you by the ears and even given you a
couple of slaps. But you being far away, I shall only reply to
you at leisure. I have already replied to your letter. If I had my
way, I would drag you here by the ears. But because I had
wanted you to come only when you wished to come and when
I accepted your conditions, I wrote that you should forget
Sevagram. On my conditions you can come even today. But you
will not follow my conditions and I do not understand your
conditions sufficiently to accept them. That is why I say that
you should forget Sevagram. There at least you have your work.
I have got my work here which you never made your own.
That is why I wrote what I did. And when you will not come
because of your lack of understanding or imperfect understanding,
where is the question of your being separated from me?
Why should you give up the translation work for that reason?
"How stupid the mind! It discards the divine stream of de-
votion to Rama and founds its hopes on dew drops."
You have got to do the translation. Do you not know that
I have taken away that work from others because I de-
pended on you? Even if I send the translations from here,
the responsibility remains yours. I keep asking people here
how your translations read. Balwantsinha says they are crude.
Mahadev and Bablo say there are quite a few mistakes. Both
father and son are studying Hindi quite well. Hence, you have
got to take a lot of trouble. I do not know if you can spare
that much time. You must think it over. I have a feeling that
Viyogiji is not taking interest in the Harijan Sevak now. It
that be the case, even you will be in trouble. You should meet
him from time to time. You should find out who carries on
the work in his absence. I have thus no intention at all of
taking away the responsibility of the Harijan Sevak from you.
Yes, I am certainly thinking about shifting the Harijan Sevak.
It may be brought here or printed at Poona. If that comes
about and if you are determined not to come here, the beauti-
ful relationship we have will certainly come to an end. It is
beautiful because there is no opportunity for any friction and
you are not too closely connected with my ideas. But if all this
comes to an end I shall put the entire blame on you. That is
the sum and substance of all my letters. I am trying to absorb
you in me but what can I do if you keep running away from
me and put the blame on me?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
