33. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
RASHTRIYASHALA, RAJKOT,
March 6, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,
In reply to your letter of even date, will you please wire
to H. E. as follows?
"I am grateful for your wire. My actions especially my
fasts are never taken mechanically. They are promptings of the
inner call. The call to fast came to deal with an emergency.
There could be no waiting, no consultation with anybody. As
to police excesses, my observations so far have led me to think
that they have been far in excess of my fears. Moreover there
have been so far as I can see gross illegalities and irregularities.
I invite your attention to my Press statement on the matter.
But they did not cause the fast. Breach of promise is the deter-
mining factor. If I get your clear assurance that the substance
of the terms of my letter to the Thakore Saheb of 3rd instant
will be satisfied, I shall gladly break the fast. The strain of
the fast is nothing compared to the uncertainty of the immediate
future. I may run no risk. There is anarchy in Rajkot. If I
survive to tell the tale I shall relate it. Durbar Virawala should
be removed. Thakore Saheb is a cipher. He does not rule.
Durbar Virawala's will is law. A sympathetic Dewan should be
appointed who need not have Thakore Saheb's signature to
documents. Prisoners should be released before I can leave
Rajkot. I have never seen things like what I have seen, and
am daily seeing, in Rajkot. I appreciate your anxiety to end
my fast. I have great regard for you. I feel that there is
a sympathetic bond between us. I feel too that I could rely
upon your honour. But if I do not at once respond to your
kind suggestion, you know the importance I attach to what to
me is a calculated breach of honour and all the dark things
that have come under my observation during these days of
agony."
This being my silence-day, I could not dictate this letter.
I am writing it lying on my bed. But in order to enable you
to read it with ease I am asking Miss Harrison to type it for
me. The typed copy will accompany this. Miss Harrison will
carry this to you.
I know how anxious these days are for you. I am sorry
that I am the unwitting cause.
Yours sincerely,
PS.
After finishing this I saw your note to Miss Harrison. I
shall be glad to see you tonight at 8 p.m. when my silence
breaks, i. e., if that hour is convenient to you.
M. K. G.
From a copy: C.W. 10139. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
