162. LETTER TO J. KER
NADIAD,
June 14, 1918
DEAR MR. KER,
I have just returned from Bombay and read your letter of
the 10th instant to Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel.
It is clear that your instructions have not yet reached the
Mamlatdars and the Talatis, for they have collected chothai
from those whose goods were distrained but not sold.
I assume
that in all such cases chothai collected would be refunded.
Your decision to collect chothai from those against whom
forfeiture orders are passed creates a position different from the
one taken up by you in your letter of the 4th instant and the
impression left by you upon my mind in the course of our con-
versations. My letter of the 3rd instant says, "Should you see
your way to pass such orders, i.e., like those of the Uttarsanda
Mamlatdar, I assume that there would be no chothai to be
collected". You said in reply, "No quarter-fine will of course
be levied from those who come forward to pay even now." In
the circumstances your letter under reply means a revision of a
previous intention. I trust that you will give effect to the original
intention. I may add that at the public meeting at Nadiad
held on the 8th instant I made the announcement in the terms
of the original intention and told the people that the only out-
standing question was as to the refund of chothai collected before
the date of settlement. I said the possibility of success in getting
refund lay in their prompt payment of the assessment wherever
they were able to pay.
In regard to the 3 Wadthal cases I admit the fact that in
one case the villagers succeeded in preventing bidding to the
full value of the property distrained. But in the other two they
failed in their plan and competitive bidding took place up to
the full value of the buffaloes so that the chothai in the two
cases remained unpaid for natural causes. Your argument that
if the bidding had resulted in the whole amount of execution
being realized the question of refund would have arisen, applies
equally to the other cases in which chothai is not to be executed.
The distinction can be drawn only where "tricking" can be
160
proved. I respectfully deny that in the third case there was any
tricking. It was part of the game by all legitimate means to
prevent the Government from collecting.
As to the forfeiture cases, I thank you for the consideration
you propose to show regarding the forfeiture where the original
holder has recently died. As to the other two cases they fall
under my request for a revision of your orders regarding chothai.
As to the case in which chothai execution has been levied
for the sake of two anna arrears, I am making further inquiries.
Regarding the last paragraph of your letter, I can only say
that throughout our conversations and my conversation with the
Mamlatdar I spoke of suspension. It is referred to in my letter
of the 3rd instant. I have described the order of the Mamlat-
dar as a suspension order. In your letter of the 4th instant you
have not repudiated my interpretation. In fact the Mamlatdar's
order is clearly a suspension order made as a result of the con-
versation between him and me and in my humble opinion it is
impossible to revise a decision on which people have already act-
ed. You may be aware that people have commenced voluntary
payments all over except in Uttarsanda where we are having
some difficulty. There too payment has commenced but not as
fully as is possible. I hope therefore that you will be good
enough to revise your view regarding the settlement.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10700. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
