338. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
December 24, 1946
MY DEAR SHAHEED,
I remind you of our pleasant meeting in Faridpur when
Deshbandhu Chittaranjan Das was still in his physical case. If
I remember rightly, you were the only one sitting in front of
me spinning assiduously, though you were unable to pull an
even or fine thread. And then, if I remember rightly, when I
applied to you some distant adjective of affection, you corrected
me by saying that you felt as son to me. I would like to
think still that you are the same Shaheed and to feel proud
that my son has become Chief Minister of Bengal. . . .2
I wish you had Bengal on the brain rather than Bihar.
Assume the truth of all that has been said in the Bihar pro-
vincial Muslim League's reports. . . . You do not want to satisfy
yourself by thanking God for Bengal being as bad as Bihar. . . .
You seem to believe the stories of Bihar cruelties with which
you have been regaled. . . . I frankly confess to you that these
reports do not carry conviction to me. If even 50 per cent of
the stories are true, life would become a burden for me. . . .
You should know that though here, I was able to affect events
in Bihar by my putting myself on protein-and-fat-free diet and
by my proposal, if things did not mend, to undertake complete
fast.
Though I have not come out publicly, and I hope I shall
never have to do so, things in this part of Bengal are not at
all rosy. Fear still dominates the refugees. Refugees ought not
to be threatened with stoppage of rations. There are several
other humane ways of inducing them to return to their homes.
If you really want them to do so, you ought to supply them
with proper food, warm clothing and decent habitation. . . .
If you cannot do so, because of want of funds or sufficient work-
ers, it would be quite proper and honourable to make that
announcement and let philanthropists do the needful. There
are workers enough in the country who would respond to the
call. You, single-handed, will not be able to cope with the
work. And if you really mean the thing, you ought to send a
responsible Minister whose sole task would be to attend to this
public duty. In this you will find in me a ready, willing, and,
I hope, efficient helper. 1
Yours,
BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book II, p. 104
