428. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
September 1, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your exhaustive letter, also your telegram regarding Harilal.
I am sorry about the permit, but it cannot be helped. I have read your
remarks to Mr. Polak; he laughed over them and says you should have
spoken to him when he was there. Mr. Medh himself wants only a tempo-
rary job so that if you want him only for a time he will be quite willing
and I am quite agreeable that you should have assistance. I certainly
feel that you want some one to help you. Otherwise, what I am afraid
of is that you will break down or that you will leave something undone
which ought to be done now, especially the books. But if you have Mr.
Medh only temporarily it will be very bad to offer him only £3. You
should offer him £4 per month and if he makes himself thoroughly effi-
cient, for the second month he should have £5. You will want him for
about six months I think, even after Mr. West's return. Although I should
be sending Gujarati matter from here, the political movements going
on make my position very uncertain. I might have to go to England
or I might have to go to gaol. I have informed Mr. Duncan, whom I
met today, that, in the event of the legislation going through, I would
be the first one to go to gaol rather than be registered or pay the fine. I
1 Surendra Medh, who worked with Gandhiji and later with Manilal Gandhi in South
Africa
believe the people here, too, are determined, but I should naturally take
the lead in a matter of this kind. If that happens, it means incarceration
perhaps for three months. You must, therefore, make your preparations to
carry on the work efficiently without relying on me. I have the account
against Mr. Osman Latief in my mind; I think I will be able to recover
the amount some time or other. You can print Suliman Amod's books
in 200 pages or 100 whichever suits you better. The theatrical handbills
were received yesterday afternoon. Could you not have sent them by
post instead of by parcel? I am really delighted with Harilal's taking a
deck passage and managing everything himself. The papers re-directed
by you have been received. I am very sorry indeed to hear of the death
of Thakarshi. It is wonderful how young men are taken off so quickly;
I believe I have found out reasons for the phenomenon but if I were to
discuss them my voice would be a voice in the wilderness. You should
furnish Osman Amod with an estimate of the cost. I have had a comp-
laint about the Smashan fund article. I have written to Motilal and
I shall deal with it in the Gujarati columns. It is ridiculous for him to
complain about it especially against you. I hope you have pruned down
considerably Shelat's contributions; you need not insert any of his con-
tributions without shewing them to me as I have told him I would not
put them in unless I found them to be suitable. You should tell Messrs
Woods & Son that we are debarred from circulating their handbills
through the paper. I will write to Mr. Dada Osman about the adver-
tisement. I received the proof sent by you at the same time as the paper.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.] Please send me Kuhne's book which might be with you or
in Mr. West's room.
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
PHOENIX
NATAL
From a photostat of the original: S. N. 4372
