587. LETTER TO DR. NORMAN LEYS
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
May 28, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter of the 26th ultimo forwarded through
Mr. Vaze. I thank you for that letter. I appreciate it for I know
that it is only by a frank exchange of views that we come nearer
one another. For me the word 'political' is inclusive. I do not
divide different activities—political, social, religious, economical—
into water-tight compartments. I look upon them all as one in-
divisible whole each running into the rest and affected by the rest.
I also believe with you that our political freedom properly so called
will depend upon our ability to solve many of our domestic prob-
lems such as the communal trouble. In other words, it will depend
upon internal reforms. The outward will be merely therefore a
symptom of the inward. I do not at all hold that this communal
problem is insoluble. It seems to defy human effort for the time
being. But I have the fullest faith in our ability finally to solve
it. It may be of course that before we reach a solution there will
be bloody fights between the two. In spite of all effort sometimes
they become as it were unavoidable.
I would however like to add a word of caution against think-
ing, if you did think, that these communal troubles are not due to
our dependence upon the British rule. It is my conviction that that
rule is based upon the policy of 'divide and rule' which policy
sometimes English officials have been frank enough to admit. If
the Government chose, it can certainly contribute much to a
speedy and permanent solution. But if I mention this I do so not
to excuse ourselves for our inability to solve the problem without
the help of the rulers, but I mention it to explain our difficulty.
Your second point is too difficult for me to pronounce an
opinion upon. I am not an attentive student of European politics
or European history to be able to draw the distinction that you
do between the European States where Roman Catholicism is pre-
dominant and where Protestantism is predominant. And, for the
reason I would prefer to hold silence upon the third point which
is equally interesting as the second. There is no doubt that man-
kind is affected largely by the way it looks upon God. So far as
India is concerned the vast majority think of God as the Monitor
within each one of us. Even the illiterate masses know that
God is only one, that He is all-pervading, and, therefore, is the
witness of all our actions.
If you wish to elucidate further the two points of your letter
which at present I understand but partially and if you can find
time, I shall read your elucidation with all the attention I am
able to give to it. And I know that I shall profit by it.
Yours sincerely,
DR. NORMAN LEYS
BRAILSFORD
NEAR DERBY
ENGLAND
From a photostat: S.N. 12468
