142. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Night, February 11/15, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got both your packets. The fact that Ramji does not get
yarn means, does it not, that we are short of it. Is the position
likely to be the same at other places too? You alone can ex-
plain this.
I think you know that Madanmohan Bauhra wishes to come
here for my darshan. Read my reply to him.
The problem of Budhabhai and Parvati seems a difficult one.
Personally, I feel that they should live separately for some time.
If you agree with this suggestion, try for it. If something else
occurs to you, write to me. Does Parvati behave properly in
the Ashram? Does she observe the rules?
You are being tested fairly well, it seems.
February 12, 1932
You have to carry a fairly good burden on account of the
dairy. You are strong enough for that and transfer the burden
to God, and so I don't worry. It will be enough if Parnerkar can
live there quietly. Let him do what he wishes.
My views about the orchard should be treated as those of a
man without experience in that field. That is, unless they are
confirmed by an expert, count them as no better than deserving
to be thrown into the river Sabarmati.
Get some news about Prabhudas. If it is necessary, as his
guardian, write to the authorities where he was sentenced to and
inquire in which jail he is kept. Send to him at the address of
that jail Dr. Talwalkar's letter regarding his health.
Mirabehn had written to me directly and I, too, have re-
plied to her directly. I have asked her to send that letter to you.
Totaramji should be examined by Haribhai for his piles.
Does he suffer from constipation?
With whom do they intend to keep Dhiru in Palanpur?
What about Vim ala ?
Send to the Japanese writer permission to translate Young
India articles after informing Jivanji.
If Jairamdas's letter contains nothing objectionable, it can
certainly be sent to me.
Afternoon, February 15, 1932
I don't ask you in every letter to convey the Sardar's bless-
ings or regards to all. But you should assume that he sends them
with every letter. There are 68 letters this time, besides the
talk on the Gita and this letter to you. A list is attached here-
with, so that, if you do not receive any of the letters, you and I
will know which.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8203. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
