359. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER, RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 6, 1905
[MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,]
I am sending you to-day all the Gujarati matter. I may not send
any more. Khanderia tells me he has sent a report on the Pietersburg
Address. If there is anything in conflict with the sub-leader I am send-
ing you in Gujarati, you should strike out the portion, that is to say, there
should be nothing falsely praising the Acting High Commissioner. His
reply is not as satisfactory as it might have been, as you will see from
what I am sending.
Desai tells me that you are not keeping quite good health, and that
you are suffering from boils. This is inexcusable. There must be some
irregularity about the diet. I cannot too strongly advise you to copy
West's simplicity. We are all making a luncheon of Kuhne bread, nut
butter and jam. The slices are cut out at home and brought to the office
and luncheon made at the office. You could do likewise if you have to
take your food in town. I would like you to be very careful. You should
see the Gujarati people regarding the earthquake fund. It should not
be allowed to become a fiasco. I am trying my best on this side. Has
not Kaba yet arrived? Mr. Mukerji writes to me saying that neither he
nor Mr. Dadabhai received their copies of Opinion during the middle
of April . . .applies for cheques . . .
Your letter to hand together with Maganlal's. I am sending Guja-
rati matter which is double that sent last time and still hope to send some
more. I can understand from your letter the difficulties you are experienc-
ing there. As I give most of my spare time to Tamil, I cannot cope
with the work satisfactorily. Henceforward, as far as possible, I shall
send, just as I am doing today, the bulk of Gujarati material by Saturday's
post. Please be careful, as I do not read again what I write. Do send
me The Indian Review. It will be possible for me to translate from it.
I was very much pleased to read Maganlal's letter. It is good that
you have grown vegetables. Let me know if pests cause any damage to
them. Whose plot is the best? Dada Sheth has not yet called me. I shall
come if he does.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the original: S. N. 4236.
