272. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
August 14, 1908
DEAR SIR,
I deem it to be my duty to approach you, at the eve of what promises,
for Indians, to be an interminable struggle. Nearly sixty Indians are
now undergoing imprisonment with hard labour at the Johannesburg
Gaol. Over thirty have suffered imprisonment and been discharged
since the renewal of the struggle. Thirteen Indian merchants are at
present undergoing imprisonment at Standerton.
On Sunday3, we meet to burn registration certificates. The return
of these certificates up to the time of writing is about. . . .They are still
pouring in, and, by Sunday, it is highly probable that we will have
at least fifteen hundred. I do not know that all those are true men
[who] would fight to the last and suffer every form of hardship. The
giving of their certificates is an earnest.
The Chairman of the Natal Indian Congress, Durban, the Chair-
man of the British Indian League, Cape Town, the Vice-President of
the Natal Indian Congress and the Joint Secretary of the Natal Indian
Congress, each representing a different faith or clan of India, accom-
panied by a few indentured Indians and a few who claim pre-war
residence are today at the border either to be arrested and imprisoned,
or to be passed unchallenged.
In my opinion, these facts represent strong, [gen]uine and invincible
opposition to the Asiatic Act, and I am right in assuming that you do not
intend to deal unjustly by those who are entitled to reside in the Trans-
vaal. The difference between you, as representing the Government,
and the British Indians is very small indeed. I appeal to you once
more, therefore, to revert to the draft Immigrants' Restriction Bill
that was shown to me, and to accept the amendments suggested by me,
leaving the question of educated Indians open, unless you can bring
yourself to so amend the Act as to keep the door open for educated
Indians being professional or University men. I ask you to study carefully
the petition to be presented to the House, and to answer to yourself
whether the Bill published does not break the compromise in almost
every particular. I ask you, then, to go back to the interviews we had
before voluntary registration started, and to what you used to say. I
ask you further to accept my assurance that there is absolutely no wish
on my part or on the part of the leaders of the Indian community
to seek for anything more than fair treatment of those who are bona-
fide residents of the country.
If the proposal above made by me is not acceptable to you, I venture
to suggest that you see a few Indian leaders and come to an acceptable
arrangement which will carry out the spirit of the compromise and end
a painful situation. If you cannot do either, I am afraid that the
resolve to burn the certificates at the Mass Meeting on Sunday must
be carried out. The sole responsibility for the advice rests on my
shoulders.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
GENERAL J. C. SMUTS
PRETORIA
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4857
1 Dawad Mahomed
2 Adam Hajee Gool Mahomed
3 Parsee Rustomjee
4 M. C. Anglia
5 The source has " . . . Transvaal, the. . . ".
6 Vide the preceding item.
