314. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
March 22, 1934
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,
I got your letters. I sent a wire to you yesterday. I started
working at 2 this morning, and that is why I am able to take
up this letter at 3. There was no other way. I wanted to
write to you yesterday but could not find the time for it.
I will give you the 5th and 6th.
I hope Ghanshyamdas will
be able to come.
I must go to Purnea in connection with the Bihar tour.
Rajendrababu has fixed a programme according to which the visit
to Purnea would be postponed for the present and I would spend
one day there on my way to Assam. You can go to Assam a day
earlier. We may start together from here and I would get down
at Purnea, spend Monday there and, leaving the place on Tues-
day, reach Gauhati on Wednesday.
My plan is that after finish-
ing the Assam trip we should return to Bihar, spend a week here,
during which we should complete the Harijan tour in Chhota
Nagpur, and then go to Orissa. From there we should return to
Bihar again.
After spending a few days here, we should draw
up another programme.
This is how my mind is working. We
should give some time to every province. By doing so we shall be
able to do something at least, if not much. We shall be able to
meet the local workers. But we can plan all this only when we meet.
I will start from here on the 27th to go to the North, and
return on the 4th. You can come here on the 4th if you wish.
Ramnarayan complains that he has not heard from you. He is
pressing me to tour Rajputana.
Lakshmidas Shrikant has asked for help for the Bhil Seva
Mandal. What reply can we give to him? We shall discuss the
matter when you come here.
Please note down all such points
in your diary. Otherwise we might forget about them.
Please send the two hundred rupees to Chidambaram.
BAPU
[PS.]
We must pay the railway fare to Bijapur.
We can't spend a
single pie from the Harijan Fund. If we spend any money from
it, we would be stealing it from the Fund. I am returning the
letter concerning Assam as also the one concerning Chidambaram.
[PPS.]
Lakshman Shastri's letter is enclosed.
I think we should
give him the help which he has asked for. If you also feel that
way, send him what you think right for that purpose. Bring
the letter with you and note down the point in your diary.
Vamanrao's letter is enclosed.
Please read the portion which I have scored out.
I scored it
out because, when sealing the letter, I remembered that I had
already written to you about that matter.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1135
