580. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 10, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I had received the rakhadi in time. I got the [hand-made]
paper made in Junnar. It was good. I have given the whole bulk
to Khurshedbehn whose need was greater than mine. The yarn is
being kept aside. It attracts a good many people's eyes. And
what will be the payment for my labour of spinning? Whenever
I can spin 160 rounds during a day, it is Diwali for me.
I have all along been under the impression that indigenous
reed-pens are available in plenty. The one with which I am wri-
ting is believed to be Indian. I will inquire.
Among the Socialists there are many good people, and some
have the spirit of self-sacrifice in them; there are some who possess
a powerful intellect and some who are rogues. Almost all of
them have Westernized minds. None of them knows the real con-
ditions in Indian villages or perhaps even cares to know them.
Be thankful that your food was appreciated.
I do not recollect the name Lakshmibai Thunse.
It is all right if Kaka has invited you. Your duty, however,
lies where you are. I have not changed my views. Deo seems
to be upset by the attempt to entice you. Reassure him on my
behalf. He needs no such reassurance from you of course.
I also feel about Hitler nearly the same way as you.
If one point regarding my attitude is borne in mind, every-
thing else will be clear. I am indifferent about the time when
the goal will be reached, but not at all about the work to be
done and the goal to be reached. I say that I do not care whether
the rich do or do not give up their wealth not because I am
unconcerned whether or not they do so but because I have no
fear that they will not do so. If the steps we are taking are
right, sooner or later they will lead to only one end.
The theory about man having descended from the ape does not
convince me. There is no doubt, however, that the soul which
lives in the human body now has lived in the bodies of an ape
and other animals in the past.
I do not like the argument that the atatayi may be killed.
Who should be regarded as an atatayi? For the present I do be-
lieve that murderers and other criminals will have to be impri-
soned. But I do not remember even having said that that is ahimsa.
I certainly do not believe that it is. I have said that in the
existing circumstances such action may be unavoidable. This only
means that my ahimsa is still far from perfect and that, therefore,
I have not yet been able to discover a remedy for this kind of
violence. Truth lies in recognizing a fall from an ideal as what
it is.
If we win power by any means other than ahimsa, the
swaraj will most certainly not be the swaraj of the poor. They
will profit only in proportion to the degree of ahimsa we observe
in winning swaraj. Perfect ahimsa neither you nor I nor anybody
else can claim. But one who believes in ahimsa will become more
and more non-violent day by day and in consequence his field of
service will keep ever expanding. The field of service of the votary
of violence will become narrower day by day and will ultimately
become restricted to himself.
You have done well in inviting Kelkar.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Ba has taken Devdas to Simla. His illness was fairly serious.
We have a good many sick-beds here these days. Mira is ill.
Amtussalaam also is practically ill. Nimu and her children
are with me. Lakshmi is arriving from Delhi today. She is going
to Madras. Prabha is here.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10378. Also C.W. 6816. Cour-
tesy: Premabehn Kantak
