63. LETTER TO GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
YERAVDA JAIL,
May 12, 1922
FROM PRISONER No. 8677
TO
THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
With reference to the Government orders passed on Prisoner's
letter to Hakimji Ajmal Khan, a friend of Prisoner's, and returning
said letter to Prisoner with certain remarks in the said orders read
out to Prisoner by the Superintendent of Yeroda Jail, Prisoner No.
8677 begs to say that on application to the Superintendent for a
copy of the said orders, he says he has no authority to give Prisoner
a copy thereof.
Prisoner would like to possess a copy of the said orders and
send one to friends so that they may know under what circum-
stances Prisoner has been unable to send to friends a letter of wel-
fare. Prisoner hereby applies for instructions to the Superintendent
to give him a copy of the said orders.
Regarding the orders, so far as Prisoner recollects and under-
stands them, the Government base their refusal to send Prisoner's
letter to its destination on the ground that (i) the letter contains
reference to prisoners other than Prisoner himself, and (ii) the
letter is likely to give rise to political controversy.
With regard to the first ground, Prisoner submits that the
letter contains no references that are not strictly relevant to Pri-
soner's own personal condition and welfare.
With regard to the second ground, Prisoner respectfully con-
tends that the possibility of a public controversy cannot be a valid
ground to deprive a prisoner of the right of sending a quarterly
letter of welfare to friends and relatives. The implication of the
ground is, in Prisoner's opinion, dangerous in the extreme, it being
that an Indian prison is a secret department. Prisoner contends
that Indian prisons are an open public department subject to criti-
cism by the public in the same manner as any other department.
Prisoner contends that his said letter is strictly one containing
information regarding his personal welfare. References to other
prisoners were necessary to complete the information.
Prisoner
would gladly correct mis-statements or exaggeration if any be dis-
covered to him. But to send the letter in the mutilated manner
suggested by the Government would be to give an erroneous
idea of his condition to his friends.
Unless, therefore, the Government will forward Prisoner's
letter subject to such correction that may be found necessary, Pri-
soner has no desire to exercise the right of sending to friends a
letter of welfare, which right becomes of doubtful value under the
restrictions imposed by the Government under the said orders.
M. K. GANDHI
PRISONER No. 8677
From a handwritten copy: S.N. 8013; also Young India, 28-2-1924
