206. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SEGAON,
September 26, 1937
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I do get your letters and read them. It is a great surprise
to me how you could stand the strain of five days of touring.
When two devoted workers come together, it becomes hard for
both. Sometimes two weak persons can easily work together.
And even a strong man will have some pity for his weak com-
panion, and the two, therefore, can work together. But you two
were like two tigers neither of whom would yield to the other.
Your joint tour, therefore, must have been interesting to watch.
Very well. Since you have contributed your share towards the
Kamala Memorial, what does it matter? The amount collected
also was quite satisfactory, considering the times.
Did the
(Ahmedabad) mill-owners pay handsomely?
I understand what you say about the Kathiawar Parishad.
Forget the Nariman episode . You have entrusted your prob-
lem to me and I have passed it on to Bahadurji . He is a hard
worker. He spares time regularly every day and reads every paper
and makes notes. He will take two weeks for just reading all
the papers. He spares time from the pile of cases with him and
reads the papers as if this also was one of his cases. Don't mind
the delay, therefore, and let things take their own course.
Don't read the attacks in the newspapers at all. Read the
accompanying letter and return it. Where did you deliver such
a speech?
If the Congress session becomes expensive, according to me it
will only signify our [moral] bankruptcy. I see our doom in the
abundance of our resources. Such glory will be borrowed glory.
It will not bring out of the volunteers' hard labour. Please don't
read in this any reflection on you. I am only foreseeing our
future. It is a pathetic picture of our condition. I have already
written, five or six days ago, a letter to Ramdas expressing these
views but in a different manner. Whatever happens, please don't
interpret this letter to mean that you should take no interest in
that work and let it suffer. Go on with it according to your
lights and as best as you can. All this I have dictated because
I have sat down to dictate this letter specially to you.
Mahadev has been sent to Dhulia. . . .1
I started dictating this letter in connection with the Durbar
case. What I have dictated above was only by way of preface.
Don't put up a Congress town. Make it a village so that the
village arts can be poured into it.
But art requires talent and
heart, never money. Don't, therefore, permit anybody to spend
even a pie on decoration. I think that in the confectionery shops
and tea-stalls, we can permit the use of only cow's ghee and cow's
milk.
In other words, the owners should buy their stores from
us or under our supervision, and to help us meet the expendi-
ture on such supervision we should issue licences against payment
of a fee. But I do believe that we should provide facilities for
such shops and stalls. Only, they should abide by our rules.
And now about Durbar. We must get his village restored
not for his sake but for the sake of our honour. In exchange for
Dhasa he has acquired Kaira as his capital. Nobody knew the
Durbar of Dhasa, but everybody knows the Durbar of Kaira.
Raojibhai's letter, therefore, has had no effect on me. On the
contrary, it makes me angry. But in my old age now I must not
yield to anger. And moreover he is far away. I, therefore, re-
strain my anger. We are likely to worry, and do worry, about
Dhasa more than he is likely to do. Besides, he worries because
of his friendship with Durbar. We should have had to worry
about Durbar even if he had not been a friend and was only a
national worker. If we did not, nobody would have cared for us
in the Congress. All this, however, is mere prattle. From the
information that Raojibhai has given, it seems we should start
taking steps immediately.
I had thought that we would start
after the new Ministry has had some breathing time. I feel now
that you as President of the Gujarat Congress Committee or the
Secretary of the Committee should write to the Premier suggest-
ing that for the sake of the prestige of the Congress he should
take up Durbar's case and advise the Governor to recommend the
return of Dhasa to him.
I think the request will be granted and
that I shall not have to do anything in the matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SWARAJYA ASHRAM
BARDOLI
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 210-
