5. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI AND SANTOK GANDHI
[September 15, 1913]
CHI. KASHI 2 AND SANTOK 3 ,
Today is Friday and I have finished my writing work. So I have some
free time. Jeki 4 wants to know whether the children will be able to live without
you. Parents fondly imagine that their children would not be able to live
without them. To uphold their conceit, parents believe that their children will
be fretting restlessly in their absence. They do not realize that all the people
about them get deprived of their parents and still none of them pines away to
death. To children, those who love them at the moment are their parents.
Rukhi laughed and frisked about as soon as the train moved out. Radha cried
a little after the train had left but when I told her of a prize for her, after
about five minutes, she also started talking to others. Krishna and Keshu
were not even aware that anything had happened. They were shouting and
running all the way back. All of them lifted up one another and played among
themselves. When they reached home, they asked for the finest dishes to be
served. I even had to tell Krishna and Keshu, "See now, your parents have
gone to jail and so, though you are children, you ought to exercise some self-
control." They, then, felt a little abashed. These two do not call to mind
anyone even for a moment. Rukhi and Radha are real ladies. I gave them the
salt cakes which I have preserved specially for them. All that Rukhi wants is
to be served vegetables. Whatever vegetable is served to her, she likes it as if
it were her mother and her father. Children are not born with infatuations of
any kind. They forget the infatuation of their previous existence, too. Thus,
they are unconsciously like saints who are free from all desires. Grown-up
people consciously become sannyasis. Even otherwise, children and sannyasis
are alike in their state of mind. I do not wish from this to draw the conclusion
that parents should abandon their children. But they should give up their
fond attachment and stop believing in what does not exist. They should not
shower so much affection on the children that the latter would pine away in
their absence, nor should they believe that the children would suffer when
separated from them. But children are born as a result of our sin and are
1 A party of 16 Satyagrahis, led by Kasturba and including Kashi and Santok left
Durban on September 15, 1913 to cross over into the Transvaal and thereby court
arrest. The Satyagrahis were arrested on the 22nd and on the 23rd, were sentenced to
three months' rigorous imprisonment each. Gandhiji seems to have written the letter
after seeing the Satyagrahis off at the Durban railway station.
2 Wife of Chhaganlal Gandhi
3 Wife of Maganlal Gandhi
4 Jayakunvar Doctor
4
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
5
dependent on us and therefore we ought to have compassion and love for
them. When there are others to look after the children and it becomes necessary
for us to leave them for the sake of some other duty, we should not yield to
blind love, nor suffer. The children will get along quite well without us. That
we may not do without them is another matter. Even so, we have never heard
of any mother who has pined away to death at the loss of her only son.
Shravan's parents burnt themselves to death. They were helpless and the
significance of that story is quite different.
I meant to write to you quite a worldly letter, but have written one with
a deeper meaning. So, read it attentively. Show it to Chhaganlal, Raojibhai,
Maganlal and Jeki. If Ba wants to read it, I have no objection but I fear she
might not be able to draw the right lesson from it and might unnecessarily be
distressed.
You know how well I love both of you. I had wanted to tell you many
things here but could get no free time. Today the bag opened itself.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33098
