97. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
THE ASHRAM,
July 2, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,
Both your letters to hand. Much of what you write is due, I
see, to your misunderstanding. I am not backing out at all. Only
I would not be on the committee which I do regard as right. All
the rules are framed by the committee. Even in the matter of
selecting a name, do not accept my suggestion only. I do not
think there are more men on the committee than are needed. Now-
adays Mama and Narahari do not come here at all. There is
at present such an understanding with Vinoba that every three
months he should come and stay here for quite some time. I have
asked for a copy of the rules being sent to Mama, Narahari and
Appa .
As the principles were laid down at the time of the founding
of the Ashram they are not mentioned in these rules. Panditji
and Chhaganlal Joshi can both be on the committee. They do
not wish to be there. I rather liked their plea. They are neither
particularly enthusiastic nor indifferent about the committee. I
regard the committee as absolutely necessary. It is indeed my
aim not to tie down the committee here and now with too many
rules.
I believe we cannot yet interest ourselves in the affairs of the
families. One who has lived in the Ashram for five years and
studiously endeavours to observe its rules can become a member
of the managing committee. The committee of course has over-
all control of all the departments.
If your interpretation of the rules is correct they will have to
be amended.
I have conceived of the school as an autonomous body within
the Ashram itself. The managing committee is not intended to
acquire some prerogatives for its members. Living in the Ashram
and leading a similar life [elsewhere] I regard as one and the
same.
I did know your opinion on the question of prayer, but I did
not send you my comments. All the aspects had been discussed
here, so I presumed you must have inferred my opinion from
it. There was an open discussion and I had discussed the matter
specially with Mahadev. Had I found a difference of principle in
the opinion you held, I would have joined issue with you.
From my standpoint, I do not agree that there is any diver-
gence between us in regard to the ideals of the Ashram school. The
reason why you think there is, is that you do not fully under-
stand that I am an anekantavadin. I am quite convinced that we are
at present in no position to take pupils from outside; besides we
are trying new experiments every day. It is certainly desirable to
make experiments, but we cannot involve outsiders even if we
try to. Fortunately they are not so simple-minded as to get them-
selves readily involved. People all over the world act in accor-
dance with current traditions and that is only right. We are either
too advanced or too backward for many to keep us company.
I believe, nowhere else in India is the educational field so wide as
ours, because we deal with children and also with their parents.
We may not perhaps be in a position to cope with that field, but
what I say is true. What does it matter if people from outside
compare our school with Ambalalbhai's? Should we not be
guided by our own conscience? Certainly we have no wish to
boycott anyone. Tulsidas, the Antyaja, would have a place right
here.
The object in having you on the committee is clear enough,
viz., that all may feel the need to consult you while you are at
the Ashram. Let us assume that perhaps Maganlal may not feel
that way. Is that any reason why you should hesitate? If my
idea of the committee is correct, Mahadev, Kishorelal and Maganlal
cannot by themselves carry the burden.
The ideal before the school would be to discover through ex-
periments what national education is and for the teachers to consi-
der themselves as pupils because they are seekers, too, groping for
their ideal. I place you and myself in the same category. The
idea you have in regard to khadi is equally true in regard to
education.
What you have yet to do is this. Return the rules after ad-
ding to or deleting from them. There may possibly be an error in
incorporating into the rules that part of your criticism which all
accept. Therefore I want you to translate your own criticism into
the rules, so that it will be easy for everyone to understand it.
Else we would all be trying to interpret them in our own way.
You write nothing about your health. Let me know about
the weather there. Shanker has written many letters to you. Now
what about his complaint that you have not replied to them?
Blessings from
BAPU
SF. KAKASAHEB
YEOTMAL
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19926
