183. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SIMLA,
July 19, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
As usual outside Gujarat I can get no time for writing letters
and I have been only a trifle better in Simla than Bombay.
Here though there is not such a rush of visitors, constant attendance
upon Emerson and interviews with the Home Member and the
Viceroy separately and prolonged beyond all calculation have left
me no time for anything else, and twice I had to finish the even-
ing meal hurriedly.
I followed your advice and read the introduction in the
"library". The original must be very good. I marvel at the
immense industry that Romain Rolland gives to all he writes.
The introduction is another sketch like the one he wrote before,
bringing his opinion up to date. Your translation is quite read-
able. It does require retouching in several places but I have no
difficulty in making out what the original must be like. The
merit of your translation is that it is faithful to the original.
For the reasons you have stated you are naturally anxious
to know definitely whether we are going to London or not. But
I fear that I might not be able to come to a decision even at the
end of the Simla visit. There are many difficulties and many
hitches. I think I have been able to make it clear to the autho-
rities that I cannot go if the present unsatisfactory state of things
continues. But the authorities may find it difficult or may be
unwilling to give satisfaction. I had hoped to be able to leave
today but may not be able to get away before Tuesday or Wed-
nesday. These delays do not worry me because it has been the
lot of my life. "Take no thought for the morrow" has got to
be literally followed by one who will enforce his own life to
the teaching of the Gita. You should therefore tell both Romain
Rolland and your sister how uncertain everything is here and how
difficult it is to give definite news about the proposed departure
for London long in advance. The proper thing is not to expect
us till we have actually embarked.
I hope you are now quite at peace with yourself and realized
that the loved one lives more truly for the dissolution of the body
and renders the love also truer because unselfish and also be-
cause it is transferred to all that lives. Every death of a friend
or a relative should enrich universal love.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5435. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9669
