430. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 6, 1936
CHI. PREMA,
You can write to me now. We are leaving on the 8th for
Nandi Durg.
You seem to have gathered good experience. Merely because
we doubt a man's sincerity we cannot reject his application if he is
prepared to sign the Congress Pledge. There will always be men
who will wangle admission under one or the other pretext. If the
majority of the members are sincere, ultimately all will be well.
The report of the Maharashtrian's letter is perfectly correct.
But his supposition was completely wrong. The correspondent's
letter could be interpreted to mean that by resting my hands on
girls' shoulders I used to gratify my sensual desire. His words of
course were different.
But the truth is that my discontinuing the practice of resting
my hands on the shoulders of girls has nothing to do with my
sensual desire. It had its origin in my pampering the body with
food while doing no work. I had a discharge, but I was awake
and the mind was under control. I understood the cause and
from that time stopped taking rest as prescribed by the doctors.
And my state now is better than it was, if such a state could
be imagined. If you wish to ask me more questions about this
you may, for I have cherished high hopes of you. You may, there-
fore, know from me anything concerning myself that you wish to.
The articles I have written recently deserve careful pondering
over. If you have understood them, the practice of brahmacharya
will become very easy. If one is convinced that the genital organs
are not intended for sex-gratification, wouldn't one's attitude
change completely? As a man happening to see on the road the
blood-stained sputum of a consumptive may take it to be a gem
and long to pick it up, but will come to his senses as soon as he
realizes his error, so is the case in regard to the function of the
genital organs. The truth is that this belief has never been held
with sufficient conviction and clarity. And now the new edu-
cation denounces it, teaches that moderate sex-gratification is a
good thing and asserts its necessity. Think over all this.
The experience of your friends that you have described is
excellent.
Let this suffice for the present.
Probably Lilavati will join you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10380. Also C.W. 6818. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
