264. LETTER TO N. M. JOSHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
December 21, 1938
MY DEAR JOSHI,
I am very grateful to you for your two letters containing an
exhaustive reply to my letter. I am glad too that Parulekar took
the trouble of writing out his speech. Though the sentences mark-
ed do not appear in the speech, there is hot stuff enough in it,
perilously going near to the sentiments ascribed to Parulekar in
the report I sent to you. Mark the following:
They often described British bureaucracy as Satanic. I must find
out a stronger term than the word "Satanic", as this act is more devi-
lish . . . . They know that the Bill is not in your interest and, therefore,
they are afraid of you. They feel nervous. They think that you will
throwaway their Gandhi caps. This "Gandhi Cap Government" has
shown by its acts that they are not the friends of the poor. They are
there to work in the interests of the rich. . . . If they postpone the discussion
they will have to discuss the Bill in Bombay who are politically con-
scious. The workers in Bombay will take out monster demonstrations
and will create such a row that those who are responsible for the Bill
will not be able to enjoy sound and comfortable sleep. The workers
can be compared to a sleeping lion.
I warn Government not to wake
him up. Let them not tease him. Let them not attack him. They
must realize that if they provoke him the working class has enough
strength to retaliate on the strongest Government. . . . This Bill is a deadly
poisonous pill coated with sugar. We must scratch the sugar and leave
the poison to be swallowed by the framers of the Bill.
I should not like such language in the mouth of a member
of the Society.
As to your remark about the danger to civil liberty, I would
like you to give me some concrete suggestion for a Provincial
Government to be at least able to know what public men are
saying and doing. Or, do you suggest that they ought not to
concern themselves with the sayings and doings of public men?
I am not now thinking of the possible punishment that might be
inflicted upon those who make speeches inciting to violence or
whatever is considered contrary to law. I am thinking of peace-
ful action such as warning to reckless speakers and establishing
contact with organizations to which they belong. So far as Paru-
lekar is concerned, I am making further inquiry. In any case I
I am quite clear in my mind that there should be no prosecution
against him and I am writing to Kher accordingly.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
