400. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 18, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
You were certainly not in a mood to write when you wrote
that letter. It was as long as your letters usually are, but it seem-
ed to be incoherent. Just as one should not eat when one is not
hungry or go out for a walk when one does not feel like it, simi-
larly one should not write a letter when one is not in a mood
to write one. Or, you may say merely that you are tired and
do not wish to write, and stop there.
It is not a good sign that the end of the day finds you irri-
table rather than cheerful. This is no evidence of a spirit of
non-attachment. I advise you, nay urge you, to reduce your res-
ponsibilities. That will do no harm either to you or to the Ashram.
Only work which is done with a cheerful mind bears fruit.
I see the co-workers here every fortnight, and this time I
had asked Dhurandhar to come with the others. He keeps good
health. He has lost some weight, for he takes the diet prescribed
for 'C'-class prisoners. You will be permitted to visit him now,
provided no one has visited him meanwhile.
325
I hope you wrote what you did about the questions arising
from lezim exercises without giving careful thought to the subject.
You don't know where the doctrine of "art for art's sake" leads
a person. In its name, young men in the West have in this age
descended right into hell. Perhaps you didn't have a clear idea
of what art means when you wrote the letter. But, then, you your-
self have warned me that there will be no sense or logic in your
letter. I will not, therefore, dwell further on this subject.
It is possible that you do not appear hysterical to yourself.
Kisan may also not see that you are so. Or it may be that nei-
ther of you has understood the meaning of 'hysterical'. Perhaps
you have never consulted a dictionary to find out. Don't take it
for granted that our M.A.s know English. Moreover, very few
people know the meanings of such technical terms. You are a
fine specimen of a hysterical woman. Being hysterical is not neces-
sarily a defect of character. It is desirable, however, to overcome
this tendency sooner or later. But I will not lead you into a dis-
cussion of this subject. I don't mind your thinking that you are
not hysterical. Since you always wish to do what seems right to
you, I don't worry about the matter. "No one striving to follow
good ever comes to harm."
Your statement was that it was the special excellence of the
Ashram that no one in it who took up some work left it off. I
would regard that as a certificate. Maybe the Ashram does not
deserve it today, but we should certainly aspire to deserve it one
day. I am not unhappy about our failures. I am aware of them
and, therefore, I am vigilant. The fact that we get no time to
learn what we had wished to learn is only evidence of my short-
comings. My organizing ability and my ability to teach are limit-
ed, and my sense of proportion in regard to time is also limit-
ed; nonetheless, if circumstances had not kept me away from the
Ashram for much of the time, I would have somehow managed
to fulfil most of the programme. I say this from experience. But
we should think about the past only with a view to improving
things in future if we can. All of you should apply your minds
and see if you can organize things and do what I have failed to
do. Find some time and think over what we had planned to do,
what remains undone and how much of it can still be carried
out. Try to do whatever can be done. If you think that nothing
can be done, forget what cannot be helped. We should not go on
worrying about the matter.
1 Bhagavad Gita, VI. 40
To become a cipher means to shed the feeling, 'I am doing
this'. There is no suggestion of pessimism in this.
Mahadev and I may claim to have done twice the normal
amount of work during this Week. This time, Sardar has not
yet been inspired to take up spinning. But all three of us had fasted.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10281. Also C.W. 6729. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
