81. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
February 17, 1912
MY DEAR MILLIE,
What a horrid thing that you should get chicken pox ! Henry says
it was due to the sin of going to Delhi even after the event. Whatever
the cause, I am sorry you were not able to attend the Congress sittings.
It was quite like you to have turned your illness to good account by
reading on things Indian. I hope that the illness has not left you weaker.
These illnesses if properly treated invigorate patients in the end.
Waldo is evidently having a good time of it here.
I hope you are not worrying about Amy. To worry where we cannot
help if possible is to render us still more helpless for future service.
Of the bill and the prospects of the struggle, you will learn from
my letter to Henry.
Manilal, Ramdas and Devdas are with me at present. They are
all well. Manilal will be going to Phoenix shortly. Hoosen too has been
paying a visit to the Transvaal. He proposes to leave for India shortly.
I have now 25 boys on the Farm - 8 Mahommedans, 2 Parsees
and the balance Hindus. Of the latter, 5 are Tamils, one Calcuttan
and the rest Gujaratis. They are divided into at least four standards.
Medh, Pragji and Jamnadas assist me at school. Gujarati, Hindi and
Tamil are being taught besides English. I shall find it somewhat difficult
to manage the school if and when Desai and Medh go to India. I
want to teach the boys sewing. Mrs. Vogl has been coming once a
fortnight for the purpose. Poor woman. She has her old trouble coming
on again and again. The doctor has now forbidden railway travelling.
So the class may be interrupted. But I have learnt sufficient to continue
the class for some time. Sandal-making is going on regularly. I make
my own shirts now. Ramdas, Devdas and I wear shirts of my own
make. Mrs. V. is quite proud of her new pupil. But I fear she conceals
the true fact when she credits me with having turned out an excellent
shirt. I have just finished Devdas's knickers too. During the past six
months, we must have made nearly 50 pairs of sandals-mostly for
the Farm boys. Some have been made to order also. I sent one pair
to Maud and if you give me the tracing of your right foot, holding
the pen perpendicular I shall do myself the honour of making a pair
for you. Mrs. Vogl and Miss Schlesin have theirs.
1 Pragji Desai and Surendrarai Medh left for India in the second week of March
1912, vide Vol. XI, pp. 244-.
102
I think I gave you the school hours. Rise at 6 a.m., breakfast 6.45
a.m. - home-made bread toasted or fried in ghee and cereal, coffee
or milk (condensed I am sorry) and stewed peaches 7.15 manual work
- some hoeing, some in the kitchen, some wood-chopping and others
sandal making and sewing - 10 a.m. bell for bathing, 11 a.m. to 12
noon diner - rice and curry and bread, fruits if any and some cereal
and milk preparation for those boys who are experimenting in saltless
diet. 12 to 1 boys read for themselves. 1 to 4.30 schooling. 4.30 to
4.45 drill. 5.30 p.m. supper-wholemeal porridge, milk, stew and coffee
and bread. 7 to 8 some religious reading and hymns - Gujarati, Hindi
and English. Religious reading from Mahommedan scriptural books,
Parsee and Hindu. At 8 p.m. boys are free to go to bed. I sleep with
them on the open verandah. Mrs. Gandhi too sleeps on the open
verandah with the boys who cannot be accommodated on the verandah
where I sleep. Devdas shares Mrs. Gandhi's bed as of old. Boys do
their own washing. On the Farm they wear nothing but the shirts and
trousers. If it is cold, they wear jerseys and jackets too if they wish
to. There is hardly any compulsion used. Appeal is always made to
their good nature for making them do anything. All boys must be
vegetarians and non-smokers at least on the Farm. No boys may come
from outside to have tuition only. Parents pay 3/- per month for board.
They pay also 10/- for books. The 10/- should last six months. And
now you have the whole picture of the school. They are taught English,
arithmetic and their own mother tongue. History, geography, etc., are
taught incidentally.
With love,
BROTHER
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
