270. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
NANDI DURG,
Chaitra Vad [11, April 27, 1927]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I have your letter. Cholera has broken out in an epidemic
form in Porbandar and Bhai Amritlal Thakkar is afraid we can-
not hold the convention in June. Is it true? He has another
reason, viz., my indifferent health and I too agree with him.
Please let me know the various aspects of the situation.
I have forwarded to Chi. Chhaganlal the letter about funds
for the school, asking him to send the amount as and when
possible. I also understand from your letter that you have no
intention of coming under the Vidyapith and that, if your present
requirements are met with, you will later on manage yourself
somehow.
I have been writing to Narandas about the khadi work.
Now about the Satyagraha Dal.
There will never be too many satyagrahis; my blessings there-
fore even to those who would try to become one. But are we
likely to gain any special advantage by forming a Dal? There
could be recruiting for an immediate task on hand. Will the Dal
be useful as a stand-by when an occasion comes up? Or if we
have such an organization, it should, I am convinced by experi-
ence, be engaged in some constructive activity. In the event of a
struggle, we can draw from it the required number of workers and
the rest can come and join of their own accord. What will these
18 persons do as long as there is no occasion to launch a struggle?
Of course they do carry on their spinning; when I speak of con-
structive activity I mean that which would keep them occupied all
the time. All these 18 persons have their own business to attend to.
At the moment they have no social activity to take up collectively.
Who will build up faultless character? How is it defined?
You for one know well that the Satyagraha Ashram exists just for
it. And even there, who could certify faultless character?
Satyagraha and the satyagrahis are like the sun and its rays,
you cannot hide them under a bushel, they cannot be unmade
by your refusing to recognize them.
Everywhere today I see occasions for satyagraha; but where
are those who would offer it? Those that would are ever ready.
They are preparing themselves and when they have the confidence
they will never wait for my permission or anyone else's.
In spite of all this cautioning, I would ask you to let all that
you have done stand as it is. It would not have mattered had
you not worked it up, but where the intention is noble there is
no room for disappointment or for undoing what has been done.
Think of something that would strengthen the bond among the
workers. As for my criticism in the first instance you should
think it over yourself and then make such additions and altera-
tions as you think right.
When we meet we shall again discuss it further.
This Dal is certainly not in response to those who are press-
ing us to take up political activity. Their point of view too deser-
ves to be understood. It is a different thing that you and I are
not interested in it. They maintain that even today we should
carry on a movement, as far as we can, over all the issues that
are believed to have a political aspect. Satyagraha mayor may
not come off, but let us at least present a petition regarding our
present miseries. If nothing more, let us come together for dis-
cussions since we are allowed to. If nothing else, let us at any
rate exchange views and so on.
This line of thought cannot certainly be dismissed; we too
had been thinking this way in the past. Your Dal does not answer
this expectation. You should find out some simple way for them,
or help them find it. One of the ways to do this is to willingly
leave the organization of the Political Conference to them and help
them with it as much as you can.
As I write, more comes to my pen. But if I set out to "print"
all of it I would tire my hand and my doctor will warn me that
my blood-pressure may rise.
You should therefore strike the 't's and dot the 'i's in what
I have written today. And if you cannot, you should get me to
do it on some other occasion.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2866. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah
