56. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 11, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
If you have patience and faith, all the pages of the "book of
nature" will be open to you. It is the promise of the God of
Truth that "to those who worship Me (Truth) with love, I
grant the yoga of understanding." Meditation on this verse opens
up to me all the pages of my nature. When the book is lying
before you, whose fault is it if you cannot read it or do not take
the trouble to read it? But I think I have said too much. In
any case, I have explained to you the method of reading that
book. You will say that you knew it. If you do, would it not
prove me right in describing you as omniscient?
I can have no objection at all to your sending all my letters
to . . .1. The last letter was about her and, therefore, I particularly
wished that you should send it to her. You may now write and
tell me how the matter stands. . . .2 s a y s that I could not find
the correct remedy for . . . 3, and she is right, but only partly.
I have discovered the remedy, but I am not in a position to
apply it. How can I help that? The remedy which he needs
is a woman-either a woman whom he could love and would
marry, or one who would be more than a sister to him. I had
my eyes on . . . ever since I saw her and . . . 's affection for
her and hers for him. I have always believed in the innocence
of their love. But how could I burden . . . with a responsibility
till an opportunity arose? Your letter gave me the required
opportunity. I do not know whether my diagnosis is correct and
whether . . . is the remedy for him. Perhaps . . . herself does
not know it. We can discover the truth only if we try the remedy
which I have suggested. All that I desire is . . .'s peace of
mind. In the absence of such peace, his abilities remain un-
used and his health is wasting away. He does not even know
whether he feels interested in the work which he does.
You seem to have collected from somewhere a good many
stories about my childhood.
Do you know that Ramabehn is ill? You should at least go
and talk to her. In actual fact there is often no cause for the
fear which we entertain in our imagination. The saying, "A ghost
is the projection of our fancies and a witch of our fears" is liter-
ally true. It is a hundred per cent true.
I hope you are properly looking after the new arrivals among
women. You may reduce your other work, but attend to this
carefully.
I read about Kisan in the paper. Dhurandhar has been doing
fine work. But he should take care and make his body strong.
What is his weight?
What did I write about you in my letter to Anandi ? What
did I tell Lilavati ? I don't remember. I have no doubt at all
1,2& The names have been omitted.
4 Addressee's friend, Kisan Ghumatkar
5& Daughters of Lakshmidas P. Asar
about your observing brahmacharya at present. I don't know what
may happen in the future. If you can tell, you know more than
Narad and Rama did. However, I have always admired your
resolution.
I don't believe that anyone can easily tempt you.
But I have seen women as determined as you get married.
How can anyone blame them for that? Hence, at present I can
only wish that you will remain faithful to your resolution, and
bless you that you may. I may help you as much as I can, and give
you blows as often as necessary. The result lies in God's hands.
I want your letters to be in no way different from what
they are. If you cease to be natural, I will take no interest in
you. You are full of complexes. I can try to remove them only
as and when I observe them. However, who am I to remove
them? It does not lie in man's power to do so. I should like to
be an instrument in removing them to the extent that He per-
mits me to be so. It is in my interest to do this, since I hope
to take much work from you. If I believed that what I was
trying to inculcate in you would bear no fruit, do you think I
would take the trouble to write these long letters?
I do not know any instance of the cause of an individual's
or society'S fall having been discovered. Many guesses, of course,
have been made. The immediate cause is sometimes discovered,
but in all cases there is not one such cause only. Generally speak-
ing, however, it may be said that a fall can be traced to lack of
dharma. Political subjection can never be the root cause, for it
is itself the result of other causes, other weaknesses.
One's duty as a neighbour is always to help a neighbour
in a manner consistent with dharma.
The seed of ego is destroyed only when one feels oneself to
be a cipher. If anyone looks inward and ponders deeply over
the matter, he cannot but realize his total insignificance. As
we count an insect insignificant relatively to the earth, so is man
insignificant in relation to this universe which is millions of times
vaster than the earth. That he is endowed with reason makes no
difference to this fact. His greatness lies in realizing his insigni-
ficance, for, simultaneously with such realization, he realizes
that, insignificant in himself, he is an insignificant aspect of God
and that, when he merges in Him, he becomes God, that this
microscopic atom which he is contains the infinite power of God.
I believe in the theory of maya in my own way.
In the
cycle of Time this universe is maya, but, during the moment of
time it exists, it is real enough. I believe in the theory of the
many-sidedness of truth.
If there is anything in this world which faces man as a
certainty, it is death. And yet we fear that inescapable certainty;
that is the greatest wonder of life, that is real attachment and
that is atheism. It is possible only for man to rise above it.
One's good and evil deeds do accompany the soul after the
death of the body. The soul, as soul, suffers their consequences,
whether in another physical body or in a subtle body.
Isn't this enough?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10302. Also C.W. 5753. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
