45. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
The pressure of work on me is increasing day by day. The
condition of the two elbows also requires rest. You should, there-
fore, tell everybody that at present they should not expect long
letters from me. Probably I may have to content myself with only
a letter to you and one to Kusum who is ill. We should regard
this as the smallest sacrifice that we can make for our Harijan
friends. We shall have to make much bigger sacrifices in future.
Even if the whole Ashram gave up its other activities and plunged
in this movement of self-purification, I would not regard that
sacrifice as too big. But there can be no renunciation without
complete freedom from desire. And there can be no freedom
from desire without self-purification. Anybody, therefore, who
wishes to plunge into this yajna of self-purification should purify
himself. The line "Hari's way is for the brave" is perfectly appli-
cable in the present situation.
But some of the inmates seem to tremble even at the sugges-
tion for simplicity in food which I have made. Those who tremble
and cannot overcome their misgivings are at any rate truthful, and
deserve compliments for that. How long can self-restraint prac-
tised through false shame endure? Those who remember the story
of the pilgrim should reflect over how the other characters who,
blindly following his example, got tired in two or three days and
returned.
I do not get much time at present. When I get some, I
wish to suggest a good many more changes. If we eat more than
we need or eat things which we do not need for nourishment, we
are guilty of theft according to our principle, besides harming our
health. The experiment which I suggest in this letter is not
quackery, it is based on true science. Really speaking, we should
eat what the poor and the prisoners do not get only when those
things become absolutely necessary in our case. Hence I feel that
we must from time to time advance towards greater and greater
simplicity. We should learn the secret of eating only a few things
at one meal. Doctors have conducted experiments and proved
that this is necessary for health. We may eat several things in the
course of the day, but we should not mix them all at the same
meal. We cannot eat at the same meal rotli, dal, vegetables, milk,
rice, etc. But we can eat at one meal rotli and milk, a vegetable
and milk, rice and dal, rice and milk and rotli and dal. We should
never take dal and milk together. Similarly, we should not eat
wheat and bajri at the same meal. And also it is better not to
eat rice and vegetables together. I make this suggestion because
I have read about it and put it into practice. If we follow this
practice the burden on the stomach will be lightened and the
body also will feel light. Those who do not adopt such experiments
with full knowledge [of their likely benefits] will certainly be
upset by them. If the mind does not co-operate, such an ex-
periment may possibly fail. We shall succeed in it if we strengthen
our mind by thinking that through such a practice we shall increase
our capacity for renunciation, show proper regard for the poor,
save money and benefit our health.
I am realizing in actual experience that milk, bread, vegetables
and fruit make a completely balanced diet. My weight has gone
up to 103½ pounds. I eat fresh fruits with nothing else. With
milk, I eat dates or a vegetable. I mix half the quantity of milk
with dates and drink the remaining half. In this manner, I drink
from two and a half to two and three-quarter pounds of milk. In
the morning, I eat mosambis or oranges without fail. At seven, I
have milk and dates; at twelve, two oranges or mosambis, and at
four a vegetable, milk and one loaf of bread. This is my daily food.
I have been thinking of omitting milk or bread. I take twice
a day sour lemon juice with water and soda bicarb. Perhaps this
may not be necessary. I have yet to find that out. Mirabehn is
at present living on almost the same diet as I am doing, and she
informs me that it has benefited her. It is too early yet to attach
importance to her experience. Since her heart is behind her ex-
periment, naturally she feels that it is benefiting her. If there is
no benefit in reality, we shall know by and by. It is also necessary
not to eat jowar porridge in excessive quantity. It would be advis-
able to observe moderation in regard to the quantity of every item.
In case of stomach-ache, or headache or, for those who suffer from
constipation, indigestion, one may drop one or two meals, or
even fast for the whole day. Nobody should lose courage all too
soon. The best way of running the joint kitchen without much
trouble is that anybody who does not like a particular item should
not eat it, but without asking for something else in its place.
Every meal provides sufficient nourishment. Generally, milk and
vegetables will suit everybody. They should be enough. It is a
superstitious belief that one will become weak if one does not eat
solid food for the whole day. Of course all this does not apply to
persons who are ill. They should always get food which the state
of their health demands. But I am convinced that if we plan
our diet on a scientific basis and eat moderately, nobody would fall
ill. This should be enough for today on the subject of food.
Show this letter to all. Everybody may reject what does not appeal
to him or her.
Prabhashankar must have returned there. I hope he is quite
happy. Tell him that I had got his letter. This time I content
myself with this letter in reply to him. I think all the suggestions
will be acceptable to him. Is Ratilal calm? Do you know that
Ramji has many complaints to make? Amina is unhappy. Ask
her what the cause is.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro‒9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 497-. Also C.W. 8265.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
