217. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
SEVAGRAM,
February 12, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
After reading the enclosed, pass it on to Krishnadas. After
reading he should return it to me.
1. In regard to myself, I have taken the position that even
when [a particular form of personal service] may not be necessary
a person may be allowed to offer it after he has been told so-just
for his satisfaction. That is why I let the girls massage my legs.
I would not let any others do so. I don't mind what Bhansali
does, for I have complete faith in him. Nobody is privileged.
Nobody can be privileged. This must be clear.
2. The responsibility for anything that you may permit
Champa to do will be yours. I will not guide you. You are free
to be as strict as you like. I have told Champa that she may
secure from you whatever liberty she wants, but must not ask for
my permission, since the daily supervision over her is not mine.
3. The Ashram manager should be a sthitaprajna, a gunatita
and a bhakta. For this see Chapter II, XII and XIV [of the Gita].
4. For learning English, why should anybody want to hear
it read by someone else? One may read it for oneself. Bhansali
may read from Ramakrishna and explain in Gujarati. Nobody is
forbidden to read English by himself. One may learn any Indian
language, and Bhansali may teach it. I would never say that those
who knew English should forget their knowledge, except perhaps
sarcastically. I myself know English and love the language. But
the language must be used only when necessary and not other-
wise.
5. Omprakash should hand over his watch to the Ashram.
I think I shall be able to get Rs. 30 for it. This would be the
right thing to do. But if O. prefers to pay that sum to the
Ashram and keep the watch himself, he may do so.
6. Certainly, it is one's duty to learn an Indian language,
i.e., one's mother tongue.
7. Ordinarily it is desirable that the class should be conduct-
ed at the place fixed for the purpose.
This has been written in Gujarati unconsciously. I hope you
will follow it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 4576
