415. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
LONDON, S.W.,
November 20, 1914
MY DEAR WEST,
I have your welcome letter after months. You all say that
you had not heard from me at all. That's strange. Certainly, not
a mail has been missed by me— either I wrote myself or Sorabji
for me, at least to someone or other in Phoenix. It is evident,
therefore, that my letters have all, or some of them, miscarried.
I wish that your surmise was true and that I was working among
our wounded soldiers. Most of the members of the Corps are
certainly doing so, at Netley. When the last batch went I was
bedridden. In any case, my presence was necessary here, in order
to get together the required number of men. I was to have follow-
ed, however; but now unheard of difficulties are being put in my
way and am prevented from going to Netley, or to any of the
other hospitals where our wounded soldiers are being received. It
seems to me that I am being prevented, because the officials im-
mediately in charge fear that I might make mischief. The osten-
sible reason given to prevent my going is ill health. I may be
quite wrong in my surmise, however. At any rate, I have placed
the whole facts before Mr. Roberts, the Under Secretary for India
— and I should know before long probably.
So you will see that I have not yet been separated either from
Mrs. Gandhi or Mr. Kallenbach. We are all now living under
Mr. Gandevia's roof. He, as you know, is the Secretary of the
Corps. He is the proprietor of a boarding house for Indian students.
He has placed one of his best rooms at our disposal.
I envy you your gardening work. Just now my own health
seems to have been completely shattered. I feel that I hopelessly
mismanaged my constitution in the fast. I was in a hurry to regain
my lost energy. I, therefore, overfed the system and overstrained
the body in compelling myself to take long strenuous walks. I was
too impatient and am paying the penalty : I can now scarcely
walk with any strenuousness without the original pain starting. The
ribs seem to have become shattered— they will not stand any strain,
nor the groins. I, therefore, am obliged largely to keep indoors
and remain in bed. Of food I can take very little— the slightest
excess would upset me. In spite of all this, I am able to attend to
my work. Nor does all this imply that I am only skin and bones.
By carefulness I am able to undo the mischief done. The mental
and moral atmosphere is also a great drawback. Everything ap-
pears so artificial, so materialistic and immoral that one's soul
almost becomes atrophied.
I am longing to go to India and so is Mrs. Gandhi; but a
sense of duty and— I am not sure that, on this occasion, it is a
right sense of duty that compels me to remain here.
I share your views about the War. If I had the moral strength,
however, I would certainly be the passive resister that you have
pictured in your letter.
I am glad that you all are getting on well there and that your
little ones are doing so well and add to the joys of your life. I
hope that everything there is going on peacefully.
Please remember us to all. I may not be writing any other
letter this week so that I would like you to show this to everybody.
This letter is being taken down, you will be glad to know,
by an Indian friend. After James, he is the first Indian friend I
have found capable of taking shorthand notes. He is just now
staying in the same house with me awaiting instructions to proceed
to one of the hospitals where our Indian troops are. His name is
Manic Lal Chandra, and has been in England for about four
years.
Mr. Chandra, from what I understand, is a much-
travelled man.
I shall try and write to Polak, but you may pass this letter on to
him lest I fail to do so.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
From a photostat of the handwritten original signed by Gandhiji: C. W. 4416
Courtesy: A. H. West
