128. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
October 3, 1934
CHI. HARILAL,
I have your letter. Narandas has been a little hasty. I am
sending a wire to you today as follows:
"Delay spending money received from Narandas. Await
letter. Bapu"
I woke up at 2.30 and started thinking about my dharma
towards you. I couldn't go to sleep again and left the bed at
2.45. After cleaning my teeth and drinking warm water with
honey, I have set down to write this.
I want the loan which Narandas may give you to be debi-
ted to his private account. Till I am quite sure, I do not wish
1 This is in English.
110
to draw your expenses from a public fund or secure them from
friends in public life. It would be compromising dharma to do so.
I do not yet believe in your regeneration.
I must have
independent proof of that. I, therefore, do not wish to ask you for
an assurance to that effect. However, I wish to assure myself
through your conduct. If you have produced a good impression on
Ishvarlal with whom you are staying, ask him to write to me.
And let me have your own replies to the following questions.
1. Have you touched liquor any time after you wrote your
first letter to me from there?
2. Have you indulged in sexual pleasure through mind,
speech or body?
3. Do you smoke?
4. Have you any other addiction?
Let there be this understanding between you and me.
If at
any time you break your word to me or if it is proved that you
have deceived me, I should fast for at least seven days.
I may
fast even longer, if I wish and have the strength to do so, in case
your breach of promise or misdeed pains me very much.
Though I was still hopeful about you, I had hardened my
heart to stone and did not give you any monetary help. But I
felt from the letter which you wrote to me from Porbandar that
there had been a change of heart in you and wanted to give you
whatever help I could.
If you have come to have trust in my way of life and my
understanding of dharma, you will be convinced of the correct-
ness of whatever demands I make or advice I give. Please do not
ask me to discuss and explain, but carry out my suggestions as a
patient does those of a vaid as so many orders. Do not do any-
thing through a feeling that because I am your father you have a
special dharma towards me. You may have such dharma to help
me when I am completely disabled. But in this matter treat me
as a friend, a vaid and a co-worker. Why are you so keen on
staying in Porbandar?
It would be convenient for me to help
you if you stayed in Rajkot.
If, however, you decide to stay in Porbandar, I will have no
objection to your staying in our ancestral house. Is any part of it
vacant? Does it get good air?
Till I am satisfied, and Ramjibhai also is satisfied, that you
have become steady, please give up the idea of starting a store.
With the help of khadi samples, you may secure what orders
you can in Porbandar.
If you have come to have the same faith in the spinning-wheel
and khadi that I have, you should enthusiastically start learning
spinning on the takli and the spinning-wheel, and spin daily on
the former. Learn all the antecedent processes also.
You can do
all this more easily in Rajkot.
Are you ready to live with me
and under my eyes? I may like you to do that after the Con-
gress session is over.
Kakasaheb and Kishorelalbhai are here with me. And
Vinoba also, of course.
Whatever you do, do after full deliberation. Do not do any-
thing that is beyond your strength, nor anything that does not
appeal to your heart or reason. Do not try to establish good rela-
tions with me merely in order that you may be able to live. You
have been able to do that somehow all these years.
Doesn't God
provide for everybody, good or bad, in some manner or other? But
imperfect man must continue to discriminate between good and
evil till the end of his life. Nobody living in the flesh has become
perfect or will ever become, for the marriage of the atman with the
material body is in itself a limitation of its perfection. Marriage
by its very nature is a limitation. When the atman becomes a
perfect brahmachari, it will no longer create new bodies for itself.
But why need I take you into all this?
May you attain the highest good.
May God dwell in you.
He alone is your true Guru. "Friends of the body but care for
their own interests; they will keep away at the end." You should,
therefore, do as the self within bids you, with God as witness.
It
will not hurt me in the least if you do not accept my advice.
But it will hurt me very much indeed if you deceive me. I am an
old man now, and you are not a child.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
