349. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
LONDON,
November 11, 1909
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
Although I have your kind message through Mr. Polak that I
should not address you as Professor my reverence for you will not enable
me to adopt a more familiar style.
In his last letter, Mr. Polak tells me that overwork and anxiety have
ruined your health and that your plain-spokenness has endangered your
life. I venture to suggest that you should come to the Transvaal and
Join us. I claim that the Transvaal struggle is national in every sense
of the term. It deserves the highest encouragement. I have considered
it to be the greatest struggle of modern time. That it will succeed
in the end I have not the slightest doubt. But an early success will
break up the violence movement in India.
I have moved very freely among our countrymen here and I notice
extreme bitterness against you. Most consider that violence is the only
method for securing any reform. In the Transvaal, we are trying to
show that violence is futile and that the proper method is self-suffering,
i.e., passive resistance. If, therefore, you came to the Transvaal, publicly
declaring that it was your intention to share our sorrows and, therefore,
to cross the Transvaal border as a citizen of the Empire, you would give
it a world-wide significance, the struggle will soon end and your country-
men will know you better. The last consideration may not weigh with
you. But it does with me for the sake of themselves. If you would come,
and if you are left untouched and I am free, I should deem it a great
privilege to nurse you. If you are arrested and imprisoned, I should be
delighted. I may be wrong, but I do feel that it is a step worth taking
for the sake of India. Feeling so strongly, I would be pardoned for
suggesting that the Transvaal question should have a prominent place
on the Congress platform and nothing can be so effective as for you to
say that you would join the struggle.
I have written this letter in the midst of interruptions. I have not
therefore been able to explain all I should like to. I would only [add]
that my reverence for you has prompted this suggestion. I would see
you reach perfection among your countrymen in S. A., where you would
not be misunderstood and where you would be mentioned as nowhere
else.
Will you kindly send your reply to me at Johannesburg, Box 6522 ?
I remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 924
Courtesy: Servants of India Society, Poona
1 Polak had written on October 14: "You will see what poor Gokhale has to
suffer. He tells me (privately) that the Governor sent for him and warned him that his
person was in danger. The S[ervants] of I[ndia] watch him day and night and never
let him go out unguarded."
