86. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKER PATTANI
TINNEVELLY,
September 24, 1921
DEAR FRIEND,
Your letter reached me here, having wandered from place to
place. I am certainly glad that you wrote to me. You have the
right to do so. Though I cannot claim to have understood you
thoroughly I have known you for years as my well-wisher.
You put the greatest emphasis on the Prince's visit. I think
your argument about the visit is the weakest. The Prince is com-
ing here to uphold the prestige of the present Government. His
visit now is uncalled for. I do not consider him as outside the
Government. Nobody will oppose him as an individual, but he
should have no quarter as the future head of the present system.
Your quotations from our Shastras about loyalty can hardly apply
here. What a great difference between Rama and Ravana!
But what you write about other matters does weigh with
me. I do not at all want to lessen children's respect for their
parents. However I do believe that such sad results as you
describe have followed. But this incivility is a transitory phase.
Besides, just as a son should have respect for his father, the father
also should have love for his son. But this also I do not find.
The real malady is that both lack the religious spirit. Having said
and admitted this, I may also tell you what I think about the
matter. The people have on the whole benefited by our program-
me in regard to schools [and colleges].
I do not know anything about Shri Shukla's resignation. I
know Manilal has a hot temper. I have been taking all possible
measures in regard to such things. This is a grim struggle. I
have plunged into it in the hope that in the end the people will
become religious-minded. I feel immense joy when I see the
beautiful transformation in the lives of many. At the same time,
I am grieved to see that many have joined the fight just to feed
their ego. But who am I [to judge others]? I am not at all worr-
ied, for I am carrying on the fight with a detached mind and
trust that God will save me from all sins.
I remember your repeating to me the verse which you have
quoted. I keep it in mind and carry my burden. Will God
blame me if the cart is broken or the rider unwary?
We shall discuss things if and when we meet.
I hope to go to Bombay on the 2nd.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 3176; also G.N. 5863
