201. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
July 4, 1908
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
The test case brought against Mr. Sorabji, a Parsi gentleman of
culture and English education, who has entered the Colony under the
Immigrants' Restriction Act, marks another stage in the Asiatic struggle.
Mr. Sorabji, who holds splendid testimonials from the Chairman of
the Charlestown Local Board and other prominent Europeans, is now
to be tried not under the Immigrants' Restriction Act but under the
Asiatic Law Amendment Act, for being an Asiatic without registration
under the Act. I say nothing with reference to the trial under the Asiatic
Act because it is sub judice: but the fact of the case being brought under
the Asiatic Act proves the point I have ventured to raise before General
Smuts that educated Asiatics were free to enter under the Immigrants'
Restriction Act. That they become liable to a removal order if they
do not accept the Asiatic Act has been known all along, and that was
why the petition against the Immigrants' Restriction Act stated that
what the Government gave with the one hand, they took away with
the other. Could Mr. Sorabji bring himself to accept degradation
under the Asiatic Act, he would not be a prohibited immigrant. What
General Smuts asks Asiatics to give against repeal of the Asiatic Act
is that they should surrender the rights of, say, Sir Mancherji Bhownaggree.
It will now be seen clearly that Asiatics are not asking for anything
they are not entitled to by law. The anomalous position before the
Colony in view of the arrest of an alleged permit-forger at Pretoria
today is that those who are rightful residents and who helped the
Government can be kept on tenter-hooks, whereas those Indians who
are dishonest and steal into the country, by forgery or otherwise, may
remain in it without molestation, because they would never approach
the Government officials for identification, licence, or otherwise.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 11-7-1908
