473. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
At night, November 21/25, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter on Thursday (20th) morning. You should
not forward any letters unopened. Open every letter before for-
warding it. You may not read the letter, if the correspondent so
desires, but even that on the understanding that the correspondent
should write about no subject which is forbidden. Confidential
letters, therefore, should be about personal matters only. Adhere
to the method which you have been following.
It is certainly a painful matter that undesirable freedom was
taken in several respects at the time of Hari-ichchha's marriage,
1 The addressee in her letter had expressed disillusionment about the sin-
cerity of the Ashram workers. In the absence of Satis Chandra Das Gupta,
she was attempting to run the Ashram on her own. She had expressed the
possibility of employing paid workers if the efforts of the Ashram inmates were
inadequate, and had enclosed extracts from a letter from Satis Chandra Das
Gupta which was more in the nature of a discourse upon Tarini's death. (S.N.
16758-m)
336
but you did right in tolerating everything patiently and giving all
possible help.
Sometimes dharma lies in setting aside such rules. The atti-
tude which you adopted was inspired by the spirit of non-violence.
A principle has no exception. When, however, the rules and regu-
lations framed to embody a principle are felt to kill its spirit, they
may be set aside. The occasion of Hari-ichchha's marriage was of
this kind.
At the present time I have dedicated myself heart and soul to
spinning and other related processes, and I find myself constantly
thinking about the subject. Since we do spinning as a form of yajna,
we should be very exact and regular in doing it, display the ut-
most perseverance and sincerity in our work and become very
proficient in it. Most of us have no knowledge of even some ele-
mentary things about spinning. We should acquire it now. That
is, everyone should be able to ascertain the count, strength and even-
ness of his or her yarn and keep a record of these. One should
also keep a record of the time spent every day. If we do these
things habitually, they will take very little time. Everyone should
pay attention to increasing his or her speed, but without wasting
yarn. People should also learn to keep the spinning-wheel in re-
pair. That is, they should know how to make the belt, jotar and
spindle-holder. They should know about the different models of
spinning-wheels. But you should not be burdened with the task
of thinking about all these matters and getting people to carry out
my suggestions. I have nothing else to engage my attention, but
you have to face new responsibilities and problems every day. These
suggestions, therefore, should not impose a burden on you. You
may carry out, and persuade others to carry out, only those sug-
gestions which people can easily take up and act upon. Other
people, too, should concern themselves with these things and
think about them. Everyone should do what his interest and capa-
city incline him or permit him to do. You will find in the letter
to Lakshmidas a description of my experience in this regard too;
please read it.
Saturday morning
You have given a pleasing description of the service you are
doing. Take care that you do not fall ill through all this labour.
You have the spirit of non-attachment in you in good measure.
There is little likelihood, therefore, of your falling ill. Krishna is
bound to protect those who dedicate their work of service to Him.
Your losing weight is a good sign indeed. You have had a good
44-22
crop of fruit in the Ashram. Mathew has not described what free-
dom he takes. He has merely stated that he takes freedom. If
you know in what respect, let me know. We keep him in the
Ashram because he is a good man. I, too, believe that he will
come round some day.
When you have no time because of pressure of work, it will
suffice if you write only a few lines. You will find it easier if you
write down from time to time what you think you must tell me.
Don't you see that that is what I do here, though I am not as
busy as you are? I don't depart from my daily routine in order to
write these letters. That routine, of course, concerns the hours of
meals, sleeping, answering the call of nature and spinning. The
hours which are not taken up by these activities are practically all
spent in writing letters, except on Tuesday. I know that you can
arrange properly all your work, but even then I feel tempted to
write this. It is also a test of non-attachment to work, that a per-
son who has cultivated it will not feel that he is working under
pressure even when he is busy with a variety of tasks. There is an
excellent thought in an English saying. It is that a busy man can
always spare time for others. The point is that such a person,
even though working hard, is always found as fresh as if he had
no work and no one is disappointed by him.
I was very happy that you could take in Dhiru and Vimu. It
was also good that those two children felt drawn to the Ashram
of their own accord. Let me know how Dhiru behaves now.
Amidas's experiment is worth watching. From here, I see an
error in it. If he does no work and rests all the time, he can cer-
tainly live on fruit, but his experiment will not have succeeded.
That is right food for the body which gives it the necessary
strength for the ordinary duties of service. To get such strength,
he should be able to digest almonds and such other tissue-building
foods. My experience so far tells me that a weak stomach cannot
digest foods like almond, whereas it can digest the same nutrients
from milk. However, I don't wish to write about this to Ami-
das or suggest it indirectly to him. His sincere faith will probably
give him the required light. Let us hope that he will correct his
mistake, if he is making any, and that he will learn from his expe-
rience the value of milk or discover some vegetarian substances
similar in value to foods of animal origin.
case is a sad one. I did feel something unattractive on
his face, but I believed that he was a good man and used to dis-
1 The name has been omitted.
miss the other thought from my mind. And I was right in doing
that. Even when he fell at times, he continued to struggle and
it is possible that he has succeeded in his struggle by now. If so,
the expression on his face may also have changed. It was said
about Socrates that till the last his face did not seem like a good
man's. There is, therefore, only one path for creatures like us
who are always liable to error. We should always assume a man
to be good till we come to know something against him.
Give me the names of Chandrakanta's father and mother. I
will then write slips for them. What you have written to them is
right. They ought to give up worrying about her. It would be
best if Kanta's mother does not come to the Ashram. She will
probably be a burden on Gangabehn. Punjabhai's becoming un-
conscious occasionally is God's grace. That seems to give him
some rest. It would be best if Champa's delivery takes place in the
hospital to which Amina was admitted. She will get all facilities
there and will be well looked after, and nobody else will be put
to trouble. Some woman or other who can be spared from the
Ashram may visit her from time to time and stay with her. If
this is possible, suggest it to Champa. If she agrees, she will find
the arrangement convenient.
Monday morning, November 24, 1930
Most probably I wrote to you that I had received the bark-sheet
sent by Ratubhai. I used it till this day as a covering when
sleeping, but it has not become soft. I do not know whether or
not it can be washed. As it remains stiff, I thought it would be
more useful for spreading on the floor and that is what I have
started doing from today. I am sitting on it just now.
Vinoba tells me in his letter that he has sent two taklis. I
have made inquiries. They do not seem to have been received
here so far. I wonder if they have been received there. If you
have received them, send them here.
I call this chapter the key to an understanding of the Gita,
and the gist of it is that life is given us for service and not for
enjoyment. We have therefore to impart a sacrificial character
to our lives. Intellectual assent to this proposition is only the first
step, but such assent and conduct in terms of that assent are bound
to rid our heart of its impurities in course of time. But what is
real service? In order to obtain the right answer to this question,
restraint of the senses is essential, as it gives us a clearer and clearer
vision of the God of truth. Service rendered with selfish motives
ceases to be sacrifice. Hence the urgent need for the spirit of de-
tachment. When this is understood, all manner of controversies
lose their meaning for us. 'Did Krishna really ask Arjuna to kill
his relatives? Could such killing ever be a part of one's duty?'
Questions like these are set at rest for ever.
When detachment
governs our actions, even the weapon raised in order to strike
an enemy down falls out of our hand. But a mere pretence of de-
tachment serves no useful purpose. If only we persevere in our
effort, detachment may come to us perhaps the very first day, or
maybe only after a thousand years. We must not worry over the
time this takes, for the effort carries within itself the seeds of suc-
cess. We must however be on our guard and make sure that it is
a genuine effort, and that there is no self-deception. And this is
certainly possible for us all.
I have thus been able to complete Chapter III in two parts.
I have now fifteen minutes left to me in which to finish this letter.
The title you have suggested for these discourses is rather long.
It seems you propose to publish them one by one. Kaka suggests
a short title Gitabodh. I like it. The intention behind the present
attempt is that it may help those who read the discourses to under-
stand the meaning of the Gita as I have understood it. I don't know
whether I shall succeed in my aim. But that is the intention
behind my attempt and, therefore, the title Gitabodh suits the
discourses very well. I doubt the necessity of an English translation
of these discourses. But the final decision can only be made
there. As for the suggestion to complete the devotional reading
of the Gita in a week, Kakasaheb will now discuss it personally. If
no one likes the idea, we certainly don't wish to act upon it.
Blessings from
BAPU
After 8 a.m., Tuesday
[PS.]
Dudhabhai is in jail. Ascertain in which jail. If he is in
Sabarmati Jail, someone should go and visit him. Where has
Somabhai taken up work? I wrote to Jairamdas and told him that
I was not eating fresh fruits. My reason for doing so was that
there was a statement by the 'lathi' Department of the Govern-
ment that it was not true that I had given up eating fresh fruits
in protest against lathi-charges and that I still ate them. I have
already told you what I eat. However, I give here the history
so far, so that, if an occasion arises, you may issue an authorita-
tive rejoinder. I had given up fresh fruit for the most part during
the salt-march. I had resumed it after I was brought here. But I
gave it up after I heard about lathi-charges. I must have accept-
ed it for three or four days when I heard about the lathi-charges.
That was the position when Jairamdas met me. After that, with
a view to overcoming constipation and saving expenditure, I gave
up the dry fruits which I had been eating, namely, dates, currants
and raisins and started eating vegetables only. For some days I
ate both fruit and vegetables and then went over exclusively to
vegetables, but realized that I could not keep fit on them alone.
So I again went back to dates and raisins. Among the vege-
tables, I used to be supplied unripe papaiya. Sometimes the papaiya
would be ripe and I would eat that too. This did not happen
while Jairamdas was here. I must have accepted about ten times
ripe papaiya supplied from the garden here. Lemon, I of course
take every day, and Jairamdas has mentioned the fact. His state-
ment, therefore, is quite correct and the Government's on the
whole incorrect. It is only recently that I have been receiving
papaiya and no one can say, because I eat it, that I live on fresh
fruit. Probably no official knows about this fact at all, for the
papaiya is supplied to me along with raw vegetables. It is never
bought from the market. This is the position. Kakasaheb will
be released on the 29th and he will of course state the correct
position more clearly. My belief is that the Government official
[responsible for the statement] has made no distinction between
fresh and dry fruits or that he has assumed, from my having ac-
cepted a basket of fruit which may have been brought by a
visitor and which I may have passed on to Kakasaheb, that I
myself had eaten the fruit. God alone knows how the statement
came to be issued. If no controversy follows, you need not go
out of your way to issue any statement.
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 64 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
