71. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
BOMBAY,
March 18, 1920
DEAR MR. SASTRI,
As I took an active part in the Congress affairs last year I
have been asked to interest myself still more actively to the extent
of joining an organization. The demand has come from those
with whom I have had the privilege of working although I was
not connected with their organization. They have asked me to
join the All-India Home Rule League. I have told them that
at my time of life and with views firmly formed on several matters
I could only join an organization to affect its policy and not be
affected by it. This does not mean that I would not keep or that
I do not have an open mind to receive new light. I simply wish
to emphasize the fact that any new light will have to be specially
dazzling in order to entrance me. I placed before the friends the
following points on which I hold decided views:
1. [The] highest honesty must be introduced in the poli-
tical life of the country if we are to make our mark as a nation.
This presupposes at the present moment a very firm and definite
acceptance of the creed of Truth at any cost.
2.
Swadeshi must be our immediate goal. The future
aspirants after membership of the Council should be asked to
pledge themselves to an out and out protection of the country's
industries-specially cloth manufacture.
3. Definite acceptance of Hindustani-a resultant of Hindi
and Urdu-as a national language of intercourse in the immediate
future. The would-be members will be therefore pledged so to
work in the Imperial Council as to introduce Hindustani and in
the Local Councils the respective vernaculars, at least as an op-
tional medium for the time being till we are able to dispense
with English for the conduct of national affairs. They will also
be pledged to introduce Hindustani as a compulsory second
language in our schools with Devanagari or Urdu as an optional
script. English will be recognized as a language of Imperial
intercourse, diplomacy and international commerce.
4. Acceptance of the principle of redistribution of pro-
vinces so far as possible on a linguistic basis at the earliest
opportunity.
5. Hindu-Mohammedan unity in its essence and from
a political and religious standpoint as an unalterable article of
faith. This contemplates mutual help, mutual toleration and
recognition of the sufferings of one section to be the sufferings
of all. This will exclude, from the official programme of the
League, the unity propaganda by means of inter-dining and in-
termarriage and will include vigorous co-operation on the Khilafat
question. In my discussions amongst the friends I have also told
them that I will not think of asking for official recognition of
my creed of civil disobedience and that I do not belong to
any party and would like to make the League a non-party
organization helping all honest men if they are otherwise capable
of doing justice to the service they may choose irrespective of
party. The League, according to my opinion, cannot become
an anti-Congress organization but it should work as it is now
doing to further the interests of the Congress.
Do you advise me, knowing me as you do with my quali-
fications and limitations, to join the League?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of V. S. Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 69-71
