213. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
September 14/16, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I follow your hint concerning the women.
Read my letter to Chhaganlal Joshi. You or Gangabehn should
keep in correspondence with the women who have settled down
for work in different places outside the Ashram. If it seems neces-
sary and if she can find time, Gangabehn should even pay visits
to some of those places. Lapses will occur in some of them, but
we need not be afraid about them. We should remain, and see
that others, too, remain, sufficiently vigilant and leave the result
to God. What indeed is our tapashcharya in comparison to the degree
of self-control we expect from and wish to see in others? What-
ever that is, we wish to follow no other path. We wish to uphold
the fullest freedom for women. It does not matter if we miss the
path on our way, if we stumble, are pricked by thorns or fall down.
I gave the letter on Tuesday as usual, but it must have been posted
late by the office here either deliberately or through negligence. I
have not complained. You should, of course, write to me whenever
you do not get the letters in time. It is good that Punjabhai has
returned. Have you appointed anyone from the Ashram to look
after him? I am writing to Manibhai about the money for
honouring the memory of the poet which is lying with Reva-
shankerbhai. Tell Mrs. Zaulinger that I am awaiting her reply.
She may write to me anything she wishes to without any hesita-
tion. You have acted rightly in regard to Kamalabehn Lundy.
For the present it is best that she should say or write nothing.
There is plenty of silent service she can do. Balbhadra has done
fine work indeed in carding. This shows that, if we refuse to regard
a person as too dull-minded for a particular thing and go on
encouraging him, the result is bound to be good.
I am getting on all right just now. As usual I take milk and
curds. Instead of raisins and dates, I eat daily seven or eight
tomatoes, four or five big-sized, baked sweet potatoes and about
six spoons of cabbage or any other vegetable that is available. This
helps me in passing stools. I drink at 7.30 in the morning the
juice of one lemon with hot water and salt. In the afternoon, I
take the juice of one lemon with soda bicarb. If this regimen
suits me, it will solve the problem of constipation and effect consi-
derable economy. I get the vegetables from what grows in the
garden here. If we count the expenditure, I don't think it exceeds
two annas daily, whereas raisins and dates probably cost every
day not less than six annas. Those who suffer from constipation
may try this diet. I cannot say that it will benefit all. About myself,
too, I cannot yet say that the good effect will last. If this experiment
is followed, any other food should be avoided. The baked
sweet potatoes should be eaten by themselves and chewed well.
They should not be dipped in milk or curds. Probably it will do
no harm if one eats the skin. I do eat some. Because of my deli-
cate stomach I am afraid to eat all. Anybody else who has a
similar stomach and who tries this experiment should also avoid
the skin. I would be really happy if you could find my sandals.
Kusum is bound to know about them. She may have entrusted
them to Premabehn. If you have not yet sent the cotton send it
even by post in the last resort. Both the belts, one of six strings
and the other of eight strings, were found to be too thin. They
come off the pulley and go on revolving without moving the lat-
ter. Do not send me new ones in their place. Some are ready
with me and I will somehow manage to make others. I asked
you to let me know a simpler method because such a method
would save my time.
September 15, 1930
My silence ended a little while ago and Kakasaheb read out
to me Ramdas's letter to him. Ramdas says in it that he wrote a
letter to me which I have not received. I was very happy that
Ramdas gave in the letter to Kakasaheb detailed information
about his health and studies. When he is released from jail, we
shall be able to write to each other. I shall then get any letter
written by him if I can keep up this correspondence. I send you
the letters in cloth-lined envelopes now. I have with me only the
envelopes received from you. I retain their size when returning
them, so that you may be able to use them again. Otherwise I
could have made them smaller and used them.
Tuesday morning, September 16, 1930
I read in papers about Ba having been harassed in Surat by
the police. Is there any truth in the report?
The law, that to live man must work, first came home to
me upon reading Tolstoy's writings on bread labour. But even
before that I had begun to pay homage to it after reading
Ruskin's Unto This Last. The phrase 'Jatmahenat' is a translation of
the English expression 'bread labour'. Literally it means labour
for roti. The divine law that man must earn his bread by labour-
ing with his own hands was first stressed, not by Tolstoy but by
an obscure Russian writer named T. M. Bondoref. Tolstoy took
it from him and gave it wider publicity when he accepted it. In
my view, the same principle has been set forth in Chapter III of
the Gita where we are told that he who eats without offering sacri-
fice eats stolen food. Sacrifice here can only mean bread labour.
Be that as it may, that verse is the origin of our observance.
Reason, too, leads us to an identical conclusion. How can a
man who does not do body labour have the right to eat? "In the
sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat thy bread," says the Bible. A
millionaire cannot carry on for long, and will soon get tired of
his life, if he rolls in his bed all day long and is even helped
to his food. He, therefore, induces hunger by exercise and helps
himself to the food he eats. If everyone, whether rich or poor,
has thus to take exercise in some shape or form, why should it
not assume the form of productive labour, i.e., bread labour? No
one asks the cultivator to inhale fresh air, or to use his muscles.
And more than nine-tenths of humanity lives by tilling the soil.
How much happier, healthier and more peaceful would the
world become if the remaining tenth followed the example of the
overwhelming majority at least to the extent of labouring enough
for their food. And many hardships connected with agriculture
would be easily redressed if such people took a hand in it. Again,
invidious distinctions of rank would be abolished if everyone with-
out exception acknowledged the obligation of bread labour. At
present these distinctions have invaded even the varna system in
which there was not a trace of it originally. There is a world-
wide conflict between capital and labour, and the poor envy the
rich. If all worked for their bread, distinctions of rank would be
obliterated; the rich would still be there, but they would deem
themselves only trustees of their property and would use it mainly
in the public interest. Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one
who would observe non-violence, worship Truth and make the
observance of brahmacharya a natural act. This labour can truly
be related to agriculture alone. But at present at any rate
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A person can, there-
fore, spin or weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of
tilling the soil, always regarding agriculture, however, to be the
ideal. Everyone must be his own scavenger. Evacuation is as
necessary as eating; and the best thing would be for everyone to
dispose of his own waste. If this is impossible, each family should
see to its own scavenging. I have felt for years that there must
be something radically wrong where scavenging has been made the
concern of a separate class in society. We have no historical record
of the man who first assigned the lowest status to this essential
sanitary service. Whoever he was, he did us no good. We
should, from our very childhood, have the idea impressed upon
our minds that we are all scavengers, and the easiest way of do-
ing so is for everyone who has realized this to commence bread
labour as a scavenger. Scavenging, thus intelligently taken up,
will help one to understand religion in a different and truer light.
If children, the old and those disabled by illness do not do bread
labour, that should not be regarded as violation of the law of
bread labour.
The child is, as it were, included in the mother. If nature's
laws were not violated, the old would not be disabled and there
would be no disease.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Tell Khurshedbehn that, if she requires money, she should
have no hesitation in obtaining it from the Ashram. If she got it
from any other source, it would pain me.
There are 55 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
