436. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
VALMIKI MANDIR, READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
April 6, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
I write this about two things that I discussed before the
Cabinet Delegation on the 3rd instant.
Sir Archibald Rowlands was with me last night in order to
have a talk with me about the salt tax. At the conclusion of
our talk he was frank enough to tell me that, had he met me
three months ago, the tax would have been abolished. I omit
the rest of our important conversation in order to make my letter
as brief as possible. Regard being had to the admission, I sent to
Sir Archibald Rowlands Shri Sudhir Ghosh, whom he knows well,
to have further talks with him. He now contemplates abolition
within three months or so. I know that nothing can be done by
a single official, however strong or able he may be, unless he is
supported by his superiors. And so I invoke your assistance in
this humanitarian work. But more even than that is the consi-
deration that I put before the Cabinet Delegation, viz., that
independence should be ushered in with the greatest good grace
which the poorest villager in the remotest village can at once
realize. More of this you can glean from Sudhir Babu, if you
1 Finance Member, Viceroy's Executive Council
2 Pyarelal explains: "In the course of their conversation, Sir Archibald
Rowlands, while admitting to Gandhiji that he had been converted to the
proposition for the abolition of the salt tax, seemed to favour the retention
of the salt monopoly by the Government even after the salt tax was abolish-
ed. Gandhiji felt that this would largely defeat the end in view. In com-
pliance with Sir Archibald's request, he sent him [on April 25] a draft of a
proclamation announcing the termination of the levying of the salt tax
and a note on the proposed proclamation." Vide Vol. LXXXIV.
feel inclined and can spare the time. He is carrying this
note.
About prisoners, I will not say anything as I understand
that their release is imminent.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 157-
