428. LETTER TO DR. N. N. GODBOLE
WARDHA,
March 20, 1935
DEAR DR. GOD BOLE,
I thank you for your letter enclosing your valuable note on the
comparative merit of cow-butter fat and buffalo-butter fat. The
carefulness with which you are approaching this question tempts
me to put further questions. I am using tamarind as part of
food, of course in measured quantities, for those who are suffering
from constipation and who are on uncooked green leaves such as
methi, chakvat and the like. The popular belief in these parts,
however, seems to be that tamarind produces boils and induces
rheumatism. Is there any warrant for these beliefs? Can you also
tell me what leaves are edible in an uncooked state? I am using
just now the bhajis one gets in the market including cabbage,
cauliflower, in an uncooked state.
One thing more. If you are following the pages of Harijan,
you must have noticed the opinion I have published on unpoli-
shed rice. It seems that there is no such thing as whole
unpolished rice to be had in the market. I had difficulty in
procuring whole unpolished rice. And I am now grinding my
own paddy and have now whole unpolished rice.
Chemists,
however, say that there is no proof to show that whole unpo-
lished rice is meant by those who have given their opinion in
its favour. I have, however, contended that in a matter of such
importance medical men who have given me their considered
opinion could not have used the expression 'unpolished rice' in a
loose unscientific manner.
There can be degrees of polished rice
but surely not of unpolished. They contend that it is highly likely
that the pericarp which even a slight polishing removes, is
unnecessary for the system if not also injurious. Of course they
admit that they have no authority for their statement. They simply
say that the testimony in favour of unpolished rice has reference
only to the partly polished, hand-pounded bazaar rice which passes
as unpolished. Can you throw any light on this controversy?
Is the pericarp of rice indigestible? Is it harmful to the system?
Can it be that this matter has escaped investigation up till now?
Yours sincerely,
DR. N. N. GODBOLE
HINDU UNIVERSITY
BENARES
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
