36. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
[CAPE TOWN,]
April 19, 1911
DEAR GENERAL SMUTS,
After having thought over our conversation of this morning,
I feel that I should place the position frankly before you.
If the question is not settled during the present session, the
prospect of passive resisters remaining totally inactive is too
appalling to contemplate. There are men on Tolstoy Farm with
their families who are pecuniarily ruined. There are others
outside in the same position. If they are not to court arrest or
are to avoid it, their movements must be hampered. They cannot
for instance go to Natal and return without being challenged at
the Border. Some who are traders cannot trade because they will
not produce their registration certificate[s] so long as the struggle
lasts. I should have nothing to say about all this misery if we
were conducting an active campaign. But, to continue using
military terms, our conversation contemplates a truce for a year
or longer, i.e., until the Parliament meets again. I do not know
how this is to be done. As you know the campaign has cost us
heavily, and our monthly expenditure for supporting families, &c.,
is naturally great. If we are to again start begging, we must
agitate here, in India and in England. There are men from
Natal. They have broken up everything. Are we to keep them
for months in a state of suspense?
I am sincerely anxious to help you, but I do not know how
I could promise inactivity on the part of the passive resisters.
What you, the Imperial Government and I want to avoid is the
ferment. I fear that, in the nature of things, it is well nigh im-
possible to avoid it if the matter is not closed during this session.
On the other hand, it will be churlish for me not to ap-
preciate your own difficulty, especially at the fag-end of an
exhausting session. You have many difficult questions to solve.
Indians know at present only one. But I confess that I do not
apprehend the difficulty your legal advisers do as to the alter-
native solution suggested by me. Seeing that you want some day
or other to pass the general bill, there is no reason why the
Transvaal Province may not anticipate the education test of that
bill. It will keep out not a single white man whom you may
want in the Transvaal and it will keep out all the Indians save
six highly educated men per year. So far as I have been able
to gauge the feeling of the leaders of the opposition, they will
not raise any opposition. All will understand that the solution
will be tentative and intended to meet the trouble in the Transvaal.
The Free Staters will have a long time to consider your general
bill and at the next session all will start anew. Is it too much
then, sorely tried though you are with many other troubles, to
ask you to remove the serious handicap in the way of my coun-
trymen, and enable them to take their humble share in the ap-
proaching Coronation festivities[?]
As this letter is of a very personal nature and arises out [of]
a conversation part of which you wish shall remain confidential,
I will not publish [it] without your authority.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
[PS.] As Mrs. Sodha's appeal comes up on Saturday at
Bloemfontein, why not now instruct the Attorney General not to
arrest her in the event of its being lost by her.
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5477
