49. LETTER TO GEORGE JOSEPH
January 13, 1933
MY DEAR JOSEPH,
You can better imagine than I can describe my joy at receiv-
ing your letter, and especially your letter to Pyarelal. I shall try
to have your letter delivered to him. But let me say two things
in connection with that letter.
My fast was not a fast unto death in its literal sense. The
Roman Catholic priest, who is a visitor to this prison, knows me,
and when I was on the eve of taking that fast, he came over to
me in his kindly manner just to say one word, and he said
how he drew the distinction between a suicide and a sacrifice. A
suicide carried with it a certainty of destruction. A sacrifice
meant risking life, the greater the risk, the greater the sacrifice.
But there should be nothing beyond risk. I had no hesitation
in agreeing with the distinction, and my fast being conditional
was not a fast amounting to suicide, but it was a fast involving
the greatest risk, but still a risk and no more.
You will be interested to know that some of my Roman
Catholic friends have detected no flaw in the fast. Of course, in
Hinduism some few extreme cases there are in which ending of
life is peremptory, but these I need not consider at present. There
is general agreement between Hinduism and other faiths that
suicide is a sin.
Now, about the Inner Voice. Here again I can agree with
you whole-heartedly when you say that the voice of God can
never counsel or countenance sin. Encouragement to sin can
only come from the devil. But the real difficulty comes in when
the question of sin itself is debatable. Those who would consider
a particular act to be sinful will naturally reject the claim that it
was prompted by God. Hence it was that in answer to a ques-
tion I said that whilst in self-defence and for the sake of truth
which I worship I was bound to say what I believed, my claim
was not to be accepted as part of argument in determining rele-
vant questions. The opponents were bound to rule [out] that
claim as wholly beside the point. Whether the claim for the
voice of God was well or ill-made in a particular case can only be
decided after the claimant's death, and in some extraordinary
cases it may even then be difficult. Apart from the danger of
hypocrisy there is the still greater danger of self-deception to
which mankind is prone, and it is possible for self-deceived people
to attain great things and yet their claim that the voice of God
was behind their acts might be wholly wrong. These are final
difficulties which will remain to the end of time, but if the truth
is to make any progress, then self-deluded people must also be
allowed full play.
Finally comes the question of confession. You may not know
that I have some very valued Roman Catholic friends also. I am
in the habit of picking up knowledge more from personal con-
tact than from printed texts. These friends have not yet been able
to clearly define the function of Confession and the Confessor.
For instance, what is one to confess who has no consciousness of
guilt and when there is, I can understand a Confessor granting
absolution, but can he also guide the future acts of the penitent?
In the place of the Confessor Hinduism has the Guru. I
have all my life striven to find one, one to whom I can shift all
my burdens and roam about merely doing his will. But then
such implicit limitless obedience is not a mechanical act; and
having got the spirit of obedience instinctively within me I would
be satisfied by nothing less than tendering complete obedience.
But it seems to me that it is not given to all to find the true
Guru in this short span of life. But it is given to all to make
that diligent search, and it may be that that very search is its
own reward, and that it keeps one in possession of peace and joy
everlasting. Anyway, you will accept my testimony that ceaseless
search has not only given me such joy and peace, but has protec-
ted me from conscious error.
I thank you for copying for me that extract from Imitation
of Christ. I read that book in one single sitting, I think, in the year
1905 or 1906, and a friend, only a few months ago, sent me an-
other copy.
With our love to all of you,
Yours sincerely,
GEORGE JOSEPH, ESQ., M.A., BARRISTER-AT-LAW
"HILL VIEW", MADURA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18923
