151. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
Unrevised
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 5, 1938
CHI. MANILAL,
You will be leaving on Wednesday. You came but I feel as
if you had not come at all. We had long enough conversa-
tions but I can't say that we talked at leisure. But, then
where do I have such a thing as leisure? Whatever decision
you take, do it calmly. If you can keep [Indian] Opinion going,
do so. But remember the meaning of keeping it going, which
I explained to you. I would not consider it being kept going if
it is done through advertisements. This does not mean that you
should now stop accepting advertisements. But it would be piti-
able for the journal to be kept going on advertisements. Advert-
isements should be used for increasing the profits or for reduc-
ing the subscription rate. In the case of pice-newspapers a pice
would not help to meet even the cost of the newsprint. But be-
cause they get advertisements they are able to reach lakhs of read-
ers by charging a nominal price. If we accept the policy of
taking in advertisements we can justify it only in this way.
The royal road for you, therefore, is that you should divide the
total expenditure by the number of prospective subscribers and
fix that figure as the subscription rate from the very beginning.
If you don't get subscribers at that rate, then you should con-
clude that I. O. should be closed down. The rest you know. If
you want to earn, settle down there. I won't consider that ob-
jectionable. If you wish to return to India, you should be con-
tent with whatever you get and decide to devote yourself to
public service. Please treat all this as no more than my advice
and do what you yourself wish.
Have an amicable talk with Kallenbach.
Don't carry with you any worries about Sushila and the
children. Vijayalakshmi and Nanabhai are there to look after
them. They will stay in Akola as long as they wish and then
come here. You should also know that what the children will
acquire in India in the ordinary course from the surrounding
atmosphere they cannot acquire in a foreign country, despite all
our efforts. You need not, therefore, worry about the children's
107
education either. Sushila should come to Segaon early, because
most probably I shall be in the Frontier Province in October.
And I can't say how long I shall be there.
My health is all
right. Pyarelal and Sushila are still in Delhi. Maybe they will
come after a few days. Don't be lazy in writing letters.
If my message has not been sent already, it will be enclosed
with this. Please give it to Ramdas. The enclosed letter is for
Ramdas.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4871
