557. LETTER TO PYARELAL
December 17, 1946
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have your strange letter.
Whatever was important, you have settled while leaving. I know
I cannot change your decision. I am not able to see my mistake. If
I have made a mistake, it is your duty to point it out to me; and if
you cannot do it, that is, if you cannot convince me, then you should
follow my rule. If you are clear to the last moment, then there is no
doubt that you should leave me. Now you may act and act quickly
in the light of what you consider your duty. I have informed you that
for me this is my severest test. If I do not do or die you must think
me worthless. Then you may take it that my life is a burden.
You write that my confession was such a heavy punishment for
Sushila that compared to that her keeping away without notice should
be considered real mercy. This I cannot swallow. If that is so, then
what I did in the case of Ba, my father and many other dear ones
should be considered a mistake, is that not so ? Surely you do not
wish to say that I made a mistake only in this case ?
You also realize that if I make a mistake again and having committed
it, do not publicly correct it, there is no hope of success in my present
work. Hence, I can do nothing else.
Though I may make a mistake and proclaim it to the world, yet
the heaviest punishment is borne by one at whose cost the mistake
is made! ! ! How can that be so? Is there not something very wrong
in this line of thinking ?
Suppose that A who is innocent is assaulted and abused by B.
Then B repents and makes a public apology. In thus purifying himself
B will have proved guilty and yet A will suffer, is that so ? That A's
love may cause anguish to him is another matter. Such anguish is only
for the good.
SV-1V : 21
If you consider B's confession proper, there is no difference
between him and me. Even if A is not innocent, B, who adheres to
non-violence will not be proved innocent because by his own yardstick
he has definitely been guilty. And anyone who has accepted my moral
standard will say that it would be only proper that A also makes a
public confession of his guilt.
Now, in deference to both of you, I have taken the only course
possible for me. I have not mentioned anything in the diary. I do not
give as much importance to my diary as you do.
Sushila of course insists that everything may as well be known to
the public. But here insistence has no value because she says it out
of anguish. She does not regard it as a duty. That is why I have not
sent the note I had written to Nirmal Babu. I have torn it up. I have
written to Sushila that her duty is to follow your advice; when you
and I say different things, in my opinion she should do what you say.
Now I have said everything that needs to be said. You may do what
you consider proper.
Sushila is very deeply wounded. I have tried my utmost to pacify
her. It may be good if you remain with her for the time being. I wish
you would go to the village and stay with her. Both of you should
together consider and decide what your duty is. The task this time
is extremely delicate.
I have written all this after careful deliberation. This is the first
thing I did after the morning prayer. Before this I wrote a postcard
about Sriramulu and the first few sentences in the diary.
I must keep a copy of this, but probably you will not wish it copied
in the diary. So you may return this to me or a copy of it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have sent replies to Asaf Ali's questions. Read them when you
get the copy. So, Sushila will be coming here on Saturday.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Vide pp. 325-.
