320. LETTER TO C. Y. CHINTAMANI
AS AT SABARMATI,
May 31, 1931
MY DEAR FRIEND,
You are fishing for a compliment but I am not going to give
it to you if only because it would be a repetition of what I have
told you before. But you are quite right in thinking that I do
not read newspapers. Even the local ones I read for a few minutes
and that too grudgingly. Leading articles, as a rule, escape me.
You did well therefore in sending me the Leader cutting. An
266
inoffensive paragraph in Navajivan by Mahadev Desai has been
made much of. I can only give you my assurance that I am not
going lightly to declare war. I know what it would mean to
Lord Irwin. The relations between us so developed during the
negotiations that the very consideration that a declaration of war
would hurt Lord Irwin to the quick would alone make me wait
a thousand times before embarking on any such step. But I can
tell you in confidence that many occasions have arisen when, if I
was so minded, I might have broken up negotiations with local
authorities. But I have exercised and am still exercising immense
patience. In any case I am not going to take any step without
giving an ample opportunity to the Viceroy to review the situation
and taking the public into confidence. It goes without saying that
I would do nothing without first getting the sanction of the Working
Committee.
So far for the peace or war part of your fears. The communal
question is a horse of another colour. My position was made clear
to Lord Irwin times without number and I made it clearer still at
the farewell interview in Bombay. He greatly sympathized with my
position. As you know, the Congress demand is far above what
the Round Table Conference has hitherto discussed. If we do not
reach a communal settlement, I could not make the demand with
any confidence in myself. But my non-participation in the Con-
ference need not mean war. Failure to arrive at a settlement can-
not be debited to the British Government though the question at all
arises because of the present system of administration. But I need
not carry the matter any further. In this matter too I am feeling
my way and if I at all can, I would certainly attend the Con-
ference. I have come to no irrevocable decision. If the way at
all opens up before me I will go to London without the slightest
hesitation. Do please write to me whenever you feel inclined.
Yours sincerely,
SYT. C. Y. CHINTAMANI
C/O THE "LEADER"
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat: S.N. 17175
