119. LETTER TO G. V. KETKAR
[As AT] SABARMATI,
May 7, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. In order to enable me to give a decisive
opinion I should certainly like to have Shankar Rao's version also.
But subject to that reservation I have no hesitation in agreeing
with you that all parties should be represented on Congress Com-
mittees by agreement or there should be an open honest election
without any wire-pulling. You should show your letter and my
reply to Shankar Rao and let him say whatever he likes in oppo-
sition to my opinion if he wants to oppose it. I would like to
see the happy relation established in Maharashtra between the
two parties not only to continue unbroken but to grow in strength.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SRI G. V. KETKAR
THE KESARI AND THE MAHRATTA OFFICE
568 NARAYAN PETH
POONA CITY
From a photostat: G.N. 7962. Also C.W. 981. Courtesy: G. V. Ketkar
on the taxpayers the expense of transporting the articles from the places where
they now are. I am to say that your further contention that the Government
are responsible for delivering such articles in the same condition in which they
were seized, does not appear to be warranted by anything in the terms of the
Settlement. On the contrary clause 16(c) of the Settlement expressly says that
"compensation will not be given for deterioration". I am to add that under
section 4(3) of Ordinance IX of 1930 even property seized but not forfeited
may be used in such manner as the Magistrate may direct. The motor-car and
cycle now in question were, however, actually forfeited and had they been
sold or destroyed, the original owners would have had no further claim to
them, since clause 16(a) of the Settlement agrees to the return of seized mov-
able property only if it is still in the possession of Government. I am therefore
to express the hope that you will now make arrangements to take delivery
of these forfeited articles without more delay, since it will not be possible
for Government to be responsible for their custody indefinitely if those inte-
rested do not choose to avail themselves of clause 16(a) of the Settlement.
