146. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG,
October 30, 1911
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
I have to thank you for your long cablegram with reference to
the Congress Presidentship muddle. I was sorry to hear about
your illness. Will you never be able to travel outside India and
England? British statesmen do; why cannot Indian statesmen?
If you could possibly pay a brief visit to South Africa, it would
not be now a question of your courting imprisonment, but it would
still serve a double purpose. It would bring the people here nearer
to India, and it would give me the privilege of so nursing you
as to restore you to health. In my opinion, we have at Tolstoy
Farm, as also at Phoenix, convenience enough for patients like you.
I am quite sure that I can anticipate Mr. Kallenbach's warm wel-
come to you at Tolstoy Farm, and, of course, Phoenix you could
treat as your own home.
The first intimation I had of my name being seriously discussed
in connection with the Congress Presidentship was a telegram from
the Natal Indian Congress, advising me that it had received an
invitation for me to preside at the forthcoming session, and urging
me strongly to accept the invitation. My reply was in the negative.
I, at the same time, enquired about the name of the sender of the
invitation. Much to my surprise, the names sent were those of your-
self, the All-India Moslem League, Mr. Petit, Mr. Natrajan,
Mr. Natesan, Mr. S. Bose and Mr. Malviya The inclusion of
your name and that of the All-India Moslem League gave the
1 Not available
2 Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya (1861-1946); "patriarch" of the Indian
National Congress; editor of The Hindustan, 1887-9, The Indian Union, 1889-92 and
The Abhyudaya, 1907-9; member of Provincial Legislative Assembly, 1902-12, Impe-
rial Legislative Council, 1910-20 and Indian Legislative Assembly, 1924; asso-
ciated with the Congress since 1886; he was elected President of the 1909 Lahore
cablegram an importance which made me waver in my decision,
and I felt that, if you who knew my views so well also wished me to
preside, there must be some special reason for the invitation. The
news was received by me at the Farm. I travelled to Johannesburg,
and the people at Durban confirmed the telegrams through the
telephone and simply insisted upon my accepting the invitation.
To them, it was a unique honour to the Indians of South Africa
and an equally unique opportunity of bringing the South African
Indian case still more prominently to the notice of the Indian
public. Had I not been so foolishly egotistical, I should certainly
have doubted the correctness of the message that was sent to me
from Durban. Before, however, I had had reason to doubt the
accuracy of the message, I had allowed the Durban Congress to
accept the invitation, but I felt that I should send my own cable-
gram independently to you, which I did. Three or four days later
I received from Durban a letter confirming the telegraphic messages,
which, however, included a copy of a letter from Reuter, which
put a different interpretation upon the cable. It seems to me that,
during the time that I was in Cape Town, Mr. Polak, who was in
Durban, had arranged for a code address covering the names given
above. Advice was evidently given to all these parties of the code
address, and Mr. Bose of Calcutta made use of it. In deciphering
the cable, therefore, our people at Durban read the cable to mean
that it was sent by all the six parties, but Reuter's letter, which was
sent to the Congress at the time the code address was registered,
shows that the code word might mean, according to circumstances,
one or all the names. In this instance, if my interpretation is cor-
rect, the code indicator must be read to mean only "Mr. Bose", as
the cablegram was from Calcutta. So reading it, I concluded that
the so-called invitation was no invitation at all, but that it was
merely an enquiry to know whether the Natal Indian Congress
could spare me. Probably, had Mr. Bose known my whereabouts
precisely, and that cablegrams addressed to me simply "Gandhi"
would reach me, he would have cabled to me, when of course
session and the 1918 Delhi session; Vice-Chancellor in 1919, of Benares Hindu
University which he had founded in 1916; President Hindu Mahasabha, 1923-
5; attended Round Table Conference, London, 1931-. Gandhiji was his guest
on the occasion of the founding of Benares Hindu University, when Malaviya
used "lovingly to explain . . . like an elder brother the various view-points
of the different parties", and in 1924, used to read out the Bhagawat to Gandhiji
during his 21-day fast. Vide An Autobiography, Part I, Ch. X & Part V, Ch. XXXVII.
there would have been no fuss, and I should have simply answered
that I could not accept the honour; but the mischief has already
been done, and the over-enthusiastic people at Durban even autho-
rized Reuter to publish the news.
Your cable in reply to my
second cable1, informing me that the decision had yet to be made,
confirmed my interpretation of the cable. The rest you know.
I can only hope that the decision at Allahabad will be against my
nomination. I may receive it tomorrow. This is being dictated
on the 29th, Sunday. I could not very well occupy the presidential
chair, and conceal the views which I hold so strongly on many
questions that are debated year after year at the National Assembly,
and I am fully aware that an expression of those views on the Con-
gress platform might not only be unacceptable to our leaders but
might even place them in a false position, which I should be the
last person to desire to do. I am also aware that my views are
likely to be considered immature and based on insufficient data,
also that I may myself change them, and, however strongly I may
dissent from any of these three propositions, I think that all those
who differ from me have a perfect and reasonable right to enun-
ciate them. It seems to me that, just now, I can best serve the cause,
that is as dear to me as it is to the Congress, by simply serving
the South African Indian cause, and, if an opportunity offers itself
of going to India, to serve my countrymen in an independent capa-
city, if not, unofficially under the guidance of a leader like you,
from whom I have derived inspiration. Though our views differ,
I know, on many matters, my regard for you and for your character
as I have pictured it to myself remains the same as before.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten original: G.N. 3804
