331. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
May 5, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I am surprised you did not receive the Johan-
nesburg letter this week. I certainly sent it. I have a list of all the
articles I sent. I should check it as soon as I receive Indian Opinion, and
then let you know. If it is at all possible to let me have Gujarati copy
as well as English copy in advance on Fridays, it will be very much
better, as I should then receive them on Sunday mornings and make use
[of them]. You have sent me many cuttings. I am dealing with them
in Gujarati but some of them really should have been dealt with this
week and if they have, I should not have to write on them at all.
That I could do on Sundays if I got an advance copy. You may also
in sending your copies mark there whether you have dealt with it in the
current issue or not. I do hope Gokuldas left yesterday. I can then
prepare him for the work on Monday, but as there is no telegram, I
fear that he has not left. I would like you to tell me whether Mr.
Isaac has dealt with the matters you entrusted to him. I want you to
remind me about the list of Mr. Nazar's effects next week. As I am
destroying your letter, I may forget all about it. You should do the
work of general supervision as to the other matters and devote the ba-
lance of your time entirely to the books. I wish you to promise to your-
self as to the time when you will have the balance-sheet ready.
Kalyandas ought to be a tower of strength to you. If he is willing
to stay with you he may do so, but I think that if he remains with
Hemchand, he will exert a better influence on him. He will not very
often take his luncheon in Phoenix. All, therefore, he will have is one
meal in the evening. He may as well have that separate but you may
all decide otherwise, if you choose to. I am glad you are attending
to the improvements of your ground. It is most necessary work, and
I would like you, now that you will be freer, to devote your time to
it methodically. There should not be a weed within your two acres.
I will write to Sam about the garden. I return the cutting on gardening
you have sent me. You should keep it and let others read it. You
should read other books also on gardening. I think there is a little
book with Mr. West. You should learn to lead in such matters. I
shall write to Mohanlal about a weekly letter. I spoke to Vyas also. I
do not think it is necessary at present to offer to send them the Opinion
free of charge. Let them feel that it is their duty to write these letters.
I have not yet recovered the money from the theatre people. You
should not, therefore, execute the job until I have done so.
Apropos of the Johannesburg letter, may it not have been received
by Anandlal directly, because I believe the first batch of my Gujarati
writing I addressed to Anandlal. . .2
From a photostat of the original: S.N. 4356
