516. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 22, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
I have long delayed replying to your letter, as I have hoped
to send you a fairly lengthy reply. But I see that I am not likely
to get sufficient leisure for attempting a very full reply in the near
future.
What you say about silent prayer and congregational silence I
understand and I appreciate also in theory. When I was in
South Africa, I attended several such meetings. But I was not
much struck with the performance. In India, it will fall fiat.
After all, there are many ways of worship and it is not necessary
to graft new ways, if old ones will answer. I am myself not satis-
fied with what we are able to do in the Ashram. I cannot procure
a devotional mood all of a sudden or in an artificial manner.
If some of us in the Ashram really have that mood whilst at prayer,
it is bound to have its effect in due course. It is because of the
belief that there are some earnest souls in the Ashram who ap-
proach the prayer time in a proper devotional mood, that I have
persisted in retaining the congregational prayer meetings in spite
of odds and sometimes even severe disappointments. I may be
partial, but my own experience is that our prayer meetings are
very slowly but surely growing in dignity and strength. But I am
painfully aware of the fact that we are far far away from what
we want to achieve. Nevertheless, I shall bear your suggestions in
mind. I have already discussed them with friends.
You seem to think lightly of my having invited suggestions
with reference to sanitary matters. In my own humble opinion
we needlessly divide life into water-tight compartments, religious
and other. Whereas if a man has true religion in him, it must show
itself in the smallest detail of life. To me sanitation in a com-
munity such as ours is based upon common spiritual effort. The
slightest irregularity in sanitary, social and political life is a sign
of spiritual poverty. It is a sign of inattention, neglect of duty.
Anyway, the Ashram life is based upon this conception of funda-
mental unity of life.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
HORACE G. ALEXANDER, ESQ.
WOODBROOK
SELLY OAK
BIRMINGHAM
From a photostat: G.N. 1405
