200. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
August 5, 1909
MY LORD,
I beg to acknowledge your two letters of yesterday's date. I hope
to send you copies of your letters at the earliest opportunity. My letter
in reply to yours of the 3rd instant has already gone forward.
With reference to the allegation as to the question of educated
Indians being a new question—I deal with it on a separate sheet of
paper in order to enable you to use it without having to refer to this
letter. The terms of the proposed amendment to be submitted are also
enclosed herewith. I fully realise that the difficulty will be on the ques-
tion of right. I have given many an anxious night to find out a solu-
tion without insisting on the "right", but I have failed because anything
short of it, in my humble opinion, implies a record on the Statute-book
of the Colony of racial inferiority, and this reply to your question is also
the reply to Your Lordship's suggestion that, in the enumeration of
demands, the status of educated Indians should be replaced by "the oc-
casional admission of the few highly educated Indians", etc. Any such
substitution is not possible because the fight is not that of getting the few
educated Indians admitted, but it is essentially that of having the poten-
tial or theoretical right recognised. Physicians, lawyers, etc., have been
mentioned in connection with the question in order to emphasise the
tangible consequences of a denial of the "right", and this became neces-
sary in order to satisfy Mr. Cartwright's friends as . . . [Colon]ial
stand [point it] is necessary for them to know in a tangible form that our
demand does not involve the admission of more than six such Indians
into the Colony; as a matter of fact, there may not be even two per year
applying for such admission and, personally, I should want no assu-
rance from the local Government that they would admit six or a smaller
number. The principle being conceded, mere admission is a matter of
detail and I frankly confess that, had it been purely a question of admit-
ting a few such Indians, I should never have advised tremendous suffer-
ing on the part of my countrymen of the Transvaal.
I am much obliged to Your Lordship for your further and valuable
suggestions as to improving the statement. In concert with Mr. Ritch,
I am attending to it directly. After the suggestions are incorporated, I
will have a few copies struck and will forward them to you, but final
order for printing them will not be given until I have received your
approval and permission to circulate it.
I am, etc.,
[ENCLOSURE 1]
As TO THE ALLEGATION THAT THE QUESTION OF
EDUCATED INDIANS IS A NEW QUESTION
It is necessary to bear in mind that there were two conferences;
the one in the January of 1908 when Mr. Gandhi was still in prison.
At that time the question of educated Indians was not mentioned be-
cause no such mention was necessary. This is so because the repeal of
Act 2 of 1907, on condition of voluntary registration being gone through,
would have automatically re-instated British Indians possessing educa-
tional attainments.
The second conference took place on the 20th August between the
Executive Council and the leaders of the Progressive Party, Mr. Cart-
wright, Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Quinn. This is the meeting concerning
which it is alleged that the question of educated Indians was not among
the points discussed. This allegation received direct refutation in Gene-
ral Botha's despatch, No. 528, dated the 5th September 1908, at page 43,
cd. 4327. General Botha says there: "The ninth subject of discussion
was the fresh demand made for the immigration of Asiatics not claiming
previous domicile in the Transvaal, but who could pass an education
test." This is an admission that this subject was discussed at the confe-
rence, but, it is claimed by General Botha, it was a fresh demand brought
up there. But this is also wrong, as is shown from the correspondence
between Mr. Smuts and Mr. Gandhi, commencing from the 22nd
February 1908. Indeed, as a matter of fact, the conference was brought
about because the negotiations that were going on with General
Smuts for repeal of the Act fell through, inasmuch as General Smuts
imposed a fresh condition as to the prohibition of educated British
Indians before he would repeal the Act. Moreover, in the. . .4 [above
1 Vide "Statement of Transvaal Indian Case", pp. 288-301.
2 Gandhiji was sentenced to two months' imprisonment on January 10, 1908, but
was released on January 30 following the settlement; vide Vol. VIII, pp. 36- and 43-.
3 Vide Vol. VIII, pp. 101-.
4 Some words are missing here.
quotation] a claim which ministers had previously decided was inadmis-
sible and, even had it been otherwise, it is difficult to see by what means a
Bill providing for the immigration of Asiatics and the clause in question
could be passed through either of the Houses of Parliament in view of
the almost universal feeling of the white colonists on the subject." It
may also be added that at this conference there was no agreement come
to. The Asiatic leaders retired with distinct instructions from the mem-
bers of the Executive Council and the Progressive Leaders that they
were to put before their respective committees the points that were dis-
cussed at the conference and inform General Smuts of the decision of the
committees. Accordingly and immediately, Asiatic meetings were held,
and both Messrs Gandhi and Quinn reported to General Smuts. In the
Blue-book above-mentioned, the whole of the letter written at the spe-
cial request of the Private Secretary to Mr. Smuts is not given. The
following are the opening sentences from the letter to Mr. Lane
(Mr. Smuts' Private Secretary), dated the 20th August:
Mr. Cartwright told me that I should write to you what I told him as to
the decision of the meeting today, and to give my impressions also.
I placed before the meeting, for the third time today, the terms that I
told them the Government were prepared to offer, and I told them further
that these would form an acceptable compromise, if some provision was
made for highly educated Indians and Mr. Sorabjee's re-instatement; but the
meeting would not listen to anything short of repeal of the Asiatic Act and
the recognition of highly educated Indians under the general clause of the
Immigrants' Restriction Act. All I could persuade them to accept was that,
the statutory right being recognised, there would be no objection to an
administrative discrimination against educated Indians, so that only the
most highly educated Indians could enter. 2
[ENCLOSURE 2]
AMENDMENT
Part of sub-section 1 of Sec-
tion 2 of the Immigrants' Res-
triction Act No. 15 of 1907 reads
as follows:
"Any person who when ask-
ed whether within or outside this
Colony by a duly authorised offi-
cer shall be unable through defi-
cient education to write out (from
Proposed Amendment of sub-
section 1. as follows:
"Any person who when ask-
ed whether within or outside this
Colony by a duly authorised offi-
cer shall be unable through defi-
cient education to pass an exami-
dictation or otherwise) and sign
in the characters of an European
language an application for per-
mission to enter this Colony or
such other document as such offi-
cer may require; provided that
for the purpose of this sub-sec-
tion Yiddish shall be accepted as
an European language; provided
further that" (what follows is im-
material)
nation test in an European lang-
uage that may be set; provided that
for the purposes of this Section
Yiddish shall be accepted as an
European language and provided
further that the Immigration Offi-
cer shall have full discretion as to
the nature of the examination
which may vary in respect of per-
sons or classes and that the deci-
sion of the Immigration Officer
in respect of the examination shall
not be subject to review by or ap-
peal to the Supreme Court or any
other Courts of the Colony, and
provided further that any Asiatic
passing the examination test put
to him by the Immigration Offi-
cer and not being otherwise in
terms of this Act deemed a prohi-
bited immigrant shall not be sub-
ject to the provisions of Act 36 of
1908, provided further that"
NOTES HEREON
1. If Act 2 of 1907 had been repealed and if there were no Act 36
of 1908, there would be no occasion for reference to Act 36 in the pro-
posed amendment. But the reference has become necessary as Act 36
contains a removal clause, and as sub-section 4 of Section 2 of Act 15
provides that any person being subject to a removal order becomes a
prohibited immigrant in spite of his passing the examination tests. Said
sub-section 4 reads as follows:
Any person who at the date of his entering or attempting to enter this Colony
is subject or would if he entered this Colony be subject to the provisions of any
law in force at such date which might render him liable either at such date or
thereafter if found therein to be removed from or to be ordered to leave this
Colony whether on conviction of any offence against such law or for failure
to comply with its provision or otherwise in accordance with its provisions,
provided that such conviction be not the result of the commission by such person
elsewhere than in this Colony of an offence for which he has received a free
pardon.
2. The proposed amendment as to examination has been given
in order to satisfy the objection raised by General Smuts that the pre-
sent law may not contain sufficient discretion for the Immigration
Officer, to warrant him putting one test before one immigrant and a
different test before another.
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten
office copy: S. N. 4980
