591. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
May [27]2, 1932
MY DEAR VERRIER,
"Ask and ye shall receive" has been verified once more. Your
lovely letter arrived here today. I read it after five and today
being Friday, without any prompting from me, Mahadev gave
effect to your suggestion about fellowship by singing "Lead
Kindly Light" in its very beautiful Gujarati version. At the
evening service it is always Mahadev's part to sing the bhajan.
The hour would be approximately 7.40. The prayer commences
at 7.30 and opens with the 19 verses at the end of the second
discourse of the Gita. It is followed by Ramanama and then
comes the bhajan. As soon as I read your suggestion I had no hesi-
tation in endorsing it, but I was debating as to the choice of
the hymn. I had in mind the singing of the English text and so
the choice was limited. It could either be "Lead Kindly Light"
or "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross" or "Take My Life And
Let It Be" for the simple reason that I myself cannot very well sing
any of the other favourite hymns of mine-not that even these
three I sing accurately. But it would be a fair approach to the
tune as I have heard it. Mahadev is unused to the tune of Eng-
lish hymns, but by thinking of taking up the Gujarati version
of "Lead Kindly Light", Mahadev solved the difficulty about the
choice and singing. There is a special fitness about the choice of
this hymn of Newman's. It was that hymn which, when I was
in physical distress, was sung to me by Olive Doke in Johannes-
burg under the late Rev. Doke's roof. So you may take it that
we shall be here singing this hymn at 7.40 every Friday evening
with the knowledge that you at least will be joining us wherever
you are, whether the suggestion is taken up or not by the other
friends. Let there be no Press publicity about this at the present
moment. I do not know that the Government will appreciate it and
from my place as a prisoner I would not like to do a single
thing that they would not approve of, unless of course I had to
engage in an open quarrel with them in any vital matter. I
shall be asking Narandas to sing this bhajan on Fridays at the
Ashram prayer which during summer months always begins at
7.30.
Yes, I like very much, if only for the sake of the old lady
and Eldyth the idea of your going to England for a few months
and you certainly need the change for the sake of your health.
And since you should be going, the sooner you leave the better.
I do not like the idea of Mother and Eldyth coming to village
India or any other India. The spirit with them may be willing
but the flesh will not respond. You yourself are no bright example
in this respect, and it would be unwise to put the strain on them
of settling down in India. It would be however a wholly different
thing if, independently of any prompting on your or anybody
else's part, they felt the clearest possible call from within. But
in that case, there would be no question of seeking or accepting
advice from any quarter. Such cases have of course happened
before now. There the spirit surmounts the flesh.
I do not at all like the news about Shamrao's illness. He
should be ashamed of himself. He must learn the art of living,
befitting a true servant of Daridranarayana.
The passages you quote from Plotinus are very striking and
very beautiful. The first is good for all time, the second the
modern mind will carp at. I have personally no difficulty in
understanding the author's meaning.
During your absence and Shamrao's, who will be in charge
of Karanjia?
With love from us all to you all, including your host and
hostess,
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (3), Pt. I, p. 233
