41. LETTER TO SHYAMLAL
July 23, 1945
BHAI SHYAMLAL 2 ,
There are two ways of serving the Harijans. First, by raising
them through education, etc., and secondly by rooting out
untouchability from among the caste Hindus. The first course
always bears fruit and it is desirable to pursue it however little
one can. Simple 'Eradication of Untouchability' does not serve
our purpose. Therefore, 'Harijan Sevak Sangh' is a more appro-
priate expression. It is true that so far very little work has been
done among the savarnas. The reasons are obvious. We lack
self-sacrifice. Everyone, to some extent, can do the work of
spreading education.
But everyone cannot work among the
savarnas for the removal of untouchability. Untouchability cannot
be removed by delivering speeches. It will be removed only by
the power of our self-sacrifice.
In such self-sacrifice, fasting has
an important place. The fasts should be backed by discretion.
Something could be done if competent Shastris issue public
statements. What Barveji says is not right. There can be no
separate village for Harijans because they are an integral part of
society and yet outside it.
They need wells, schools, etc., and if they are properly built
and if savarnas are allowed access to them, it would be one step
towards eradication of untouchability. Abolition of untouch-
ability has political implications but it must be pursued with a
purely religious motive. It is a need of Hinduism. The answers
to your more important questions are as follows :
1. Castes must go if we want to root out untouchability.
Read my preface to Varnavyavastha .
2. I feel that if it becomes necessary we should continue
special schools, wells, and so on.
3. Propaganda among the savarna Hindus is necessary. I
have mentioned its limitations above.
4. If there is a conflict with the savarnas for securing the rights
of Harijans, we must put up with it but secure them the rights.
5. The suggestion is good, but discretion will be necessary
in [implementing] it.
6. I consider the movement for temple-entry as necessary.
7. I do not know how far it is possible to have a meeting
of Hindu leaders. But there should be such a meeting.
8. The question of separate wells has already been dealt with.
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
