41. LETTER TO SIR MAHOMED HABIBULLAH
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
November 9, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter and for taking me in your confi-
dence regarding the appointment of a successor to Sastriji.
The proposal to appoint Sir K. V. Reddi does not appeal to
me at all. I have not the honour to know the gentleman. As you
tell me he is a party man, it would be fatal to appoint a party
man. The Agent has to enjoy the confidence of all the Indians
there and of all the parties here. I hardly think that Sir K. V.
Reddi will be able to possess that confidence.
The appointment is a most difficult task and it is not an easy
thing to replace Sastriji. My own suggestion to you is that you
should appoint yourself. You know all that Sastriji has done.
Therefore there will be perfect continuity. You proved your mettle
in South Africa when you led the Deputation. So far as I am
aware you are not a suspect as a party man. The next few years
are most important in the life of the little Indian community in
South Africa and any mistake in the appointment will prove disas-
trous. If, therefore, you have sufficient courage and humility to
appoint yourself, the whole difficulty is solved. But if you will shirk
the duty or your going is utterly impossible, I suggest your making
a desperate effort to secure Prof. Paranjpye. If that fails, in
spite of Sastriji's advice that no officials should be appointed you
should have Kunwar Maharaj Singh. I mention his name not
because I know him or have ever met him but because Charlie
Andrews swore by him as the man next to Sastriji if Sastriji could
not be secured as the first Agent.
If all the three proposals fail, then I would say you should
ask Sastriji to appoint his own successor. I can't go any further.
May God help you to a right decision. You must not throwaway
my first suggestion.
Yours sincerely,
SIR MAHOMED HABIBULLAH SAHEB BAHADUR, K.C.I.E.
MEMBER OF VICEROY'S COUNCIL, NEW DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 13282
