751. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
February 25, 1934
CHI. MRIDU,
I received your letter. I have destroyed it. You should not
have stretched the meaning of what I said. I merely warned
you. Ultimately only your decision matters. In such matters any-
body else's opinion should be considered as of no value; because
the same act can uplift one person and degrade another. It
depends on one's mental state. Neither Mummy and Papa nor I
would wish you to be weak in the least. I am certain that none
of us could wish that your progress should be stopped. I would
not even give any advice that would inspire doubt in your mind
on this score. So your decision is of course acceptable to me.
Besides, I would not even know all the details.
I do not feel that you have in any way shown disrespect
to me, or are doing so by your decision not to go to England.
Have no fear. I am not going to stop guiding you or advising
you when it is necessary. This is because I have great expecta-
tions of you. In every way only good is in store for you. I did
not think either that you had got excited. My blessings are ever
with you.
Your earlier letter is lying with me. I have had a long dis-
cussion with Bhai about the definition of swadeshi. The Swadeshi
Board cannot be of much use right now. Even so, the Board
should issue certificates if only to establish its control. I am
beginning to feel convinced that no certificates can be issued in
regard to products of mills which cannot ensure control on the
prices of these products or on the working conditions of the
labourers or on other managerial matters. Therefore, the swadeshi
propaganda body should only concern itself with popularizing
such goods as are not in demand but on whose production and
consumption it can have some control. In other words, such a
body can and should have control only on small-scale and
cottage industries. It would have been well if we could have
discussed this matter. But we had very little time to talk. Only
for this reason, you may come to Patna if you want. Before that
459
there is only one Tuesday when I shall be at Belgaum. You
may come over there if you wish.
One question in your last letter has remained unanswered.
Seeking release on parole cannot be permitted. Maybe there are
conditions under which this would be proper but I cannot ima-
gine them. Vallabhbhai did not consider it even when Dahyabhai
was on his death-bed. He was under a lot of pressure, too. That
is why what you write is correct.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11187. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
