451. LETTER TO CORBETT
VILLAGE DRULI KANCHAN (G.I.P.),
POONA DISTRICT,
March 28, 1946
DEAR MR. CORBETT,
I have your letter. In my opinion the incidents you describe were
disgraceful enough if and where they happened. I say 'if' because whilst
I have known of some, I have no knowledge of all that you have
described. But to give them all-India publicity in the columns of Harijan
is to exaggerate the evil out of all proportion. To advertise an evil is
to give it a fresh lease of life. Wisdom, therefore, dictates dignified
silence and a determination to prepare to face manfully a repetition.
There are Anglo-Indians who are ashamed of their Indian parentage
and will have nothing to do with Indians. These excite prejudice and
when feelings run high come in for exhibition of such prejudice resulting
even in disgraceful incidents you have described. Living in the midst
of a population which numerically reaches nine figures, regrettable
incidents will sometimes happen. Times of peace should be devoted
[to] think[ing] out ways and means of avoiding the re-eruption. One
that occurs to me is that Anglo-Indians should cease to think of
themselves as separate people requiring special privileges. These they
will not, and should not, enjoy in independent India. Indeed, nobody
should have special privileges. All over the world they have been the
251
bane of foreign rule which is evil itself. It must breed evil and exist
on that breed.
There are Indians who have adopted European manners and
customs and conduct themselves as superiors, much to the discomfort
of their fellow-men. I know that before now even these have come
in for the ill-treatment to which you have drawn my attention. How
nice it would be if all these ugly features of society were removed
even before independence becomes the order of the day in law and
in fact!
This letter is not intended for publication.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
