123. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 11, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter which consoles me. Those who believe in
God's guidance just do the best they can and never worry. The
sun has never been known to have suffered from overstrain and
yet who slaves with such unexampled regularity as he! And why
should we think that the sun is inanimate? The difference between
49-
him and us may be that he has no choice, we have a margin no
matter how precarious it may be. But no more speculation of
this sort. Suffice it for us that we have his brilliant example in the
matter of tireless energy. If we completely surrender ourselves
to His will and really become ciphers, we too voluntarily give up
the right of choice and then we need no wear and tear.
I have just commenced almond paste instead of milk. I was
daily decreasing the quantity of milk because it was not suiting
me. It may be that while I am resting, I do not need animal
proteid. I am simply trying. Therefore, if you have more almond
paste we had in London, please bring the bottles with you. Just
now I am flourishing on dates, tomatoes and almond paste, of
course with lemon and honey water twice during 24 hours. It is
too early yet to say how I shall fare without milk. I shall not do
anything consciously to injure my health, much as I would love to
give up milk altogether.
There may be no time for you to tell me when you come,
therefore let me know by letter how you washed the woollen
blankets. Did you soak them in cold water or warm and how
long? How much Lux did you use, in how much water? I pro-
pose to use powdered Apana soap. I am in no hurry.
I take it that you share my letters with the Ashram and that
you get from the Ashram what may be worth knowing.
I had a letter directly from the Privats. They seem to have
thoroughly enjoyed their stay and I am glad.
Do you ever meet Manilal our host and his wife?
If you meet Pyare Ali tell him or send him word not to send
any more dates. I have about 20 lb. from Jerajani. Moreover
what Pyare Ali gets are old dates and, therefore, they are weevily.
My love to Damodardas and his people.
Love from us both.
BAPU
[PS.]
The accompanying for Nargis. I have heard from Agatha
Harrison. She says that Percy Bartlett and Hyam and a university
girl are coming. I forget the names. But perhaps you have heard
from her too. I have Devi West's letter written to Ba.
From a photostat: C.W. 9504. Courtesy: Mirabehn
