105. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
May 5, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
My analysis of your position reacted upon me and made me feel
that if my remarks were sincere (and they were that absolutely) I could
not possibly let you spend a penny on my behalf without being guilty
of having participated in a fraud upon yourself, your creditors and
1 Vide pp. 126-.
125
myself My resolve was a most natural consequence of my discovery
long ago made but realized only during our last communion. No matter
what others may say, I should defend the position before all that you
are today in an insolvent position. To fully grasp the truth is to avert
the crisis and make yourself solvent. Your condition is not hopeless
or helpless. But every insolvent is not necessarily helpless. If he can
enter into a composition with his creditors he can pay 20/- in the pound.
But at the moment he has not the money to pay his creditors and
is therefore insolvent. Such is undoubtedly your position.
All the same, you are bound to send the £200 to your brother-
in-law. Only I wish it would be the final lesson of your life. Your
position does not warrant the gift. It is no use calling it a loan nor
can it do any good to your brother-in-law. But a promise is a promise
and you should send the money. Will you then seriously set to work
so that your position becomes sound, i.e., you can confidently say, 'I
have no debts I cannot pay on demand without a loss'. To arrive at
that stage, I feel that a firm adoption of the propositions suggested
by me is necessary. That alone will save [you]. And the very effort
will provide you with an occupation which is bound to raise you.
Now for your modifications. I must say I do not like them but
you must be the final judge. If that is the utmost you can do, then
let that stand. I return the paper. Anyway, please resolve quickly and
act promptly.
Please let me know if you have examined your tools. If you find
any missing and you want them, please let me know.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
