319. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
"MORARJI CASTLE", MAHABALESHWAR,
May 27, 1945
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
BOMBAY
DEAR SIR,
I refer you to my letter of 6th May, 1944, written from
the Detention Camp.
Up till recently there has been no hitch about friends and
relatives going to the samadhis of the two departed ones, my
wife and Shri Mahadev Desai. But a hitch occurred recently.
Tactful handling made devotion fairly possible during fixed
hours. Now comes the rumour that H. H. the Aga Khan's
Palace is about to be occupied by the Military and in that
event, devotion may not be permitted at all. I can only hope
that the fear is wholly unjustified.
In my letter of 6th May, 1944, to the Government I re-
duced my contention to writing to the effect that
by reason of the cremation of the corpses of Shri Mahadev Desai and
then my wife, the place of cremation which has been fenced off becomes
consecrated ground. The party has daily visited the ground twice and
offered floral tributes to the departed spirits and said prayers. I trust that
the plot will be acquired by the Government with the right of way to
it through H. H. the Aga Khan's grounds so as to enable those relatives
and friends who wish to visit the cremation ground whenever they like.
To this the following reply was received :
I am to inform you that it is legally impossible for Government
to acquire the site compulsorily under the Land Acquisition Act.
Government considers that the matter is one for private negotiations
between you and His Highness the Aga Khan. I am to add, however,
that your request has been communicated to His Highness the Aga
Khan and is now understood to be under his consideration. Government
understands that he has no objection, in the mean while, to the rela-
tives of Mrs. Gandhi and Mr. Mahadev Desai and any other persons
suggested by you going through the Palace grounds to the place of
cremation on the understanding that this is by his leave and licence.
I do hope that, no matter who occupies or owns the
palace, the consecrated ground on which the two samadhis stand
will be protected and reserved for devotion by the friends and
relatives of the families.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3940
