347. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,
May 17, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
When my illness is fast becoming a thing of the past, yours
seems to be obstinate. Whilst it remains so, you must not stir
out. But why does it persist like that? Are you undergoing any
treatment there? What exactly is the food you are taking? I
ask this question as Mr. Gregg has sent me a book containing the
latest researches on food and its relation to health. One thing
does appear to me, however, apart from the book. May it be
that your vegetarian food does not agree with your body that has
been built up upon flesh foods? While the change may not
have done any visible harm, may it have undermined the consti-
tution or may it be that the change of diet does not serve for
rebuilding a shattered constitution? So it happened in my case.
I went on famously on fruits and nuts alone for more than six years.
But after that severe attack of dysentery I could not rebuild the
body without milk to which in some shape or other the constitu-
tion was used up to 45 years or rather 40 years. You know my
rigid predilection, bordering on fanaticism, for vegetarianism.
But my fanaticism exhausts itself with my own person for the
simple reason that it is a matter of lifelong habit and of deep
religious conviction. But religious conviction is a matter personal
to every individual. Therefore, even being a vegetarian, I never
enforce my conviction on friends but leave them free to do
as they choose, even when they are under my influence, as I did
for instance for Prabhudas, Chhaganlal's son. I had an English
friend living with me in Durban. He had become a vegetarian
under my influence. After some time he became ill. I could see that
he could not get on well without his usual diet. I begged of him
to procure meat from outside and become well. I could not in-
troduce it in my own home. I want you to seriously consider the
question therefore. You have to think not only of yourself but
of Nikhil also and even Hemprabha Devi if she is still as bad as
you are and Tarini if he is a vegetarian. If you are eating pulses,
they are of course a fatal thing for weak persons and those with
sedentary habits. You saw with what agitation Andrews cabled
to me all the way from South Africa about milled rice. And
my concern about your food became enhanced upon reading the
book sent by Mr. Gregg.
If there is any particular book on Buddhism that you require
please tell me and I shall try to procure it.
The paragraph about yoga in Navajivan was unfortunate. I
did think of yoga practices, but only from two sides, their reputed
helpfulness in restoring health and in aiding brahmacharya, the
latter for the sake of helping the student world whose mind is
cut up to pieces under dissipating practices, and the former with
reference to my own health. Having read a book on brahma-
charya, during my illness and having heard copious references to
use of asanas I began further research. I do not hope to get
much help for acquiring greater purity. Not that I do not need
all that I can get, but I do not feel that I shall get it through
these practices. One who considers himself proficient in yoga
told me that in their final stages Raja Yoga, Hatha Yoga and
Karma Yoga were one and the same and that it was only in the
final stage that conquest of passions in every shape and form was
at all possible; and that in Hatha Yoga the final stage was difficult
of attainment and required extensive practice. I was not surprised
to hear this. For, I knew it before I was so authoritatively told.
For that conquest therefore I have only to continue along the
path I have so long followed. But I am taking gentle exercise by
way of some of these asanas and am eager to take more as I be-
come stronger. You need not therefore think any more about
the yoga practices.
Some day in order to remove expectations
and misunderstandings, I propose to write about this thing in the
pages of Young India. If I make any discovery about the simple
use of asanas for regaining health, I shall certainly write to you.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1570
