63. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 9, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Another remarkable letter from you. May your life on land be the
same as on board. I do not wish to offer any comment on the letter
except to say that it does great credit to your heart.
The second bore-hole is finished. It was finished on Saturday last.
But it was tested on Monday and Tuesday. It is 220 ft. deep, it gives
40,320 gallons per 24 hours, water at 50 feet, I think, from the surface.
On Wednesday the engine was removed to the third site. Logan told
me today he had gone down 80 feet. If all goes well, the operations
should be finished by the end of next week.
I went round to the dam with Du Ploi today. He has offered to
make the dam watertight for £40. Albrecht says he could put up two
dams near the 1st and the 3rd hole for that amount. He says it is
1 What follows has been written with the left hand.
not at all necessary to renovate the old dam now. I am inclined to
agree with Albrecht. Only following your example, I thought I could
not be wrong discussing the thing with Du Ploi. Albrecht has also
suggested that I should have a siphon for one of the bore-holes. I am
going to discuss the thing with Kennedy if he comes tomorrow and
if there is any conversation of importance with him I shall write another
letter to you. I am not going to Town on Monday. So this letter will
be sent to Town tomorrow evening.
I have sent the account with cheque to Heymann. He writes
expressing satisfaction, and suggests that I should not allow Hilt's arrears
to accrue. I had occasion to talk to Lapin through the phone on Friday.
I have therefore asked him to collect [the rent] from Hilt.
Lapin telephoned saying that the outfitter to whom Amies objected
would not leave and that Amies insisted on his agreement rights. I
have asked Lapin to further interview Hilt and to smooth matters over.
I have a letter today from Amies complaining about the same matter.
I shall do whatever may be necessary. Lapin has promised to send
me a wire if need be. I have also suggested that if £1 or £2 would
induce the outfitter to go, he should spend the amount. MacGeorge
has paid in both the amounts.
Albrecht is working practically the whole day since the massage.
He is showing many lovable traits in him. He has risen in my estimation.
No progress this week with fencing. We are on re-laying the floors.
We have commenced with the school. But fencing won't be neglected.
Medh and Desai are on the Farm. At Albrecht's suggestion, we have
burnt up the grass between the peach trees. He now proposes to harrow
between the trees. I think that we commenced burning too late.
However, I am a blind man and I follow Albrecht in these matters.
If a mistake has been made, no very great harm has been done. I
am gaining experience with a vengeance.
The native John has not made headway with his house. But he
is creeping up.
Mrs. Goldstone did not come on Sunday after all. I have got one
more addition to my school. I am declining to accept any boys for
the school who would not accept a saltless diet. I am anxious not to
disturb the present boys in their progress. The school still absorbs me.
That is my predominant occupation.
Isaac is going to see Call tomorrow. I have a letter from Dr. Gibson
who says Call should not be removed for the present. He has returned
the two letters you wrote to Call. Evidently Call is not able to receive
any letters. At present it is a living death for him. His poor fiancee !
Mrs. Gandhi took a little salt on Sunday and she has had a severe
relapse of her old complaint. Whether salt is to be blamed or not I
do not know. Anyhow, I blame it.
Albrecht loves Chhotalal and he Albrecht. Tonight Chhotalal sleeps
with Albrecht.
I am still unable to give you extracts from the book. But I am
sure you do not need them, after your brilliant experience of the voyage.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
