241. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
[DURBAN,
After January 5, 1914]
TO
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
I give below a few facts known to me concerning Bhai
Hurbatsingh, who passed away on Monday last1, believing that
readers of Indian Opinion would like to know them.
When I was in Volksrust gaol two months ago, it was sancti-
fied by the coming of Hurbatsingh. He was one of the batch of
37 Indians or so who, after waiting for a while in Charlestown,
entered Volksrust and elected to go to gaol. When I saw Hurbat-
singh among them, my heart overflowed with joy. I became intro-
spective and reflected over what I had done. My heart was full
because even a 70-year-old Indian like him, who had spent 30
years in Natal as a labourer, had thought of India, India's honour
and of India's tapascharya in ancient times. Even in his declining
years, he preferred to endure the sufferings of prison life rather than
live in comfort. I grew sad as I reflected: "Dear self of mine! If
you have led your innocent brothers, unlearned but wise, into a
wrong path, what a burden of sin will you have to bear? If
ever you discovered that you had made a mistake, what good would
your remorse do then? The men whom you had led to death would
not come back to life; those who, following your advice, endured
the hardships of gaol-life, would never forget them." At this
thought I felt sad. But then I considered: "No blame would
attach to you if you acted sincerely in advising your brothers to go
to gaol. Truly is it said that without yagna this world would
perish. But yagna is not merely kindling wood and pouring ghee
and other things into it. This may purify the air, but surely it will
not purify the spirit. When we offer up our bones to burn like
wood, pouring out our blood like ghee in order that they may
burn, and sacrifice our flesh to the flames, that alone will be
true yagna, and by such sacrifice will the earth be sustained.
Without such yagna, such sacrifice of self, it cannot be sustained.
No people has risen without self-sacrifice; can it be otherwise
with us? Certainly not." Reflecting thus, I saw that it was no
matter for grief if an old Indian like Hurbatsingh went to gaol for
India's sake and died while in prison. I once asked Hurbatsingh
why, in his extreme old age, he thought of going to gaol. In reply
he said : "When all of you, and the women too, are going to gaol,
what should I alone do outside? When you went to Charlestown,
I decided to leave my small farm and follow you. When my
friends came to gaol, I also did the same." "But, friend," I asked,
"What if you die while in gaol?" This wise Indian replied: "If
I must, I shall. I am an old man; what is the good of my living
on?"
This veteran had been sentenced to imprisonment with hard
labour. When the first batch of prisoners during the first satya-
graha campaign was sentenced to simple imprisonment, the
Government, I believe, hinted to the Courts not to award simple
imprisonment to any Indian satyagrahi. In consequence, after
the first cases of simple imprisonment, no Indian received such
sentence. Fortunately, in Volksrust the gaoler was kind to Hurbat-
singh. The latter used to work in the garden, watering the
plants, and his energy put the younger satyagrahis to shame.
Is there an Indian who will not shed tears of joy at the glori-
ous death of such an Indian? When Hurbatsingh's body is carried
to the cremation ground, I do hope that every Indian will follow
it on foot right up to the ground. By paying this homage, we shall
not only honour the memory of the departed one but shall also
honour India and ourselves.
I am,
India's bond-slave,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 7-1-1914
