445. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
MUZAFFARPUR,
April 23, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got both your letters.
I have just sat down to write letters
after cleaning my teeth. It is 3.40 a.m. now.
I hope you will
look upon this as an improvement as regards my hour of rising.
We are in Gokhalepuri in Muzaffarpur.
We arrived here from
Assam at 10.30 last night.
A small suburb, named after Gokhale,
has been built here by Bajpai of the Gokhale Institute.
I have to
perform its inauguration ceremony today after the period of sil-
ence ends. Rajendrababu saw me in Katihar yesterday.
As Valji felt a little ill, instead of going to bed immediately on
arrival here I sent for a doctor and could sleep only after twelve.
Please do not worry about me. I am taking the utmost care
of my health. I somehow manage to get my full quota of sleep.
Narandas (Gandhi) has been quite ill after his release.
There
is profuse bleeding from his nose. But he is a little better now. He
will see me in Ranchi.
It seems strange that you feel perplexed. I had told every-
body that you would immediately understand my step.
But your
letters show your pain.
Nobody among those who are outside
seems to have felt as you do. Jawahar did so, of course, but I
thought that he would understand the step after a while. I wonder
whether my belief that a person who is in jail cannot correctly under-
stand the situation outside is being proved true in your case also,
or whether I am following a completely wrong path. I still don't
feel that I am doing that.
To me it is as clear as daylight that
the decision I have taken is correct.
It is useless to ask me
also why I didn't think of this in Poona.
I couldn't have thought
of it then.
The right solution occurs only at the right time, and
then alone does it work. The decision taken in Poona was the
right one at that time and this one is right at the present time.
One shouldn't mind what Aunt says. If we had not taken this
decision, we would have invited untold harm.
There are difficulties of course. Not a single one of them was
out of my mind. We will overcome them. This step has raised
the morale of the people. It will rise still further. We can
give a reply to the cultivators, and will do so.
We couldn't have
done that if I also had given up civil disobedience. I hope it will
not occur to you even in your dream that this is my pride speaking.
Since I cannot explain all the reasons to you, who are a prisoner,
I leave the matter here. The fruits of patience are sweet. Have
patience. Everything will be well.
About the Swaraj Party being revived, the reply is quite
simple.
It was absolutely necessary that it should be revived.
I feel that a party which has survived so many bitter experiences
must have a place in the Congress. I don't think this is a tem-
porary phase; it has come to stay. I know that there are difficul-
ties in that policy too. Personal aspirations and ambitions also are
playing a part. And ability is limited.
You may say what else
you will. But realities cannot be wished away. At the most we can
improve them a little. We may exercise control. We can do
neither more nor less. You may even say that I have forced them
to take courage in both hands. They wanted to take this course
but did not have the courage to do so. The suggestion which I
had made in Poona is now bearing fruit.
It would have been a
different matter if we could have kept the Congress completely
away from the legislatures.
But that would have been coercion.
You were the first to show me The Sun. Are the reports in it al-
ways of that kind?
There is some truth in that one. Poor Lester.
She and Agatha will meet me in Patna tomorrow.
Both of them
liked my decision very much.
They are trying hard and doing
their best. But nobody is likely to listen to them just now. All
the same, it is good that they are trying so hard to understand the
situation. Both are sincere and brave. One Ceresole is coming
from Switzerland. He is an expert engineer.
He is coming to
give help in Bihar. He is a lover of peace. I had met him in
Villeneuve.
He is a good man.
If he keeps good health, he
will be able to do much useful work. Let us see what he can do.
I got a wire only yesterday about Fulchand Bapuji's death.
A
good worker has passed away. It was an excellent death. The
accompanying note was published by Narasinhbhai . You will
like it. He says that Fulchand went to bed that evening as usual.
He was working till the last day. There was no trouble. Naturally,
there was nobody by his side when he passed away.
The clock
stopped during the night. Chandrashankar Pandya has sent a wire
and asked my advice as to what should be done. What do you
think can be done? This is no time to think about a memorial.
Do you have any suggestion to make?
Thakkar Bapa had called on Dada in connection with collec-
tions for relief work. Dada is all right. His health is improving
fast. He seems to be in no hurry. Be it so. That also is good.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 96-
