520. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR,
April 19, 1932
CHI. SUMANGAL PRAKASH,
I have your letter. It would have been better if efforts had
not been made to have Chandrakanta given 'A' class. But what
is done is done. Now she must give up the facilities of 'A' class
or make the very least use of them.
I do remember that when I was in England I had a letter
from you but I never had any time there to spare and I hardly
wrote to anyone in this country. Even if you wrote about
Kanaiyalal's death, I have completely forgotten about it. What
had been the matter with him?
I also remember about the scheme for the publishing house.
I do not recollect that I was able to go through it. I take it
that it is unnecessary now to say anything about it. I had not
been given the book about Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi. You
must, if necessary, follow a strict regimen and put your health
in order. It is now more than two months since I gave up milk.
I give up milk whenever a pretext presents itself and that is
what happened this time. This has not done me any harm and
so long as no harm comes from it I shall continue to eschew
milk. In place of milk I take four tolas of roasted almonds
ground to a paste. In addition to this I take baked bread,
dates, lemon and one vegetable a day such as white gourd,
brinjal, etc. I take sour lemon with soda-bi-carb. In the early
morning I have honey in hot water with a little soda. That is
my diet. You are not to copy this. You must have chiefly milk,
curd and fresh fruit. If you still feel hungry you may take
greens and chapati or bread, but this is not to be a substitute
for milk and fresh fruit.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to say how long my body
will endure. Whatever I may say will only be guessing. I can
not claim that my life has been one of self-control from the
beginning. I have indulged myself in some form or other and so
I cannot take from the body as much work as I should like.
Most of the others, too, are poor in health and, therefore, either
311
do not see my physical weakness or ignore it. Be that as it may.
All that I wish is that the few years that are left to me should
be spent in some work or other of service. It will be enough if
I am not condemned to live the life of an invalid. The full span
of a man's life is a hundred years. For the reasons explained
above I do not consider myself fit to reach that age.
It is good to have the teeth scraped by a machine. Pyor-
rhoea must be got rid of.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
