261. LETTER TO P. GOVINDAN KUTTI MENON
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
April 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Here are my answers:
1. I wish to see God face to face not as I would like to see
Him but exactly as He is.
2. If the whole world becomes celibate in my sense, it will
be transfigured into something infinitely superior to what it is
today but there is not much chance, I fear, of the whole world
taking to a life of complete self-restraint all of a sudden. There-
fore we thus talk of grahasthashrama, the stage next to that of
complete celibacy.
3. There is not much hope of my visiting Kerala in the
near future. You are misinformed in thinking that purity amongst
the untouchables and unapproachables is not preached. Not
only is it preached but it is practised.
4. I do not desire total abolition of English but if you will
think in terms of the millions of each province, you will find that
for them English can never be the medium of instruction. Hindi
should be the language of intercommunication between pro-
vinces and English should be the language of intercommunication
between India and the World. It therefore comes third in point
of time as also importance.
5. I do not think that there ever will be one religion in
India or elsewhere. But there will be and should be sincere res-
pect and toleration for one another's religion.
6. If everybody spins regularly there need be no surplus
self-spun yarn but there will be enough for all and that with
the least possible trouble and expenditure that the world has
ever conceived. And if there was a surplus, we could automati-
cally reduce the time spent by each on spinning.
7. I have put nothing before the people which the most
ordinary man cannot do. For instance, what is the difficulty in
everyone handling a spinning-wheel, or giving up foreign cloth,
or giving up drink, or in believing and in promoting Hindu-Mus-
lim unity, or in regarding an untouchable as his own brother, or
in learning Hindi in addition to his own language?
8. One's food should consist of grains, fruit, milk and the
fewest condiments, if any at all. Much fat should be avoided.
The quantity and quality should be regulated by actual and
careful experiments.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. P. GOVINDAN KUTTI MENON
PANDARATHIL HOUSE
PUDUCODE
VIA OTTAPALAM
S. MALABAR
From a photostat: S.N. 19415
