451. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 6, 1927
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
This will reach you the same time that Sastri reaches South
Africa. Though in one way his arrival will somewhat ease the
terrible strain which you are undergoing, I can say that in the
initial stages, his arrival will also add to your burdens. For you will
be wanting to protect him from both the Indian malcontents and
Europeans.
I had your cablegram to one portion of which, that is, with
reference to Pragji, I sent you a reply. You have been this time
so grandly economic in sending me cablegrams, and have I not
shown my appreciation by dealing with your warning about rice-
mills and destruction of vitamins?
At first I thought I would deal with that part of your cable-
gram which referred to Sastri's table allowance. But I saw at
once that this was one of your nervous mistakes—if that is a pro-
per expression to describe what you know I mean. That cablegram
was not from Charlie the man of God, but from C. F. Andrews
the man of calculation whose calculation had told upon his brain
and brought on all kinds of imaginary fears due to his ner-
vousness. After all have we not hit upon Sastri for his character
and learning and for his simplicity and hatred of all pomp and
ceremonial? Just as if you become a Grandee and sought to win
over people by entertaining them at fashionable hotels and moved
about in first class motor-cars you would lose all the magnificent
influence which you have gained in South Africa, so I am sure
will Sastri lose all his influence if he began to give lavish entertain-
ments with a view to gaining friends not for himself but for his
cause. After all will it not be better that he appears in reality as
a representative of a poor, exploited continent than that he should
appear as an agent of a mighty foreign and expensive Govern-
ment dependent for its lavishness upon the impoverishment of
dumb millions? Is not his agency of the Government subordinate to
his agency of the Man within him?
I recall the controversy that was carried on in the public
Press in 1889 or 1890 in London in connection with the expensive
upkeep of the Bishop of London with his palace. I remember also
the sensation that was created when the Bishop came out with his
balance-sheet in which he showed on the expenditure side the cost
of liveried servants, a carriage in pair, etc., which he justified be-
cause he had to move among and affect the lives of lords and kings.
If I recollect rightly, this publication of the balance-sheet and the
defence exposed the Bishop to further ridicule. Imagine Jesus
wearing robes resplendent with diamonds and pearls and holding
dinners served in golden plates with the choicest old wines and
viands with a view to comforting epicures and millionaires of his
age. But I must stop here. I think I have given you enough tonic
for steadying your nerves and refreshing you.
Though I seem to be on the road to recovery, the head still
remains silly and becomes refractory under the slightest pressure.
However, I pray and grin and bear it. He gave me all the needed
strength for all these years. He might humble my pride by re-
ducing me to helplessness.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 12347
