524. LETTER TO SAMPURNANAND
July 27, 1937
BHAI SAMPURNANAND,
I had taken your book to Tithal, and had started reading
it there.
I finished it last Saturday, i.e., on July 24. I used
to read it whenever I had a few minutes to spare. I have read
it carefully from cover to cover. I liked the book, the language
is sweet but it might also be regarded a bit difficult for those
totally unacquainted with Sanskrit. The glossary of English-
Hindi and Hindi-English equivalents given at the end is useful
for the student. It is laudable that arguments in favour of socialism
have been put forward without any disparagement of others.
I have no difficulty in accepting almost all the principles of
socialism propounded in the book. I have also read with care
the book by Jayaprakash. Can there possibly be any difference
between his interpretation and yours? Neither in your book
nor in his do I find a clear idea how the ultimate revolution in
India will be brought about. This I could not understand even
after discussing it with many others. Only the day before yes-
terday a report of Meherally's Madras speech came into my
hands and I went through it. It explains fully what the socialists
are doing. The object is to start a revolt in every sphere. But
a revolt has never been possible without violence. In your book,
however, I find nothing of the kind. Have we or have not we
acquired strength through peaceful ways such as the civil disobe-
dience or non-violent non-co-operation carried on since 1920?
You say that the principles of socialism cannot be fully
implemented until we have State power. Supposing, you ask,
a powerful land-owner turned a complete socialist, could he well
and truly act upon his principles? Assuming that he had no
punitive power, could an Indian raja who was a socialist be
able to implement socialism? I recollect your having written that
socialism cannot be practised in its entirety until the whole world
turns socialist. Does this imply that even if we gain complete
independence socialism will not be fully or almost fully imple-
mented? I hope you have understood my point. The pur-
pose behind this question is only to ascertain how far it would
be possible for me to accept the socialist principles and the means
of their implementation.
You may reply to this letter at your leisure. I am in no
hurry.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From Hindi: C.W. 9940. Courtesy: Kashi Vidyapith
