324. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
October [5]1, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in today (Wednesday). My writing was
with the right hand. You found it clear because owing to the
weakness of the body I had to trace my letters slowly. The left
elbow was at fault.
Up to yesterday there was no pain at all.
But today I have a feeling that it would return with the filling
in of the flesh. If it does return, it need not cause any anxiety.
Of course I am spinning the full quota, i.e., 200 rounds at least.
Keshu brought a new Gandiva. It works extremely well. I do
not think I take more than one and a half hours. My weight stands
at 99 lb. Now that I take some exercise, the weight cannot and must
not increase by leaps. I have taken two pounds of milk today and
for the first time, 20 dates. Ba is with me during the day, feeding
and nursing me. I have to give much time to correspondence
as the volume has increased enormously.
I wrote a note to Kisen. I wonder if she received it.
Narandas has got the permission to see you, if you would care
to see him. Do you get all the letters collected during the week
or only one per week?
So you see that you cannot build a theory on a few days'
or even months' observation. Do not now try to fix the quantity
of salt mechanically. The quantity will adjust itself. An occa-
sional drop will always help. If you are melting and can stand
cold water, you should take two or three quick cold baths. And
you should try deep breathing. It cools the body at once. This
is done through the mouth as when you are whistling. Try in
the open air to breathe in the air and you will instantaneously
find the cooling effect. And do not stint yourself for fresh fruit.
Take as many oranges as you like, and raw tomatoes (ripe of
course).
Mahadev had forgotten to give your message to Gurudev
and touch his feet on your behalf. So, having your letter by
me, I read the portion to him and, much to his embarrassment,
touched his feet on your behalf. He sat speechless, expressing
gratefulness through his expression.
I am glad you and Kisen are working at making perfect
slivers. They are the key to fine spinning. I am just now spin-
ning 45 counts quite easily. Probably the count is finer. It will
be tested tomorrow.
Horace, Esther, Muriel and many other friends who write to
me always mention you and want me to send you their love. I
am so very bad at conveying these messages. I must not omit
the Italian sisters who have been sending beautiful letters.
Love to both of you.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6244. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9710
