602. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
November 8, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,
Your letter was delivered to me just now. It was imme-
diately read out to me and I am now dictating this reply. May
you have, on your birthday, all the blessings you desire, basket-
fuls of them. Why should we fear death, which comes to all sooner
or later-to the great and the humble, to the white and the black,
to human beings and other creatures? Why grieve over it either?
I often feel that death must be a less painful event than birth.
I leave aside the pain which the baby suffers in the mother's
womb before birth. But all of us know the suffering in this world
which commences from the moment of birth. Consider the help-
lessness of the baby at the moment of birth-every baby as helpless
as any other. On the other hand, if our life has been pure we
shall have no such experience at the moment of death. A baby
does not seek knowledge, nor can it have any. At the time
of death, on the other hand, it is not only possible for one to be
in a state of union with the Brahman but we actually know that
many persons die in such a state. Birth always means entering
a world of suffering, whereas death can be complete deliverance
from suffering. We can thus think from many points of view about
the beauty and the benefits of death, and can also meet our death
in that spirit. I bless you that your death may be of this type.
This wish includes everything else which is for your good. The
two friends join me in wishing this. Even after knowing all the
facts about your health, I adhere to the view which I have
expressed. If you are permitted to obtain your food at your own
expense, I see nothing wrong in your doing so. We should regard
our body as a trust, and it is our duty as its trustee to take care
of it to the best of our ability. You should not ask for or accept
even a grain of jaggery to gratify your palate, but I see nothing
wrong in your trying and getting even the costliest variety of
grapes if you need them as medicine and if they can be had. You
need not, therefore, feel unhappy if you have to eat such food.
If we can, we should also help others who may be placed in simi-
lar circumstances to secure such food. In my view you don't re-
quire all the wheat that is supplied to you. I also think it desir-
able for you to banish jaggery altogether from your food. Your
body does not require it at all. It is better to take innocent
honey instead. Mixing any form of sugar in milk affects its digesti-
bility. It would be better to increase the quantity of milk instead.
You are doing right in eating butter and not olive oil. The
olive oil available in India is not always pure, and of course it
cannot be fresh. Moreover, olive oil does not contain the vita-
mins which butter does. The vegetables which you eat should
always be green vegetables. Potatoes and similar vegetables are
practically a substitute for rotli. They contain starch. You require
very little starch, and whatever little you require you will get
from wheat. You should not eat pulses in any circumstances. If
you eat a sufficient quantity of butter, two pounds of milk will
be enough for you. Whether you should increase or diminish their
quantity will depend upon your weight at the time. You should
go on increasing the quantity of either or both to as much as
you can digest, till your weight becomes steady. Among the green
vegetables, gourd, pumpkin, the different kinds of edible leaves,
cabbage, cauliflower, tender bean-pods and brinjal are consi-
dered good. The wheat flour should be whole. If the wheat has
been properly cleaned before it is ground, no portion of the flour
should be thrown away. Among fruits, grapes, mosambis, oran-
ges, pomegranates, apples and pineapple are beneficial for
health. Some experiments being made in America indicate that
a meal should not consist of a variety of articles. Fruit has the
most nourishing value if it is eaten alone, and the best practice
is to eat it when the stomach is empty. There is even a saying
in English to the effect that fruit in the morning is gold and in
the afternoon silver. Our first meal, therefore, should consist only
of fruit, though there would be no harm if it is preceded by a
glass of warm water the first thing in the morning. If you can
get permission to live all the twenty-four hours of the day in open
air, it would be worth while to secure it. It would help you
if you can slowly do breathing exercises in open air. You need
not at all be afraid of the cold at night. It will have no harmful
effect on your health if you have properly covered yourself up
to the neck and wound a piece of cloth over the head so as to
keep the ears covered. It is essential that the lungs should be
supplied with the purest air the whole day and night. You
should expose your body to the sun in the morning for as long
as you can bear. Discuss all these suggestions with Dr. Contrac-
tor and then do what seems best to you.
I hope Madhavji is happy and comfortable in every way.
Give my blessings and regards of all three of us to the co-
workers who are with you in the jail. Probably you know what
is going on here in regard to untouchability. You can send any
suggestions which occur to you. You will be permitted by the
authorities there to do so.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2903
