85. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 1/2, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got a letter from you today also, along with Duncan's.
He should have taken your permission, but how could he know
that it was necessary to do so? The best thing would be to have
a complete list of the rules to be observed both by new-
comers and the old inmates, so that a copy of the rules could
be given to every newcomer as soon as he joins. If you draft the
rules in Gujarati, I will translate them into English. Or Duncan
himself may do that. He is certainly a capable man.
It was very bad indeed for so many persons to harass one
person. Since you have already explained that to the people,
I will not write anything concerning it. However, read my letter
to Duncan and explain its substance to everybody.
I have gone through Titus's report. I like his suggestions.
I think it would be better if the accounts relating to his work
were kept separately, though under your supervision.
Titus should be given one assistant to help him.
It would not be a bad idea to buy a mule or pony for carrying
milk. So far as I can see, ultimately there will be a motor-van.
I also approve of his suggestion for buying two machines.
I had never approved of the business in Bidaj. I, therefore,
fully approve of his suggestion.
Is cows' urine being utilized now? There ought to be a hut
for storing milk as suggested by him. Think over all these sug-
gestions and implement as many of them as seem good to you.
Jekibehn's sons will not come to the Ashram. They are studying.
I had a postcard today from Mahalakshmi. She says that she
will arrange after she is released in two months' time.
My hand has got tired with the effort of writing this much,
and so I must be brief with the rest.
I had a long discussion with Panditji and Lakshmibehn. From
among the suggestions discussed, the following should be carried
if they are not already being followed. If the bread generally
remains half-baked, the bakery should be closed. The persons
who work in it should not keep changing. If it gets too hot
near the furnace, there must be some defect in it. There should
be no emission of heat at all. The use of potatoes and other tubers
as vegetables should be stopped. They may be served as substi-
tutes for rotli.
We must grow the required vegetables in the Ashram
even if it is more expensive to do so than to buy them. Toma-
toes and one bhaji should grow in the Ashram all the year
round. Ultimately we shall not incur any loss by doing this.
We must buy no vegetables from outside except for persons who
are ill. In my view, unboiled milk and wheat is a complete diet.
Nothing else is necessary. It is not necessary to have all the
items in one's food every day. Sometimes one may have only
milk and sometimes only rotlas. And it is also essential for physical
and spiritual health to eat only one thing during the whole day
occasionally. I would not fix any particular days for such mono-
diet, but serve it according to convenience. If a large quantity
of milk happens to be left over, I would keep the kitchen closed
on that day. And if a large stock of potatoes has accumulated,
I would not serve rotlas on that day.
When no vegetable can be served, I would have tamarind
fruits plucked from the trees and serve chutney prepared from their
pulp crushed with salt. Eating tamarind daily may be harmful,
but eating it occasionally can do nothing but good. However,
nobody ought to pluck even one tamarind fruit to gratify his or
her palate.
I will write more about prayers after I get your opinion.
It would be more convenient if diners sit in the kitchen in
rows according to the items to be served. There should be one
row of people who want rice and another for those who are to be
served the normal menu. You may ask a guest in advance what
food he will have. Or he should be offered all the items at the
time of the meal, and he may accept whatever he likes. I know
that this would be a little too complicated.
The news that my fast of 21 days will commence from the 8th
will have become old by the time you get this letter. Let no-
body be upset by it. On the contrary, all should wake up.
I expect most from the Ashram. There is plenty of impurity
in it. This impurity must be banished. This fast is addressed
to all co-workers, and the Ashram is naturally included. If we had
as much of the spirit of dedicated service in the Ashram as we
need, I would be dancing with joy today and be sure that, when
the time comes, all the inmates would go and plant themselves on
the sands of the Sabarmati with unshakable determination of fast
unto death. My impending fast is preliminary to similar fasts
by other people.
Everybody should do the following:
The people should either concentrate completely on the prayer
or not attend it at all. Those who bring only their bodies to the
prayer and leave their minds behind violate truth. Instead of
doing that, let them follow their own inclination. The best thing,
of course, would be for such persons to leave the Ashram. No-
body should talk ill about others behind their backs. If impure
thoughts disturb anybody, he should confess them to you at least
if to nobody else. Or he may write a note and inform you.
If he cannot control such thoughts and remains pure only outwardly,
he should leave the Ashram. Those who do not like any of the
Ashram rules must leave. If, moreover, we can fix a code of conduct
during this period of self-purification, it should be accepted.
An inmate of the Ashram who is ill should be satisfied with what-
ever treatment is possible in the Ashram itself. At the most he or
she may be sent to one of the branches of the Ashram if abso-
lutely necessary.
Nobody should shirk work or steal anything or hide anything.
Everybody should be content to eat the food that is served, and
should eat all food as medicine and not for the pleasure of the
palate. It should be remembered that pulses, rice and tubers are
not essential. Spices, sugar and jaggery also are unnecessary.
Wheat or bajri or jowar and unboiled milk constitute complete
food. It will be enough if vegetables and fruits are occasionally
included.
Envy or malicious criticism of one another should be regarded
as sm. Everybody should do some Harijan work. In short, I
will expect the Ashram to get rid of all spiritual maladies dur-
ing this fast. If it cannot do this, I have no right to expect
anything from other people. Show this portion to all the inmates.
I have decided to send N. and Margarete. But I will reconsider
the matter if I get a letter from you tomorrow conveying your
decision against such a step. Give the ladies the clothes, utensils
and other things which they may require. And see also that satisfac-
tory toilet arrangements are made for them. In regard to their
food, it is not necessary to do anything more than prepare one or
two things specially for them in addition to the normal menu. I
have already explained other things.
The child will easily mix
with the other children. It will be enough if he does not learn
any bad habit.
Since Jamna herself has given you a testimonial, I am sure
you will not worry. Don't let anybody run down here.
BAPU
[PS.]
Tell Duncan the history of both the ladies and take what-
ever help you require from him.
May 2, 1933
I wrote the foregoing yesterday, but could not dispatch the
letter owing to heavy pressure of other work. N. will have
reached the Ashram before you get this letter. I got your letter
yesterday too. I have started writing this before the prayer. I
got up at a quarter past one.
Your letter is heart-rending. There is no limit to my hard-
heartedness. You will have received the wire which I sent to-
day. I have asked you to send Parashuram here immediately on
receipt of it. You must have done that. I have called the
children too. I have also asked you to give him the railway fare
from Ahmedabad to Poona plus four rupees. We need not tol-
erate such persons in the Ashram, for it is beyond our capacity to
reform them. If they are with me, I can get some work out of
them too. But that would serve no useful purpose. If there are
others like him, ask them all to leave. You may clean up every-
thing. Henceforth, only those who willingly and scrupulously
observe the rules may stay in the Ashram. My hope is that in
the Ashram itself there will be persons who will have cultivated
sufficient fitness and will undertake an indefinite fast when the
time comes. I see that time drawing near. Such is the nature
of my intended fast. It is the first step in self-purification. If the
Ashram will not be the first to bring that self-purification, whom
else can we expect to do so? This is a much more difficult
task than fighting for salt. Only those who are eager to cultivate
fitness for offering themselves as sacrifice may stay in the Ashram.
You will have to think about the old families in the Ashram
who may not be ready to join in this. You can stop admitting new-
comers. Those persons who joined the Ashram for the specific
purpose of learning some work may be asked to leave if they are
not without other means of support. Persons who have been
living in the Ashram because they have no other means of
support may remain, namely, Narmada Rana. But please treat all
these as passing thoughts which occur to me in my solitude
here. Do only what you think proper and what appeals to you and
is within your capacity. I have given you complete freedom. I
don't want you to be burdened with too heavy responsibility for
the affairs of the Ashram during the 21 days of the fast. Nobody
should expect you to humour him or her. If any of the old
families living there do not wish to join in this work of self-puri-
fication, you may permit them to cook their own meals. An
allowance should be fixed for them after careful calculation and
they should live within that sum. Any saving they make will be
theirs, and, if they overspend during one month, they should meet
the balance from the allowance for the next month. If you can-
not get a full-time worker for the departments, such as the dairy,
which must be continued, engage paid workers and maintain them.
Or you may reduce the work in these departments to the extent
necessary. Personally, I don't think that will be necessary. How-
ever, I cannot dictate the final decision in this matter. Call all
the people together and think over these suggestions with them.
There should be no coercion in regard to anything. From the very
beginning it has been assumed that the Ashram may have to
sacrifice itself one day in this manner. Probably some of the in-
mates will remember that I have often explained this possibility.
I am not, therefore, putting forward an altogether new suggestion.
Even those who agree to join should know that, though they may
be ready to undertake an indefinite fast with irrevocable determina-
tion, they must go on with their work for the time being as if they
expected to live for ever. As we always go on working even
though we know that one day we shall receive the summons from
Death, so should we do now, and with all the greater devotion now
since we should be prepared to die of our own free will.
Duncan, being a guest, may be exempted from many things,
but that certainly does not mean that he should be free to approach
me directly. Tilakam is an unhappy man, and, moreover, he is a
Harijan and a worthy man in other respects. I think highly of both
these persons. If your experience is different, please let me know.
I feel confused in my mind regarding . . .1. I don't like his
venture. It is certainly a violation of his pledge. You may give
him the capital that he wants, but I suppose it will be on per-
sonal security. That doesn't seem to me proper. We cannot
assume that he will necessarily succeed in his enterprise. He
doesn't seem to have learnt any humility. If he has done so, he
should accept a job anywhere. Ambalalbhai would certainly
offer him one as fitter. If there is nobody in the Ashram now
to utilize the equipment which we have, Ranchhodbhai or
Ambalalbhai can remove it to his factory. They will at least
keep it safe, if they do not buy it up. But I may be mistaken
even III assuming this. I have written this only for your infor-
mation. You are free to ignore the suggestion completely. It is
possible that you have understood . . . better and that I am
doing injustice because I am disillusioned with him. If, however, I
am right in my view, it is possible that. . . will not immediately
be able to earn enough to support the whole family. If so, the
Ashram must meet the balance of his expenses. We certainly
cannot leave him on the street. I am thinking only of our
dharma in this matter. After all, doesn't that family mean
. . .3 himself? Of course I will not abandon it because . . .
is no more with us, but I would certainly make it submit to as
much hardship as it can endure.
Have I forgotten about Joshi completely? This is known
to happen to persons who are nearing their death.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8369. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
