450. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 6, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have been regularly receiving your letters. But it is well
for you to know that one letter was received after the letter follow-
ing it. How that letter could have been delayed for two days and
where, it is difficult for me to know. Do you post the letters your-
self or who does?
Do please write as often as you like. I am interested in know-
ing the progress of events there. I shall write beyond the Monday
letter only when necessary.
If all goes well after the experiences you have gone through,
I shall be delighted. But how it can after you have found the
principal parties shifting their ground and prevaricating, I do not
know. But you have my full letter and I shall await your reply to
it. No more compromise with bhang. But you will come to deci-
sion yourself with due regard to all the circumstances as they may
present themselves to you.
We moved to Bangalore yesterday. And though there was
some strain, not of the journey but at a place near Nandi where I
had to stop and whose people had made all the arrangements for
my comfort, the blood-pressure had not increased at all nor did I
notice any other effect of the strain. The doctors came yesterday
and they said I should be quite all right in a month's time and
able to do the ordinary touring though not at breakneck speed.
I have already given the address here-Kumara Park, Banga-
lore City.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
[Ps.]
Just as I was closing this I got your wire. I was prepared
for it. I have wired saying that subject to Jamnalalji's opinion you
should go with Valunjker and Gangu to Sabarmati and learn
Hindi with Valunjker, pending other arrangement. Now that Gangu
is attached to you so much, I want you to keep her under your
wings so long as it is necessary. There are several other places
I have mentioned to you already but I am not in a hurry to come
to a decision. If Valunjker and Gangu are not to be with you, it
might be as well for you to pass a few days with me before set-
tling down anywhere else for finishing your Hindi. You may
have acquired enough confidence now to finish your Hindi even
at the Ashram. What in my opinion you need is someone who
would talk to you in Hindi only. But I shall be largely guided
by your instinct.
You are having the richest experiences of your life. Turn to
verse 9 of the 6th chapter, Gita:
"The equiminded one is the same to the good as well as evil.
We have to love them all in spite of the sad discoveries.
But love and equal treatment are expressed and can be expressed
only in service.
'You are bad but I love you just as when I
thought you were good.' Life's work is summed up in attaining
that state.
Rock of ages cleft for me
Let me hide myself in Thee.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5234. Courtesy: Mirabehn
