91. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 8, 1928
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
For the last so many days or even months, I have wanted to write to you
but how was it possible for me to find time for it ? This, too, I am dictating
immediately after the morning prayers. I have got the shawl sent by you and
when the time comes, I shall certainly use it. But in this season, the occasion
will never come. I am getting fully acquainted with your activities and am
pleased with them. I even rejoice in them. But do remember that you are not
to pursue any activity at the cost of your health for, your first duty in going
there lies in improving your health. However, if you can make use of your
activities in improving it, I do not have to warn you. Do not have so much
attachment for the activities that they ruin your health, and in order to regain
it, you have to sacrifice your activities. It is like a saint losing both the worlds.
Remember that the efforts to improve your health are also meant to excel in
devotion to your duty.
Nothing has yet been decided about my going to Europe. It has been left
to me to decide it but I do not have the confidence to take a decision in this
matter. I do not know what is good. I do not at all like going there, but in
1 Also vide Vol. XXXVI, p. 59.
2 Also vide Vol. XXXVI, p. 210 and ff. After a lot of deliberation, Gandhiji
ultimately dropped the idea of visiting Europe, ibid., p. 251.
76
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
a week or two, I will decide this way or that. You are dreaming of paying a
visit here. Forget about it. It is attachment. You are not fully aware of our
wish to rub shoulders with the crores of suffering and half-starved people.
Before spending each rupee, you must reckon that with that money, sixty-
four persons can comfortably have their second meal. Moreover, there is no
need to risk your health by coming here in this weather. We meet through
letters; that is no less grace of God.
You are inviting Kashi. The above argument applies in her case also.
Only warm climate suits Kashi. The cold climate which you enjoy, which
gives you strength, enfeebles Kashi. As far as service to her is concerned,
there is hardly anything you could do. Besides, you may not even be able to
do that, and for one's own help, one cannot call one's parents. Moreover, you
have made that relation virtuous. Treat any invalid woman you see there as
your mother and help her. Consider such service as service rendered to Kashi.
In the same way, treat every invalid man as your father. The spinning-wheel
makes us do the same. It teaches us to render pure, selfless and dedicated
service to numerous invalid and helpless parents, brothers, brothers-in-law and
sons and daughters. Day by day, you are gaining proficiency in rendering
such service. I am reminded of you by the figures you had given me about
the growing business of lanterns, etc., here. I find from Devdas's letters that
he is doing very good work in Jamia. Do not hesitate to write to me whenever
you feel like doing so.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32978
