310. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 9/14, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
Your packet was given to me late last evening. I will cer-
tainly inquire why you got the post late. But that will often
happen and you should not, therefore, worry if you do not get
the post on the day expected. You should, however, be regular
in posting the letters at your end.
Both of us were weighed today. We are weighed every
Thursday. Kakasaheb's weight is between 115 and 116, which
means that there is some improvement. My weight came to
104. I have discontinued taking enema since four days ago. I
eat tandalja and that has had a beneficial effect. I have not given
up ratalu altogether. I intend to take it twice or thrice in a
week. On the other days I will eat patakalu or some other vege-
table. I still continue tomatoes. So far, I have not felt the
need for fruits. If the weight remains steady, I intend to con-
tinue as I am doing. My promise that I will take care of my
health in whatever experiments I make should reassure all of
you.
I do not feel that your letters are too long. I should cer-
tainly like to see that the burden on you does not increase. Your
work is to see the letters which I write, to distribute them to the
addressees and to write to me. I think your having to send letters
written by others is an extra duty. It is so because really speaking
it is not right for me to express opinions from here. It is a mere
accident that we are able to send and receive letters.
I got Radha's long reply. She writes in it about . . .1 having
stolen something and other such matters. She says that Keshu
was upset when he knew about the thing. What are the facts?
Read the letter I shall write to . . .2.
I have nothing to say about your decision regarding Giriraj.
I think it is perfectly correct. You alone know all the facts.
I hope to know by and by what has been done about the children.
What can one say about Amidas? His courage inspires nothing
but respect. I feel unhappy in so far as I was responsible for
his vow of not taking milk. Now that his father is there, I
don't worry any more about him. We should do all we can to
look after him. It is God who will protect him.
I suppose Bhagwanji will accept responsibility for Manibehn's
expenses. I saw Pyarelal. No harm has been done to his health.
It is weak, though. I believe I shall now be able to see him
frequently. He gets bread and milk at present.
I didn't see any letter from Chitalia. I don't remember at
the moment the sum which he requires as help. I think I did
ask someone to note it. His letter is likely to be in one of the
files. Shivabhai and Chhaganlal will probably know about it.
Perhaps Raojibhai, too, may know. Chitalia himself will be able
to tell you. Has he asked for Rs. 1,500 for the building?
Ascertain the position and do what you think best. If necessary,
you may write to me again about the matter. Read the letter
I have written to him.
October 13, 1930
I read the new ordinance. You, too, will have to think about
the matter. I myself wish to say nothing from here. Discuss
the matter with the person who is the leader there and go on do-
ing what you think right. I am not surprised by the ordinance.
I did expect some such measure.
Tuesday morning, October 14, 1930
In this series, I have dealt cursorily with the importance of
vows, but it is perhaps necessary to consider at some length their
bearing on a godly life. Now that I have discussed all our vows
except that of swadeshi, let us consider the necessity of vows.
There is a powerful school of thinkers who concede the propriety
of observing certain rules but do not acknowledge the necessity of
vows. They go even so far as to suggest that vows are a sign of
weakness and may even be harmful. Again they say that, if a
rule is subsequently discovered to be inconvenient or sinful, to
adhere to it after such discovery would be positively wrong. They
say: "It is a good thing to abstain from liquor, but what harm is
there in taking it occasionally, say on medical grounds? A pledge
of total abstinence would be a needless handicap; and as with
liquor, so with other things. Why may we not even speak an un-
truth for a good end?" This argument does not convince me. A
vow means unflinching determination, and helps us against temp-
tations. Determination is worth nothing if it bends before dis-
comfort. The universal experience of humanity supports the view
that progress is impossible without inflexible determination. There
cannot be a vow to commit a sin. Such a vow represents a
wicked nature. In the case of a vow first thought to be meritorious
but later found to be sinful, there arises a clear necessity to give it
up. But no one takes, or ought to take, vows about dubious mat-
ters. Vows can be taken only on points of universally recognized
principles, which, however, we do not habitually act upon. The
possibility of sin in such a case is more or less imaginary. A
devotee of Truth cannot stop to consider if someone will not be
injured by his telling the truth, for he believes that truth can
never do harm. So also about total abstinence. The abstainer
will either make an exception as regards medicine, or will be
prepared to risk his life in fulfilment of his full vow. What does
it matter if we happen to lose our lives through a pledge of total
abstinence? There can be no guarantee that our lives will be pro-
longed by liquor, and even if life is thus prolonged for a moment,
it may be ended the very next through some other agency. On
the other hand, the example of a man who gives up his life
rather than his pledge is likely to wean drunkards from liquor and
thus become a great power for good in the world. Only they can
hope some time to see God who have nobly determined to bear
witness to the faith that is in them even at the cost of life itself.
Taking vows is not a sign of weakness but of strength. To
do at any cost what one ought to do constitutes a vow. It be-
comes a bulwark of strength. It makes no difference whether such
a resolve is called a vow or known by some other name. A man,
who says that he will do something "as far as possible" be-
trays either his pride or his weakness, though he himself may
attribute it to his humility. There is, in fact, not a trace of humi-
lity in such an attitude of mind. I have noticed in my own case,
as well as in that of others, that the limitation "as far as possible"
provides a fatal loophole. To do something "as far as possible"
is to succumb to the very first temptation. There is no sense in
saying that we will observe truth "as far as possible". Even as
no business man will look at a note in which a man promises to
pay a certain amount on a certain date "as far as possible", so
will God refuse to accept a promissory note drawn by a man who
will observe truth "as far as possible".
God is the very image of the vow. God would cease to be
God if He swerved from His own laws even by a hair's breadth.
The sun is a great keeper of observances; hence the possibility of
measuring time and publishing almanacs. He has created in us
the faith that he always rises and will for ever continue to rise,
and thereby given us a sense of security. All business depends upon
men fulfilling their promises. There could be no commerce if
merchants did not regard themselves as bound by their word to
one another. We thus see that keeping a vow is a universal
practice. Are such promises less necessary in character building
or self-realization? We should, therefore, never doubt the neces-
sity of vows for the purpose of self-purification and self-realization.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
About the Gandiv spinning-wheel and about my diet you will
get some news in my letter to Mirabehn.
There are 63 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
