616. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 15, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,
I received your letter just now. The lesson for Manu is attractive
from the point of view of handwriting. It needs more meticulousness.
As you become more meticulous, your handwriting will become as
beautiful as pearls. Then I shall not only read it myself, I shall also
make Manu read it. This time there are four pages. My suggestion
is that just two pages will be sufficient. Manu will not be able to take
in more at present because she has a heavy load of work and she
does not wish to give up any of it. So she has no time left. I have
not even asked her what she herself has in mind. I am not asking
her even while dictating this. I am stealing even this little time. I am
quite fatigued mentally and physically. The body wants to relax. Not
so the mind. The mind is absorbed in Bengali. But the memory having
become blunted the progress is slow. Swamiji is not here. As such,
I am the only one left to teach Sanskrit. And I cannot spare time.
One cannot say that even Swamiji was giving much time. Manu's
development does not depend on learning all that. It largely depends
on me. And so, it will depend on my efficiency and patience. I have
not even in my dream considered keeping Kishorelal's letter, or any
letter, secret from you. But I do wish to spare you mental anguish.
But if you cannot check your curiosity it would be only proper that
you should see it. So I am sending you the letter. Return it after reading.
From my point of view, it contains as much ignorance as love. From
his point of view, there is a whole group of people who believe that
my practice is impelled by lust. How can I say that the view of this
group is altogether wrong ? For, man does not know himself. You will
not find any open accusation made in these letters, though in Devdas's
letter it is openly made. Whether or not I am free from physical desire
will probably be known only after my death. The term 'probably' is
deliberately used, because it does not always happen that we are able
to correctly judge a man after his death. Only God understands the
heart of man. When I cannot say with any certainty about myself that
I do not feel the weight of whatever is happening, who can say that
about Manu ? She appears to be unconcerned, but she herself may
not be fully aware of the turmoil in her mind. I am not bothering her
about it. I am carrying on, leaving everything in the hands of God.
367
For me, all this is an inseparable part of the yajna and it remains
to be seen how far my non-attachment can carry.
I have read both your papers. I am sending them back, though
you have said that it is not necessary to return the second paper. Your
reply to Satis Babu is correct The reply about Dr. Chandra Shekhar
is also correct. He must certainly be given medicines, etc. If possible,
persuade him to reduce the use of medicines. More than medicines,
what is needed is nursing and reassurance.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
