172. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 25, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter.
You want from me inspired utterances which would touch
the heart. If I had a safe filled with them, I would open it
and send some every week. But I have no such safe. The words
which I pen or speak, come to me unsought. Only such words
have truth in them, for they are living words. All other state-
ments are insincere. They may seem arresting, but I think they
produce no abiding effect on the heart. I can do nothing insincere.
During my student days in England, I attempted twice [to make
prepared speeches] and failed on both occasions. I never tried
again.
And what is true about my speaking is also true about my
behaviour to you on all other occasions which you mention. I
remember the conversation we had regarding Mirabehn. I must
have replied to you as I felt at the moment. I can understand
that my words did not produce a good impression on you. That
is a measure of the imperfection of my non-violence. I must
have said only what I felt, but you might have felt a sting in
my words. "One must speak the truth in words which are
agreeable" is not only a maxim of practical wisdom but is a
moral principle. "Agreeable" here means non-violent. If I had
told you gently what I did excitedly, my words would not have
left behind them the bitter memory which they have. Truth
stated in a spirit of non-violence may hurt at the moment, but its
ultimate effect must be as sweet as amrit. This is an essential
test of non-violence. I am writing this from my own bitter
experience. I may have spoken to you vehemently in defence
of Mirabehn, but I have not made any man or woman weep as
bitterly as I have made her. My hardness of heart, impatience and
ignorant attachment were responsible for such conduct. I have
felt Mirabehn's self-sacrifice to be beyond praise and, therefore,
wish to see her perfect. The moment I see any imperfection in
her, my ignorant attachment makes me impatient and I rebuke
her sharply. The result is a flood of tears. These instances have
opened my eyes to the presence of violence in me and, recall-
ing them, I have been trying to reform myself. I, therefore,
welcome your letters. I do not know whether in return I
shall be able to give you anything, but personally I benefit
from them. I realized this thing-my hard-heartedness-more
vividly in England.
Mira was the chief person in atten-
dance on me. There, too, I caused her to weep bitterly on the
slightest provocation. But I learnt a lesson from that experience.
God has never let any delusion of mine last for ever. Even in
the political sphere, whenever I have taken a false step God has
immediately opened my eyes. Your letters help that process of
awakening.
You will now understand my previous letter better. How can
we expect perfection from an imperfect being? A blind man has
collected a band of other blind folk. But the blind man knows
that he is blind, and also knows the cure for his blindness. Hence,
though living with blind people, he is confident that he will not
lead them into a pit, nor will he himself fall into it. He walks
with a stick in is hand. He feels the path ahead with the stick
before taking every step. And, therefore, things have gone well
on the whole so far. If, despite his using the stick, the blind man
has occasionally strayed from the path, he has immediately realiz-
ed his error and retraced his steps and led back his co-workers.
So long as my blindness remains, even a person like you who
loves me will continue to have reasons to criticize me. When the
blindness has disappeared, there will be no such grounds for
criticism. Meanwhile, let all of us, blind men and women, who
are seekers after truth, describe the elephant as we perceive it.
Our descriptions will vary, but each will be perfectly true from
the person's limited point of view. After all, everyone of us will
have but touched the elephant. When our eyes open all of us
will dance with joy and shout: 'How blind we were! This is
an elephant, about which we had read in the Gita. How fortu-
nate it would have been if our eyes had opened earlier'. But
why should we worry if their opening is delayed? Time has no
meaning for God, or rather He measures it differently. Ignorance,
thus, will become transformed into knowledge.
I hope you will get from this an explanation of all the short-
comings you may have observed in me. That does not mean, of
course, that you should not put your doubts before me. You
may continue to put them and I will reply every time.
Send my blessings to Sushila and Kisan. And also to Dhuran-
dhar if you are permitted to write to him. How is Jamnadas's
health? What happened to his school?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10274. Also C.W. 6722. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
