254. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
May 5, 1919
DEAR MR. MAFFEY,
I thank you for your two letters and your telegram. Your
assurance has given me the greatest relief. It saddens me to hear
that the Viceroy had to give up his holiday. I hope, however,
that the strain has not proved too much for his health.
I enclose herewith some of my recent leaflets. You will
glance through them only if you have a few moments to spare.
I observe that Moulvi Rafiuddin Ahmed has suggested that
some definite reassuring announcement be made regarding Islamic
questions. What is an armed peace worth if it is not followed up
by real contentment and you will never have real contentment
unless Mahomedan sentiment is conciliated and Rowlatt legislation
withdrawn. Probably you know that Mahomedan women and
children too take the liveliest interest in the questions of Khilafat,
Palestine and the Holy Mecca.
Regarding the Rowlatt legislation, it may be argued that
agitators have poisoned the public mind, but whether such be the
case or not, the fact is that the public thoroughly distrust that
legislation and how can you withstand emphatically expressed
public opinion? What you see in India today is not a revolu-
tionary plot. I am not prepared to say that there are no men
entertaining wild dreams of revolution. But I do say that the
large bodies of men who have taken part in the acts of violence
have simply in a wild and furious manner given vent to their pent-
up feelings which is a mad protest but nothing more. Bolshev-
ism has not yet entered India. But I would like you to consider
whether you can prevent its entry or prevent mad acts of violence
without endorsing the doctrine of satyagraha. I ask you to believe
with me that it is not so much the military dispositions as satyagraha
that is the restraining force. I think, it is commonly admitted that
violence could not have been avoided in spite of the elaborate
military precautions if the restraining and sobering influence of
satyagraha had not been there when Mr. Horniman was deported.
Now I come to a less thorny topic, probably a topic on which
we may meet. I enclose herewith the form containing the swadeshi
vow. What a great thing it would be if the Viceroy would take the
vow! You will see that Englishmen can take it just as easily as
Indians. Do please submit it to H. E. when you think he has
time to go through it. Even if the Viceroy cannot see his way to
take the vow, but if he approves of the scheme, I would like you to
let me have a separate letter for publication.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 6589
