439. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
MAIN CAMP : SODEPUR,
CONTAI,
January 1, 1946
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter, as also the wire Wherever Satis Babu and
Hemprabhadevi are in charge, there can be nothing wanting
in perfection of arrangements. Therefore wherever I am,
I regularly receive the post redirected to me from Sodepur. Just
like you, Satis Babu officiates as sentinel wherever I go and so has
he done here. "Here" means Contai (in Midnapore). Though
we are in unfamiliar surroundings, everything is so well arranged
that I get the maximum possible free time. So why should
my health suffer? I daily see the miracle wrought by prayer.
Thousands attend, the number sometimes reaching even a hundred
thousand, but the prayers are peaceful. There is no noise and
no jostling. This is an altogether new experience.
I have gone through the papers regarding Rajaji. I hope
the matter has been settled. I say this because doubts persist
in my mind. I get letters of that type. I reply to them only
when I must.
What shall I say regarding your health? Dinshaw's sugges-
tion appeals to me. But if you use up the strength that you daily
regain, believing that you are thereby doing service, what can be
done?
About the samadhi the Aga Khan had sent a wire saying
"Will Meet." There has been no other communication. I
understand his discussing the matter with you. The reply you
gave regarding Jinnah was excellent. I am not attracted by the
Aga Khan's proposals. I am wholly opposed to such partition.
More when we meet.
I am reaching Sodepur on the 3rd. On the 9th I leave
for Assam, and shall be back to Sodepur most probably on the
18th. After that I shall be leaving for Madras on the 23rd.
I have spared a maximum of two weeks for Madras. After
spending a few days in Sevagram, if you permit me I shall
go to Poona. Otherwise I shall first go to Bardoli and then to
Poona.
I had a letter from Bhai Vaikunth saying that Balasaheb
and you and also Deo are pressing him. Do get him in as
member. The rest after I return.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 285-
