32. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 12, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I did not consider your letter too long, for you have given in
it an account of your visits such as I had wanted you to give.
I have been to Sinhagarh thrice. Once I went there while the
Lokamanya was also there, and we met each other a good
many times. I saw his house. You have certainly described a few
things about which I did not know. I did meet Hari Narayan
Apte . I certainly wish to read his novels, but I do not have the
courage to take up anything new just now. Urdu, economics,
watching the sky, spinning and writing letters-these keep me
busy enough. And off and on I take up something extra to read.
What you say about the Superintendent is correct. I saw
and understood everything. But we should tolerate all that. As
a man he is certainly not bad. But authority is an evil thing.
And, besides, authority over whom? We should, therefore, rea-
son thus: How good is it that even in unfavourable circumstances
a little measure of humanity has survived? Who knows to what
depths we would have descended if we were in his place? You
will frequently get the kind of experiences you had. It is through
such experiences that we learn to cultivate forbearance, genero-
sity, patience and courtesy. In favourable circumstances, every-
one can behave in a manner which will win him or her the
good opinion of others.
There was no special meaning behind my question, "Are
you satisfied now?" I asked the question only casually. Sushila
may not have felt hurt, but I myself felt sorry.
Having permit-
ted her to come with you, I should have talked with her a little.
But I had no time and so contented myself with an inquiry about
Jamnadas. My blessings to her.
I certainly intended to write on the subject of sex. But it
would be better if you ask me specific questions. We need not stop
the teaching of English. All that I meant was that we should
not teach it to new pupils before they have learnt the other
things. I have written more about this in my letter to Narandas.
Your body ought to be [as red] as copper. If you have no
objection to fish and if you think you can maintain good health
by taking it, you may go out to eat it. Imam Saheb used to do
that. If you wish to discuss this subject further with me, you may.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10289. Also C.W. 6737. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
