405. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
SEGAON,
April 29/30, 1936 1
BHAI BAPA,
I have written to Chimandas. To Choithram I wrote from
Lucknow itself. The case of Amtussalaam is a difficult one.
She is not going to be happy with me, too, and I am now going
to settle in a village. For the present, however, I am going to
Nandi Durg with Sardar. He has been confined and I am be-
ing jailor to him; I mean he is ill and I am to act as his nurse.
I am prepared to take Amtussalaam there. It is not good run-
ning away from Rukmini's harassment of her. That would
encourage her in her ways. We must find out a way to reform
Rukmini. Therefore, consider Amtussalaam's case in this way.
Is it necessary to have her there? If it is so, keep her there and
clip Rukmini's wings. If she is not needed she should be sent
to me forthwith. I sent her there with a view to satisfying her
ambition to serve and under the belief that she was needed
there. She is certainly not to be accommodated on the assump-
tion that work may be taken from whoever is there. You are
fully entitled to do what you think right after looking at the
question from this angle. I am enclosing her letter herewith.
Now about Sastri. He was here and talked about many
things. His mention of Ganesan's abuses is only an excuse. He
is tired of the work because he has no energy to raise the funds.
On my part I am disappointed about him. I believe he is fit
for specified desk work and can perhaps maintain accounts
and carry on correspondence well. But he has not the ability
to run an institution. He lacks initiative, has no self-confidence,
no interest in the work, no such thing as drive. However, he is
a good man and he is honest. I advise you, therefore, to relieve
him from the Kumbhakonam work and entrust the burden to
Bhashyam Iyengar. Let him do as he wishes. As for Pratap-
mal, Jagannath Das may take him on if he wants to, but
we should not shoulder the burden of expenditure. He may carry
on by raising funds from Madras or any other place he likes.
In no case can Ganesan continue. You might share the burden
to any extent you choose provided Bhashyam Iyengar and
Venkatasubbayya can shoulder the responsibility. You should
boldly settle the matter as you wish. See that in whatever you
do Sastri and Ganesan are carefully kept out. Sastri may be
accommodated anywhere else. I wish you should no more bur-
den me on his account. My heart turns towards the villages.
I wrote the part concerning Amtussalaam at Wardha and then
had to leave it incomplete as visitors came up. Now I com-
plete it today, the second day, here at Segaon which is five miles
from Wardha. You should take it that I have settled finally
when I return here from Bangalore. Till then you may regard
it as the Mahatma's imposture.
It is not that Sardar is taking me to Nandi Durg, I am
taking him there.
Is it not enough, considering that I have not written to you
for a long time, that I wrote all this from a village on country-
made paper with a country-made reed-pen and country-made
ink?
I got a long letter from Amtussalaam. I am enclosing my
reply to her, which you should read to her.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
[PS.]
Reply to the Wardha address.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1158
