41. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
September 20, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I have your letter.
Herewith is a draft reply prepared by me. You may make
in it such changes as you wish.
What ignorance that Dunichand should be sent a humi-
liating reply on behalf of the Board! It is good that you are
keeping a watch.
*
*
*1
I read your remarks about Narahari. Your annoyance is justi-
fied. But there has been no deliberate malice behind what has
happened. There is nothing but misunderstanding at the bottom
of the whole thing. It will disappear in time. I am convinced
that there is no malice in anybody's heart. I have decided that,
if Kaka can be persuaded, he must not leave Gujarat at present
so as to end all this bitterness, if for no other reason. Let him
manage or mismanage the education department of the whole
country from Gujarat.
There is no necessity at all for you to leave. And if my view
has appealed to you, at present managing the Vidyapith means
no more than disbursing funds to the individuals concerned in
terms of the resolutions passed. The Vidyapith will be a mova-
ble institution. Everybody will go on doing the work entrusted
to him. All decisions about teaching programmes will be made
by Kaka or by the teachers collectively. My view is that every-
body will have to shoulder independent responsibility in the place
which he has selected. If anybody consults someone whom he
admires, it will be only as a friend. This is the plan I have in
mind. I have discussed this scheme at length with Kaka, Kishore-
lal and Narahari. If you approve of it, all that you have to do
is to write a letter and put it into operation. About salaries,
Narahari and Kaka have decided something. I have not meddled
in that. I should like you to free yourself from the burden of this
dispute.
I hope you are keeping good health. Rajendrababu is expec-
ted here around the 23rd. I do hope you will be here then.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 133-
