28. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
SABARMATI,
Vaishakh Vad 7 [June 1, 1918]
CHI. RAMDAS,
I very much wish to write to you but cannot do so because of much
pressure of work. Two letters from you have remained unanswered. I feel sad
when writing to you is delayed. Of course we both think of you every day.
Today, Ba and Devdas are with me. Devdas's health is excellent. He has
grown very strong. As the climate there has suited you, the climate here has
suited him. Devo teaches and learns, both. He has got the knack now. He
has learnt 9 chapters from the Gita by heart and read many books. He is
now going to Madras where he will teach Hindi and learn Tamil. He remains
quite cheerful. He has become as neat as you are and washes his clothes, too,
almost as clean as you do yours.
Ba also keeps quite well. She has changed her nature and become straight-
forward and pleasing in her ways.
You did well in expressing your views about Mr. West 5 and also in
1 From Nadiad and Wednesday in the date-line as also from the contents; Gandhiji
met the Kheda Collector on February 21, 1918 and was at Nadiad the previous day
which was a Wednesday. Vide Vol. XIV, p. 557.
2 Anasuya Sarabhai
3 One word is illegible here.
4 As suggested in the source; Vaishakh Vad 7 in the year 1918 corresponded to
June 1.
5 Albert West, Gandhiji's co-worker who looked after Indian Opinion on the Phoenix
Farm
25
26
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
levelling charges against me the way you have done. I am not displeased but
I think your charges are not justified. Mr. West is not proud and he has not
left the Press. What Manilal did. . .1
I see that you are still not at peace. When you get tired of the place,
come over here. But you can do so only if Manilal does not need your help.
Remain there as long as it suits you . . . .2 I wish that you return having
earned enough and having made your body sufficiently strong.
Miss Schlesin must be very fine. Tell her that I am eagerly waiting for
a letter from her. Have you met Mr. Philips? Let me know the names of all
the persons whom you have met. Tell me all about what you have learnt and
what you feel you have learnt only half as well as you should have liked to
do.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
