311. LETTER TO A. K. HOLTTUM
BETTIAH,
May 19, 1917
DEAR MR. HOLTTUM1,
I thank you for having come to Sariswa and having sent
your carriage.
After you and Mr. Lewis had withdrawn, I sat with the people
who must have numbered over 500 and talked to them. I told
them that you wanted to do justice, that you were ready to take
back the zirat lands and that you considered that it was more
profitable to you to get it back. I told them too that in your
opinion the people had taken the zirat lands from your predece-
ssor not only willingly but most eagerly, that it was given to the
raiyats not in lieu of indigo cultivation but it was given in order to
relieve the raiyats from liability to supply labour to the landlord.
I further told them that you had shown me Mr. Barclay's letter to
Mr. Gourlay confirming the view and finally told them, whilst on
this point, that if they returned the zirat lands, you expected them to
grow indigo again as before up to the termination of the period of
their contracts and I assured them that I would plead with you
that it would be quite unfair to ask for raiyats to revert to indigo-
growing (for reasons to be presently stated). I then invited those
who wanted to abandon the zirat at once, although they had paid
for the full agricultural year. As a result, over 175 gave in their
names there and then and men have been streaming in during the
two days. The total has reached nearly 500 up to the time of
writing.
In going through the khatians1, the receipts and the amounts
charged against the zirat land, I find in 70 tenancies that on an
average the raiyats are paying you Rs. 24.. per bigha of zirat
land. The largest amount charged is Rs. 91.. per bigha and the
smallest is Rs. 7.. per bigha. Incidentally, I observe that whilst
27 bighas of kasht land pay Rs. 59.13.6, 27 bighas of zirat land
pay you Rs. 659.7.. It seems that in the vast majority of cases,
the raiyats hold less than one bigha of zirat land. The rate fixed
varies with the extent of their kasht holding and not with the quality
of the zirat. And they are paying as much as Rs. 1-8- per bigha
of kasht land in addition to from six annas to 12 annas per katha
of zirat. And the kathas of zirat seem to vary with the bighas of
kasht and in no case amounting to more than 3 kathas per bigha.
The average worked out for fifty villagers comes to 1½ kathas per
bigha. This, in my opinion, hardly bears out Mr. Barclay's con-
tention. It rather bears out the raiyats' contention that the settle-
ment of zirat is another form of the tinkathia and was designed to
cover the losses suffered by the concern when the price of indigo
fell. The raiyats insist that pressure was effectively put upon them
to take zirat land. Their contention seems to be borne out by the
readiness with which they have come forward to surrender it. For
the last ten years, the raiyats have been paying what according to
the above view amounts to tawan for not growing indigo. And the
concern has on that account an average of more than Rs. 100
per bigha of tinkathia. In the circumstances and regard being had to
the fact that you believe it to be advantageous for you to receive
back the zirat land, I hope you will not press for reversion to
indigo-growing.
I notice that in some cases damages have been settled on kathas
taken out of the kasht land of the raiyats. I venture to think that,
if you would see your way to accept my suggestion, take back the
zirat and forgo the future damage whether tacked on to the zirat
or to the kasht land, one of the sorest points of dispute between the
concern and the raiyats would be amicably settled and you will
have set an example which would be advantageously followed
by the other planters.
In describing the process adopted by the concern for recover-
ing losses on indigo from the raiyats, I have hitherto confined myself
to your mukarrari land. On tikka land, you seem to have accepted
the system followed elsewhere. You have taken handnotes for
balance of tawan payable by the raiyats bearing heavy rate of interest.
I suggest that the outstanding handnotes may be cancelled. The
raiyats for the sake of peace and compromise should say nothing as
to refund either on the hunda above referred to or the tawan already
collected and of which the handnotes represent the balance.
As to the fines, I must confess that there is overwhelming evi-
dence to show that they have been imposed on recalcitrant raiyats.
This complaint is almost universal. I told the raiyats that you
said that only nominal fines were imposed when the raiyats came to
you for adjustment of their mutual quarrels and that you refunded
these to the winners. The raiyats resolutely protested and said that
the fines even as much as Rs. 25 at a time and more were imposed
for the so-called offences against the concern.
The raiyats are equally firm in their complaint against your
jamadar, Gokul Missir, and I would be pleased to place the evidence
before you if you will care to go further into the matter.
With reference to the method (I understand only recently
adopted) of the charging for permission to build new buildings
or to rebuild, you justified the charge on the ground that the earth
on the raiyats' tenement belonged to the landlord and if the
raiyats used it for building purposes, they must pay for it. I find,
on looking up the Bengal Tenancy Act, that the law allows the
raiyats to build without any interference from the landlord so long
as they build for the benefit of their holdings. It seems to me that
the charge is not warranted by law and I hope that you will waive
it in future.
There remains then the question of cutting trees. The section
of the Bengal Tenancy Act dealing with the subject clearly allows
the raiyat to cut without previous notice to or permission of the
landlord. But I understand that of late years the landlords have
all over been receiving half of the timber cut. I do not know
whether the custom has been proved; this is a large question which
can await settlement.
I await papers promised by you regarding Kodai Pan. As to
Sitaram Tewari1, I think Rs. 36 on 11 kathas is a clerical error
and I venture to suggest that it would be graceful on your part to
recognize the error and take the rent at the usual assessment rate.
I would beg of you to carefully consider the points mentioned
herein and, if you can grant relief to your raiyats in accordance with
the suggestions made above, I do not doubt that it will lead to a
lasting peace between your concern and its raiyats and, what is
more, it will be a simple act of justice.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 83,
pp. 141-
