278. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Not Revised
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
July 26 [1919]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have taken to writing to you regularly but I find no response
from you. You are paying me in my own coin — only not with the
same reason that I had. But I know that you are all the same attending
to my letters.
I have sent you a long cable today with copies to Mrs. Naidu and
Shastriar. You will see in Young India my letter regarding suspension.
I felt that I ought not to resist the Viceregal appeal to refrain. But
there is no getting away from the fact that if the Rowlatt Act is not
repealed, Civil Resistance is a certainty.
Regarding South Africa, there is the news today that our people
mean Civil Resistance if any equal status is not granted to them. I
have a long letter just now from Sir George Barnes. It is not satisfactory.
You shall have all that next week. I am dealing with it. You have,
I hope, reports of all the meetings — that are being held here. It is
a wretched situation.
The Punjab sentences are monstrous.' They must be revised. To
me the reforms are worthless if the spirit of the men on the spot is
not changed.
1 Vide Vol. XV, p. 467.
2 Member of the Viceroy's Executive Council in charge of the Department of
Commerce and Industry
3 The post-script has been struck out.
4 From the contents
5 Vide Vol. XV, pp. 468-71.
6 ibid., pp. 477-80.
7 ibid., pp. 472-.
The Mahomedan question means trouble so far as I can see.
Evidently a decision has been arrived at regarding Turkey but it is being
suppressed. This is a suicidal policy. I simply cannot understand this
diplomacy that is satisfied with....
I had an interview with the Governor. Montagu has sent a nasty
message. He opens well and ends ill. It is confidential. He says if
it was folly to take up civil disobedience, it is wickedness to renew
it. One may return in his own words if it was folly for the Government
to pass the Rowlatt legislation, it is wickedness to persist in it. And
yet Montagu says in the same message that the Act will not be repealed.
We are used to that kind of language. All I know is that the Act
has got to go and some of us have to die in the attempt. It has cost
treasures of blood. Let them keep it if they dare. They do not understand
the ABC of civil disobedience. I must be patient. I have therefore told
the Governor that if the Government desire that I should further suspend
C.D. for the time being, I shall do so but they should reckon upon
my renewing it in the near future if they will not repeal the Rowlatt
Act.
You have Manilal Vyas's case before you. You have also the
Punjab Committee of inquiry. It must have the power of revision of
sentences.
You will be interested to learn that at last the great Jehangir Petit
has paid a portion of the funds I furnished Millie. The rest he will
pay in time.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
1 This sentence, occurring at the end of a page, is left incomplete in the source.
2 Vide Vol. XV, p. 319.
3 ibid., pp. 426-.
