331. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,
October 30, 1909]
MY LORD,
I have for some time past been wishing to place before Your Lord-
ship the result of my observations made here during my brief stay on the
nationalist movement among my countrymen.
If you will permit me to say so, I would like to say that I have been
much struck by Your Lordship's candour, sincerity and honesty of which
one notices nowadays such an absence among our great public men. I
have noticed too that your imperialism does not blind you to matters of
obvious justice and that your love of India is genuine and great. All
this coupled with my desire to withhold nothing from Your Lordship
regarding my own activity about Indian matters as they may have a
direct or an indirect bearing on the struggle in the Transvaal, emboldens
if it does not require me to inform you of what I have seen.
I have made it a point to see Indians here of every shade of opinion.
Opposed as I am to violence in any shape or form, I have endeavoured
specially to come into contact with the so-called extremists who may be
better described as the party of violence. This I have done in order if
possible to convince them of the error of their ways. I have noticed that
some of the members of this party are earnest spirits, possessing a high
degree of morality, great intellectual ability and lofty self-sacrifice. They
wield an undoubted influence on the young Indians here. They are
certainly unsparing in their efforts to impress upon the latter their
convictions. One of them came to me with a view to convince me
that I was wrong in my methods and that nothing but the use of
violence, covert or open or both, was likely to bring about redress
of the wrongs they consider they suffer.
An awakening of the national consciousness is unmistakable. But
among the majority it is in a crude shape and there is not a corresponding
1 Though the draft does not carry the addressee's name, it is clear from the con-
tents that the letter was addressed to Lord Ampthill. Acknowledging it on November
I, he wrote to Gandhiji: " . . .although I am not yet prepared to make any comment,
I hasten to thank you for the expression of your views of which I fully appreciate the
spirit and the candour. I must, however, confess that I do not fully understand your
arguments and that I am in doubt as to the conclusions at which you have arrived.
I should like to talk the matter over with you and I will ask you to come and see me
(as I am now in London) as soon as I can see my way to a free moment."
2 The original bears no date. This is derived from Lord Ampthill's acknowledge-
ment.
spirit of self-sacrifice.
Everywhere I have noticed impatience of
British rule. In some cases the hatred of the whole race is virulent. In
almost all cases distrust of British statesmen is writ large on their minds.
They (the statesmen) are supposed to do nothing unselfishly. Those
who are against violence are so only for the time being. They do not
disapprove of it. But they are too cowardly or too selfish to avow their
opinions publicly. Some consider that the time for violence is not yet.
I have practically met no one who believes that India can ever become
free without resort to violence.
I believe that repression will be unavailing. At the same time, I feel
that the British rulers will not give liberally and in time. The British
people appear to me to be obsessed by commercial selfishness. The fault is
not of men but of the system and the system is represented by the present
civilization which has produced its blasting effect as well on the people
here as on India. India suffers additionally only in so far as it is exploited
in the interest of foreign capitalists. The true remedy lies, in my humble
opinion, in England discarding modern civilization which is ensouled
by this spirit of selfishness and materialism, is vain and purposeless and
is a negation of the spirit of Christianity. But this is a large order. It
may then be just possible that the British rulers in India may at least do
as the Indians do and not impose upon them the modern civilization.
Railways, machinery and corresponding increase of indulgent habits are
the true badges of slavery of the Indian people as they are of Europeans.
I, therefore, have no quarrel with the rulers. I have every quarrel with
their methods. I no longer believe as I used to in Lord Macaulay as a
benefactor through his minute on education. And I do think that a great
deal too much is being made of pax Britannica. To me the rise of the cities
like Calcutta and Bombay is a matter for sorrow rather than congratu-
lation. India has lost in having broken up a part of her village system.
Holding these views, I share the national spirit but I totally dissent from
the methods whether of the extremists or of the moderates. For either
party relies ultimately on violence. Violent methods must mean accept-
ance of modern civilization and therefore of the same ruinous competition
we notice here and consequent destruction of true morality. I should
be uninterested in the fact as to who rules. I should expect rulers to
rule according to my wish otherwise I cease to help them to rule me. I
become a passive resister against them. Passive resistance is soul-force
exerted against physical force. In other words love conquering hatred.
I do not know how far I have made myself understood and I do not
know how far I carry you with me in my reasoning. But I have put the
case in the above manner before my countrymen. My purpose in writing
to Your Lordship is twofold. The first is to tell Your Lordship that, when-
ever I can get the time, I would like to take my humble share in national
regeneration and the second is either to secure Your Lordship's
cooperation in the larger work if it ever comes to me or to invite your
criticism.
The information I have given Your Lordship is quite confidential
and not to be made use of prejudicially to my countrymen. I feel that
no useful purpose will be served unless the truth is known and proclaimed.
If you will pursue the inquiry further, I shall be pleased to answer
any questions you may wish to put. Mr. Ritch has full knowledge
of the contents of this letter. If a discussion is considered necessary,
I am at your service.
In conclusion, I hope I have not unduly or unwarrantably trespassed
upon your courtesy and attention.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the original draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 5152
