414. LETTER TO PRAGJI DESAI
LONDON,
Kartak Vad 12 [November 15, 1914]
DEAR PRAGJI,
I have your letter. I can well understand that you have
doubts. I think I have sent to someone the replies to your ques-
tions. All the same, I shall try to answer them again. A satya-
grahi cannot support war directly or indirectly. There are no two
opinions about that. I am not such a perfect satyagrahi. I am
trying to be one. Meanwhile, one should go as far as one can. Soon
after I landed here, the War started. I spent some days thinking
out my duty. It seemed to me that to go on living in England,
keeping my thoughts to myself, also amounted to taking part in
the War. It was obvious to me that, if this island were not protected
by the Navy, the people would starve and they would all fall into the
hands of Germans. I am being protected, therefore, by that Navy,
which means that I was indirectly supporting the War. As a satya-
grahi, it was my duty to go away to a spot where I would not
need such protection and could do without the food so procured.
Such a place would be the mountains here. There, one is not
under any protection. If the Germans took me away, I should
not mind. I must subsist on whatever fruit or grass or leaves
grew on the mountains. This food is not protected by the Navy.
I am not, however, ready for this manner of living. I could not
summon the necessary courage. It is for cultivating such courage
that I am going to India, where the circumstances are favourable.
They are not so here, and to create them here one must have an
atman a hundred thousand times stronger than mine. What is
my next duty, then? Brothers, husbands and sons have gone,
rightly or wrongly, to get themselves killed, leaving behind weeping
sisters, wives and mothers. Thousands have already been killed.
And am I, doing nothing, to continue enjoying myself, eating my
food? The Gita says that he who eats without performing yajna
is a thief. In the present situation here sacrifice meant, and means,
self-sacrifice. I saw, therefore, that I too must perform yajna. I
myself could not shoot, but could nurse the wounded. I might
even get Germans to nurse. I could nurse them without any
partisan spirit. There would be no violation of the spirit of com-
passion then. And so I decided to offer my services. Now, I am
not a private individual, but a public figure. I must also talk to
others. These others are out for fighting and are not opposed to
war. I must address them an unconditional letter, which I did.
But you must have seen in it a sentence to the effect that we would
unconditionally undertake any work for which we were qualified.
Everyone knows that I am not fit for active service. I could not,
therefore, be asked to fight. This is the explanation for using the
expression "unconditional". The main point, however, is whether
I could even undertake to nurse the wounded. I have explained
it, therefore, at greater length. It is possible you may even then
remain unconvinced. If so, write to me again. I shall keep writing
to you in reply whenever I have time. Gradually, you will come to
see the point. It is after much deliberation that I have taken this
step. Whenever I was questioned there, I used to reply that I
could not even join in ambulance work now. You have seen that
my position is still the same. It is on a level with the idea that
I must not kill a snake. But so long as, in my cowardice, I fear
a snake, I would certainly remove it to a distance, if not kill it
outright. This also is a form of violence. If, while I am removing
one, it struggles hard, I should hold it so tight between the sticks
that it might bleed, and even be crushed to death. Even so, my
statement that I ought not to kill a snake would and must hold
true. So long as I have not developed absolute fearlessness, I
cannot be a perfect satyagrahi. I am striving incessantly to achieve
it, and will continue to do so. Till I have succeeded, do all of you
save me [from doing anything wrong] and put up with my cowar-
dice. You should all keep struggling to make yourselves fearless.
Let everyone there read this letter and then send it to Medh.
Afterwards, send it on, or a copy of it, to Chi. Maganlal, so that
he, too, may have some points explained.
I have written this letter in three instalments. I am so busy
even here. I commenced it last week, resumed it yesterday and
finished it today, the [Kartak vad] 12th.
Further news you will get from the other letters. Sorabji
is busy nursing the wounded.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5657; also from a
photostat: G. N. 2659
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
