167. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
Unrevised
May 28, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
Why did you have to keep waiting for forty-five minutes?
In any case, I didn't think you would run away. Since you were
meeting me after a long time, I was eager to ask you a few ques-
tions and have a careful look at you. Of course you did well to
go back to your place of work. But I was eager because on that
day you had stayed on.
I am unable to say anything about Aurobindobabu. If a
man with a flabby body cannot have pure wisdom, what can
one say of one who is slim? I can only say that my path has
borne fruit for me. Let us not make ourselves judges of the whole
world. We should admit that among the two hundred persons
living under his wing there are several whose lives have undergone
a great transformation through his influence.
Everybody follows his own natural bent.
It is not quite correct to say that in the West they do not
recognize the necessity of purity in private life, nor is it correct
to say that here everybody recognizes it. We ourselves not only
recognize it, but go further and believe that the actions prompted
by a reason not purified inwardly will not endure, however
attractive they may appear. Such actions cannot be judged from
their immediate results.
It is true, of course, that actions which
have no connection with morality do not require inward purity.
A dissolute carpenter will be able to make a right-angled table.
But a person lacking in purity will not be able to eradicate
untouchability or turn the people to the spinning-wheel, for
both these tasks require qualities of the heart. In such activities
calculations of time count for little. We should have no doubt at
all that actions performed with sincere and truthful motives are
bound to have certain results. If we do not have such faith,
we shall never be able to adhere to moral principles.
God is beyond the reach of human thought. The God, there-
fore, whom we worship is a creation of our imagination. Nobody
has seen the real God. If anybody has seen Him, he has not been
able to describe Him.
It is difficult to say which Form of Him
is dearest to me. The Form, however, which I worship is known
as Truth. He both has a manifest form and has none. He
manifests Himself in innumerable ways. How can imperfect man
see perfect truth?
I don't intend to write anything about the jewellery though
I have already made a note of the point in my diary. The
additional note which will appear after your letter will be for
my information. Isn't that what you desire?
I will use the khadi when it is received.
Lilavati has arrived here from Rajkot. This time her health
is excellent. She has gained weight, too, and seems to be quite
happy.
I intend to leave on the 31st and reach Wardha on the 2nd.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10373
61-
