253. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[J OHANNESBURG,]
November 1, [1907]
[THE EDITOR
THE TRANSVAAL LEADER
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
In your leading article in today's issue on the Asiatic Registration
Act, you have imputed to the British Indian Association a statement to
the effect that nearly the whole of the 400 men said to have been regis-
tered had no right to be in the Transvaal. I am not aware of any such
statement having been made by any official of the Association. I know
that some of our pickets did make some such statement, but that was
mere bravado. The chief picket, Mr. Naidoo, immediately corrected it,
but the correction did not appear in your report. The official statement
made by the Association is that four men at least, who, according to the
interpretation of the law put upon it by the Government, have no right
to be in the country, have applied for and probably received registration
certificates. The Association does not even consider these men to be
not entitled to their certificates.
If the Government keep the office open for receiving applications,
I must respectfully decline to consider it as a graceful concession, as it
would be, in the opinion of the majority of Indians, a confession of weak-
ness on the part of the Government. The British Indian Association, in
all humility and in obedience to a higher call, has challenged the Govern-
ment to do its worst. We do not require the registration pin-pricks, and, if
the vigilance of the pickets has kept Indians away from what they consi-
der a plague-spot, the same vigilance will be exercised in Pretoria also.
You ask what can be gained by the Indian opposition in the teeth
of General Smuts' threat and the refusal of intervention by the Imperial
Government. So far as I am aware, in the last resort, Indians have not
pinned their faith either to intervention from Downing Street or to
recognition of the principles of humanity by General Smuts. Though the
effort now being made by the Indian community is undoubtedly calculat-
ed, if successful, to give them a status in the colony, they are fully aware
that they may lose their all in the struggle. But, if that happens, which
I do not believe, they will at least have gained a soul, and put that gain
in one scale and all that General Smuts and his Act can give to the
Indian community in the other, and I have no hesitation in asking my
countrymen to reject at all costs the latter. You will then see that, while
we take advantage of all that the law may give us, the sanctioning of the
Immigration Restriction Bill or any other harsher measure will not
turn the community from the straight and narrow path. If it does-
and I do not say that it will not-then every Indian knows that there
is a precipice on either side.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transvaal Leader, 2-11-1907
