29. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
POONA,
November 4, 1945
CHI. SUSHILA,
I wonder whether you know it, but Kishorelal and Gomati-
behn are getting weaker and weaker. The cold of Sevagram
does not suit them. They shrink from asking for anybody's
services. Gomatibehn is actually ill. She is suffering from some
kind of typhoid. The constant fever has now come down a little.
We trust and hope that it will come down to normal. But it
will take some time for her to leave the sick-bed, and it will be
quite a while before she is able to look after herself. She would
not accept the services of anyone who may offer them, and if
they can help it, neither of them would accept anybody's ser-
vices. I would like it if someone were to stay with them now
and look after them. There is no question as to whether they
will like it, for I have not heard of their having ever complained
to anyone about not getting any service. But wouldn't my heart
complain? If, therefore, you can get away from there and go to
Sevagram, and if your health permits you to look after them, I
think it would be the best arrangement. In that case you will
also have to cancel your plan of accompanying me to Calcutta.
I believe it will be February by the time I finish touring and
return to the Ashram. By that time, winter will be over and
we may hope that both of them will have got well. I hope to
reach Sevagram on the 21st. I should like both of you to go
to Sevagram before then. I think it necessary for Manilal to
accompany me on my tour, not to look after me but to gain
experience which might help him in his work and to get to
know people. He, therefore, will not be there all the time.
Arun will certainly accompany me to Sevagram. One cannot
say what progress he will make in studies, but I think he is
showing himself to be a good servant. He has taken to Kanu
and, therefore, he is bound to learn to serve. Hence he also
will help. Besides, if both of you agree of your own accord, not
for my sake, to let Arun stay and grow up in the Ashram, as he
now says he would like to do, he will study and also acquire
practical wisdom. Moreover, he has now become friends with
Aminbhai, who is a learned man, and stays in the Ashram.
Probably you do not know him. Manilal is certain to know him.
He is an artist like you, but a much better one. Arun has already
started learning from him. And Aminbhai says that if he were
given two years' time Arun would learn much more here than
he would by joining even the best of schools. This may perhaps
be too optimistic a view. But what difference does it make to
us? It is a fact that his company is beneficial. My purpose in
writing all this about Arun is to tell you that he has the spirit
of service in him and that, since he will be with you in the
Ashram, you will not get bored there. Kishorelal and Gomatibehn
will thus have the benefit of your service without any hardship
to you. If they feel that you are likely to suffer in any way by
staying there to look after them, they are not the type who will
put up with it. Let me add too that Kashi also is tired out.
She cannot work much now. And Chhaganlal is on sickbed.
He has continuous fever. If it turns out to be as prolonged as
Gomatibehn's, he also will require to be looked after. I believe,
therefore, that it will be good if you are in the Ashram for his
sake at any rate. I have thus put before you what I believe to
be your duty. Both of you may think over this and do what you
consider right. If your presence there is not essential, both of
you should at once leave for the Ashram. You may write to me
from there and tell me what you intend to do. Ila will be with
you, of course. But my impression about her is that she is not
likely to be a burden on anybody. And, moreover, she cannot
stay without you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 4965
