467. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR,
November 24, 1930
CHI. PREMA,
I have your letter giving me all details. I was glad. I don't
always remember the reasons behind my decisions. You have
proved yourself a true soldier. It is a mistake if you believe that,
by remaining there, you are not doing a soldier's duty. All per-
sons are not sent to the front. Many recruits are kept in reserve.
Moreover, very responsible persons are required at the head-
quarters. One must of course give up fear of danger and face it
whenever it comes. But anyone who needlessly rushes into danger
is not a soldier but a fool. I look upon Narandas as a true soldier.
Who knows what dangers are in store for you? True soldiership
lies in abiding by God's will. That is non-attachment. If we ex-
press that idea in common language, it means that we should act
as ordered by the general to whose discipline we have voluntarily
submitted ourselves.
The Ashram children have complained in their letter against
Dharmakumar, that he is dirty. Dhiru seems to know about it.
Inquire about this.
I understand your view about the ceremonial recitation of the
Gita. On this issue you may quarrel with Kakasaheb to your
heart's content. Personally, I think that at the back of your op-
position to the proposal is your aversion to or lack of faith in the
prayers themselves.
If you had your way, I think you would
have nothing besides the dhun. I would advise you to have faith in
all the items of the prayers. If possible, concentrate your attention
on the meaning of each item. If you cannot do that, have faith
that the words you hear are noble and that even the fact of listening
to them will do you good, and attend to them respectfully. Please
do not understand from this that I wish to convert you to the
proposal for completing the recitation in seven days. I have writ-
ten this to convince you that there is some meaning in the prayers
333
behind which lies fifteen years' tapascharya, with unswerving faith,
on the part of some of us.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10243; also C.W. 6691. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
