367. LETTER TO S. R. HIGNELL
LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
June 28, 1919
DEAR MR. HIGNELL,
I have your letter of the 25th instant for which I thank you.
After much consideration, I thought that I should send a cable-
gram to Mr. Montagu which I did yesterday and of which I send
you a copy herewith.
Your letter was not unexpected by me. I share the Viceroy's
regret but sometimes in life duty compels one to do things,
although one may regret having to do them. May I, however,
draw His Excellency's attention to the fact that the unfortunate
events that happened in April last were not precipitated by any
manifestation of satyagraha? The Government well knew that I
was proceeding to Delhi purely and simply on an errand of peace,
not to offer civil disobedience. And looking back upon the black
days of April, I cannot help feeling that if the Government had
not committed the error of serving the orders that it did upon
me, the history of that month might have been written differently.
Moreover, I am taking extraordinary precautions in order to avoid
any excitement that may follow upon my arrest and imprisonment.
You will observe from the proof copy of the instructions that I am
issuing for the fellow-satyagrahis that for the time being civil dis-
obedience is to be confined only to me and not to be taken up
by the others unless there is a certainty of absence of violence.
And lastly, must the subject always be in the wrong and the
Government always in the right? Is it not a proper thing for
a Government to recognize an evident mistake and retrace its
steps? I respectfully submit that it is time that the Government
revise and reconsider that position regarding Rowlatt legislation.
I am grateful for the assurance contained in the last paragraph
of your letter and I hope that the forthcoming committee will be
thoroughly representative and independent possessing the power
of revision of sentences and that Mr. Roy will be soon granted
his liberty.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6697
