349. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
BARDOLI,
January 20, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,
I have your wires and your letter of the 5th instant, with
enclosure which came later. The two documents were re-
directed from Wardha and then I had to see the State Congress
friends before I could reply. Hence the delay which please forgive.
At the outset I must thank you for the friendly tone of your
letter. Nothing else and nothing less was expected of you.
Nevertheless the letter has not given me satisfaction. The
only thing relevant to my request was the statement issued by
the State Congress manifesto calling off civil disobedience and
its language. If it left nothing more to be desired, the immed-
iate result should have been the discharge of the prisoners who
had offered civil disobedience from within and as members of
the State Congress.
Even Shri Kashinathrao Vaidya's statement was irrelevant.
The State Congress manifesto was not before him. Had he
known the implications of the manifesto, he should not have court-
ed imprisonment at all. But his case needs to be condoned by
the State Congress manifesto. Perusal of Shri Kashinathrao
Vaidya's statement did not confirm the impression created by
your letter. His statement I regard as mild and subdued.
There is no threat in it. He has endeavoured calmly to argue
the position of the State Congress and brought out the facts to
the date of his conviction. It is noteworthy that he has accepted
the fact of suspension and exhorted the State Congress members
to desist from civil disobedience.
The Aryan League and the Hindu Mahasabha activities
should not be confused with that of the State Congress. There
never was any intention of amalgamation on the part of the State
Congress.
Do you want me to find out what Sardar Patel, Shri Deo or
Shri Bhulabhai said or did?
As a matter of fact I have not
even showed your letter to the Sardar though I am living with
him at present. Not that I would not share your letter with
him, only he has his work cut out for him as I have mine. But
I could find out what they said if their opinion was relevant to
my purpose or to the argument. If, however, you want me to,
I shall gladly do so.
You were quite right in dismissing from your mind the sugges-
tion that I had secretly advised anyone against the attempt to reach
a settlement between Hindus and Muslims. Baba it was who
brought Shri Narasingh Rao with him. Maulvi Bahadur Yar Jung
was also to be of the party. But he could not come. They had
come to a standstill. I, therefore, advised them to proceed no
further but await Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's advice and be
guided by him. Maulana Saheb is now in correspondence with you.
Now about "Bande Mataram". Some students did come
to me. I told them that "Bande Mataram" was no religious
prayer but that they had a perfect right to say it in their rooms
or their prayer room. I told them too that by proper representa-
tion they would get redress and that till they had the redress
they should remain without their studies unless they could go
elsewhere. I have seen the explanation issued by the Osmania
University authorities. It has not given me satisfaction. I do
think that this is a matter you should set right without delay. If
I have erred, not having all the facts before me, you will please
correct me. But, of course, this question stands on its own footing.
I have not interested myself in it. The students are not
under my guidance. And I told those who came to me that I had
no time to study their question, important though I admitted
it to be.
You say that drunkards and the like have sought imprison-
ment. My informants say that if such people have courted
imprisonment they were unauthorized and had nothing to do with
the State Congress.
I believe I have now covered all the points in your letter.
If my argument has any substance in it, I repeat the re-
quest for the discharge of all the State Congress prisoners and for
permission for the State Congress to pursue such activities, politi-
cal or otherwise, that are constitutional.
I hope this finds you in the possession of the best of health.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 6846
