409. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
April 30, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,
I got two letters from you. I understand what you say
about money. Of course, your father's letter is excellent and I
noted what he had to say about giving you money. Inform him
that I have sent it.
It is all right if you have given up milk for health reasons.
But you are not to undertake any experiment with a view to
giving up milk. The fit was probably due to your going with-
out milk. You are not to worry at all. As long as you have
your parents' blessings and they have not the least dissatisfaction
about you, what have you to worry about? How does it matter
what the world says? You alone have to settle your account
with Jayaprakash. His is a different case. Hence it will not do if
you fall ill under the stress of worry. The true follower of the
Gita is one who can remain calm and composed in any situation
whatever, and you have to become such a one. For the present,
write to me regularly.
Jayaprakash came to see me yesterday; Patwardhan was
with him. He spoke to me about your future although he said
nothing in reply to my letter. He said he wished to put you
355
for three months at the school in Banaras where, he said, you
might learn the Montessorie method. Then he mentioned Patna
and asked my opinion about it. I told him I had no objection
to the proposal. You should have the three months' experience
at the Banaras school, and then we shall see what is to be
done. In any case you must maintain your health.
My stay in Nandi and Bangalore will take up a month,
after which I am returning here. I came to Segaon today and
shall be here for three days at least. Then again, after another
two or three days I shall be leaving for Bangalore on the 8th.
I expect Jayaprakash took your luggage with him and you were
able to speak to him. Pyarelal alone has accompanied me to
Segaon. Ba has not come as she is unwell.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Note that my address continues to be Wardha. The Mysore
address is: Nandi Hill, Near Bangalore.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3462
