62. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
November 24, 1932
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,
I have waited almost to the breaking point before writing this
letter. Untouchability work is proving beyond my ability to cope
with and this in spite of assistance I am getting from Sardar
Vallabhbhai and Sjt. Mahadev Desai. The correspondence is daily
growing in volume. The number of visitors is increasing daily and
more and more time has to be given to these visits as the move-
ment progresses. I am already in arrears with my correspondence
and the statements I must make for the public. My difficulty is
enhanced by the fact that my elbows are giving more trouble
than before and I am not able to use my hands for writing as
much as I should, nor have I regained my pre-fast vitality so as
to enable me to put in more work than I am doing now. As
it is, we all begin work at 4 o'clock in the morning and it continues
with necessary intervals up to 9 p.m. The only way therefore
out of the difficulty is for the Government to send one of my
prisoner-associates to stay with me. The following are the names
that just now occur to me:
1. Sjt. Mohanlal Bhatt
-Camp Jail, Yeravda
2.
Shanker Kalelkar
-Central Jail, Yeravda
3.
" Ramdas Gandhi
-do-
4.
" Swami Anand
-Camp Jail, Nasik Road
"
5.
Chhaganlal Joshi
-(Jail not known)
6.
" Jugatram Dave
-Byculla, House of Correction
"
These prisoners have been intimately connected with me and
have worked under me, and they know English, Gujarati and
Hindi, which is what I need. If I had my choice, I would
choose Swami Anand as being the most competent for the work.
He has been Secretary of the Anti-Untouchability Committee
established by the Congress in 1929 and since then has been devot-
ing most of his time to untouchability work.
50
I need hardly say that I have confined my request to the
least assistance I need immediately. If this is a matter which can
only be decided by the Government of India, may I ask that
my request may be telegraphed to them?
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40)(4), Pt. II, p. 77
