115. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Wednesday, February 3/8, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet just this evening.
Lady Vithaldas, Bhai Trivedi, Vidya Hingorani and Damodar
came in the afternoon and saw me. I got the leather for the
sandals.
I have heard that Ramdas, Chhaganlal, Surendra,
Somabhai and others, in all 190 persons, have arrived here. Most
probably some of them will see us.
For your scabies, you should eat green leaves and tomatoes.
Baths with [potassium] permanganate will certainly help.
At the bottom of the letter from C.P. Scott's son you write
that you have sent by book post a biography of the late Scott.
The book does not seem to have been received here. If you re-
member to have sent it, write to me again so that I may inquire
further.
You have stated in the "Ashram Samachar" that I spin 500
rounds in two days. I spin, not 500 rounds, but 500 yards, in
two days. I spin 375 rounds in two days and it is my ambition
to spin as many in one day. But I do not think I shall be able
to fulfil it as quickly as I had hoped.
Night, February 6, 1932
I had a letter from Tilakam. The food does not seem to have
agreed with him. Read my letter to him, and if he agrees, carry
out my suggestions. Pulses do not agree with people who are
used to meat. If they start with milk, they experience no diffi-
culty. They ordinarily eat rotli, etc., even with meat. As a
substitute for meat, they generally take pulses, but a stomach used
to meat cannot digest pulses. In any case such persons must
not eat any kind of nuts such as ground-nuts, etc. Milk and
curds are but pure forms of non-vegetarian food.
February 8, 1932
You will find with this an article on the subject of the exis-
tence of God. It is a translation of a portion of an article pub-
lished in Young India. I had read that portion for a gramophone
record. The record is on sale now. Anand heard it. He took
down the extract and sent a copy to me for translation.
The
Hindi article mentioned above is a translation of that extract.
The translation should not be published now. Anand wants the
Hindi translation to help him to make a Sindhi translation. Send
it to him and ask him not to publish it just now. The inmates
of the Ashram can read it. You may even publish it in the Ashram
Patrika. If you do, publish it as an original article. Let Paras-
ram correct its Hindi. I leave it to you to decide whether or
not you should publish it in the Patrika. If your publishing it is
likely to be misconstrued or if someone is likely to reproduce the
article elsewhere, drop the idea. It will be enough if the inmates
of the Ashram who are there read it, think over it and under-
stand its meaning.
I read in the papers news about a few things having been
seized from the Ashram. I expect I shall get more details from you.
I have some free time today and so I wish to describe a
few details of the routine here.
Both of us get up at 3.40. After brushing, we pray. After
that, we take warm water with honey and lemon-juice and then
read till the stroke of five. From five to six, we walk. At six,
if I feel the call of nature I answer it, and then sleep for about
20 minutes. I get up at 6.45, when the bell for opening the cells
is given, and read up to seven. The Sardar, after answering the
call of nature, walks about and sits down to breakfast when milk
is brought. As he eats the breakfast, he reads from the news-
paper, which has arrived by then. During the day, I read,
write and spin. In between I take a nap twice. The Sardar
walks about much longer than I do. He generally reads from the
newspapers which are supplied to us. I have two meals a day.
The Sardar occasionally eats salad or something else like that at
twelve. I again take warm water and honey at that time. When
the honey is exhausted, I add jaggery and lemon-juice. I once
happened to remark that Mirabehn or Pyarelal used to prepare
fruit for me to eat. Since then the Sardar has monopolized that
duty. It is he who prepares dates and tomatoes for me and does
it with great love. I have accepted this loving service without
the slightest hesitation. Having mentioned the service rendered
by Mirabehn and Pyarelal, it would be a useless attempt on my
part to decline the Sardar's help. He takes milk and bread
in the morning. At four in the afternoon, he takes bread, curds
and some vegetables and, generally salad. I used to take milk
in the morning, with dates, tomatoes and, from the fruit sent by
Lady Thackersey or Prof. Trivedi, some oranges, chikus, etc. At
present, I eat dates and tomatoes and, in the morning, take
half a pound of milk, and in the evening the same quantity
of curds. But I see that I shall have to reduce the quantity of
milk still further. My health is good, of course. Do you know
that my weight has increased? I see that now I do not need very
nourishing food, especially when I enjoy solitude and peace of
mind. This was my experience last year. While in jail, I could
live without milk and maintain my weight. After my release, I
lost weight in a short time for want of milk and, therefore, re-
sumed it. In England, it was only with that that I could keep up
my strength. Here I may not perhaps need milk. On the con-
trary milk may even do me harm. Of course I will do no viol-
ence to my body. My aversion to milk remains. But I will give
the body what it requires. Let no one, therefore, worry after
reading this. I will also mention some other work which the
Sardar does. It is he who trims the envelope which you send and
prepares it [for use again]. There are many such happy details
which I can mention. But are not these enough? Just as we
walk about between five and six in the morning, so do we again
in the evening. Between six and seven, I read. Meanwhile, the
Sardar prepares dates, babul sticks for brushing teeth, etc., for
me and then joins me in the cell. At seven, the prayers begin.
After prayers, reading and writing again, till 8.30. By nine, we
are in bed. Both of us sleep in the open. From among news-
papers, we get The Times [of India], The [Bombay] Chronicle, The
Tribune, The Leader, and The Hindu. From among weeklies, we
get Social Reformer, and from among monthlies, The Modern Review.
As for books, I get some from outside and I have brought some
with me. They supply enough fare to both of us.
I have read the following books so far: Durant's [The Case for]
India, Crozier's A Word to Gandhi, Brailsford's [Rebel] India, Al Haj
Salmin's Imam Hussain and Khalifa Ally, Samuel Hoare's Fourth Seal,
R. MacDonald's travelogue, Survey of Matar Taluka1, Ramanathan's
Speech on Khadi, Will Hayes' Essence of Hinduism Ruskin's St. George's
Guild, Shah's Federal Finance, Rothenstein's Ruin of Egypt, Hayes' The
Book of the Cow, A. E's. Candle of Vision, Kinley's Money, and Shankh
ane Kodi (Gujarati). I am now reading the biography of Munshi
Zaka Ullah written by Andrews and Shah's book, Sixty Years of
Economic Administration of India. The Sardar has read Hoare's and
MacDonald's books and is now reading the book on Egypt. He
gives plenty of time to newspapers and, in addition to the two
hours which he gives to walking, as I have mentioned, he must
certainly be spending two hours more in walking at other times.
Besides this, there are 36 letters.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8207. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
