59. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
September 11, 1932
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,
I have your letter. Your letters from Banaras and Delhi
have not reached me. You have not acknowledged the letters I
addressed to Deolali. It is good that you have now given me
detailed news.
First of all about your health. The benefit Mira has derived
from salt is largely psychological. It cannot all be attributed to
salt; salt does not possess all that virtue. No article of diet or
medicine can affect brahmacharya to that extent because ultimately
brahmacharya is a state of mind; a disturbed mind affects the body.
As long as the mind is not firm and rid of passions how can diet
alone help? Admittedly, improper or excessive food can be
harmful. Salt, taken in small quantities, can do no harm. In
the same way, it does not appear that you have lost much by
giving up salt. Salt does not have enough strength to affect one
either way. I have written to you earlier regarding a suitable diet
for you. Ultimately you must find out by experiment what food
suits you. Go to Deolali if you have found the climate there agree-
able. It may also be a good thing otherwise, for you will be of
help to Radha and Damodardas. True, there are only a few
days left if they are to leave Deolali at the end of the month.
But however short the period it will benefit you to go there.
And even if they have to vacate the sanatorium there is nothing
wrong in your staying on at Deolali for your health's sake. It
ought to be easy to find another place. What happened to your
plan of going to Kuvalayanand? What did Dr. Talwalkar say?
You must build up your health.
Now for the Ashram. It is true that the Ashram inmates are
not what they ought to be, they are full of short-comings. That is
why the public have the right to criticize and condemn the Ashram
inmates who must not only tolerate the criticism but take a
lesson from it. I am not surprised to learn that you too have been
similarly affected because that is the truth. But in spite of all that
the total result is not bad; that is my belief. People residing in the
Ashram have certainly changed for the better. The fact is that much
remains to be done while little has been accomplished, but that was
to be expected. And who can be defined as Ashram inmates?
If you have not discussed this matter with Narandas, open your
heart to him and listen to what he has to say. I have no hope
of finding a more steadfast, wise, sensible and conscientious man
than Narandas and I consider it God's grace that it was grant-
ed me to have him. It is also true that Ashram people are
not free from diseases but they do not really catch illness in the
Ashram; the malady is already with them. In short we try
to bring about fulfilment amid deficiency. God has ordained that
we go on making efforts till we die but has reserved unto Him-
self the fruit. Thus I shall be content if it can be said that
there is no tardiness of effort in our Ashram. I shall even ad-
mit that there is scope for improvement in the effort.
Is anybody doing something for Pandit Jagatram ?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2394
