29. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
NADIAD,
Ashadha Vad 13 [August 4, 1918]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
On inquiring from Prabhudas, I came to know that Kashi 4 works in the
kitchen. I feel that she should be completely free of that work. She can do
only light household chores. Truly speaking, stitching, cleaning grains and
reading are the right activities for her, that is to say, for keeping her occupied.
She should devote as much time as she can to taking slow walks. My advice
is that she should completely give up taking medicines and observe control
over her diet. It will do her good if she takes only rice kanji 5 for the present.
I have observed that milk is no good when one is ill. There is nothing better
than milk for building up the body on recovery from illness. The diet for
illness is fruit juice, green vegetables and things made of wheat but without
ghee. Wheat kanji can be made the same way as the rice kanji. Barley water
is also good. It is possible to remain fit by taking light food which helps to
1 The rest of the paragraph is illegible.
2 One sentence here is illegible.
3 From Nadiad in the date-line; Gandhiji was at Nadiad on Ashadha Vad 13 only
in the year '1918' and it corresponded to August 4.
4 Wife of the addressee
5 A kind of sour gruel made by steeping a substance in water and letting the
liquor ferment
LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
27
move bowels. If all this does not help, one should reconcile to one's state of
health instead of trying in vain for cures. My suggestion would certainly do
you no harm. On the contrary, it has the maximum potential for doing you
good. Medicines hardly help and there is no limit to the harm they cause. A
person like Dr. Jivraj Mehta, in spite of having worked under first-rate doctors
abroad, has to struggle hard. Thanks to the conditions here and our attachment
for the medicines, he earns money and name for himself.
Rubbing tobacco on teeth may do good. Drakshasav if given to Kashi,
will certainly help her. It is not a medicine. It is food. It is a diet which acts
but slowly. We can experiment with it. It seems Jatashankar Vaidya prepares
it hygienically.
Kashi cannot digest solid food. She should for sometime be on liquid
diet only.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32895
