126. LETTER TO GORDHANDAS PATEL
[SABARMATI,]
February 21, 1918
DEAR SHRI GORDHANBHAI1,
The most respected Anasuyabehn, Shankarlal Banker and
I have just returned from a meeting of workers. They said the
mill-owners wanted them to give something in writing in return
for a concession of eight annas. I have told them not to affix
their signature to any document without consulting their advisers
and also that we would advise them in a day or two what increase
they could reasonably demand. They would serve their interests
well, I told them, if they went by our advice and accepted the
suggested figure. I politely explained yesterday to members
of the Mill group my responsibility in the matter. I think the
principle of arbitration is of far-reaching consequence and it is
not at all desirable that the mill-hands should lose faith in it. I
find it impossible, therefore, to run away from this duty which has
come to me unsought. Shankarlal Banker and Vallabhbhai Patel
agree with me. It is not desirable, from the workers' point of
view and yours, in fact from that of us all, that they remain with-
out work, in a state of uncertainty. Banker has collected figures
of what the Bombay mills pay. I shall be obliged if you send me,
without delay, a statement of the wages paid by the local mills. I
should also be happy if the Mill group could favour us with its
views on the different categories of workers without in any way
binding itself to accept our decision. If any of you could join
us in our deliberations without being committed in any way, our
conclusions would be the more reasoned for that. I am not parti-
cularly disposed to favour workers as workers; I am on the side of
justice and often this is found to be on their side. Hence the gene-
ral belief that I am on their side. I can never think of harming
the great industry of Ahmedabad. I hope, therefore, that your
Association will extend its full co-operation to us in this difficult
task. I should be happy to have an immediate reply to this
letter. I have told the workers that, if possible, we would an-
nounce the results of our deliberations by Wednesday at the latest.
Hence this hurry.
M. K. GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
