163. LETTER TO TRANSVAAL INDIANS
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before June 21, 1909] 1
TO
ALL TRANSVAAL INDIANS
I am also going as a member of the deputation to England. Two of
the four delegates have already been arrested, and are now installed in gaol.
Other Indians, too, who have suffered many a wound, have been arrested
again. I do not at all like going to England in these circumstances.
However, it is the opinion of all our European friends that I should go;
the community desires it; the Committee in England is of the same
opinion. I am therefore going along with Mr. Hajee Habib. But there
is no guarantee that by going to England we shall succeed in getting
our demands accepted—demands whose rejection has led already to
hundreds of Indians going to gaol. It may also happen that Lord Crewe
will refuse to receive the deputation, saying that he cannot meet men
who have been defying the law. Those who are sending the deputation
must realize that in sending a deputation, which will be in England at a
time when all statesmen of South Africa will have assembled there, so
that we may have no regrets later, we are only making an experiment.
It will be wrong to build any hopes on it.
There is only one unfailing remedy—going to gaol. Even if a few
Indians keep on going to gaol from time to time, we are bound to get
in the end what we want. We shall get it even if there should be only
one such Indian to fight to the last.
This is a war between truth and falsehood. Since truth is on the
side of the Indian community, it must win . It is the duty of every
Indian to assist the deputation. There are some Indians who are bent
upon creating dissension in the community. The Government has its
spies among Indians. Efforts are continually made to mislead the Indian
community through them. These efforts will be intensified during the
visit of the deputation to England. It is the duty of every Indian to
counteract all these. Those who are not strong enough for the hardships
of gaol must keep at home. If one is approached for one's signature
on any document, it should not be given without thorough inquiry.
It is necessary that meetings are held at every place to extend support
to the deputation. Such meetings should not be confined to the Transvaal,
but must be held all over South Africa. It should also be remembered
that this deputation is not going on behalf of the satyagrahis. They put
their faith in nothing but the truth. For them following truth is
itself a victory. The deputation is going rather out of regard for the
sentiments of those who have not been able to hold out till the last and,
if possible, with a view to lightening the burden on the satyagrahis. The
latter, therefore, need not pay any attention to the deputation. When
the force of their truth grows stronger than the falsehood of the Trans-
vaal Government, their trials will come to an end as a matter of course.
Remembering this, the satyagrahi must continue to seek opportunities
for imprisonment.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 26-6-1909
