28. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI P. DESAI
November 11, 1936
CHI. MAGANBHAI,
I have been able to use your letter to the full. Get hold
of Harbhai's monthly and send it to me.
By a happy coincidence, just as I was leaving, Jivanji put
into my hands your work Sukhmani and Kaka's Jivanno Anand.
When I started on Sukhmani it so engaged my attention that I
could not put it down. I write this after finishing it—except for
the "Ashtapadis". I did that in the "Library". What else
could I have done? I have now begun reading the "Ashta-
padis" too! But that I will do at my leisure. I like your ex-
position very much. . . .'S translation is good and beautiful. In
the language of your essays I feel there is something lacking,
though I cannot lay my finger on it. However I found your
translation of the essays of Puran Singh and Vaswani quite
pleasing. Only you can tell why it should be so, or maybe it is
only my feeling. This is, however, an unimportant point and your
book is useful for students as also others.
You have done well in raising a doubt about the words which
McAuliffe puts into Guru Arjun's mouth on the subject of the
Shastras. McAuliffe has no doubt put in great labour into his
work. But I suspected him as far back as 1922 when I read
all his chapters in jail. Later I heard that it was thanks to him
that Hindus and Sikhs became disunited. You should write a
Sikh history if you have the time and can do the necessary
reading. You have to read a vast amount of literature on the
subject for the purpose, move among the Sikhs, ransack the
library of the Khalsa community and meet Sir Joginder Singh.
Probably you know that he is a great writer. It is not a small
thing to write a good history. I greatly appreciate your study
as revealed in Sukhmani. I see that you are interested in the
subject and therefore you may be able to undertake the task.
A superficial book will not satisfy me. Maybe for many years
to come this is the work cut out for you. In that case "Better
is death in the discharge of one's duty".
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9066
