18. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,
October 26, 1906
DEAR MR. POLAK,
I am sending you all the cuttings that I consider to be useful. If
I can find the time, I shall translate the substance of the fight of the
women suffragists for the Guzerati columns, but if I do not, let
Chhaganlal translate them, and make an effective use of these valuable
cuttings. I have asked Mr. Mukerji also to deal with the matter in his
London Letter. Of course all the cuttings I am sending you are not
necessarily to be used for Indian Opinion. Some of them you would like to
see yourself—that is why I am sending them.
I have not allowed myself a moment's rest ever since my landing
here. Work commenced on Saturday immediately on landing.
I gave an interview to The Tribune man on board, and to The
Morning Leader man, whom your father had brought with him, at the
station immediately I got on to the platform. Soon after having my meal,
Mr. Ally and I went over to the London Indian Society and paid our
respects to the Grand Old Man, and made with him appointments for
seeing Sir William and Sir H enry. I have not gone to bed before
one o'clock, except on Wednesday night: interviewing people takes up a
lot of time. So far as I have progressed, it seems that Sir George Bird-
wood, supported by Sir Muncherji, Sir Henry Cotton and others, will
introduce us to Lord Elgin. It will therefore be a very good movement.
Mr. Ameer Ali has telegraphed to me saying he also would join in
introducing the Deputation. Lord Elgin will therefore know what an
influential backing we have and that the Conservative, the Liberal, the
Anglo-Indian and the Mahomedan opinion is all solid in our favour.
I have received your cable. It was extended by me for the
columns of India. I hope it represents correctly what I received in your
cablegram. It was not very clear. I send you a copy of the cablegram
as received by me. You will see for yourself whether it is a correct
copy. I hardly think it is. You should have given me the necessary
stops.
As soon as the date of the Deputation is fixed, I shall cable you
and shall include a few words regarding Mr. Abdool Gani. I may,
however, state that I made absolutely no such statement as was attri-
buted to me by Mr. Murray. I did not tell him that the second bond
should be lodged with the Bank: on the contrary, I told him that we
should use the second bond for raising a loan. The whole conversation
took place through the 'phone. You may, therefore, assure Mr. Abdool
Gani that there was no such binding statement made by me.
I now come to the most important part of my letter. I think that it
is quite possible to have here a very strong committee solely devoted to
the affairs of British Indians in South Africa. Sir Muncherji is very enthu-
siastic. Sir William has approved of the suggestion. The way is therefore
paved. Ritch's hands will be free. No matter whether the Deputation
succeeds or not, its work must be continued, and there is not the slight-
est doubt that we will have legislation as soon as Responsible Government
is established. We will then be able to avoid a Deputation, which will
be almost [un]necessary if we have an effective working committee.
We would not only then do more through it than through a temporary
deputation, but would do it at perhaps one-tenth of the cost of a
1 Vide "Interview to The Tribune", pp. 1-.
2 Vide "Interview to The Morning Leader", pp. 2-.
3 Sir William Wedderburn
4 Sir Henry Cotton
deputation; but if it requires the proper man, it requires funds also. I think
that at the most—or perhaps at the least—I have not yet all the figures
before me—we would want to spend £25 per month. The committee
will probably last two years. Anyhow we shall guarantee a year's expenses,
viz., £300. We would not be able to take up offices cheaply on less
than a year's lease. We would have to pay something to Ritch, as he
cannot be expected in the present state of his finances to do the work
gratis. After he returns to South Africa, it is my intention to offer the
post to your father, if he will take it. I am going to discuss it today
with him at luncheon time. Please therefore call a meeting of the
Association British Indian Committee and place the whole position
before them. If they agree, let me have a cable saying, Yes. At the
same time you should have funds ready. Do not send me the affirmative
cable unless you get the funds there in your possession, or unless you feel
absolutely certain of getting them. Mr. Ally entirely approves of the
idea; probably he will be writing.
I passed last Sunday with your people. Nothing surprised me, as
you had prepared me for everything; otherwise to meet your sisters and
your brilliant father would have been a most agreeable surprise. Both
the sisters are really most lovable, and if I was unmarried, or young,
or believed in mixed marriage, you know what I would have done! As
it is, I told them that if! had made their acquaintance in 1888 (for not
doing which they took me severely to task) I should have adopted them as
daughters, from which proposition your father violently dissented. Your
mother was very hospitable. Professor Parmanand was with me. He
has made himself one of the family. Your mother is suffering from a
very severe attack of indigestion. I mildly proposed an extended Jewish
fast. I am afraid the proposal won't wash, however it has gone in for
what it is worth. I pushed in the claim for earth-bandages also, and by
the time I have done with them, I might be able to make some impres-
sion. Anyhow she said she was quite open to conviction. The soup,
let me tell you, was all prepared by your father. He told me he passed
a considerable time in thinking out all the ingredients, etc., etc. I have
not been able to go and see Milly's sister. I see that I have more
work before me than I bargained for, and have not a moment to spare
to pay friendly calls. I have, however, written to her asking her to give
me an appointment for an evening. The reply is due some time today.
I will not leave before seeing her.
You will not be surprised to learn that this is being dictated to
our friend Mr. Simmonds.
1 Committee of the British Indian Association
2 Vide Vol. V, p. 21.
3 Mrs. Millie Graham Polak
I sent the cable about our arrival, as Mr. Ally was anxious that
I should. He has promised to do so to Mrs. Ally.
Since the above was in type I have seen your father. He thinks that
£300 per year will not be sufficient. Of course his ideas are necessarily
large. At the same time they are entitled to every respect, as he has
local knowledge and experience. If, therefore, you can push through
the proposal for £500, it will be better. We should simply spend what
is absolutely necessary. At the same time, if authority is given for spend-
ing more, I know that the money will not be wasted. I have now seen
Mr. Scott, and, you will be pleased to hear, Mr. J. M. Robertson. Your
father took me to Mr. Scott, who is his personal friend, and it was at
the House of Commons that Mr. Robertson happened to come in, and
we were introduced to him by Mr. Scott. Both gentlemen have
interested themselves in the question. Mr. Scott suggested that I should
address a number of members of the House of Commons, and Mr. Scott
and Mr. Robertson are going to see about it. A similar suggestion has
been made by Mr. Mackarness also. Let us see what happens. This
now brings me up to date. I need not now say anything more. Care-
fully go through all the cuttings I am sending you: they are worth reading.
My kind regards to all. I have not the time to write separately to any
one else. As it is, this portion of my letter is being dictated at five
minutes to eight. I am to see your people again on Sunday.
Will you please send this letter to Mr. West so that I may not have
to repeat in my letter to him what I have said in this letter ? I do
not think the personal matters I have touched upon need prevent this
letter going to him. I am not sending you a copy of the full text of
our letter to The Times as you will see it reproduced in India. You
will see something in the current issue of India about the election of
Mr. Naoroji to the Presidentship of the Congress. You need not deal
with the matter in the paper. I have no time to go into the reasons.
Had it been necessary I would have dealt with it from here. You may
reproduce two notes from India without any comment, regarding the
treatment of indentured Indians on board the Umfuli.
Yours sincerely,
[H. S. L. POLAK, ESQ.
Box 6522
JOHANNESBURG
SOUTH AFRICA]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4406
1 This is not available.
2 This he did on November 7; vide "Meeting at House of Commons", p. 105.
3 Vide "Letter to The Times", pp. 4-.
