220. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
POONA,
February 28, 1946
CHI. KISHORELAL,
Today I am attending to a few letters among which your
letter catches my eye. What you write about Gomati is quite
understandable. Some nature cure practitioners can diagnose a
case which [allopathic] doctors cannot, but this cannot be applied
in the case of Gomati, and I am of the opinion that Dr. Din-
shaw cannot cope with the case. He has plenty [to recommend
himself]. He is liberal but has fallen into a track which he is not
likely to give up all at once. He is pulling on with what is not
to his liking, thanks to his boundless faith in me.
I have taken
up the burden of running the clinic under these circumstances.
He will guide us wherever we may ask him. Hence even if
Dhirubhai comes, he cannot have the benefit of Dinshawji's know-
ledge, his brilliance and experience. At present he can utilize
my own limited knowledge. Dinshaw himself is physical culture
personified but he does not instruct others. He is possessed by
nature cure, by his desire to establish university for it, and he
entertains a hope that it will come to be through his asso-
ciation with me. If this department should wholly belong to
the poor, we may bid on it some hope of establishing a uni-
versity. Under the circumstances, I don't think we can give
satisfaction to Dhirubhai. I have a feeling that something like
Ashram life might come to be here, as though I could do noth-
ing else! Or, maybe, I was not interested in anything else!
Thus I am proceeding willingly as well as unwillingly. I am
sending away from what may be called the menial staff; it
remains to be seen how far I succeed. Therefore, if Dhirubhai
and such others came, they will have thorough experience of sani-
tation and other work and will have to be content with my
own knowledge of nature cure, such as it is. If, in the mean while,
Dinshaw opens up and acquires the ability of transferring his
knowledge to others, we can make some progress.
Bharatan Kumarappa will not be able to give such work as
you expect. In fact he will be able to write independently. It
seems to be very well organized now. Pyarelal and Rajkumari
have taken up the English work. Sushila of course very much
wants to be useful but I don't take from her much work
of this kind. If I did, her medical work would inevitably suffer.
I am relieving Kanu for his primary job. At present I get much
of his work done by Sushila Pai, and she is doing it well. She
has always been in the line. I am taking from her the work of
the Gujarati Department.
For Hindustani I have brought Om
Prakash. I trust he will be trained. He certainly wants to be.
It is fairly cold here. I presume you have left Bombay.
Blessings from
BAPU
[KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA]
SEVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
