132. LETTER TO C. R. DAS
[Before June 13, 1925]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I had very happy days with you. I feel that we have come
nearer each other for the communion at Darjeeling.
Had a purse of only Rs. 7,000 at Jalpaiguri. This I have
handed to Satish Babu with instructions to transfer it to the
Charkha Committee you are appointing. At Jalpaiguri, too, I
had the same experience as elsewhere. Spinners are there but no-
body to organize them. There is a good girls' school here.
They have about 20 wheels not one of which is passable. The
poor school-mistress, though she spins fine, does not know a good
charkha from a bad. The committee is unconcerned as to the
condition of the charkha. This can be easily remedied if there
was expert guidance. The proposed committee will supply that
guidance.
I do want you to learn spinning both at the wheel and the
takli. You can do it if you will but put your mind to it. If
the Governor said, 'Spin and take what you want', you will work
at the wheel for twenty-four hours and master it. Well, it is not
the Governor who is saying it; but one who loves you and loves
India does say: 'Spin and take swaraj.' Oh that we could do
one thing of permanent value! To clothe ourselves through the
wheel is not an impossible programme.
The spinner whom
Satish Babu promised will be with you as soon as we reach
Calcutta. Do learn the thing and spin religiously for half an hour
for the sake of the millions and in the name of God. It will give
you peace and happiness. And then when you are doing it, the
young men over whom you exercise such wonderful control will
also take it up. I hope fever will not worry you again.
A letter is going to Bhorlal by the same mail that will take
this to you. We reach Calcutta by 18th. We are at Barisal
between 14-16.
Please tell Basanti Devi to send her first quota of yarn to
me. I want thirty days' collection made into strands of 100
yards each nicely and neatly. Nothing but first class work will be
accepted from the Mayoress of Calcutta.
With love to you all.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
