294. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[CAPE TOWN,]
Phagan Vad 6 [March 17, 1914]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
You are right in what you say about wheat and dates. Every
grain of wheat will yield a plant. That is not the case with a
date palm. The part of the date fruit which we eat will not grow
if planted. So long, therefore, as we are still on the middle level,
eating the date fruit is not very objectionable. Groundnut is certain-
ly open to objection, as I have always been saying. We have not,
however, reached a stage when it can be given up. Olive is not
open to objection because it contains a separable seed. You have
rightly pointed out the objection against the sesame seed. Ulti-
mately, we are to give up sesame oil itself and make do with
what oil can be obtained from dry fruit. Of course, the objection
I have mentioned will probably apply to every variety of dry fruit;
almond, for instance, is but seed. You will see on reflection, how-
ever, that there is much difference between consuming wheat and
consuming almonds. An almond tree continues to flourish, but the
wheat plant, once the grain has been removed, is no better than
a weed. It is of no other use. No such violence as is involved in the
sowing of wheat and other operations is involved in similar opera-
tions relative to almond. It is not possible, however, to go very
deep into this kind of argument. I am but ignorant myself. I
am telling you of my own conclusions, tentative and immature
as they are. The basic principle, undoubtedly, is this: one should
make do with the fewest possible articles [of food] and in the
smallest possible quantity, no more than what is absolutely neces-
sary to pay the body its hire. It will be best to frame the rules of
our diet bearing this principle in mind. A man who cooks a meal
of just an ounce of rough-ground wheat and is free in five minutes
is far superior to the one who wrings (as I do) the utmost pleasure
from a variety of fruits. Another, however, who lives on no more
than five bananas will out-distance the first. In other words, one
who lives on fruit diet stands a far better chance of rising than
the other. Even here, the mental attitude is the primary factor.
The motive is the chief thing.
We cannot deduce any rule that, if we can consume the fruit,
we can also consume the leaves, the bark, etc.
The reason why certain green vegetables are permitted on
ekadashi but wheat is forbidden seems to be an obvious one rather
than anything abstract. Since people do not have an entire meal
of vegetables or look upon them as food, some vegetables were
permitted for gratifying the palate; but wheat, being food, was ex-
cluded and in this way the original aim of eating less on ekadashi
was to some extent maintained.
Gourds, etc., are, like tomatoes, more or less a kind of fruit.
The tomatoes are allowed because they can be eaten uncooked.
It is doubtful if gourd and the like, if uncooked, can be digested
by all. Radish, etc., are but roots of a weed and the consump-
tion of roots is thoroughly objectionable according to Jain prin-
ciples. When Ba wanted to have ginger, I ate it with her to
know its effects. I liked it and continued to take it after neem
juice. Ba has quite an enthusiasm for it. Both she and I liked
it. She collected some tender shoots of ginger. They were
nothing but roots. I ate them for a day or two and relished
them very much indeed. This morning, I was filled with
compassion and despised myself. It was as though I could see
the souls in these pieces of ginger. On one knot of it, there are
several tender shoots. To eat them amounted to destroying so
many embryos. Deeply pained, I gave up ginger today. I had not
done so till now, having kept myself free to eat it when neces-
sary. Henceforth, I will treat it as forbidden and avoid eating it
as far as possible. Before I am in India, I don't want to place my-
self under any more restrictions than those I have already ac-
cepted. Ginger, however, I will not eat in this country.
Consumption of cooked food involves the destruction of life
in an unnatural, and therefore cruel, manner. The destruction
of life through eating uncooked food occurs in a natural manner.
Moreover, food, when cooked, loses its nourishing element (vita-
lity). Having regard to this, we can practically eat only ripe
fruit. To pluck or eat fruit before it is ripe is objectionable.
You will see from this that I have not been able to act upon all
the results of my thinking. To that extent, my thinking is ahead
of my action. But that will remain, of course. The effort is
always for eagerly following up thought with action.
If the desire to eat our food while it is still hot comes back
again and again, it is because of the hold of a vicious habit of
long standing. The desire must be suppressed with the utmost
effort. Improper desires will always occur. By suppressing them
every time, we grow firmer in mind and gain in spiritual strength.
Ba's condition is not so good, nor so bad. The oedema is quite
heavy today but she moves about with courage. I have asked her
to eat whatever she relishes. One cannot say what will happen.
She is not bed-ridden at present.
I am likely to be detained here for three weeks more.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5697
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
