373. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
August 22, 1934
MY DEAR AGATHA,
This is merely to tell you that I am slowly rebuilding the
body. The seven days' rest was good at the price of seven or eight
pounds of flesh. I knew your anxiety which you showed in your
letter and cable. I could not avoid the fast. Friends have to put
up with that part of me. For this last may not be the last of my
fasts. I can survive discredit by the world and not by myself.
Of the current events you will know from Mahadev and
Pyarelal and the cuttings that Chandrashankar may be sending
you. These letter(s) are not, I think, duplicated to Mira. What-
ever you may consider necessary, you will pass on to Mira. She
seems to be going about in a business-like manner. Anyway
you must give your own impressions.
Poor Kamlani! I expect to have full accounts from you
and Polak.
C.F. Andrews reaches Bombay on 25th. He may be here on
26th. Till then do not be anxious about the future.
I have no
cut and dried plan. Of course Bengal and the Frontier with
Abdul Ghaffar Khan as the centre-piece are there. But I see no
clear line of action. I want to precipitate nothing. But things may
become impossible for me any moment.
I must have room to
move. The Black Hole will suffocate anybody-much more me, an
open-air creature. A most unnatural condition is becoming natu-
ralized in this unhappy land. This is written to give you my
mental condition, not to expect more from you than you are doing.
What can you the handful do, if we here can do nothing? And
I admit that we are doing nothing or not enough. It is in this
atmosphere that I have to act when this convalescence is finished.
You must not be alarmed. What I have described is nothing new.
You know these things. I have put them here in order to show
that the things are about the same as when you left India. Not
even all the ordinary civil disobedience prisoners have been dis-
charged. And extraordinary treatment is being meted out to
Jawaharlal. He may be pounced upon any day. They have put
him out. Without seeming indecent he can't find himself in prison
and they tell him he may be taken away any moment.
This
gives no chance to poor Kamala for whose sake Jawaharlal is
discharged. This is cruelty double distilled. And in spite of their
declarations, many prisoners are still being detained without the
slightest cause. Attachments of land still going on for fines! My
ahimsa is on its mettle. But I do not want to act. I am passive
till God wants me to act; not my will but His shall be done.
You should share this with Mira and Muriel without fail.
Of course Polak and any other you like.
Love to you and your sister to whom I was unable to write
when her little note was received.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1479
