76. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
February 23, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT,
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
[ SIR,]
You were kind enough to tell me today that you had heard
from the Government in reply to my letter of the 4th instant,
and that the Government was sorry for the inconvenience that was
caused to my wife and that, with reference to the other parts of my
letter, the Government could not discuss with a prisoner the pri-
son regulations in general. I appreciate the expression of sorrow
about the inconvenience caused to my wife.
Regarding the other part of the Government reply, I beg to
state that I am well aware of the fact that, as a prisoner, I may
not discuss the prison regulations in general. If the Government
will reread my letter of the 4th instant, they will discover that I
have not invited a general discussion of the regulations. On the
contrary, I have merely ventured to seek information on the
particular application of certain regulations in so far only as they
bear on my future conduct and welfare.
I presume that a
prisoner is entitled to seek and receive such information. If I
am to see my friends and wife in future, I ought to know whom
I may or may not see, so as to avoid disappointment or even
possible humiliation.
I venture to make my position clear. I have the good fortune
to have numerous friends who are as dear to me as relatives. I
have children being brought up under me who are like my own
children. I have associates living under the same roof with me,
and helping me in my various non-political activities and experi-
ments. I could not, without doing violence to my most cherished
sentiments, see my wife, if I may not from time to time also see
these friends, associates and children. I see my wife not merely
because she is my wife, but chiefly because she is my associate in
my activities.
Nor should I have any interest in seeing those I wish to, if I
may not talk to them about my non-political activities.
Again, I am naturally interested in knowing why Pandit
Motilal Nehru, Hakimji Ajmal Khan and Mr. Maganlal Gandhi
were excluded. I should understand their exclusion if they were
guilty of ungentlemanly conduct, or if they wanted to see me for
any political discussion. But if they have been excluded for any
unnamable political reasons, the least I could do is to waive the
pleasure of seeing my wife. I entertain ideas of honour and
self-respect which I would like the Government, if they can, to
understand and appreciate.
I have no desire to hold political discussion with anybody,
much less to send out political messages. The Government may
post anyone they wish to be present at these interviews and their
representative may take shorthand notes thereon if the Govern-
ment deem it necessary. But I may be excused if I wish to guard
against friends and relatives being refused permission for reasons
outside the prison regulations. I have now stated my position
frankly and fully. This correspondence commenced on the 20th
December last. I would urge the Government to let me have
an early, straight and undiplomatic reply.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
No. 827
From a photostat: S.N. 8022; also Young India, 6-3-1924
