109. LETTER TO N.
January 18, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
I have your two interesting and instructive letters. It is very
great work you are doing, and if the young men who have respond-
ed to your call remain steadfast and do not give in after the first
flush of enthusiasm is exhausted, the street-cleaning you are doing
must prove infectious and it would be a great advance towards the
removal of untouchability. I am therefore surprised that anybody
should cavil at the work itself or take exception to the fact that
you, who have become an Indian by adoption and by right of
love, should have taken the lead, and if anybody thinks that I
would not have advised such work if I was out, he is wholly mis-
taken. I have personally undertaken such work before now, both
publicly and privately, and the cleaning of Harijan quarters that
was done all over India on the 18th ultimo was due to the sugges-
tion made by me and heartily taken up by the Servants of Untouch-
ables Society. You are at liberty to make public use of this letter.
I did think from the language of your previous letter that you
had fasted all the days that I was fasting. I am glad therefore
of the correction you have made.
As you know, I am deeply interested in the question of scienti-
fic or (which is the same thing) hygienic and spiritual dietary.
Tell me therefore more about your diet. Give me the actual
things you take and the quantities, and how far you have been on
this diet. As you seem to have read practically everything I have
ever written, perhaps you are aware that I have lived on fruits
and nuts for over six years, that I have gone without milk for
over nine years, and it has been the most disappointing thing for
me to have been obliged to take even goat's milk. I know of no
one of my acquaintance who has been able to do hard physical
work as also hard mental work, as you seem to be doing, merely on
fruits and vegetables; that means, no protein, no starch and no fat
of any kind. The two letters before me whet my appetite for see-
ing you face to face and understanding you more than I do. I
confess that I am very stupid and I don't and I can't understand
people merely through their correspondence. To know them I
need to look at them and talk to them, and you have written so
much to me about yourself that I do want to know you if I can.
But at the same time I don't want you to come here at the sacri-
fice of the great work you are doing there. You should come only
when you can be spared for a few days from your work.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 18966
