80. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Posh Sud 5 [January 17, 1918]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I have your letter. If Meva can stay by herself with me, I
can arrange to have her here. The Doctor may send her in the
company of some reliable person or with you. After leaving her
here, you can go back.
There are four ladies working here, Narhari's wife,
Mahadev's, Anandibai (a widow) and Avantikabai. I propose
to assign them to different villages. Three of them are even now
in villages. Ba, too, is in a village working among the women
there.
You have suffered long enough from the injury caused by the
nail. I hope you are absolutely free from it now.
Ramdas has purposely joined the tailor's. He wants to earn
a little and also have some experience of unpleasant conditions.
He did not leave in a pique. I was pleased that he went. He
will get seasoned. He does not expect and should not expect any
monetary help from me.
The question you have asked arises because of the changes
that have taken place in my life. If I had been, from the begin-
ning, a poor man with no interest other than in the service of the
country, nothing more would have been expected of me. I could
then have brought up my children according to my ideals, and
they, on their part, would have been free, on growing up, to follow
a path different from mine. In that case, they would expect from
me nothing more than my blessings. I could have claimed this
right if I had always been a poor man; if so, I should be able
to claim it even now. Parents may change their ideals; when
they do, the children should either follow them or gently part
company with them. Only if this happens can everyone enjoy
swaraj.
When an employer becomes what you have pictured, the
employee has the right to leave his service. He should only take
care that the master is not put into difficulty immediately. If the
employer becomes an outright brute, the employee may leave his
service regardless of what may happen to the master's business. He
may also give up service if others under the master behave that
way. There cannot be, however, one single rule to fit all circums-
tances. One can decide only with reference to a given situation.
When a Kshatriya has lost all his weapons, he fights with his
bare hands and feet and dies fighting. On this point, too, one
cannot lay down an absolute rule. There may be occasions when,
losing his weapons, the Kshatriya will surrender and then fight again
after securing new ones.
It is not correct to say that the truth has been discovered in
the West. One is right in holding that truth and non-violence are
the same thing. The one includes the other. If anyone vowed to
non-violence speaks or acts untruth, he will be violating his vow
If a man dedicated to truth commits violence, he will sacrifice
truth. Even if a man refuses to reply, out of fear, he will be
violating the vow of non-violence.
If we think of Shri Krishna as the ground of all being and
not as a human figure, all doubts will vanish. He is an imaginary
figure, but He has so taken possession of the Hindu heart that He
exists in body more truly than we do. Of a certainty, Shri Krishna
will live as long as Hinduism lives.
There is much more I can write, but I shall not now. Even
this I have set down in the midst of difficult circumstances.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. MEVA,
If you have the courage to stay with me by yourself, do come.
I shall improve your health and you may try to be a daughter to
me and so help me to forget the want of one.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5724. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
