523. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
May 12, 1932
I got your letter. It was a beautiful one. My statement that
Jainism puts emphasis on pure nyaya has been slightly misunder-
stood by you. Pure nyaya may mean right policy or just decision,
and ordinarily that is the sense in which we use the word. But I
did not use it in that sense. I wanted to say that Jainism em-
phasizes logic, but that logic sometimes leads to wrong conclu-
sions the consequences of which are fearful. This is not the fault
of logic, but we do not always possess all the data necessary for
arriving at a correct conclusion. Nor is every word understood
by the hearer or the reader in the same sense in which it was used
by the speaker or the writer.
Hence the heart, that is bhakti,
faith and first-hand experience, is given a higher place than logic.
Logic is a purely intellectual process. We should not care in the
least if logic, that is intellect, cannot understand what is self-evi-
dent to the heart. On the contrary, sometimes our intellect is con-
vinced of certain ideas which the heart does not accept.
We
should, then, reject them. You will be able to think of any num-
ber of illustrations which will explain my point. In the sense
in which I have used the word nyaya above, it can never be an end
in itself. Both nyaya and the yoga of desireless work are means.
The former belongs to the sphere of the intellect, the latter is a
matter of the heart. We cannot cultivate desirelessness with the
help of the intellect.
Now I will deal with the issue which you have raised. Com-
passion and ahimsa are not two different things. Compassion is
not opposed to ahimsa. Anything which is so opposed is not true
compassion. We can describe compassion as the concrete expres-
sion of ahimsa. It is a contradiction in terms to describe any
man as free from attachment and without compassion.
A person
who is free from attachment should have a compassionate heart
as large as the ocean. And when such compassion embraces mil-
lions, to say that, though sattvik, it is not free from attachment
is to betray ignorance of the meaning of the word or else to give
it a new meaning. Generally, we use the word in the sense in
which Tulsidas has used it.
His meaning is clear in the follow-
ing doha 1 : G;!:!T ' lB- 'fiT ~'" %: qTq/~~ ~'" <llfl1l1T<l ,2 Here, compassion is
used as a synonym for ahimsa. Perfect ahimsa is possible only
in the atman in its disembodied state. But when the atman takes
on a body, ahimsa manifests itself in one as the feeling of com-
passion. Considered from this point of view, my mercy-killing of
the calf was an expression of the purest ahimsa. To endure suffer-
ing in one's own person is the very nature of the atman, but it
is contrary to its nature to make or let others suffer. If the mercy-
killing of the calf had been prompted by a desire to relieve my own
pain [at its suffering], the act was not ahimsa, but to end the
calf's pain was ahimsa. Indeed, ahimsa implies inability to en-
dure other creatures suffering pain. From such inability arise com-
passion, heroism and all other virtues associated with ahimsa. It
is perverse logic to argue that we should be able to look on while
others suffer. Again, it is not always true that death is more painful
for human beings than anything they may suffer in life. I think
that it is we ourselves that have made death the terror it is.
The so-called savages do not have the same fear of death. The martial
races also have very little of it. And in the West a school of thought
is spreading whose followers would prefer to end their lives rather
than go on living in extreme pain. I think that the assumption of
excessive fear of death proceeds from ignorance or dry theorizing.
Because of that assumption, we, and especially the Jains, have
perverted the meaning of ahimsa, with the result that true ahimsa
has practically disappeared. A woman who jumps into a well in
anger may clutch at a rope offered to her, but one who has
jumped into it deliberately under the force of some belief, what-
ever it be, will disdain to avail herself of a rope even if offered
to her. The practice of harakiri among the Japanese is a well-
known example of this. Whether that practice is the result of
right knowledge or ignorance is beside the point. Here I am
only pointing out that there are countless instances in which men
prefer death to life. In the West they kill animals whose con-
dition is hopeless and who suffer extreme pain, and behind this
practice lies the belief that they do not experience much fear
of death, and that they will prefer death to suffering pain beyond
a certain limit. This idea may not be true, and it is, therefore,
our duty to behave towards animals as if life was as dear to them
as it is to human beings.
If you accept so much, it is not very necessary to consider the
matter from a social point of view or from the point of view of
our duty towards society. Where the people have regard for
ahimsa, there is little risk of the example of my killing the calf
being misused. Where people have no such regard, in any case
animals are killed. Thus, my action is not likely to increase
violence to animals. When killing the calf, it was not necessary
for me to know all the possible consequences of my action. If
it was certain that the calf would never die in any other manner,
I should of course have paused before killing it. In other words,
if it were the case that nobody but I could have ended the calf's
life, it would have been necessary for me to think of all the
possible consequences of my action. But the fact is that all crea-
tures, calves as much as we, live with the possibility of death al-
ways hanging over us. Therefore, the utmost that could have
happened was that the calf would have lived for a few days or
months or a year more. These considerations are not irrelevant
to the case, since my motive was disinterested and my only aim
was to end the pain of the calf. We may, therefore, say that
even if there was any error in my reasoning, no harmful conse-
quence to the calf followed which would never have followed but
for my action. Ask me again and again till you have understood
the point. The subject is an important one and the explanation
deserves to be carefully grasped. It is easy to grasp, and once it
is grasped you will be able to deduce many other consequences
from it.
It is undoubtedly true that my approach to the problem
attacks certain generally accepted beliefs. But I do believe that
we, that is Hindus, have become so full of cowardice and inertia
that the true essence of ahimsa is forgotten and the thing has
come to be identified with superficial concern for the lives of
lower creatures. In its essence, ahimsa is a powerful emotion of
the heart which finds expression in numerous forms of service.
If it manifests itself in its perfection even in one human being,
its light would be far more powerful than that of the sun. But
where do we find such ahimsa today?
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 150-. Also C.W. 9112. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi
