428. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
May 5, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,
Surely by this time you have had more than one letter
from Segaon. I am sure in a day or two you would have begun
to like the place and the life. Ba came with me yesterday. I
walked the whole distance. It took me full two hours. But then
we again missed the way a little. We were all novices without
a guide. And I was silent. I can comfortably do the whole
distance in 1¾ hours. I was none the worse for the walk and
was ready for the evening walk. Mahadev and Lilavati walked
in at 8.30 p.m., and slept on the ground where the operations
are going on. We all sleep there, surrounded on all sides by
double trenches supported by the excavated earth. We eat the
vegetables grown here. We do not therefore get a variety but
there is more than compensation in the thought that we are taking
what is grown locally. This restriction, if persisted in, will soon
induce a cultivation of other vegetables. So much for Segaon.
Now for the parcel from Lucknow. You wrote to me the
other day saying you had advice of despatch of parcel by Miss Ala
worth over Rs. 600. You even hoped that it won't contain the
khes you had sent. Where is that parcel? Instructions together
with addresses were duly passed. But everything was topsy-turvy.
All were overworked. I am sorry about the parcel having gone
to Simla. I know what worry it is to have things wrongly addressed.
I had spoken to Khurshed more than once and then to Jerajani.
Let us see what finally happens. You need not send your cheque
before the receipt of the parcels. By way of curiosity I would
like to know how much extra the wrong address has cost.
I am sure you should accept the Jullundur nomination if it
comes to you. And I take it, you have taken over the college
responsibility. These things cannot be put away lightly.
You are right about Ku. He is coming to Nandi Hill. I
shall see what is possible. I shall not have the operation performed
unless I am sure that it is necessary and the surgeon knows his
work. Bharatan too will be going probably to Kodaikanal.
Remember the date of my departure, 8th instant. I leave
Segaon on 8th morning.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3726. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6882
