81. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
NANDIDOORG,
May 18, 1927
BHAISHRI 5 KHUSHALBHAI2,
I received your letter. I was very pleased.
Please do write to Ramdas and tell him whatever you think he ought to
do. I believe khadi work to be both a business and a form of national service.
When the use of khadi has become widespread, the very men who have now
taken possession of the Mulji Jetha Market and send crores of rupees abroad
and make profits of lakhs for themselves, will compensate the thirty-three
crores of Gods of India 4 to the tune of crores of rupees and retain lakhs for
1 In the Mysore state. Gandhiji was resting here after he had a mild stroke in the
last week of March of 1927.
2 Gandhiji's cousin, father of Gandhiji's nephews Chhaganlal, Maganlal and
Narandas who helped him in his numerous other activities. The figure '5' in old style
letters expressed reverence for the person addressed.
3 A busy cloth trade centre in Bombay
4 That is, the people of India whom Gandhiji regarded as the Gods of ancient
Indian mythology
68
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
themselves. And, in this way, both the Gods and the cloth merchants will
prosper. Today, these cloth merchants are making their profits, as they believe
them to be, at the expense of the Gods. I do wish that Ramdas, and to the
extent possible Nimu, should take full part in helping the change that is
currently taking place in cloth trade, transforming it from an immoral trade
into a moral one. But that wish is of secondary importance to me. The more
important thing is the freedom of Ramdas and Nimu. I myself am content
telling them what I think, and will be satisfied with whatever course of action
they adopt. You have as much right as I naturally have to take a share in
promoting their good. You are as much in place of a respected elder to
them as I. I, therefore, wish that you should guide them. It is your right and
also your duty to do so. It would of course be very good if we both held the
same views. But I would see no harm even if our views differed. Sincerely
held differences of views conduce to our good. I hold that we harm each
other's good by suppressing our views out of false regard for each other.
Therefore, please do tell Ramdas whatever you think.
I was glad to learn from your letter that Chi. Navin is now coming round
to the right path.
Jai Shrikrishna from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
