162. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
JEHANABAD,
March 28, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,
I got your long letter of March 7. You have given sufficient
details. You need not hesitate to write to me out of compassion
for me because of the pressure of work on me. I have not known
a father who would not welcome a letter from his son or daugh-
ter. On the contrary, every father looks forward to such letters.
It is true, of course, that if my sons were to write silly and
sentimental letters, I would be pained to read them. But I have
never taught any of you to be sentimental or to write such letters,
nor is it in the nature of any of you to be or act so. I, therefore,
have no fear on that score.
I understand what you say regarding me. It is enough for
me that you do not worry about me but leave me in God's hands.
It is also true that, if what I am doing is wrong, I alone will
have to suffer the consequences. If it is good, its benefit will be
shared by millions.
If refusal to extend a welcome to the Prince is likely to do
us any harm, we should endure it. When we accorded a wel-
come in our time the circumstances were different, and more-
over we extended the welcome jointly with other people. Keep
on sending me newspaper cuttings which you think I should
read. I rarely read your journal. And moreover in the midst of
all this touring, how can I even get it?
Dadoo and Naicker called on me as soon as they arrived.
I was in Patna then. I had only a brief talk with them. They
said they would come back and call on me again. They didn't
say a word regarding you. Nor did I ask them. I didn't think it
advisable to do so. And, moreover, your letter gives me all the
information, and so really speaking I had nothing to inquire about.
One thing seems certain, namely, that now the struggle will
be carried on through selfless and elected representatives. I cannot
say how long I shall be detained in Bihar and Noakhali.
I have to leave for Delhi the day after tomorrow to meet
the new Viceroy. I think I will have to stay there for two or
three days and then return here.
Don't worry at all about Sita. I do whatever is necessary.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. SUSHILA,
Despatch this letter to Manilal. You may add whatever you
wish to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4997
