30. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
BENARES,
February 20, 1920
THE HON'BLE PANDIT MOTILAL NEHRU
EX-OFFICIO PRESIDENT, SUB-COMMITTEE
ALL-INDIA CONGRESS COMMITTEE
LAHORE
SIR,
On the 14th November 1919, the Punjab Sub-committee of
the All India Congress Committee appointed yourself, the Hon'ble
Fazlul Haq2, and Messrs C. R. Das, Abbas Tayabji and M. K.
Gandhi, as Commissioners, with Mr. K. Santanam as Secretary,
to examine, sift, collate, and analyse the evidence already collected
by and on behalf of the Sub-committee regarding the events of last
April in the Punjab, and to supplement such evidence where neces-
sary, and to present their conclusions thereon.
On being nominated President-elect of the National Congress
you considered it necessary to resign your office as Commissioner.
The resignation was duly accepted by the Sub-committee and as
the work of taking evidence was practically concluded when you
resigned, no other commissioner was appointed in your place.
The Hon'ble Fazlul Haq was called away on important business
immediately after his arrival. Mr. M. R. Jayakar of the Bombay
Bar was therefore appointed in his place.
We entered upon our work on the 17th November 1919.
We examined the statements of over 1,700 witnesses and we
have selected for publication about 650 statements, which will be
found in the accompanying volumes of our report. The statements
excluded were mostly statements proving [ the] same class of acts.
Every admitted statement was verified by one of us and was
accepted only after we were satisfied as to the bona fides of the witness.
This does not apply to a few statements from Manianwala and
neighbourhood, which were mostly brought at our request by Mr.
Labh Singh, M. A., Bar-at-Law. Every such statement bears his
name at the foot thereof. No statement was accepted without
sufficient cross-examination of the witnesses.
It will be observed that many witnesses are men of position
and leaders in their own districts or villages.
It will be further observed that some of the witnesses have made
very serious allegations against officials. In each and every case the
witnesses were warned by us of the consequences of making those
allegations and they were admitted only when the witnesses adhered
to their statements, in spite of the knowledge of the risk they personal-
ly ran and the damage that may ensue to the cause by reason of
exaggeration or untruth. We have moreover rejected those statements
which could not be corroborated, although in some cases we were
inclined to believe the witnesses. Such for instance were the state-
ments regarding ill-treatment of women.
Needless to say that our inquiry was confined to the Martial
Law area and to the districts in which it was proclaimed. The princi-
pal places were personally visited by us. Thus Lahore, Amritsar,
Tarn Taran, Kasur, Gujranwala, Wazirabad, Nizamabad, Akalgarh,
Ramnagar, Hafizabad, Sangla Hill, Sheikhupura, Chuharkana,
Lyallpur, Gujrat, Malakwal and Sargodha were visited by some-
one of us. In most places large public meetings were held and the
public were invited to make their statements to us. The nature of
the evidence already recorded was placed before the meetings and
those who wished to challenge the accuracy of the statements made,
were invited to send in their statements even under pledge of confi-
dence if they so desired. No contradiction was received by us.
We have freely availed ourselves of the evidence led before the
Disorders Inquiry Committee in order to strengthen or correct
our conclusions. It may be mentioned that the vast majority of the
statements appended were received by us before Lord Hunter's
Committee began its sittings.
The majority of the statements were given in the vernaculars.
We have endeavoured to procure the most accurate translations,
but the statements appended to our report may be treated as original,
as we checked the witnesses through the translations and made
corrections or amendments ourselves, wherever necessary.
We have also studied the records of the trials by Martial Law
Commissioners or Summary Courts, in so far as they were available
to US, and we have studied the judicial records of several cases that
arose during the recruiting period and out of recruiting methods.
In conclusion we desire to place on record our great obliga-
tion to the leading men of every place we have visited and the many
workers in Lahore and elsewhere who have rendered valuable assis-
tance without which we could not have brought our labours to a
close within the time at our disposal.
We are,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
C. R. DAS
ABBAS S. TAYABJI
M. R. JAYAKAR
Report of the Commissioners Appointed by the Punjab Sub-committee of the Indian
National Congress
