390. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 24, 1934
CHI. MARY,
I was glad to hear from you so soon in reply to my post-
card. Jamnalalji is doing exceedingly well. The operation itself
was a prolonged affair because it had to do with the bony parts
of the ear and there were some tough bones to be chiselled and
hammered.
But the convalescence has been exceptionally easy.
He was allowed to walk yesterday and is almost on normal diet.
Even the stitches were taken off. That of course does not mean
that the bones where cuts were made were healed. That must
take some time, but not so much as the doctors had expected.
They say that the operation was successful and very cleverly done.
Mira had a sudden call from within.
One fine morning she
came to me and said that she felt an irresistible call to go to
England. I asked her, "when"; and she said, "as soon as I can
pack and go". I did not resist her. On the contrary I encouraged
her because I felt that it must do her good and be a rich expe-
rience, though she might be able to do nothing. I have confi-
dence that she will not make any serious blunder by talking
nonsense. She is too well-balanced to do that.
She does not
expect to be away for more than four months, but I have written
to her not to hurry back and that she should stay longer if it was
necessary. Her programme is very elaborate. She is leaving practi-
cally no friend unvisited and she is booked to go to Scotland also.
She has been sending long letters and she herself is more than
satisfied with the way she is being received. I fancy that she will
return in October. Is it not strange that the English climate is not
suiting her as well as the Indian climate! She told me that she
was freezing in Wales! If you want to see a sample of her very
long but interesting letters I will gladly send you a specimen.
I hope you are now thoroughly restored. Do you hear from
Duncan?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6026. Also C.W. 3355. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
