203. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
August 6, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I am sending you a cable today. It has not yet been sent because
I want to save a few shillings by codifying one or two words. Although
Millie told me that she had promised to send you a cable, I exercised
discretion by not sending a direct cable and leaving you to infer their
arrival from my cable to Daphtary. As she will be writing to you fully
about herself, I am not saying anything more in this letter. I enclose
statement which has undergone many corrections and amendments.
It is not yet in its final form nor is it intended to be for circulation. Lord
Ampthill is most cautious about these things. Whilst the negotiations
are going on, he does not want any public activity at this end. He will
meet General Smuts next Monday; we are to meet Lord Crewe next
Tuesday. Next week, therefore, will definitely decide the course of ac-
tion to be taken here. Your activity, however, need not be affected by
what is going on here, unless a definite settlement is arrived at; but even
if it is, I think you should take every advantage of your visit there to tra-
vel throughout India, see all the leaders and place the position before
them. In the event of a settlement being arrived at, it would not be bad
1 & 2 The office copy is damaged and some words are missing here.
3 & 4 These are not available.
for you to publish a pamphlet giving a history of Indian grievances
throughout South Africa. It may be somewhat after my green pamph-
let which I dare say you have before you. No matter how things go,
I gather from Millie that she would remain in London for about a
year. Personally, I think it is as well that she should do so. I assume
that you will be in India at least three months, and if necessary, you
may stay for the session of the Congress. All this, however, may have to
be altered as events ripen here. If there is no settlement, you can only
concentrate your energy on the Transvaal question, and not divert the
attention of the public by referring to other matters. I purposely re-
frained from sending you copies of letters from Lord Ampthill. I, how-
ever, send you copies of my letters to him. They will show you what is
happening here and what charges are being brought against us.
Your cable has been duly received. I hope you are being well treat-
ed by those with whom you come in contact, and that they have found
for you a suitable residence.
You should look up at the Bombay Gazette office, or at some of the
libraries, the Gazette dated the 13th July. It has a long editorial on the
struggle. The article almost seems to be inspired and is a personal appeal
to me to restrict my activity, too, in certain quarters only. It is a very
sympathetic article and you should try to read it. Miss Smith showed it
to me. The cutting I am sending to Johannesburg. By the way, when-
ever you get the time, you should try to see the public libraries there,
and make the acquaintance of Mr. Velinkar4, the great educationalist,
of whom I think I spoke to you. I am not sending you any note of
introduction to him because I hardly think you need any now.
This is how Mr. Dallow refers to you in his letter to the Yorkshire Daily
Observer: "Finding that all attempts to move the Imperial Government
1 Polak wrote in his letter of August 21: "The S[outh] A[frica] grievances pam-
phlet is already in MS. I wrote it in anticipation on board. Until a settlement, I
am absolutely barring out anything but the Transvaal trouble." The pamphlet was
published in October 1909 by G. A. Natesan, Madras, under the title: The Indians
of South Africa: Helots within the Empire and how they are treated. Polak wrote another
on the Transvaal problem entitled: The Tragedy of Empire: The Treatment of British
Indians in the Transvaal.
2 The Grievances of the British Indians in South Africa: An Appeal to the Indian
Public. Vide Vol. II, pp. 1-52.
3 Commenting upon the Indian struggle in the Transvaal and adverting to
Gandhiji, the journal had written that "if he gets in the hands of 'irresponsible
degenerates', he had better have remained in South Africa. . .we trust he may be better
advised than to throw in his lot with the class of agitator who now roams through
Great Britain and advocates he knows not what". The article was reproduced in
Indian Opinion, 11-9-1909.
4 Professor of English at Wilson College, Bombay, and later, at the Nizam's
College, Hyderabad. He was a friend of Gokhale.
9-22
on grounds of justice to redress their grievances have failed, the
Indian leaders have despatched one of their white sympathisers to India
in the hope, thereby, of awakening the attention of the Indian people to
their sufferings. The gentleman is an English Jew; an attorney by pro-
fession; in thought and habit a Hindu, and he is the only one appointed
on the Indian deputation whom the Transvaal Government was un-
able to arrest." From one point of view, what a libel that you should be
considered in thought and habit a Hindu! What would Kallenbach
say to this? And yet, from another standpoint, it is undoubtedly a com-
pliment. You may regard it as neither. Mr. Dallow has been writing,
I know, in the same strain to one of the members of Parliament. As I
am dictating this, I change my mind and will send the article to you
instead of to Kallenbach. You will like to read the whole of it and it
will be of no use in Johannesburg.
The Natal delegation is here, that is, Messrs Abdul Caadir, Anglia,
Bhayat and Badat. I enclose herewith draft statement prepared for the
Natal delegates. I am not responsible for reversing the order in which
the grievances should have appeared.
A splendid cablegram was received from Zanzibar by Sir
Mancherjee supporting the Transvaal struggle. Sir Mancherjee has
sent copies both to the Colonial and India Offices.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4981
