204. LETTER TO ASUTOSH SINHA 1
November 27, 1946
If the refugees had the required spirit of co-operation, it
would be possible. But it is a plant of slow growth and personal
courage does not come even from co-operation. It comes when it
does come, because it is a virtue which is its own reward. There-
fore, the principle that there should be volunteers who would go
to each one of the affected villages is perfectly sound. You may
have noticed that I have been giving effect to it myself and I
have made a beginning. Those who came with me from Seva-
gram are following suit. Whether they will prove themselves worthy
of the great trust reposed in them remains to be seen. That may
be said even about myself. Only I am not following anybody
but am the originator so far as I am concerned, of the idea.
Therefore, if you have any volunteers in view with the requisite
qualifications, please send me their names and addresses.
He did not want to make a public appeal, he explained, because the right
quality of men and women would not come in answer to an advertisement.
They have to be persons of sterling worth and equally high
courage. . .1 full of ahimsa, i.e., respect for the Muslims. It would
be a pity if these volunteers started with distrust. Real courage is
based on trust which is the surest foundation for it.
Besides, if he allowed volunteers, who might be attracted by the glam-
our of his presence to inundate Noakhali, it would create unhealthy excite-
ment and cause the authorities and the local Muslims unnecessary trepidation.
To make an individual act non-violently he has to be put absolutely at his
ease first. Meticulously correct conduct on their part would put the local
Muslims and the Bengal Government on their honour. He concluded:
I am watching what the Government are doing. People
cannot be compelled to return to their villages. It would be a dis-
astrous experiment in my opinion.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book 11, pp. 62-
