330. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
CAPE TOWN,
Wednesday, Jeth Vad 3 [June 10, 1914]
DEAR BROTHER,
When Ramachandra was about to go to the forest, King
Dasharatha asked him to ignore his [Dasharatha's] promise to Kai-
keyi and not to go, breach of promise though this might mean.
Ramachandra disregarded this desire born of the common
worldly attachment for the son and went to dwell in the forest,
thus showing true reverence for his father, and so made
Dasharatha's and his own name immortal. Harishchandra, by
selling his wife and showing himself ready even to bring down the
sword on Rohit's neck, proved his devotion to his wife and his
love for the son. Prahlad, by disobeying his father's order, ren-
dered a service to him and brought about his deliverance.
Mirabai1, by leaving Kumbha Rana, turned the Rana himself
into her disciple. Dayanand ran away from his parents, break-
ing betrothal already solemnized, and even gave the slip to the
men who had been sent after him; in this way he showed his
devotion to his mother and father. Lord Buddha went away as
his young wife lay asleep.
We find many similar examples. Pondering over them, we
must, in the difficult situation in which we are placed, do what
seems the right thing from the point of view of true ethics. In
the case of Shravana, the finer, intangible form of service hap-
pened to flow in the same channel as outward, physical service.
Not infrequently, therefore, we fail to discover from his example
what the right course should be. He who habitually follows the
path of truth will know the right way at the crucial moment. If
the things such as poems about disinterestedness, which we read
are of no help to us when faced with moral dilemmas, we will
have read them in vain, parrot-like. We could not have reflec-
ted over them. If, despite our having read the Gita, it does not
come to our help at the last moment, we might as well have not
read it. This is the reason why I have always said: "Read
little, but reflect over the little that you read, understand its
significance and be ready to put it into practice."
It is only when we cease to be selfishly attached to those we
love that the heart feels true compassion and renders service to
them. To the extent that I have grown free of such attachment
for Ba, I am able to serve her better. The Buddha, by leaving
his parents, brought deliverance to them as well. Gopichand,
by his renunciation, displayed the purest love for his mother.
In the same way, you will be serving your parents by strengthen-
ing your character and cultivating spotless morality. When your
soul has grown pure, it cannot but produce a corresponding
effect on all those whom you love.
[With due regards,
MOHANDAS]
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana
