199. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
SERVANTS OF INDIA [SOCIETY],
POONA,
March 2 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have before me your two letters. I have not left out a single
week. But when I was physically unable to write, being engaged here,
there or elsewhere, I asked someone to write to you. I am happy,
am progressing, am strong spiritually and becoming stronger physically
but I hate the rush and the constant moving about. Yet it is necessary,
I feel. Before I settle down I have to see certain things.
I was in Bolpur last week but Mr. Gokhale's sudden death brought
me back to Poona. What an end ! He died in harness. He was in
full possession of all his faculties to the last and was working away.
I was with him the Sunday previous to his death, which took place
on the Friday following. Well, I am without a helmsman. But it is well.
He lives in the spirit and his spirit is enthroned in my heart.
I have not joined the Society. Yet I pleaded for admission but there
were differences which could not be bridged. So I am to travel about
and see things for myself and study. This I shall do.
1 Of G. K. Gokhale on february 19, 1915
2 The servants of India Society
203
Meanwhile I am trying to settle the boys somewhere, possibly near
Bombay, i.e., 150 miles from it— in Ahmedabad. Maganlal is now
in Ahmedabad looking into affairs [sic]. He has risen to the occasion
fully. I retain the idea that there is something in the atmosphere here
which enables you to be easily spiritual. In spite of the rush I am going
through there is peace within. May such peace be also yours.
I was going to concoct a letter to the Viceroy about you in
conjunction with Andrews when I was called away, as I have said
before. I hope to try again on reaching Bolpur. If I fail, I can only
advise that you should stay in London where you are. Better to put
up with the ills we have than to risk having greater ones whilst trying
to avoid what we have. No happiness obtainable from without. You
may study agriculture there. I can understand that. And is there not
a better chance of our meeting earlier if you are there than if you
were anywhere else? Surely that thought should rivet you to England.
You will be surprised that Mrs. Gandhi has developed a passion for
you. She thinks of you at every turn. She thinks that our life is incomplete
without you. This is not my favourable construction method but this
is how it is happening with her just now.
It surprises me with what tenacity she holds on to a purely fruitarian
diet and mostly uncooked. I am living on purely uncooked fruitarian
food. The meal today consisted of 3 bananas, 1¼, 2 small cucumbers,
2 tomatoes and 2 ripe figs and a few green grapes. The latter two
were brought by friends only today. You will notice absence of ground-
nuts. These I omitted only today because I had a full dose yesterday.
I am always better when I have only a few ground-nuts. Of course
I am having no physical exercise worth naming. I fancy that you too
would have been satisfied with such food. I am going to take up other
salad vegetables if necessary in order to compete with the poorest.
I think that you should ring up Lady Cecilia and inquire whether
she received the letters you sent. They must have missed her. There
is no other explanation. In any case the least that you owe her is
to inquire through the phone or walk over to them. I should do that
most decidedly.
Now I think I have given you enough. I shall resume the chat
next week.
Yet best to address letters clo Servants of India Society. They will
thereby reach me more quickly wherever I am.
1 Lady Cecilia Roberts, wife of Charles Robert, Under Secretary of State for
India
With love,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
