365. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
NANDI HILLS,
May 22, 1927
MY DEAR BHRRR AND PROUD FATHER,
I must dictate this although it is a love letter, as I better
conserve my energy if I dictate stretched on my bed. There is
nothing however to be concerned about my health, as I am
making steady progress though it will be some time before I re-
gain the strength that I lost in the twinkling of an eye. It may
not be possible to regain all that I have lost; but the doctors are
of opinion that much of it, it is perfectly possible to get back.
Please give my congratulations to Sohaila and Professor
Muhammed Habib. Though I cannot be with you in the body,
I shall be with you in the spirit. I wish them both a happy life
of useful service to the country. Sohaila must remember that she
is not going to be married to become a mere doll and become lost
to the country. But she would be expected, like her grey-headed
XXXIII-23
young father, who is daily getting younger, to serve the country
with the same devotion that her young father is doing; and if her
husband is at all lukewarm, to touch him with her spirit and
make him joint partner in such service, as he would be joint
partner in all the joys and sorrows of life. It is no use my even
wishing that there should be no sorrow and all joy. It would be a
flat and dull picture without any beautiful shades. There may be
joys but they must be relieved by occasional sorrows. So my wish
and hope is that God will give them a fair measure of joys of
life if He must also give them doses of sorrows to remind them that
He is not to be forgotten in the midst of life's joys.
I was wondering what you were doing and how you fared
in Rangoon. You have kept me without a letter now for a very
long time. I suppose it is all deliberate and out of considerate-
ness for a bed-ridden friend. Raihana also has followed suit. But
you should know that neither your letter nor hers can possibly be
a tax on my energy.
Give my love to the bride and the bridegroom and all the
friends and members of the family who may have gathered there
to celebrate the coming event and accept the same for yourself
and Mrs. Abbas.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 9558
