289. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
June 3, 1937
CHI. MUNNALAL,
Today I am trying to answer several letters of yours. Try
to analyse and understand the reasons why you worry about
Kanchan. She is now well settled and studies as much as she
can. She couldn't be in a better place than where she is at
present. What then is the point in worrying about her? Is it
that you wish to live with her? If that is so, there is no real
cause for your worry. It is simply a question of your desire. If
you are trying to curb that desire, we should consider whether
you ought to do so.
The villagers live on Jowar and besan . You will never be able
to copy them in that. One should know one's limitations. Hence,
the reasoning behind your decision to resume solid food is wrong.
Whether from the economic or the moral point of view, which is
economical in the long run for you—to eat solid food and fall ill
or live on milk which is costlier and work regularly?
There is only one golden key in being able to live a true life.
One should plunge into whatever work of service comes to one
unsought, surrendering everything to Shri Krishna, and being
wholly engrossed in the work. Even the thoughts in one's mind
should be about how to complete the task and not whether the
work is proper or not.
That we have employed a Bhangi and are building a road is
certainly a form of service. We are in a position to make people
spend money in this way. If we don't use our advantage we would
prove ourselves fools. And, besides, the money is given by the
zamindar. That we thus make him take interest in the village,
though it be indirectly, is no small thing. We need not post-
pone the cleaning of a village and wait for the village people them-
selves to start doing something. If we can melt the heart of the
zamindar in every village, our task would be made very much
easier. However, we have to keep in view all the limbs of
society and the limits of each would be the limits of our strength.
My wish to live alone in Segaon did not mean that it was
not possible to enlarge the field of service so long as other people
lived there. I only wanted to see what one man could do, to
see for my own sake whether I could carry on the work by my-
self. The plan could not be carried out and others joined me.
I must then use their services and they should give them.
The relations with Jamnalalji should not be allowed to be-
come an obstacle. If they make us soft and comfort-loving,
we would fall off like dried leaves, and that deservedly. If we
think of nothing but service every hour of the day and strive to
remain pure, people will understand us even though a multi-
millionaire may be living with us.
I see from your letters that you spend most of your time in
dreaming, and that prevents your work from shining out. Your
motive is pure, but you start running before you have learnt
to walk and even while running you dream of flying. The result
is that you not only do not run or fly but cannot even walk.
During your illness you could somehow carry on your work, but
can you be satisfied with that?
I have now answered all your letters. I kept the letters
in front of me and went on consulting them. I am sure you do
not want me to reply sentence by sentence. The foregoing replies
will help you to resolve all your difficulties. I would, however,
advise you to stop thinking in this manner altogether and to
complete fully whatever task you have undertaken. If you do
so, all your problems will solve themselves by and by without
any effort on your part and you will be filled with such happi-
ness as you have never known before.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8579. Also C.W. 7017. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
