275. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 7, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter. You must take only that service from
Dr. Ray which he can freely give from his heart. Khadi has
ultimately to stand on its own merits and legs. It is well if we
can get real co-operation from our great men. But it must
be well also if we do not. We must rely upon the eternal truth
that nothing on this earth that is intrinsically sound and is
represented by a living force can possibly die.
Your difficulties I can understand well. And if I had a bag-
ful of coins I could send them to you by express parcel in order
to relieve your pecuniary distress; but I have not much hope of
getting anything either. What I am able to collect in these parts
will have to be used for development here. Therefore the only
way to give pecuniary help to Bengal is for me to go to Bengal
when you are ready and tour to collect.
This year is to go without, and the programme here will have
to be carried over to next year, almost up to the end of March
with an interval of a fortnight at the Ashram for Ramdas' marriage.
I therefore want you to become accustomed to think that you
must manage our business, as it may now be called, with what
capital we have. Therefore, I would like you, Kshitish Babu and
others who are associated with you to confer together and evolve
a programme which will save you from all worry and trouble.
Once we recognize our limitations we shall cease to fret.
From your letter, I gather that there will be no office in
Calcutta proper and that all your work would be done as from
Sodepur. Will there be a store in Calcutta, or not even that?
Personally, I would not mind if you thought that there should
be no store in Calcutta, that is to say, that there should be none
if it was not self-supporting.
I am still keeping fit. I shall be in and about Bangalore up to
the 28th of this month, if there is no peremptory call from Gujarat
owing to the floods. Pressure is being put upon me to go there.
But till Vallabhbhai wants me, I shall resist the pressure. For I
know that I can do nothing by my mere presence if I cannot do
active work.
Yours,
BABU SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KHADI PRATISHTHAN
SODEPUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19797
