45. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION CAMP,
December 1, 1943
THE SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY (HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,
I write this in continuation of my letter of November
16, 1943. As the Government are aware, Dr. Nayyar's brother's
wife who had an abdominal operation for delivery, died leav-
ing behind a week-old infant. The only female member of the
family is Dr. Nayyar's mother, a widowed old lady, who is a
chronic invalid. Dr. Nayyar received from her brother in New
Delhi the following wire on November 16, 1943:
Proposing sending you baby with Prakash, Government permitting.
Wire approval applying Government you yourself too.
To this she sent the following reply on November 17, 1943:
Just received wire. Permission improbable. Hence advise Prakash,
Satya alternatively staying with mother till baby out of danger.
She has had no reply yet from her brother. But she has
now heard from her uncle's daughter, Dr. Prakash Nayyar, who
is Assistant Superintendent at the Bettiah Raj Hospital (Bihar).
She went to Delhi specially for the purpose of helping the be-
reaved family. She says, she cannot stay any length of time in
Delhi, and is strongly of opinion that the best place for the
motherless baby is near Dr. Nayyar. Dr. Satyavati Malhotra
(Satya) is also a cousin and is serving in the Lady Dufferin
Hospital, Quetta. A postcard was received from her on 29th
ultimo saying that she cannot get leave to go to Delhi till Janu-
ary next. Dr. Nayyar tells me, she would gladly take charge
of the baby, if the Government can see their way to grant
the necessary permission. Naturally the responsibility regarding
the baby would be solely hers. It would be the best way out
of the difficulty. If, however, Government cannot grant the
permission, the next best thing would be to grant Dr. Nayyar a
brief parole (say, two months') to enable her to look after the
baby during the initial period and make arrangements for its
future care. Dr. Nayyar has been placed here, according to
the Government communique of 30th August, 1942, for my
sake. She has been medical attendant to my wife and me for
several years. She and her brother are like our children. There-
fore, even her temporary absence will be for us a deprivation.
Dr. Gilder was brought here during my fast. His aid is, of
course, inestimable both on account of his great knowledge and
experience. But for obvious reasons he cannot replace Dr.
Nayyar. Moreover she is effectively dividing the secretarial
work with her brother. I know it is open to the Government
to take away both the doctors from us. I simply mention the
facts as they are, to help the Government to a correct decision.
Whatever the inconvenience to my wife and to me, we would rather
that Dr. Nayyar got the parole if she cannot have the baby here.
As the suspense is great, and as the life of the baby hangs
in the balance, may I request an early decision? If the Bombay
77-14
Government have not the power of decision in their hands, this
letter may be kindly treated as addressed to the Government of
India and the decision obtained through the phone.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Chief Commissioner's Office, Bombay, File No. 1110(108), p. 13. Cour-
tesy : Government of Maharashtra
