126. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
110, FIELD STREET,
DURBAN,
September 11, 1913
THE SECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 21st ultimo in reply to mine of the 15th idem regarding the
regulations framed under the Immigrants' Restriction Act.
On behalf of the Anjuman, I respectfully submit that most
of the objections raised by my Anjuman are to principles and not
to details. Lapse of time will certainly fail to affect principles.
That certificates of identity whose applicability is limited to a period
of one year would be of infinitely less value than the perma-
nent certificates that were issued under the old Natal Act is a fact
of which the value will not be affected either way by lapse of
time. Nor will the fact of the imposition of the fee of £1 for even
interprovincial visiting permits be affected by time. In the humble
opinion of my committee, the objections raised on its behalf
merit early and favourable consideration.
With reference to the appointment of Immigration Officers as
members of Appeal Boards, their inclusion is open to serious objec-
tion in spite of their not deciding all the individual cases them-
selves in the first instance. They are the officials who are res-
ponsible to the Government for administering the Act in accor-
dance with their instructions and they are the officials who will,
my committee presumes, issue instructions to their subordinates.
They, therefore, could not be considered unbiased judges applying
their minds without preconceived ideas to cases before them.
My committee, therefore, strongly urges that the appointment of
these officials should be cancelled in order to give the public inte-
rested in the proceedings of the Appeal Boards a sense of secu-
rity and to inspire that public with confidence in the decision of
these Boards.
I have, etc.,
CHAIRMAN,
ZOROASTRIAN ANJUMAN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5858
