108. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 24, 1936
CHI. PREMA,
There is no harm in undertaking the work for the duration
of the Congress session.
Your complaint regarding the paper is justified. I hope
this paper will satisfy you.
You should go on educating public opinion about flour,
rice and oil. Though these articles cost more, they are cheap
in the end. We are building up a new economics. Conditions
differ from country to country. And, moreover, the rich and
the poor have their own economics. Please, therefore, do not
lose heart.
I know about bajra. However good the seed may be, if
the soil, water, etc., are not suitable, the seed loses its virtue.
Here is a four-line Foreword.
[Be] Khudai Khidmatgar is a book that ought to be trans-
lated in all the languages of India. It has already come out
in Gujarati, Urdu and Hindi. It will probably be translated
into other languages also. It is in the fitness of things, there-
fore, that a Marathi translation is being published; and the
greater cause of pleasure is the fact that the translation has been
done by a dedicated woman worker. She deserves compli-
ments for her commendable venture. I hope that the people of
Maharashtra will read with loving devotion the lives of the
two Khudai Khidmatgars or Servants of God.
M. K. GANDHI 4
To be an atheist till one comes to have faith in God is
as reasonable as one's trying to cremate the body of a man
who has entered samadhi, assuming him dead till one can be
sure that he is alive.
If bhavana and shraddha can be distinguished from each
other, one benefits by joining the prayer with a sincere heart
even in the absence of bhavana, in order to acquire shraddha.
If we are living among primitive people, instead of propa-
gating our religion we should propagate the religion of moral-
ity. As and when the doors of their hearts open, they may
choose whichever religion they like.
We shall have given them
general information about all the religions.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10382. Also C.W. 6820. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
