345. LETTER TO NIRMALA B. MASHRUWALA
October 7, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,
You must have got my postcards. All who go to Nasik or
write to a prisoner there should remember what I have explain-
ed. Anybody who goes to Thana or writes to someone there
may also make use of it.
I got two letters from Kishorelal and one from Gomati.
I need not say anything about the propriety or otherwise of
the fast. There was certainly some defect in it, but the fast was
absolutely necessary. It may be regarded as the ultimate step
in non-violence. I am now gradually regaining my strength. In
fact I have regained most of it. The weight, which had gone
down to 93. lb has now risen to 99. Before the fast it was
101. I am sure that on the whole the fast will benefit my health.
My daily food consists of 2 lb. of milk, nine oranges or mosambis
juice of pomegranates or grapes, and gourd or tomato soup once
a day. I walk in the morning and in the evening for a total of
an hour and a half without getting tired, write quite a large
number of letters, and spin at least 200 rounds, going up to as
far as 40 counts. Ba is allowed to stay with me during the day.
Devdas is permitted to come and see me.
It is necessary that we should spin as fine yarn as we can.
I also admit the moral blemish in wearing clothes of fine yarn,
but fine cloth has also some benefits. It is very necessary from
an artistic point of view. In the attempt to spin fine yarn, one
makes many discoveries. It makes for deftness of the hand. In
the past the people were forced to spin fine yarn. Even as atone-
ment for that, some of us ought to spin fine yarn as part of the
yajna of spinning, so that the yarn spun by them might be avail-
able whenever fine cloth is found to be absolutely necessary. If
we have to pay the full labour charges for fine yarn, the cost of
such cloth would be exceedingly high.
It was not proper for Kishorelal to have insisted on spinning
a thousand rounds during the week of the fast. He should have
recognized his limitations in this matter. One learns real humi-
lity by doing so. One may, if one wishes, do labour which is
easier even than spinning. But those who cannot do any manual
work can also serve through their thoughts and writings. He is a
thief who has hands but does not use them to do any work.
I like the verse as amended: "I wish I could always employ
my all in relieving some creatures' pain."
Kishorelal knows that Nath had some doubt about the moral
propriety of my fast. At my request, Nath came and discussed
the matter a little with me during the fast. I do not know
whether he was finally convinced.
Rabindranath went the furthest he could this time. We
have come very close to each other. I don't think I have left
out anything.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2888. Courtesy: Nirmalabehn
Shroff
