403. LETTER TO C. ROBERTS
16, TREBOVIR ROAD,
LONDON, S. W.,
October 25, 1914
DEAR MR. ROBERTS,
I have to thank you for your prompt reply of the 23rd instant.
The correspondence between us was read to the meeting referred
to in my letter of the 22nd instant and with but two dissentients,
the meeting passed a resolution expressing deep regret over your
letter under reply and authorising me to negotiate for a settlement
on the lines of my last letter.
I fear very much that there seems to be a complete misunder-
standing between the India Office and my Committee as to its
functions and the relative positions of Col. Baker and the Com-
mittee. The issue of the circular which was drafted by Mr. Mallet
and myself, and of which I enclose copy herewith, was simultaneous
with the appointment of Col. Baker as the Commanding Officer.
That circular expressly contemplates exclusive recruiting by my
Committee. And up to the time of the unfortunate rupture, re-
cruiting has been exclusively done by it with the knowledge of
Col. Baker. It is, therefore, hardly fair to suggest that I am now
even challenging Col. Baker's right to recruit— a right which never
belonged to him. Indeed, if I may say so, we have a right to com-
plain that, whilst we were trying our best to heal the breach,
circulars inviting recruits were issued by Col. Baker and even
the Students' Department intervened and more or less for-
mally wrote to those who were likely to respond to Col. Baker's
efforts. These attempts suggest that there is no intention on his
part to retain my Committee's co-operation. It would certainly
have been more becoming, if he had waited for the result of the
negotiations carried on by me for a settlement. If, therefore, in spite
of resumption of duties by the Corps, Col. Baker were to continue
recruiting, the Corps would lose its national and voluntary charac-
ter and his action would be contrary to the circular referred to by
me and the practice based upon it. It would moreover be con-
trary to the spirit of your letter of the 18th August wherein the
signatories to the offer were invited to form a committee. The least
that is, in my opinion, due to the Committee, is, in the event of a
settlement, to be allowed to retain its exclusive right to recruit.
Your letter further suggests that it would be impracticable for
Col. Baker to accept the principle of consultation with my Com-
mittee in matters affecting the internal administration of the
Corps. It has not, I feel sure, been Col. Baker's experience hither-
to. He has not, for instance, found it impracticable to seek and
value the co-operation and advice of the Committee rendered
through me as to the method of managing the Commissariat, the
way of dealing with the difficult question of different sections want-
ing different foods as also of dealing with the equally difficult
question of uniforms. It is not suggested by me that upon matters
of rendering service and doing work my Committee might be con-
sulted. I am well aware of the fact that, in the forms of con-
tract voluntarily signed by us, we have undertaken to obey all law-
ful commands of our commanding officer. But we have not under-
taken to subscribe to the exercise by that officer of functions that
we have all along understood do not belong to him. I may be
allowed to state that I have before now known how to obey
and I hope that, if it becomes my good fortune to serve during
this crisis in any capacity whatsoever for which I may be fitted,
I shall not be wanting. And I think I may say the same of my
fellow-workers. Throughout this unfortunate affair, their one de-
sire has been to fulfil the letter as also the spirit of the contract
forms signed by them.
I have already written at much greater length than I had
desired to. My Committee and I are very anxious to see a settle-
ment. And as I know that nothing conduces to a mutual under-
standing so much as personal conversation, may I avail myself
of your offer to visit me again when necessary. I am under strict
medical orders not to leave my bed at least for a fortnight. I
shall, therefore, be deeply grateful, if you could find time to come
over.
Any time and day will suit me.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten office copy signed by Gandhiji: S. N. 6069B
