170. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
April 12, 1914
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your letter of the 9th is petty, touchy and spiteful. It has made
me sad and shows that all your so-called reforms there are simply
superficial. What you call a circular letter is no circular letter. It was
addressed to you and Polak. In your letter of the 8th, you complain
of absence of my letter and in yours of the 9th you resent the very
letter which explains absence of anything from me. Polak went for
me for not writing and not getting Miss Schlesin to write about Mrs.
Gandhi's health. You, Polak and Manilal are sufficiently interested in
her health to want to know about it daily; hence the letter from Miss
180
Schlesin and the instructions that she herself should write as often
as possible. There would have been no such letter had Mrs. Gandhi
not been sick. Now tell me wherein I was wrong in sending you what
you call a circular letter. Do you see my point and your pettiness?
You are entirely right when you say you are jealous (and wrongly so)
of Miss Schlesin and Andrews. Because she wrote the letter, it became
an offence to you. And as if your letter, warning me not to send you
a circular letter was not enough, you must perforce remark underneath
Miss Schlesin's letter, "Please do not send me such circular letters
henceforth". You should be ashamed of having done this.
Manilal writes saying that you were surprised that I should have
asked him to retire even [if] you might not have. Why surprised? You
and Manilal are not equals. Manilal is a lad having to form his character.
If he wants to cultivate the habit of early rising, it is essential that
he retires early. Your hours may not be regular. Manilal not being a
businessman need never have irregular hours. And I should have thought
that you would encourage the boy to keep strictly regular hours even
though you may not. I certainly do not expect the boys to keep awake
with me because I retire late. If Manilal has misunderstood the position,
you may explain it to him. I feel the same thing about his food. If
he wishes to keep to a particular course of diet, he should not change
with you. If the entirely fruitarian experiment had agreed with him,
you should have allowed him to keep to it and made the complicated
changes only for yourself
Mrs. Gandhi is much better but an event happened yesterday which
once more proved what I have told you, namely, that she has both
the devil and the divine in her in a most concentrated form. She made
yesterday a most venomous remark : "Who has opened Devdas's
drawer?" suggesting that Jeki had tampered with it. She spits fire on
Jeki. I gently remarked that I had opened it. "Why?" was the growling
query. I said, "In order to see whether I could find a sheet for you."
"That does not contain sheets," was the retort, so much as to convey
to me that I had not opened the drawer but I was telling a fib to
shield Jeki. This was too much. And I again gently but rebukingly
remarked that she was sinful in her thought and that her disease was
largely due to her sins. Immediately she began to howl. I had made
her leave all the good food in order to kill her, I was tired of her,
I wished her to die, I was a hooded snake. The manner of the delivery
of these remarks was most vicious. I told her even though she was
ill, I could not pity her in her sins. The more I spoke the more vicious
she became. I kept completely self-possessed. I apologized to her and
told her that henceforth even to that extent I would not remonstrate
with her. Nor would I. She has a character and she has none. She
is the most venomous woman I have ever met. She never forgets, never
forgives. She is quite normal today. But yesterday's was one of the
richest lessons of my life. All the charges she brought against me she
undoubtedly means. She has contrary emotions. I have nursed her as
a son would nurse his mother. But my love has not been sufficiently
intense and selfless to make her change her nature. What wonder if
Anglia and others cannot respond to my skin-deep love? What wonder
if they misunderstood me? Truly she has so far been my best teacher.
She teaches me emptiness of the world, she teaches me patience,
forgiveness, greater need for self-sacrifice, for love and charity. The
incident leaves me, I hope, a better, wiser, more loving man if it also
leaves me sadder. Yes, a man who wishes to work with detachment
must not marry. I cannot complain of her being a particularly bad wife
or bad woman. On the contrary no other woman would probably have
stood the changes in her husband's life as she has. On the whole she
has not thwarted me and has been most exemplary. But how can a
leopard change his spots? And yesterday's incident would probably not
have happened either in an ordinary household. My point is that you
cannot attach yourself to a particular woman and yet live for humanity.
The two do not harmonise. That is the real cause of the devil waking
in her now and again. Otherwise he might have remained in her asleep
and unnoticed.
I wish you would not just now repeat walks like the Pretoria walk
but allow Manilal to follow the even tenor of his life.
With love,
Yours.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
