478. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
BANGALORE,
January 8, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
After completing a letter to Ba, I am writing this to you. It
is now past four in the afternoon. It is my weekly Silence Day.
We are in Bangalore today. Tomorrow there is a meeting of the
Panch to consider the demand of the [Ahmedabad] mills for a
reduction in the workers' wages. Shankerlal [Banker], Gulzarilal
and others have already arrived.
The mill-owners will arrive to-
morrow. I have told them that I would be able to give five hours
for the meeting.
We are leaving for Malabar tomorrow night.
The pressure of work remains heavy. But I keep good
health. Subba Rao came and examined me yesterday. He was
pleased. The blood-pressure was 155-100. This is excellent. At
the moment it is expected that Thakkar Bapa will meet me in
Calicut on the 16th.
I am staying here in a State building the same where I
had put up before. The people's enthusiasm is great. The Dewan
came and saw me. He talked a great deal about you. He has
sent his salaams to you. He shows very great love.
I had a letter from . . He wanted my permission to sell
off his car. Soon after, I got a wire from Thakkar Bapa, informing
me that he was really willing to sell it.
I, therefore, gave my
consent, although I didn't understand the position at all. In such
matters I depend entirely on you.
I, therefore, often follow the
example of Ekalavya. He made a clay image of Dronacharya and
learnt archery by practising before it so that he could become
Arjuna's equal.
I form a mental image of you and consult it.
Assuming that you would advise me to give my consent in this
matter, I sent a wire saying yes.
Napoleon has been very much affected by the death of
Kunvarji's wife. I see this from his loving reply to my letter of
condolence. I have written to him again. I see from . . .'s
letter that he is not happy. I have asked him what the
reason is.
Munshi has resumed practice. You must have read about
Jivraj.
Dr. Bidhan may be said to have returned from the jaws of
death. He tells me so in reply to a wire which I had sent to him.
A bone is fractured.
He will have to be in bed for some 15 days
at least.
I had a letter from Mama in which he has referred to a
letter of yours. He says that it is not practicable now to collect
separate contributions and keep separate accounts for the
Harijan work, nor will the people give such contributions. Hence,
for Navasari, Godhra and other centres for which separate funds
and accounts were being maintained, budgets within our means
have been passed and it has been decided to obtain the money
from the funds of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The control of the
institutions concerned will not be changed. The only change will
be that they will receive reasonable grants and will run under
the supervision of the Harijan Sevak Sangh.
Their indepen-
dent existence will in no way be endangered. Mama has volun-
teered to devote himself wholly to this work for the present.
I
plainly refuse to guide anybody.
I don't feel inclined in my
heart to do so. If you have any questions to ask or wish to
know more about the Harijan Sevak Sangh, you can write to me.
I don't know what I should tell you. If, however, you give me
the slightest indication as to what you want, I will give, that is,
send all the required information. You need have no fear that
I myself will write out the reply.
I spare my hands and brain
unnecessary exertion and economize time in doing my work.
Devdas has been released before his time. There was a wire
from him. He will of course come and see me.
The wire was
sent from Ahmedabad. Most probably he will pay a visit to Ba.
Manilal and Sushila write to me. His affairs are all right.
Keshu also has got a good job. Ramdas is very much upset. He
can enjoy no peace of mind at all.
It seems that Kishorelal is steadily improving. Brijkrishna
has survived. He can walk a little now. Jamnalal has a cold and
so on. Shankerlal thinks that his health is certainly not too good.
But his weight has increased and he has now reached about
200 lb.
Om and Kisan are quite well. And so is Mirabehn, of
course.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 59-61
