407. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
Friday, Jeth Sud 6, 1984 [May 25, 1928]
CHI. KISHORELAL,
I have read both your letters carefully.
What I said, and the manner in which I said it, does not
seem to have been correctly reported to you.
There is nothing new in the changes I have suggested. I
have not made any change in the definition of an Ashram inmate.
The only significance of the change is that we should strive hard
to follow the ideal which we have always kept before us.
I never put pressure on anyone, and have never wished to do
so. I have recently refused to do that on two friends who wish
to run separate kitchens for themselves. I, therefore, see no com-
pulsion in regard to anything. I employ earnest argument (with
love) and try to explain everything clearly.
I am of the view that those who have joined the Ashram
should conform to the moral growth or changes in the Ashram.
They cannot say that they will obey certain rules only and that,
if new rules are made and applied, it would be breach of contract.
No institution can continue to exist on that condition. There
can be fixity only about concrete matters, such as salary, period,
etc. At the Ashram, however, generally speaking, we have no
restrictions other than moral.
Even so, we decided to enforce the rule about brahmacharya
only after all the inmates had been invited to discuss it and every-
one had accepted its necessity. I did say, when reading out this
rule, that those who could not or did not wish to observe it,
could leave the Ashram.
The common kitchen is functioning satisfactorily at present.
I shall not inflict anything more on you. I have written
even this unwillingly. Really speaking, you should not, in your
present illness and from that distance, strain yourself thinking about
the changes taking place here. Maybe it is morally wrong for you
to do so.
How are you now? There is of course no question of your
staying at Santa Cruz. You are fit enough to come here. You
can take your treatment even here. The climate here is certainly
better than there. If, however, you decide to come, I hope you
will not think of going away again.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11802
