218. LETTER TO VALLABHRAM VAIDYA
SODEPUR,
December 4, 1945
BHAI VALLABHRAM,
I have your letter. After I return to Sevagram and settle
down there you may certainly come if you wish.
Maybe you are not acquainted with my views as they have
progressed. They were of course implicit in all my writings but
of late they have become more explicit. I have no longer any
interest in marriages, whether within the caste, inter-caste or
even interprovincial. Therefore, so far as possible, I do not say
anything anywhere on the subject of marriages. As it is I hardly
ever attended any and now I have firmly stopped attending them
altogether. What I believe is that if we want to preserve what-
ever is good in varnashrama every Hindu has to become not only
a Shudra but an atishudra1, and regard himself as such. And as
a true indication of it marriages should really take place only
between atishudras and the so-called other varnas. These marriages
also should be not for the sake of indulgence but so as to observe
restraint and keeping in mind the restrictions it implies.
Now I can send my blessings to Chi. Ramakant and Chi. Tara.
May they be happy, live in restraint and may their alliance be
doubly devoted to service. Often after a marriage instead of one
sevak multiplying into two both the parties drop out of service.
This is my experience. There are exceptions, and may this union
be one such. To that end pure restraint on your part will prove
helpful to them in every field.
The Medical Board has not been lax; it has to do work that
is vast in scope. Besides, they are contemplating a co-ordination of
the various systems of medicine; so the matter it seems will take
some time. Let me also add that although I have a great regard
for Ayurveda my experience with those practising it has not been
very good. But, at the moment this is beside the point. We
shall discuss this further when you can find time to come over.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
