28. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
BANGALORE,
Jeth Vad 5 [June 20, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I get your letters regularly. I feel happy. Whether the cause
of this regularity is the regret I expressed in Bombay or the new
broom in the form of Sushila is a question which only you two
can answer. If my regret is the cause, may the memory of that
regret remain fresh with you for ever, and if the new broom is
the cause, let it never grow old.
My letter is late by a week. I will be more careful hereafter.
Your regularity will keep me careful. When elders become old, the
young can keep them vigilant. Perhaps you know that, had Gorakh
not proved stronger than Machchhendra, the latter would have
fallen. If you do not know about this, ask me; I will explain the
story in my next letter, and shall have a good subject to write upon.
I am very glad to hear that Sushila has put on weight. Has
her deafness decreased somewhat? It is also good news she has
started type-composing. She can become capable of managing a
press. A girl of 17 or 18 can train herself in no time. The bur-
den of household chores on her should not increase. For that, if
you keep your food requirements simple as you used to do for-
merly, a great deal of time will be saved. Food should be cook-
ed only once and that too should be very simple, so that the kit-
chen may not occupy all one's time. Manilal knows all this art,
if, that is, he has not forgotten it. A woman is not born merely
to cook meals. Since cooking must be done, both [husband and
wife] should take a hand in it. If they do and work in a spirit
of service, they can easily discover many ways of saving time.
You may take as much as you can digest from all this that I
have written and leave the rest.
I shall certainly try to write a letter by every mail, but re-
member that the translation of the Gita which I have given you
must also be counted among my letters. That translation is in-
tended for people like you, and now it is being done at a faster
rate.
Let me know if you do not understand or like its language,
so that I may be more careful and may revise that part which you
find not easy to understand. This will help me as much as it will
help you.
I am glad to know that you continue to read the Gita. You
have sent your photograph to Ramdas. It does not seem that you
have sent one here.
I shall respect your wish that no one else should read your
letters, but they contain nothing private. Everyone naturally
wants to hear news of you; if, therefore, you wish that no one
should read your letters, you should from time to time write a
letter to Chhaganlal which all people in the Ashram may read.
All the same, I have respected your wishes and not passed on
your letters to others.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4721
