232. LETTER TO "THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE"
NADIAD,
April 15, 1918
TO
THE EDITOR
THE CHRONICLE
BOMBAY
SIR,
The publication of the summary of the Commissioner's
Gujarati address to the Kaira cultivators necessitates a reply in
justice to the latter as also the workers.
I have before me a verbatim report of the speech. It is more
direct than the summary in the laying down of the Government
policy. The Commissioner's position is that the revenue authorities'
decision regarding suspension is final. They may and do receive
and hear complaints from the ryots, but the finality of their
decision cannot be questioned. This is the crux of the struggle.
It is contended on behalf of the ryots that, where there are,
in matters of administrative orders, sharp differences of opinion
between local officials and them, the points of differences are and
ought to be referred to an impartial committee of inquiry. This,
it is held, constitutes the strength of the British Constitution. The
Commissioner has on principle rejected this position and invited a
crisis. And he has made such a fetish of it that he armed himself
beforehand with a letter from Lord Willingdon to the effect that
even he should not interfere with the Commissioner's decision. He
brings in the War to defend his position and adjures the ryots and
me to desist from our cause at this time of peril to the Empire. But
I venture to suggest that the Commissioner's attitude constitutes a
peril far graver than the German peril, and I am serving the Empire
in trying to deliver it from this peril from within. There is no mis-
taking the fact that India is waking up from its long sleep. The
ryots do not need to be literate to appreciate their rights and their
duties. They have but to realize their invulnerable power and
no Government, however strong, can stand against their will.
The Kaira ryots are solving an Imperial problem of the first
magnitude in India. They will show that it is impossible to govern
men without their consent. Once the Civil Service realizes this
position, it will supply to India truly Civil Servants who will
be the bulwark of the people's rights. Today the Civil Service
rule is a rule of fear. The Kaira ryot is fighting for the rule of
love. It is the Commissioner who has produced the crisis. It
was, as it is now, his duty to placate the people when he saw that
they held a different view. The revenue of India will be no more
in danger because a Commissioner yields to the popular demands
and grants concessions than the administration of justice was in
danger, when Mrs. Maybrick was reprieved purely in obedience to
the popular will, or the Empire was in danger because a corner of
a mosque in Cawnpore was replaced in obedience to the same
demand. Had I hesitated to advise the people to stand against
the Commissioner's refusal to listen to their prayer, instead of
taking the open and healthy course it has taken, their discontent
would have burrowed under and bred ill will. That son is a true
son of his father, who rather than harbour ill will against him,
frankly but respectfully tells him all he feels and equally respectfully
resists him, if he cannot truthfully obey his commands. I apply
the same law to the relations between the Government and the
people. There cannot be seasons when a man must suspend his
conscience. But just as a wise father will quickly agree with his
son and not incur his ill-will, especially if the family was in danger
from without, even so a wise Government will quickly agree with
the ryots, rather than incur their displeasure. War cannot be
permitted to give a licence to the officials to exact obedience to
their orders, even though the ryots may consider them to be un-
reasonable and unjust.
The Commissioner steels the hearts of the ryots for continuing
their course by telling them that for a revenue of four lakhs of
rupees, he will for ever confiscate his hundred and fifty thou-
sand acres of land worth over 3 crores of rupees, and for ever de-
clare the holders, their wives and children unworthy of holding
any lands in Kaira. He considers the ryots to be misguided and
contumacious in the same breath. These are solemn words :
Do not be under the impression that our mamlatdars and our Talatis
will realize the assessment by attaching and selling your movable pro-
perty. We are not going to trouble ourselves so much. Our officers'
time is valuable. Only by your bringing in the monies shall the trea-
suries be filled. This is no threat. You take it from me that parents
never threaten their children. They only advise. But if you do not pay
the dues, your lands will be confiscated. Many people say that this
will not happen. But I say it will. I have no need to take a vow.
I shall prove that I mean what I say. The lands of those who do not
pay will be confiscated. Those who are contumacious will get no lands
in future. Government do not want their names on their Records of
Ryots. Those who go out shall never be admitted again.
I hold that it is the sacred duty of every loyal citizen to fight
unto death against such a spirit of vindictiveness and tyranny.
The Commissioner has done the Ahmedabad strikers and me a
cruel wrong in saying that the strikers knowingly broke their
vow. He was present at the meeting where the settlement was
declared. He may hold that the strikers had broken their vow
(though his speech at the meeting produced a contrary impression)
but there is nothing to show that the strikers knowingly broke
their vow. On the contrary, it was entirely kept by their re-
suming their work on their getting for the first day wages demanded
by them, and the final decision as to wages being referred to arbi-
tration. The strikers had suggested arbitration which the mill-
owners had rejected.
Their struggle in its essence was for a 35% increase in their
wages or such increase as an arbitration board may decide. And
this is what they have got. The hit at the strikers and me is, I
regret to have to say, a hit below the belt.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 17-4-1918
