264. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
April 3, 1926
CHI. MANILAL,
I read your letter to Ramdas; also Fatima's. And of course
I had anticipated this; Jalbhai did give a hint. You are a free
man; so I cannot force you to do anything. But I write to you as
a friend.
What you desire is contrary to dharma. If you stick to
Hinduism and Fatima follows Islam it will be like putting two
swords in one sheath; or you both may lose your faith. And then
what should be your children's faith? Whose influence are they
to grow under? It is not dharma, but, only adharma if Fatima
agrees to conversion just for marrying you. Faith is not a thing like
a garment which can be changed to suit our convenience. For
the sake of dharma a person shall forgo matrimony, forsake his
home, why, even lay down his life; but for nothing may faith
be given up. May not Fatima have meat at her father's? I[ she
does not, she has as good as changed her religion.
Nor is it in the interests of our society to form this relation-
ship. Your marriage will have a powerful impact on the Hindu-
Muslim question. Intercommunal marriages are no solution to
this problem. You cannot forget nor will society forget that you
are my son.
If you enter into this relationship, you may not be able to
render any service. I fear you may no more be the right person
to run Indian Opinion.
It will be impossible for you, I think, after this to come and
settle in India.
I cannot ask for Ba's permission. She will not give it. Her
life will be embittered for ever.
In proposing this marriage you have thought only of momen-
tary pleasure. You have not at all considered your ultimate
happiness.
Pure love is as between brother and sister. Whereas here the
main urge is carnal pleasure.
I want you to get out of your infatuation. As far as I
understand, Ramdas and Devdas also have arrived independently
at the same conclusion, as mine.
I could not embolden myself to discuss this with Ba.
May God show you the right path.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 1118. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
