332. LETTER TO DEVESHWAR SIDDHANTALANKAR
As AT BANGALORE,
August 16, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your long letter and the reprint of your arti-
cles. I shall try to find time for re-reading the articles.
I shall appreciate your English writing. I do not know
whether I stated in my previous letter that the English I wanted
not for myself but for circulation amongst Mussalman and other
friends, who claim to know the Koran and Islam intimately. My
own reading I don't regard as in any way deep or learned. It
was purely for my own satisfaction.
You seem to think that the dasyus do not give the same mean-
ing in the Vedic times that the word Kaffir does in Islam. Not to
go back to historical times, I would like you to look at the his-
tory that is being enacted in our midst. Do not thousands of Hin-
dus regard Mussalmans as enemies to be converted or destroyed
because they are Mussalmans? Do not many cultured Indians
hate the British people as wicked? If somebody wrote a learned
treatise today describing the relations between ourselves and the
British and had not a boundless spirit of charity, would he not
describe the British as dasyus or atatayis fit only to be destroyed at
sight, and if that treatise [should] survive some periodic upheaval
and afterwards become religious literature, posterity is likely to
indulge in the same error that we do and say that those atatayis
and dasyus of these times were not political exploiters but were
wicked people as you now interpret the term wicked people, or
would you say even now that the British as a people are really
wicked? Or take another instance: I know as the author of non-
co-operation that many so-called non-co-operators hated co-opera-
tors as if they were wicked monsters and if the former had been
allowed, they would have drawn these poor co-operators and cer-
tainly would have made short work of them. Supposing that some
very learned non-co-operator of the type I described wrote a trea-
tise, he would of course describe co-operators as wicked men.
Would you accept that verdict or take to a free fight like the one
that took place between Shwetambars and Digambars, first cousins
as they might be called. Was not each wicked in the sight of the
other? The fact is that immediately you accept the doctrine of
slaying people whom you consider to be wicked, you really sur-
render the whole case and come under the same category as the
writer or the writings on the Koran. I do not need to cite any
history in support of what I am saying but I can supplement it
if necessary.
I have considered you to be an honest seeker. I have con-
trary opinions to what you have given about Nanak Dev and
Kabir. But this is after all a small matter. If I do reach your
pamphlet, I shall gladly give you illustrative passages where I
thought your translation was not just.
It is curious that Professor Sahgal did not write the Hindi
letter which I certainly received. I knew the name from the letter.
Yet unfortunately that letter I destroyed after replying. The only
possible mistake is that somebody else might have written on his
paper and in his name. But this is merely nothing and by the
way I pass it on to you as a piece of information.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 12388
