345. LETTER TO S. R. HIGNELL
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
June 18, 1919
DEAR MR. HIGNELL,
It is just likely that this letter will cause pain to His Excel-
lency. But I fear that it is my duty to inform H.E. that I contem-
plate renewing civil disobedience in July next unless circumstances
alter my plans.
The awful experiences of the past two months and a half have
shown me that there is nothing save satyagraha of which civil
disobedience is an integral part, that can possibly save India from
Bolshevism and even a worse fate. In spite of the indications to a
superficial observer may appear to be contrary, satyagraha alone
can smooth the relations between Englishmen and Indians. I
would like His Excellency to believe with me that the exhibi-
tion of anti-English feeling during the second week of April was
not due to the advent of satyagraha which is designed among other
things to remove the acerbity between the two members of the
Empire but to pre-existing causes and the further belief (and this
is the more important) that the madness was confined to certain
small parts only of this great continent because satyagraha had
arrived and it was doing its silent but most efficient and effective
work during the critical period. I will not deny that the military
preparations had, too, something to do with the preservation of
peace in the other parts of India. But I venture to suggest that
satyagraha had a greater deal to do with it.
Anyway, such being my opinion of satyagraha and its efficacy,
I would be no longer justified in further suspending civil dis-
obedience. I wish I could persuade the Viceroy to see eye to eye
with me in the matter of the Rowlatt legislation. It is legislation
which irrespective of merits ought not to stand after the expres-
sion of public feeling against it during the months of March and
April. No doubt, there were many causes operating in favour of
the vast demonstrations witnessed on the 6th of April last. But the
Rowlatt legislation was the causa causans. I trust that His
Excellency will see his way to withdraw the legislation.
My letter regarding the appointment of a committee of in-
quiry is already before H.E. as also my letter requesting the release
of Babu Kalinath Roy. Both these are matters of the greatest im-
portance and have an intimate connection with the Rowlatt legis-
lation agitation. I hope that both my requests will receive H.E.'s
favourable consideration.
It now remains for me to add that should a renewal of civil
disobedience become necessary, it will be confined only to myself,
the other satyagrahis will qualify themselves for civil disobedience
by assisting to preserve peace and by other services of an en-
nobling character. My earnest desire is in the present circumstances
of the country to confine civil disobedience to the narrowest
limits possible. For the time being, all demonstrations including
hartal will be avoided.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6666
