60. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
P. O. Box 57,
PRETORIA,
July 7, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
Your Pretoria correspondent has given the Indian community
deserved credit by saying that "no serious troubles are anticipated" with
reference to the struggle of British Indians in this Colony not to submit
to the Asiatic Registration Act. The Attorney-General, too, paid us a
compliment by saying that he did not expect the law-abiding Indians
to resist the enforcement of the law. The only difference is that the law-
abiding instinct, while it makes rioting and physical resistance impossible,
does not involve acceptance of any measure, however distasteful. That
instinct tells us that, if we cannot bear the yoke imposed by the law, we
must suffer the consequences of its breach with quiet dignity and resig-
nation.
Your correspondent threatens that, if my countrymen do not change
their attitude, the penal clauses will be rigorously enforced and they will
be deported. This threat was unnecessary, for we have counted the
consequence of non-submission. Gaol has no terrors for us compared to
the enforced slavery of the Registration Act, which puts on the whole
community a brand of criminality. Deportation will be a welcome relief
from the contemplation of a dog's life in what we have been taught to
consider our own home. If the Act bears as heavily on us as we represent
it to do, no sacrifice will be too great for us.
We are having a unique experience of Imperialism and the cosmo-
politan nature of the Empire. The Imperial arm is presumed to cover
the weak from the strong. Indians of the Transvaal are now waiting to
see whether that arm is to protect the weak Indians from the strong
whites—British and otherwise—or whether it is to be used to strengthen
the hands of the tyrant to crush the weak and helpless. Pardon the use
of the word, but is it not tyrannical to disregard every sentiment and our
religions, for this is no question of regulating immigration? The principle
of registration we have accepted; the manner of it we bitterly resent.
But the Government wish to impose studied humiliation. Are Indians
to blame if, rather than suffer it, they are prepared to lose their earthly
possessions? If the whole of the white Transvaal be against us, God is
with us.
I am, etc.,
HAJEE HABIB
SECRETARY,
BRITISH INDIAN COMMITTEE, PRETORIA
The Star, 9-7-1907
