40. LETTER TO JIVANLAL
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Saturday, Phagan Sud 9 [February 20, 1926]
BHAISHRI JIVANLAL,
I have got the letter written jointly by Ramjibhai and you
as well as those written separately. I must say I am in a way
shocked by it. We do not quit our personal work; on the con-
trary we seek to accomplish it at any cost. We must have a
similar attitude towards the philanthropic or religious work which
we undertake. Neither of you can therefore throwaway the res-
ponsibility just by saying so. You have undertaken the work on
your own and if you now want to get out of it you can do so
only after making proper alternative arrangements. I can under-
stand the difficulty that you both face. I write this only to point
out your duty. I had written a letter to you even before I got
yours. I still mean what I have written in it. That centre is a liabi-
lity of the Parishad or the Charkha Sangh or the Khadi Mandal.
For the present I have shouldered the responsibility and loaned
money from the Ashram. But you should not expect a public
institution to return what you have put in. You can ask a pub-
lic body to take up the responsibility of carrying on the work
and insist that henceforth that body should raise its own funds.
If eventually it is proposed to wind up the centre you should
have the right of pre-emption, and if you do not exercise it, you
should be given your share corresponding to your capital invest-
ment of Rs. 10,000. Your condition of withdrawing your capital
after two years is, I think, not fair. I would not call it unfair if
you want to fix a two-year limit to your annual subsidies. But
I certainly expect both of you to continue your help to perpetuate
the institution which you have nurtured as your own, as long as
it functions smoothly. And now that you want to make your own
business more paying, I think this centre should particularly
benefit from the gain; in fact I may demand this. The Amreli Khadi
Centre is the foremost institution of khadi work in Kathiawar.
There is much effort behind it, quite an amount has been spent
over it and the work can well be regarded as stabilized. There can
be no doubt about its utility. With the closure of this centre khadi
work in Kathiawar will suffer a major setback.
Let me know what decision you both take after considering
all this.
As regards your donations I would advise you to send over
the balance to me; I intend to spend it for the Antyajas or khadi
work. As far as possible I shall certainly not spend it for the build-
ing. All the same, I wish you should not bind me regarding this.
Since I do not go around myself, I wish to use the funds that are
lying with you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10893
