410. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 27, 1934
CHI. SUSHILA AND MANILAL,
Since Manilal has not written to me but Sushila has, should
her name not be put first?
I am awaiting your reply regarding a permit for Ramdas.
Medh has sent nothing as yet to Uncle . If he does mean to
send it, why doesn't he send it directly to Uncle, or to me?
I think I have already written to you about saving at least
Rs. 5 and sending it to me for Uncle. I have requested this con-
tribution for repaying the sum that I have got paid to him. I
would be glad if he is not given even that much as a gift. I don't
think he himself will be able to repay the sum. If you two and
Devdas pay every month, you will feel no burden and the sum
which I have borrowed from Jamnalalji can be repaid. You
should try and do this much.
Andrews has returned. We talked a great deal specially about
you. He has been very much disappointed. He complains that
Manilal has been writing articles about the Agent which are full
of anger and contempt. He doesn't say that there should be no
criticism of the Agent, but that it should be kept within proper
limits. I myself cannot read Indian Opinion these days. I rarely
see any newspapers. I therefore don't know. If however you have
been writing anything in anger or with contempt, you should
change that. You should realize that your responsibility is great.
Since I have not read anything, I am not writing this by way
of criticism. I am only letting you know the impression that
Andrews has formed.
Who is the Swami from Bengal who takes so much of Manilal's
time?
Ramdas is coming here tomorrow as cholera is raging in Khurja.
Kishorelal and Gomati are here at present. The former's
health cannot be described as too good.
Devdas is all right, more or less. Lakshmi has always been
delicate. Her daughter is doing fine. Andrews was full of praises
of Govind alias Arun.
I have regained sufficient strength. But I have still to take
some rest.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4825. Also C.W. 1237. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi
