241. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
AHMEDABAD,
September 5 [1916]
MY DEAR MILLIE,
I have your letter today. Even if Henry comes, you will be there
to receive this letter. I had Henry's long letter but I did not wish to
interfere with his plans, so I said nothing. I quite share your feeling
that if his stay there can only increase the bitterness of his soul, it
is better that he should not be so near the fire. All the same it will
be a calamity for South Africa, his permanent withdrawal. Both the
races will lose a common friend. But at times, it is better to lose one's
friends. We sometimes know them only after they are gone.
Yes, you will feel very lonely. I fear very much that you will never
have a really settled life. Reformers somehow or other manage not
to have a settled life. You will, therefore, have to find peace in
preparedness to move on when required. I do not share Henry's
optimism about the London practice. Anyway I shall be perfectly useless
in helping him in that direction. I know not a soul to whom I could
appeal for such help. If however, he cannot find his way to settle in
London, he will find little difficulty in doing so here. There is ample
scope for his energy in India. But I will not anticipate the future. I
do not fear the intimate issue. We have a common belief in the goodness
of God. Though the path immediately in front of us may be full of
darkness, as to the destination to be reached, there never would be
any doubt.
Of course, I shall go to Bombay to meet Henry unless his coming
synchronizes with the Provincial Conference meeting here.
Morgan-Bush affair is a sad thing. Thambi never wrote again to
me. I am ready to send the boys if he wants them.
We are here a busy nine-all engaged in hand-weaving. To me it
appears as a great thing. But we shall see. Just now we expect that
we shall be self-supporting in a year's time through this work.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
[PS.]
Manilal does not yet know his own mind.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
1 From the references to the Provincial Political Conference which was held in
Ahmedabad in October 1916, and Polak's arrival; Gandhiji received him at Bombay
on November 13, 1916; vide also the following item.
239
