52. LETTER TO LAZARUS
MADRAS,
[After April 17, 1915]
MY DEAR LAZARUS,
I have your letter. The Indian Relief Bill ought to serve, as
it was designed to serve, as a sound basis on which we can erect
a sound structure. I gave ample warning on my leaving South
Africa that it might be differently interpreted by the Government.
In every such case we have our own remedy—legal and moral.
We mayor we may not take up the legal remedy. The moral is,
and should be, always at our disposal, and that is passive resistance.
If the spirit of the settlement is not carried out and hardships are
inflicted by the administration, our final remedy must be passive
resistance. I hope none of you considered that we would never
have to resort to passive resistance. All that one could hope for
was that the Government had altered their spirit and that they
would not lightly invite a revival of the struggle. But this last and
sovereign remedy is always at our disposal to be used whenever nece-
ssary. Of course virtue lies in knowing when it should be used.
Generally speaking, if there is a departure from the fundamental
principles which were laid down at the time of the settlement, there
is sufficient cause for offering passive resistance. You must
understand the main purpose of the Relief [Bill]. Let me reiterate
the chief points. First, the removal of the £3 tax : second, the re-
instatement of the status of Indian wives: third, repeal of the
Asiatic Act. These three things have been obtained, I think, practi-
cally for all time. Just administration of existing laws is a point
covered by the correspondence which was published immediately
after the passage of the Bill, and it is there that naturally there was
an uncertainty. Our meaning of just administration may be totally
different from that of the Government, and to keep the Government
up to the level of our views, there must be continuous watching.
With regard to Christopher, I note what you would want me
to do. I shall try to do what I can. I have not yet settled down.
I have just arrived in Madras in the course of my wanderings,
but as soon as I settle down I shall see what can be done. I take
it that, if there is a scholarship forthcoming, he will study in India.
As to your suggestion about Indian Opinion, its sphere is
narrow for want of workers. In spite of desperate efforts we have
not been able, as you are aware, to get a sufficiently large number
of selfless workers. I still feel that it cannot be worked upon
any other lines. Immediately we introduce the system of pay-
ment according to ability, it will lose all its usefulness. Anyhow,
that is not the Phoenix ideal. You have to raise at least a few
colonial-born young men who would devote themselves to public
cause without thought of reward, and you can make Indian Opinion
a greater power than it is and you can then make it cater for colo-
nial-born Indians in the special sense you suggest.
That a sound body carries a sound mind is after all a truism,
but it is to be interpreted with many qualifications. Take the cele-
brated Sandow. His is, as you would consider, one of the soundest
bodies. I am not sure that he necessarily carries a sound mind
with it. To me a sound body means one which bends itself to
the spirit and is always a ready instrument at its service. Such
bodies are not made, in my opinion, on the football field. They
are made on cornfields and farms. I would urge you to think
this over and you will find innumerable illustrations to prove my
statement. Our colonial-born Indians are carried away with
this football and cricket mania. These games may have their
place under certain circumstances. But I feel sure that for us,
who are just now so fallen, they have no room. Why do we not
take the simple fact into consideration that the vast majority of
mankind who are vigorous in body and mind are simple agri-
culturists, that they are strangers to these games, and they are
the salt of the earth? Without them your and my existence
would be an impossibility, whereas you and I are totally un-
necessary for their well-being.
The health of both Mrs. Gandhi and myself is good. It
would have been better had we not been touring so ceaselessly
as we have done. But the holy atmosphere of India has done
all that we had expected. It is because there is something pe-
culiar about the Indian atmosphere that I suggest so strongly to
the colonial-born friends that they should consider it as a matter
of duty to visit India, and to visit as Indians wanting to live the
purely Indian life, and not half-European and half-Indian.
XIII-
I think I have now covered all the points you have raised.
Be good to the people of Phoenix, have patience with them.
They are doing their best, they are giving their all, they mean
to render services to the motherland. Help them to do so, criti-
cise them by all means, but let your criticism be tempered with
love of the settlement. Please remember me to the old folks.
I should not forget you or Brian from whom I have received so
much love. Whenever you are prepared to give me your boys
on my terms, I shall be ready to take them over. The sooner
you come to a decision, the better. Else it may be too late for
them.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 6120
