86. LETTER TO F. C. GRIFFITHS
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
July 17, 1923
DEAR MR. GRIFFITHS,
The Superintendent told me yesterday your reply to my
message.
Here then is my letter.
You told me at the last interview last week that, whilst His
Excellency was willing to permit me to see the Mulshi Peta satya-
grahi hunger-strikers and to issue suitable instructions for preventing
the flogging of satyagrahi prisoners except in the case of assaults
upon officials, and then, too, after previous sanction by the Govern-
ment, he did not wish even to seem to consider my proposals under
threat of my fasting which my letter of the 9th instant appeared
to His Excellency to convey. I repeat here what I told you in
the course of our conversation on Thursday last. Nothing was
farther from my wish than to issue any threat to the Government.
The contemplated fast, as already stated in my said letter, was for
me a purely ethical step. As a prisoner, I was bound to inform the
Superintendent of my wish to fast in the event of my failing to
obtain an interview with the hunger-strikers. My fast, I knew, was
likely to embarrass the Government which had custody of my
body, but I felt that I could not, without doing violence to my
inner being, refrain from a clear duty because it might, without
any such desire on my part, embarrass the Government if it would
not take the course that humanity plainly dictated. To emphasize
the meaning I put upon my said letter and the whole of my action
since and before in connection with the hunger-strike, I told you
I was prepared to regard my letter as withdrawn, without in any
way admitting that I had intended to issue any threat to the
Government, and to believe His Excellency's assurance that he
would have granted my request on merits even if he had not known
that I contemplated fasting. And I was thankful that you were
authorized to accept my explanation of my letter and to let me see
the two of the hunger-strikers whose names I mentioned to you.
I hope that the instructions regarding flogging have already
been issued.
If there is any omission or error, you will please not hesitate
to tell me.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 8032
