1. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]
April 1, 1913
[TO
THE MINISTER OF INTERIOR
CAPE TOWN]
DEAR SIR,
Mr. Justice Searle's decision regarding the validity of Indian
marriages and the statement said to have been made by the Immi-
gration Officer in Natal, to the effect that no boys or girls claiming
to be the children of resident Indians would be admitted unless
they or their parents produce certificates of birth, have created
great consternation among my countrymen. And passive resisters
have also felt compelled to examine their own position.
According to Justice Searle's decision, no Indian marriage
whether celebrated in South Africa or elsewhere can be recognized
unless it is in accordance with the marriage laws of the Cape Pro-
vince, i.e., every Indian marriage is invalid that is not registered
before a Marriage Officer or celebrated according to the Christian
rites. This, in my humble opinion, is an intolerable position and
disturbs rights hitherto exercised by Indians. I need hardly draw
the attention of the Hon'ble the Minister to the fact that marriages
celebrated according to the Hindu, Mahomedan or Parsee rites
are fully recognized in India by Indian law.
With reference to children, it is a well-known fact that very few
births are registered in India. Registration of birth is not univer-
sally compulsory. And it is practically impossible to produce certi-
ficates of birth except in rare cases.
The practical result of both the cases is almost completely to
prevent the entry of wives and minor children of domiciled Indians.
In the circumstances, I venture to submit that, apart from other
considerations, it is necessary in order to give full effect to the pro-
visional settlement to so frame the new Immigration Bill as to
restore the position as to wives as it availed before Justice Searle's
decision and to revoke the instructions regarding children.
May I also suggest that it would be better if the leading
members of the community were consulted regarding proof required
by the Government as to marriages or the age or sonship of boys.
I am sure that the Indian community has every desire to co-operate
with the Government in facilitating the examination of relationships
of wives and children so as to avoid fraud or deception.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 5747
