564. LETTER TO PYARELAL
December 22, 1946
CHI. PYARELAL,
Sushila's letter has brought me no peace. I have not the strength
or desire to argue any more. I wish I could unsay whatever I have
said by way of arguments. I may not mention her name, speak of her
or write about her letters that others may see - these are conditions
impossible for me to fulfil. I therefore do not propose to write except
in specific public interest.
But I do think it necessary that for my satisfaction you should visit
her from time to time and write to her at least one letter every day
and ask for reply.
In my opinion either she is out of her senses, or I am. I do not
notice the symptoms in me. This incident has nothing at all to do with
what Devdas, etc. wish. I do not wish to turn her away. The cause
of the friction is that I do not wish take any service from her. I do
not see how I can make it my duty to take service from her.
I consider the present spectacle very bad for Manu. I have given
my soul to protect her and I am still doing it. I wanted to achieve
two purposes by letting her come : first, she would be in a better situation
and, secondly, you would be restored to normalcy. But for that, I would
not have accepted her conditions. When I feel the need I may take
service from anybody. But how can anyone wanting to serve lay down
conditions ? If your attitude is the same as Sushila's, you too must
consider whether you should continue any relations with me. What
personal benefit can you have in remaining with me ? If you continue
to be with me under pressure or unwillingly, it will do no good to you
or to Sushila or to me. The position which Sushila is maintaining is
in my opinion against dharma.
Why should a personal question of this kind arise at this moment
at all ?
I believe that you can keep nothing secret from Manu. That is
what I have understood from you. I have not even liked the note, of
which she has no knowledge. As for Sushila you can tell her (Manu)
that from sheer helplessness you must withhold things from her. As
I have understood you, you have absolutely no reason to hold back
anything from her. If you have not understood how I have presented
your case to her, ask me, and I shall again try to explain it to you.
You need not give me a copy of my letter to Sushila, nor of my
letter to you. I did express the desire to have copies of both the letters
but it is not important.
You can write or tell Sushila anything you wish out of this letter
or the whole of it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
