319. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 2, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I wrote one letter to you today morning. You will probably
get it before this. What you write about . . .2 and . . .3 is a
half-truth. Everybody makes mistakes. We should not be upset
if somebody makes one, but we are bound to feel unhappy when a
person hides his mistake and it is brought to light in spite of
1 Vide p. 280.
2 & 3 The names have been omitted.
284
him, and then he puts up an unworthy defence. If we do not feel
unhappy, we shall never find a way of preventing such incidents.
If we assume that such things will always happen and do nothing
to prevent them, that will mean destruction of society. We must,
therefore, do what we can to prevent them. We will do so only
if we are shocked by such incidents. We can say that one should
not feel pain or get angry for things which don't matter, and I think
you also mean only that. If you mean anything more, I am sure
that you are wrong. If some other word is suggested in place of
"pain" or "shock", I might accept it. But your letter seems to
spring from moha1, I cannot explain how. I cannot say whether the
word moha is correct. I will be satisfied if you understand what I
mean.
I have already admitted the mistake which I made.
What I want you to show is simplicity of heart, tenderness,
humility, patience, forbearance and generosity towards others.
You can show these things only if you come down from the sky to
the earth. When will you begin to feel that you are nothing? Is
it proper to bow down to Mother Earth every day and then kick
her every day? If our prayer to her is sincere, we should make our-
selves mere particles of dust and learn to suffer the kicks of the
world. Mother Earth then will not feel our feet, as we shall have
become ash, though still alive. "Scatter the dust of separateness",
as the poet says.
I have still a stock of the slivers sent by you. It was not your
fault that they contain rough particles. The fault was partly that
of the carding-bow and partly of the cotton. If you had carded
the cotton still further, the fibres would have become weak. Other
slivers do not yield very fine yarn, but they contain fewer particles.
I am very glad that you have taken Parachure Shastri's son
in your hand.
You advised Shanta well. She may now do whatever she likes.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10333. Also C.W. 6773. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
