105. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
February 6, 1932
DEAR MARY2,
I was delighted to hear from you. Yes, I am permitted to
write and receive non-political letters such as yours is.
The paper on which you wrote your letter is nothing new to
me. Ahmedabad used to be the home of such paper. It is
prepared there even now but in very small quantities. There are
several such places in India.
The second chapter of the Gita has presented difficulties to
many. I would commend to your attention my introduction to
the Gita. I have dealt with the difficulty in that introduction.
If you have not read it, get a copy from the Ashram. It was
published in Young India.
In the first instance, forget that God
1 Vide "Letter to Ramananda Chatterjee", p. 18.
2 Of Mission Boarding School near Hyderabad; popularly known as
Marybehn, she became interested in Gandhiji's speeches and writings during
her furlough in England in 1931 at the time of Round Table Conference;
she became acquainted with Gandhiji on board S.S. Pilsna while returning to
India.
3 Hand-made
4 Vide Vol. XLI, pp. 90-101.
68
is speaking through the Gita. God never speaks save through defec-
tive human agency. In the second instance, it is not to be treated
as a historical book. Thirdly, it was written by him in whose
time war was not taboo and was not considered inconsistent with
ahimsa, just as even now generally speaking, killing of animals
for food or in self-protection is not considered inconsistent with
ahimsa, though in point of fact it is. The author of the Gita
therefore chose for driving his lesson home an illustration which
we are entitled to consider as defective. Personally I have no
difficulty in understanding the second chapter. The central tea-
ching of the Gita is in Biblical language 'Be careful for nothing'.
Results are not for us to control. Having known the path of
duty it must be pursued in total disregard of consequence.
Arjuna's reasoning was defective and arose from attachment to
earthly ties. He was not averse to war, he was averse to fighting
kinsmen. The religious answer to this attachment would be, there
is no kinsman and no-kinsman. All are—the whole creation is—
kinsmen or no one is. If therefore it is lawful to wage war at
all, it makes no difference whether it is kinsmen who are con-
cerned or strangers. But this physical, outward war is merely a
shadow of the war that is going on within—between God and
Satan, forces of evil and good. And do we not always have difficult
and delicate problems of conscience arising within us? The Gita
says, "Surrender all to God, He will take care of you and your
doubts; do not vex yourself about anything but simply perform
the service that comes to you in the name of and for the sake of
God. Cultivate uttermost selflessness and all will be well." The
result of this selfless detachment must be uttermost truth and non-
violence. Thus read, the second chapter instead of being a hind-
rance becomes, in my opinion, a help. If this does not satisfy you and
you will pursue the subject further, pray do not hesitate to write.
We are keeping the early morning hours. I mean Sardar
Vallabhbhai and I.
I am glad you liked your brief stay at the Ashram. Of course
you will go there, whenever you feel like it.
Thanks for the offer of books. I have a fair stock and friends
and strangers continue to send books which they think I should
read. Even apart from the Gita difficulty, do write whenever you
feel like it.
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5981. Also C.W. 3309. Courtesy: Mary Barr
