418. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
January 17, 1929
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I have both your letters. No apology whatsoever is necessary
for taking me to Calcutta. Of course I had never expected to
have to take such an active part in the deliberations as cir-
cumstances forced me to take. But it was as well. I was quite
happy over it and it gave me an insight into the present working
of the Congress organization which I certainly did not possess.
And after all, we have to battle both within and without.
The big Darbhanga case is a very heavy responsibility and it
must take up a great deal of your time which would otherwise
have been available for the constructive programme. Nevertheless,
I am glad you have this case and if it relieves you of all financial
burdens, it will be possible for you then to give much more time
to public work and that without a load of anxiety behind you.
Now as to the second letter. If I am to finish the Euro-
pean programme, I may not put off the visit till May and I dare
not keep the many friends who have invited me in a state of sus-
pense up to the very time of my sailing. And if I go at all I have
to go to Germany, Austria, Russia, possibly Poland, France, Eng-
land and I would like to add Italy, Turkey and Egypt though I
have no invitations as yet from the last three places. There are
also pressing invitations from America to include America if I go
to Europe. All these things I must settle now or not at all.
And your letter leads me to think that I must not think of
undertaking the European tour this year at all. The next will
take care of itself. Subject therefore to your reply, I propose to
announce cancellation of the tour and make no promise for next
year.
I have been asked to draw up a scheme for boycott of
foreign cloth. I hope to do so in a day or two, unless I can
be ready to send it even with this letter.
About the Lalaji Memorial Fund I personally do not think
it is necessary for you to sign the local appeal. Let the local people
make vigorous collections if they will. Purushottamdas Tandon is
now taking charge of the affairs of the Society and that ought to
inspire confidence.
If I do not go to Europe, I would gladly include the U.P.
in my tour programme, when I would like you to join me at
least in some places.
It is quite like Jawahar that he should give up smoking, a
fine preparation to face Hailey. I do not know that Hailey
will lay his hands upon Jawahar quite so easily as you think.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 15281
