335. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
AS AT SABARMATI,
June 2, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your two precious letters. I see you are in a hurry to
have me in England through the air mail if I would fly. But I
can hardly hop. I see no light before me as yet. My desire is
certainly to go there but the inner voice says 'no' and the external
atmosphere confirms the guidance of the inner voice. As you
know, the Congress demands are strung in a high pitch. They
could not be otherwise. If we cannot set our house in order here
so far even as the communal question is concerned I could not
speak in London as with one voice. It therefore does seem to me
that if the communal trouble is not finished and a workable
formula is not arrived at by agreement I should not have the
requisite self-confidence to deliver the Congress message. That
is so far as the Round Table Conference is concerned. But of course
if the British Ministers require my presence in order to discuss
the Congress position and understand it and if they would want
me to do a little lobbying also I could come whenever required.
But then there is the Delhi Settlement. I am bound to see, as
far as is possible for a single human being, that there is no break-
down. The Bombay Government has given me cause enough to
re-declare hostilities but if you knew everything you would yourself
be amazed at my patience. In every little thing it is like drawing
a live tooth. But I must not weary you with these troubles of
mine. I am taking them cheerfully and breaking down opposition.
Thank God, I do receive help from the Central Government. I
believe Mr. Emerson knows me and he will play the game. But
local governments may produce situations which neither he nor
I can control. I can tell you that so far as the Congress is con-
cerned, Congressmen are implementing the Settlement in a manner
not even expected by me. Of course there is overzeal now and
again in picketing but it is immediately brought under control.
You can give this assurance to all who may need it that I
am anxious to attend the Conference and try my utmost to secure
lasting peace and an honourable settlement of the constitutional
question by negotiation. It is only external circumstances which
really detain me. But in any case for reasons unconnected with
my hesitation the Round Table Conference and its Committees
stand postponed. There need be therefore no hurry just now over
my coming unless of course I am required there independently
of the Conference. I have now told you all that you should
know.
I am just now in Bardoli fixing up things.
Gurudev seems to be ailing.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: S.N. 968
