459. LETTER TO K. F. NARIMAN
July 15, 1937
MY DEAR NARIMAN,
You have sent me an extraordinary letter. Either you
are in a state of confusion, or your friends are. So far as I can
recollect, you accepted the Working Committee's decision as final
regarding the telegram. As to your other charges you had no
evidence then in your possession. Your letters showed no evi-
dence and therefore the Working Committee could neither
decide for itself except to decide against you nor could give you
a committee. How can you say you closed the matter though
in your letter you reserved to yourself the right to ask for
a committee when you had framed your charge-sheet? So far
as I can see the matter can only be closed by leading against
Sardar Vallabhbhai all the evidence you have in your posses-
sion or by making a clear admission that you have nothing
against him. Can you not see that the Working Committee's
decision so far as it goes is wholly against you? If you regard
its verdict as final, then can you sit still when unbounded vili-
fication of the Sardar is going on in front of you, and to which,
in your letters, you have allowed yourself to be a party up
to a certain extent?
You will be committing no breach of faith with me if you
were to publish the whole of the conversation between you and
me, if you will let me have beforehand what you will publish.
There are other inaccuracies in your letter which I need
not go into. Let me be however clear about one point. So
long as you feel that the Sardar has dealt with you unfairly in
any shape or form, or that he has done anything ungentle-
manly, it is your bounden duty to accept his offer. You owe
it to yourself and to a colleague, who emphatically maintains that
he has never done or meant any harm to you and has not been
guilty of dishonourable conduct directly or indirectly. If you do
not pursue the tribunal you repeatedly told me you wanted, or
drop it without unreservedly withdrawing your charge against
the Sardar, you will be committing a grave blunder. Your
colleagues of the Working Committee will certainly come to
the conclusion that you were simply guided by your own suspi-
cion though you had nothing whatsoever to sustain it. And you
would confirm the impression that the Sardar has carried with
him about your conduct at the Bombay election, and which
he so frankly told you during that drive.
Yours sincerely,
A. I. C. C. File No. 747-A, 1937. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
report . . . to the Working Committee who should . . . pronounce verdict
. . . But in view of the definite adverse view of all the members I did not
intend to pursue the matter further. . . . Vide also p. 392.
