32. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
[CAPE TOWN,]
April 15, 1911
UNREVISED
MY DEAR RITCH,
I have your letters. I hope you will read up some S. A. cases
on libel & slander & look [up] Van Zyl for your summons.
Our question is passing thro' many ups & downs. Lane told
me today that they were bound to fix up two things before the end
of the session: minors'. . .1 & Immigration. He added that J. C. S.
was conferring with Lord Gladstone and the Free State members.
He naturally wants to pass his measure. He sees much beyond
the Free Staters. So that we may still have the general bill. My
latest bulletin is—a close race between the two proposals. If the
general bill goes thro', the Free State bar will be removed. Lane
told me he might give me some definite information on Wednesday.
As to the London visit the following was the train of my
thought in the morning. What is a deputation to do in London?
The Imperial Conference will be concerned with general principles,
not details. If p[assive] r[esistance] be closed, our question will
largely consist of details. It is possible to do something with the
Colonial Secretary. But has that time yet arrived? May it not
be better to await developments here? On the other hand, may
not a deputation prevent the threatened Gold Law measures, &c[?]
Thus, there are arguments for and against. It seems to me that
if a deputation is to be sent, we should send the following cable
Cable Lord Ampthill's opinion regarding small deputation
proceeding view Imperial Conference although passive
resistance may end other local grievances serious specially
threatened action Gold Law.
I am of opinion that such a cable should be sent only after the
community is ready to send a deputation in the event of an affir-
mative reply.
Now for the dates. The conference meets on the 22nd May
Monday. I cannot leave next Wednesday the 19th, hardly on
the 26th. There then remains the last & the only date, the 3rd
May. That will bring the deptn. to London on the 20th May?
It could hardly make any impression on the Conference. The
22nd will be merely a formal affair.
As to Cape Town, not a penny need be expected. They will
support. They have neither the men nor [ the] money. Of Durban,
I know nothing. If they find [the] money, they would want to
send their own delegate. So that the Transvaal alone will have
to find the funds but the work will have to be for all.
My instinct decides against any such deputation.
Mrs. Ernest is anxious to learn from Miss Knudsen.
I shall write to Maclntyre.
I am writing to Joseph & Quinn who are to be discharged
on the 18th.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5466
