39. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 26, 1929
I have your telegram. I am publishing it with a note. But I
repeat my complaint. Whatever the cause, you fail to back your
appeal with facts and figures from week to week. You may not
plead want of time or if you want to plead want of time, then
don't expect any response. You may not have the cake and eat
it. I myself after the publication of the appeal was utterly in the
dark as to what was happening. Surely Santanam or whoever is
in charge can say from week to week how much relief has been
given, what kind of relief has been given and to whom it has
been given. You are talking about volunteers going to the vil-
lages taking notes. Some telling experience might be given. The
condition of the homes of these people might be given. A hun-
dred things suggest themselves to me. How do you expect people
1 Vide p. 15.
2 Vide pp. 48-.
to respond when very telling figures [are not] thrust upon their
attention from week to week, indeed from day to day? You can
say if you send such reports they won't be published.
You will see from my notes that I have justified your tele-
gram somehow or other. My complaint against you is that the
telegram was not absolutely inevitable. The facts related in the
telegram do not suddenly come under your notice. You can
send telegrams about landslips, overflowing flood to a terrible
extent, but you cannot telegraph about the daily happenings in
a famine area, unless you send news to a distant newspaper from
day to day. Do please wake up. I will find the Rs. 5,000/- some-
how or other. But what is the use? That won't be in answer to
your appeal, that would be merely from friend to friend and that
is not how you want this relief, if I understand it rightly. And
if you wanted it that way, you could simply have telegraphed:
you must send me Rs. 5,000/- for my starving people. Verb. sap.
SJT. C. RAJAGOPALACHARIAR
GANDHI ASHRAM
TIRUCHENGODU
From a photostat: S.N. 15355
