424. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
SIMLA,
August 26, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
Through the telephone you have asked me to send you the
amendments that I passed over the telephone to the draft commu-
nique given me by you this afternoon. Those amendments were
suggested by my colleagues who are here. With slight alterations
I give them below:
Here is the first amendment:
"Mr. Gandhi, while stating that the Congress were desirous
that nothing should be done to the prejudice of peaceful conditions,
wished to make it clear that this did not imply any undertaking
restricting the future action of the Congress in the matter of continuing
grievances or in respect of unforeseen developments."
The portion underlined represents the amendment suggested
in the first sentence of paragraph 5 by my colleagues. I need
hardly say that I entirely endorse the suggestion.
You will observe that with the exception of the portion
underlined, we have accepted the amendment telephoned by you.
I may say that there is no desire to insist upon the wording sug-
gested here. All that is sought to be made perfectly clear is that
paragraph 3 of the draft communique does not in any way fetter
the future action of the Congress. Nor does it mean that for every
grievance large or small there is to be insistence upon an enquiry
by the Congress. But the Congress should not be expected to
waive the right to seek redress, and failing redress to adopt such
measures as may seem to it to be necessary. As a matter of fact,
this is an elementary principle which does not need any enuncia-
tion. It is brought in here to avoid any possibility of a charge of
breach of faith on the part of the Congress. This clearance has
become all the more necessary because of the inferences you draw
from our conversations at Richmond.
The Council's suggestion that the sentence, viz., "To this the
Government of India take no exception" be dropped is accepted.
It is further suggested on behalf of the Congress that the rest
of paragraph 5 should be dropped. You will recognize that the sen-
tence beginning "so long as the Settlement. . . provisions" is
a repetition, with slight changes, of para 2 of the communique.
The remainder of the paragraph giving a long quotation from
the letter from H. E. the Viceroy addressed to me and dated the
19th inst. torn from its context bears an altogether different
meaning. My colleagues have pointed out that the bare quotation
would seem to carry an interpretation which commits me and the
Congress to an endorsement of the claim that the Government of
India have hitherto followed the policy of restricting action to the
requirements of the specific situation. You will agree that neither
the Congress nor I have ever endorsed the claim. On the contrary
we have had the misfortune often to point out to Government
that their action has in numerous cases gone beyond the require-
ments of specific situation. I venture to suggest that the reminder,
in a communique designed to secure peace and facilitate my
departure to London on an errand of peace, that the Government
possess certain powers which the Congress may not question is
hardly opportune or advisable. I do not know that the powers of
the Government become any the more emphatic or operative by
reason of the recital. It had a meaning in a letter which was ad-
dressed to me to serve a purpose wholly different from the purpose
that we all, I hope, have in view.
You have, in the course of the last conversation that we had
over the phone, told me, on behalf of the Council, something
very startling and distressing. I can only hope that I have mis-
understood your message. It sounded very much like a break-
ing up of the negotiations which His Excellency, you and I had
believed, had almost reached their fruition. Surely there is nothing
extraordinary in the amendments suggested herein as to lead to
such a tragic end. I can therefore only hope that having come so
near, it will not be said of us, no matter whose fault it was, we
had come near only in order to separate. In my opinion there is
ample room for discussion and accommodation if we mean the
same thing. If we do not, the sooner the agony of suspense ends
the better.
I note your warning that the draft communique is provi-
sional and confidential. Confidence will be respected.
Yours sincerely,
H. W. EMERSON, ESQ.
HOME SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SIMLA
From a photostat: S.N. 17601
