96. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
SABARMATI,
February 23, 1925
MY DEAR FRIEND & BROTHER,
I have read today your commentary on my statement on
Kohat. I honour you and love you all the more for your outspoken-
ness. But your commentary shows how with all the detachment
and impartiality in the world sometimes people most closely rela-
ted as we are can come to opposite conclusions on identical facts.
It makes me more charitable than ever towards opponents and
more distrustful of my judgment even than I am. I have twice
read your commentary and I see the wide gulf that separates us
in the affair. I am prepared to strongly condemn the publication
of the poem but I am unable to condone the looting and arson.
I do not endorse your opinion that the pamphlet was the cause of
the conflagration. The ground was already prepared. I cannot
treat the conversions as lightly as you seem to do. In my opinion
the Khilafatists have greatly neglected their duty and Maulvi
Ahmed Gul certainly betrayed the trust reposed in him.
I do not say these things to influence your opinion if there is
no cause for it. But I do want you to look more deeply into the
facts than you have done and see whether there is cause for re-
consideration. I tremble to publish our statements. The publica-
tion will give rise to an acrimonious discussion. I would there-
fore even suggest the whole matter being examined by Hakim
Saheb or Dr. Ansari. I would love to have new light on the ques-
tion. I would like all the friends to look at the facts and try to
influence us both. But if after we have exhausted all our re-
sources to come to a joint conclusion, we fail, we must dare to
let the public know our difference of opinion and know too that
we shall still love one another and work together. But that very
love demands that we take no hasty action. Are you coming to
Delhi? If you are, let us travel together. I leave by the meter-
gauge on 27th. But if you are coming and you would rather leave
by the Punjab Mail I would join you at Baroda. It may be advi-
sable to have leisurely discussion between us. The train seems to
be the best place for such discussion. Do let me know what you
would like to do. Please wire if possible. I am not publishing
the statement this week.
With love,
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I am glad you are taking Kuhne treatment. You certainly
need plenty of exercise.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: S.N. 10524
