26. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
RASHTRIYASHALA, RAJKOT,
March 4, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,
I woke up early this morning and felt like sending to the
Press what I am about to write down here. I then felt like
wiring the contents to H. E. the Viceroy. At last the correct
thing appeared to me, to pass on my thoughts to you with the
request that you should wire them to His Excellency with such
remarks as you may choose to make thereon.
It seems to me that in regarding the Thakore Saheb as a
responsible thinking Ruler, I am, or shall I say we are all, giving
currency to a fraud. I felt this when I sent him day before
yesterday my letter embodying my suggestions. I do not know if
he was allowed even to read it, and if he was, whether he under-
stood it in all its bearings. I am hoping that my own and my
ancestral connection with his father and grandfather may provoke
him to a sense of his duty. Durbar Virawala is the virtual
Ruler of Rajkot. As I have already remarked in my letter
to the Thakore Saheb, he is utterly unreliable. He does not
like the first Notification . If he could, he would undo it by
packing the Reforms Committee with a majority of his nominees.
At the present moment he holds no office in the State, and yet
his will is the supreme law. He even issues written orders and
has in the Rajkot palace his nephew who alone has access to the
Thakore Saheb at all times.
Sir Patrick Cadell, as you are
aware, had no trust in him and had even prohibited him from
remaining in Rajkot or having any connection with the Thakore
Saheb. You may not know that Col. Daly had to pull him up
for entering Rajkot during the first struggle. I cannot recall a
parallel to such a chaos as exists in Rajkot. I do feel that this is
a case for the immediate intervention of the Paramount Power so as
to induce fulfilment of the promise made by the Thakore Saheb.
Nomination by the Thakore Saheb of the names recommend-
ed by Sardar Patel, of unofficial members of the Reforms Com-
mittee, is part of the transaction of 26th December. Moreover as
I have said in my letter of yesterday to the Thakore Saheb, with-
out some such precaution the Notification could be easily made a
dead letter. I enclose herewith a copy of Thakore Saheb's letter
and copy of translation of my reply thereto.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10137. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
