559. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 22, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have had no letter from you for three days, that is, after the
big packet and that makes me feel a little worried.
Kaka has heard that Anandi is having fever. Is that true?
How is Kusum? I have sent a wire to you in regard to Lakshmi-
behn. I had a letter here from Narmada. I can't tell whether
anybody will come today. Probably I shall get a letter today.
I am writing this before the prayer.
I worry about you also. I always send you others' views
about you. I do hope that they do not upset you. Anybody
who undertakes an important responsibility should expect to be
criticized. He will benefit by the criticism if he can hear it with-
out being upset, but it would kill him if he takes it to heart.
We have in the Ashram a bhajan about "Nindakababa". I would
not say that it is a very good one. That is, the author has not
treated the detractor with generosity. But the lesson which it
teaches is right. Anyway, whether you are calm or upset, I shall
not feel worried if I regularly hear from you. For some time,
therefore, you should drop me a postcard every day.
I have asked for your opinion regarding N. She will arrive
there today. Her self-sacrifice seems just now to be as great
as her former self-indulgence. On my suggesting to her to get
her hair cut in order to save expense on soap and hair oil, she
did so. I have had many such experiences, but I have no time
just now to write about them.
I am enclosing a letter from Kanumurti Ramamurti. He seems
to have written to you about something. He wants to join the
Ashram and has expressed his desire to see me. Till now I tried
to dissuade him, but I will permit him now to come and see me.
Meanwhile, if you have had any experience about him, let me
know.
I have received an angry letter from Sitla Sahay. I have
had a letter from Prabhudas too. Nothing is certain about his
engagement.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8359. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
