301. LETTER TO M. S. SESHACHARI
February 3, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter for which I thank you. In every case where
there has been resistance offered by prostration, whether in front
of a temple or elsewhere, I have condemned it as being contrary
to the rule of satyagraha. For, satyagraha requires suffering
in one's own person, not offering physical resistance to another
which prostration undoubtedly does. Being the author of satya-
graha I have endeavoured to lay down certain rules for the guidance
of those who recognize my authority, but as I claim no monopoly
of the knowledge of the doctrine of satyagraha, it is open to any-
one to give what meaning he likes to satyagraha and lay down rules
also according to his liking.
My letter to the President of the League in Ellore has only
a limited application. The word 'dodge' is to be taken in its dic-
tionary meaning. I never knew it to bear the meaning of tramp-
1 The addressee had asked why it could not be called a satyagraha and
could be "dodged" if four or five orthodox Brahmins prostrated themselves in
front of a temple and peacefully resisted any attempt to allow untouchables
in the temple.
216
ing over any person. Once Pandit Malaviyaji 'dodged' to the
amusement of the public and to the discomfiture of the so-called
satyagrahi students prostrating in front of his college by erecting
a bridge over them and making a safe passage for the fellow-stu-
dents who wanted to exercise the right of attending the college.
Not one of the prostrating brotherhood was in any shape or form
injured or molested, and, if my recollection serves me right, the
prostrating ones admired Malaviyaji's non-violent resourceful-
ness. But that was only one way of dodging. The dictionary says
you can make a dodge behind, around, under, between or into
what will hide one. But you will recognize that all these dodgings
exclude violence.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. M. S. SESHACHARI
704 NORTH ADAYAVALANJAN
SRIRANGAM
From a microfilm: S.N. 19293
