111. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 4, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
So you could secure the permission to send me that loving
wire. I did not even try. I thought it was better that you suffer-
ed in silence than that I should secure special permission to send
you a soothing message. Later I shall hope to have the per-
mission to send you and some others daily messages.
You have understood the sacred necessity of the step. Ba
has responded magnificently. Her courage has been a source of
the greatest strength to me.
Your letter is before me. Though written before you had any
knowledge of the step, I trace in it a sorrowing mood. You
have to surmount it. If you have a living faith in a living
God, you would feel His never-failing presence protecting you.
Till that state is reached, even faith in an individual clothed
in flesh and bone is not of any avail. It is relying on a broken
reed. You should first think this out clearly and then get the
heart to co-operate with the intellect.
When your time comes, you will certainly throw yourself heart
and soul into the movement. Whilst I would call you a Chris-
tian you are sufficiently Hindu to render you eligible for full
service of the Harijans. You need not worry about this.
I wish I had time to tell you something about N. and
Margarete Spiegel. But I must economize my time and also
energy. Naturally the Ashram will undergo thorough cleansing.
I have sent proposals to Narandas.
Tell Ba not to worry about me at all. She and I and all of
us are in His hands. It is well if we live and it is equally well
if we die. We are born only to die and we die only to be born
again. This is all old argument. Yet it needs to be driven
home. Somehow or other we refuse to welcome death as we wel-
come birth. We refuse to believe even the evidence of our senses
that we could not possibly have any attachment for the body with-
out the soul and that we have no evidence whatsoever that the
soul perishes with the body.
I can go on no longer. Visitors have come in.
I hope you received the book on astronomy.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6270. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9736
