127. LETTER TO GOPALRAO
Silence Day, July 11, 1927
Your letter. You will, of course, have to consider what Kaka-
saheb says.
You want to enjoy the full bliss of brahmacharya immediate-
ly but this cannot be done. If you are content with forgoing mar-
riage then do not marry. If not, make arrangements for getting
married. You are no stranger to the difference between content-
ment and bliss.
The idea of merging into each other if you find an ideal wife
is itself a great illusion. Many have been deluded by it and it will
be no wonder if you too are lost. If you will escape it till the
end, that would be a matter for wonder.
Having seen us all married people, if you are convinced that
it is not worth while following suit-and convinced you ought to be
-give up for the present the desire to taste the joy of brahma-
charya and ponder over the joylessness of marriage, if you have
observed it. Continue to think on this line-'God alone knows
what bliss there is to be enjoyed in brahmacharya, but because there
is no joy in marriage, I am not going to marry at all.'
Here is an argument on a lower level:
'I would not say I don't want to marry. Indeed, under certain
circumstances I may marry. But today my country is in bon-
dage; plight of the women is miserable. As I am engaged in this
work, how can I marry? I must take this vow that until we attain
the swaraj of my conception, I shall not marry even if Rambha
were to solicit me.' Try to think in this way if you can. Formu-
late your definition of swaraj. I suggest a simple one: 'The day
when the spinning-wheel spreads throughout India and there is
complete boycott of foreign cloth.' If you find this hard to work
upon, write out one you like and vow not to marry until that is
attained and put up a copy in your room where everyone can
see it. Send one to Kakasaheb and one to me.
If you can do neither try this thought: 'I do have a desire
to marry and it cannot be suppressed. But I will not marry a girl
of my caste as I would not marry my own sister. I will insist on
breaking the barriers of caste. The girl must know Sanskrit, Mara-
thi, Hindi and Gujarati; she should not hanker after money; if
her parents are alive we must have their consent. She must have
absolute love of khadi; she must appreciate and have faith in my
other ideals and love the untouchables, be strong of body and
prepared to live in some remote village and be willing to honour
the well-known discipline of brahmacharya in marriage.' If you
cannot do even this, know that you will not be able to observe
brahmacharya and therefore marry at the first opportunity. If you
resolve to observe the above discipline, write down the vow and
proceed as before.
But then what I have suggested to you is only the way of
worshipping a Deity conceived with form and attributes. Obser-
vance of brahmacharya for the sake of attaining inviolate brahma-
charya is like worshipping One without attributes. It is difficult for
all of us.
I have pointed out to you the path that I myself took. I have
just been tasting a droplet of the subtle bliss of brahmacharya from
out of its physical advantages. My intellect has none the less rea-
lized its bliss but you should know all the same that I have not
actually experienced it.
If anyone can truly describe what that bliss is, Vinoba,
Surendranath and others, who, I believe, observe inviolate brahma-
charya, may perhaps be able to. I could give you only a partial
account of the [bliss of] brahmacharya which knows what sense-
pleasures and marriage mean. Only the perfect can give a per-
fect account.
It is possible that you will not be satisfied by this too. If you
would not find here the answer to your question you will now
understand why it is so. Neither Kakasaheb nor I, in fact no one
who has known married life, is competent to answer your ques-
tion from personal experience. For these same reasons we, being
embodied, are able to describe only partially the joy of moksha.
Since there is no speech without a body, moksha is and will ever
remain indescribable. Likewise, only an inviolate brahmachari can
describe the path of pure brahmacharya or we should plod on in life,
keeping in view the descriptions given by the Shastras.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
