444. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
March 18, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
What is the meaning of "anticipating trouble from all quar-
ters"? I take it to mean that the Bill will be assailed not only by us,
but by the Members on behalf of the community in general. I must
confess that I should feel delighted if the Bill were withdrawn, and the
Immigration Act of the Transvaal amended. But, if the Bill does go
through, you will have to answer all kinds of questions in connection
with the Free State, as, for instance, [ the] right of the future Asiatic
immigrants to be free from restrictions, are they to hold landed proper-
ty, etc. We ask for no such thing. All we say is that, as to immigration
and as to residence, because residence is part of immigration, they should
be on the same footing as Europeans. As to all civil rights, they would
share the same disabilities as the Asiatics. To illustrate my point, an
educated Indian entering the Transvaal would not be subject to the
Registration Law, but he would still be subject to Law 3 of 1885. Now,
Chapter 33 of the Orange Free State Constitution Act not only deals
with the manner in which an Asiatic may reside, but it also takes away
other common law rights. Sections 7 and 8 affect such rights. The
amendment, therefore, may exempt Asiatics from Clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 9, 10 and 11 so far as they may be applicable. If you take hold of the
Chapter, you will understand my meaning still more fully. We want
to appear before the public with absolutely clear hands, as I profess
we actually are. The present passive resistance has absolutely nothing
whatsoever to do with the personal gain of a single individual; and if
we make this clear and still our approach is rejected, we place our
opponent in the wrong in every respect. It is just at a time like this
that General Smuts, whom Cartwright considers to be either absolute-
ly disloyal or intensely stupid, betrays either the one or the other of
these qualities in refusing to see you. One good interview could settle
the whole question, and could also appease the wrath of the Free
Staters by showing that their fear is totally groundless. I take it that you
will again instruct Maud from your side. I shall send you on Monday
a copy of my letter to her, but that can be no guide to you in writing
to her as it will be too late for the time when you must post your
letter.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5317
