469. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 18, 1907
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I think I threw off the headache on Thursday,
but, though I am feeling much better, I do not want to give myself
overmuch work yet. The treatment I gave myself was two local earth
bandages and two abdominal bandages, and rest up to seven o'clock
in the morning, instead of six. The real thing was as much rest at night
as possible.
I am glad you have decided to adopt my suggestion with regard
to increase in extra copies. I shall ask Hemchand to send you a list
of the number of copies sold this week. Many, I know, are still left,
but that does not matter. How many extra copies did you sell on your
side?
Hemchand must go home, because I do not want to apply for an
extension of his permit as it would fall under the new law; and as I
1 "On" in the original
have advised others to do likewise, to be consistent, I must not get an
extension for Hemchand. Hemchand thinks he will save a little money
by going through Delagoa Bay, and see the place also. At the same
time, if there is any reason why he should go through Durban, he will
do so.
With reference to the block, I propose to charge the Association
for it. That being so, I have told you that copies of the supplement
should not be sold by themselves, nor should you advertise them for
sale, as you advertise other supplements. If we sell those supplements,
we can only credit the Association with the amount, which is hardly
worth while. The Advertiser article is simply contemptible.
You know how to treat the vaccination marks. If not, you should
look up Dr. Tribhowan's book, which is, I believe, with you.
I shall try to secure names for the Directory here. You may take
out the advertisement of E. Ebrahim of Standerton. I do not despair
of collecting the amount. I am glad you have written to Mr. Omar
for his contributions. You may write again, offering more copies if
he needs them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I am sending very little matter today.
From a photostat of the typewritten original with a Gujarati postscript in
Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4751
