130. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
March 18, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,
I did not like your telegram to the Harijan. It was published
by Shastri as he did not know all the implications and had no time
to refer it to me and so used his own discretion and published
it. If it had come to me, I would have withheld it. My own view
you will learn from the copy I am sending you herewith of my
reply to the British Indian Association. As you will see, that letter
too is not for publication. I think until there is any danger we
should try to affect the opinion of pro-changers by arguing with
them but not engaging in a public controversy which instead of
easing the position, will only aggravate it. If the controversy
forced itself upon our attention, we should not hesitate to take it
up. So much for our conduct.
Now, for the quality of your argument. You cannot say that
untouchability is a greater curse in Bengal than in Madras. That
means that it is of a more virulent type in Bengal than in Madras,
which is certainly not the truth. In fact, there is no pollution by
touch or sight or shadow in Bengal as in Madras. Bengal un-
touchability is peculiar and confined to the restriction upon the
handling of water. Bad as even this is, it is wholly different from
the unthinkable atrocities of the Madras type. What you want to
say is that the number of untouchables according to the Bengal
definition is much larger in Bengal than in Madras. If you had put
the argument that way, it would not have lost its force. All there-
fore that was necessary was to remove the offensive sentence: "I
repeat . . . Madras." And, are you right in saying that the Gov-
ernment definition is identical with the definition of S.U.S.1? Then
you cannot omit the fact that some of those who are classed as
untouchables by the Bengal Government themselves resent the
inclusion. You also seem to think that the councillors want to
repudiate the Pact wholly and restore the original. I have not
understood their demand in that light. If it was so, it would be
most regrettable. I think that all that they want is to reduce the
number of seats allotted to Harijans in Bengal. It will be time
enough to act when they approach the parties interested in the
Pact. I think that our profession of ahimsa should also guard us
against rushing to print till we have tried every means of concilia-
tion outside publication in the Press.
This is how I feel, but it may be that you had ample justi-
fication for sending the wire and wording it as strongly as you
have done.
I read the Hindi translation of your preface to the Bengali
Ramayana. It is a very good thing indeed, full of the devotional
spirit. I look forward to the balance of proof sheets.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20618
