394. LETTER TO J. J. DOKE
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 7, 1911
DEAR MR. DOKE,
In accordance with my promise, I reduce to writing the conditions
that appear to me to be essential to stopping passive resistance. The
demands, as you know, are the repeal of Asiatic Act No. 2 of 1907 and
the legal equality of educated Asiatics as to immigration, reduced in
practice to the entry into the Transvaal of at least six highly educated
Asiatics per annum.
The first demand is granted by the Bill, in that the schedule sub-
stantially repeals Act 2 of 1907. The second demand also appears to
have been granted. But [it] is the opinion of a well-known barrister
that the Bill does not make it possible for educated Asiatics to enter the
Transvaal under the education clause of the Bill. In his opinion, as in
my own, the existence of the second Registration Act, passed in 1908,
blocks the way. It is, therefore, necessary to so amend the Bill as to
exempt educated Asiatics who may enter under the education test from
the operation of the Registration Act.
A new disability seems also to be contemplated by the Bill. The
wives and minor children of non-prohibited immigrants are not protected
as they have been hitherto. I can only hope that this is an oversight.
There should be no difficulty in securing the necessary amendment,
at least so far as the status of educated Asiatics is concerned, because
General Smuts, in a telegram received on Saturday last, in reply to my
query says that educated Asiatics are not to be subjected to the registra-
tion laws of either the Transvaal or the Orange Free State.
1 R. Gregorowski
2, 3 and 4 Vide "Letter to E. F. C. Lane", pp. 425-.
5 Vide "Telegram to Private Secretary to General Smuts", p. 420.
If, therefore, the Bill is amended in Committee as to the points I
have raised above, passive resistance can immediately end and the suffer-
ings of conscientious objectors can be avoided.
I am,
Yours truly,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5244
