436. LETTER TO M. VISVESVARAYYA
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
6 TODIWALA ROAD, POONA,
September 11, 1945
DEAR SIR VISVESVARAYYA1,
I have your letter of the 7th July. I know I am very late
in replying to it but it was inevitable. As it is I am sending
even this late line under pressure. I appreciate your zeal in the
cause you have at heart and marvel at the fact that at your time
of life you throw into your work so much energy and thought.
There, however, my appreciation, I fear, stands.
Of course, verbally our objectives appear the same but when
I look at our means, the difference seems to me to be unbridge-
able. It may be that both of us being old and hardened are un-
able to see eye to eye. If you regard South Africa as an elongated
part of the West, I have passed the best part of my life in the
West. I have seen people, high and low, working with amazing
speed and with the most modern machinery, the income of
the commonest European labourer being higher than that of the
American. Yet it was there that I learnt to recoil from their
method and manner. They preyed upon the misery of the Negro,
holding him and his wife as beasts of burden. Things, therefore,
that attract you do not attract me but rather repel me. Much
as I would love to work as a humble co-worker side by side with
you, I cannot.
Your detailed, patient replies carefully prepared, fail to con-
vince me. What is the use of taxing you further with my ques-
tions? Let me tell you that I claim to have been working schemes
fairly successfully among the village population with well-knit
organizations. Nearly four crores (as I can recall) have been
distributed among the villagers, not as doles, but for solid work
done-and this in the face of heavy odds. Had it not been for the
opposition of the Government and their unreasoned wrath after
the August of 1942, the said organizations would have shown greater
results. But I cannot expect you with your Krishnasagar marvels
to your credit even to look at my scheme. I can, therefore,
only conclude by expressing my eagerness to follow not your
scheme but your solid work and learn from it, if I see anything
to learn.
I hope you are keeping perfectly well and fit.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SIR M. VISVESVARAYYA, K.C.I.E.
UPLANDS, HIGH GROUND
BANGALORE
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
