422. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
February 2, 1930
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
You have written to me more or less regularly, but owing to
your wanderings I have not known where to write. Your latest
has given me a deliberate address. I hope therefore this will reach
you safely wherever you may be.
I have read your article in the New Republic. I am not taking
it in Young India. It is therefore being sent to Brelvi as you have
desired.
The events have moved fairly fast. I see as clearly as never
before that the spirit of violence must be dealt with by non-violent
action if the situation is to be at all saved. There is the growing
violence of the Government expressing itself in a variety of ways
-the subtle exploitation and the necessary prosecutions as a conse-
quence of that exploitation, for instance. You will note the
extended meaning I have given to violence. Greed, pilfering,
untruth, crooked diplomacy-all these are phases or signs or results
of violent thought and action. The reaction of this violence upon
the thinking educated people is remarkable and daily growing.
I have therefore to deal with this double violence. To sit still at
this juncture is stupid if not cowardly. I have made up my mind
to run the boldest risks. I have arrived at this definite conclu-
sion as a result of deep and prayerful thinking. Lahore revealed
it all to me. The nature of the action is not yet clear to me.
It has to be civil disobedience. How it is to be undertaken and
by whom besides me, I have not yet seen quite clearly. But the
shining cover that overlays the truth is thinning day by day and
will presently break.
I hardly wanted to write this when I began this letter. But
there you are.
Gurudev passed a delightful two hours with me. He has
aged considerably. We came nearer each other this time and I
was so thankful. We had fully intended to meet again, but
Bomanjee suddenly took him away to Baroda.
Manilal and his wife and baby are here. Ramdas has a
baby. He is in Bardoli assisting Vallabhbhai's work. Mahadev
is just now here.
We did not get your first volume from the publishers. I asked
the Young India people to purchase a copy. It is on my desk at
present. I have read the first chapter. It is a fair presentation
of my religious attitude.
Love.
MOHAN
[PS.]
I do hope you have had your copies of Young India.
From a photostat: G.N. 997
