674. LETTER TO KANTILAL H. PAREKH
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
June 11, 1926
BHAISHRI KANTILAL,
I have your letter and it is quite to the point. You did well in
writing. If you still have anything to ask do write to me without
hesitation. The responsibility concerning khadi that rests on you
and on others like you cannot be taken away, until we get men
who will put less responsibility on others or who have the same
capacity as yourself and until they are able to carry on khadi work
by themselves. Along with the spread of the khadi movement we
also exhort people to lead a simple life. Until we give up some of
our undesirable habits khadi work cannot gain momentum.
If to make khadi a practical proposition is interpreted to mean
that it should compete with mill-made cloth, I think that is almost
impossible. Dharma need never enter into such competition.
Millowners may give away their cloth gratis just to kill khadi, but
can we do the same with khadi? There certainly is competition in
trade when commodities are offered, [virtually] for nothing. I am
willing to listen to all criticism of the work there. And I am eager
to remove all recognizable faults. If it is said that since the work-
ers are my own men the demands of that centre are readily conce-
ded, the complaint is entirely baseless. I know it, because it is
contrary to my nature to do so. Of course, one thing is certain.
I am entirely useless where I cannot trust people. I shall be glad
if you let me know why you regard the complaint as reasonable.
I am not at all perturbed by the way Ramdas has now been
selling khadi. It cannot be said that he compels people to buy
khadi. But one can certainly say that they buy it owing to a sense
of shame or out of a desire to help others. I see nothing wrong
in it. Only thus can the spread of khadi be initiated. The over-all
expense on khadi is much more than the artisans' wages, hence it is
our duty to effect as much economy as possible. That depends on
the spirit of sacrifice and the efficiency of the workers. I believe
this improvement is coming gradually. But please make whatever
suggestions you can in this regard. We shall certainly implement
as many of them as possible.
Now about you. If I know why you have lost faith in the khadi
movement, I can find a remedy. We must promote the desire to
work without remuneration. But how many people will do that?
Before you do what you like, there is need to assume a big res-
ponsibility, you may certainly stay in the Ashram as long as you
consider it necessary. The Ashram made you what you are and its
reward therefore is your character. Always guard it. Make it
nobler every day. That itself is the return. How long you can
serve by living in the Ashram depends perhaps on your own
convemence. One can free oneself of worries on one's own. If
freedom from worry depended upon another's convenience, it
could never be had. When the season there is over, do come here.
Before that if you have anything particular to say, do write to me.
If the answer I have given is not complete, please let me know.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10927
