30. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
August 20, 1919
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES OF INDIA
SIR,
You will perhaps permit me to reply to "Pennsylvanian" 's
well-meant advice to me. I am aware that many Englishmen
honestly hold the opinion "Pennsylvanian" does, and I thank him
for providing me with an opportunity for removing some of the
misunderstanding that exists about satyagraha.
"Pennsylvanian" has commended to me the example of his
illustrious countryman, Abraham Lincoln. I have endeavoured
to the best of my ability to translate into my life one of his sayings,
namely,
Let us have faith that right makes might, and in that faith, let us, to the
end, dare to do our duty as we understand it. 2
"Pennsylvanian" rightly insists on a "moral revolution".
Now, satyagraha is that and nothing else. Civil resistance is but a
part, though a necessary part, of it. Its root meaning is "insistence
on truth at all cost". Life-satyagrahis are under the pledge of
absolute adherence to truth, non-violence, poverty and chastity.
An institution is at present in existence at which practically the
whole of the programme sketched by "Pennsylvanian" is being
carried out. English and American friends have visited it. I
invite "Pennsylvanian" to visit it and report upon it to the public.
He will find there that men and women belonging to all stations
in life are living on terms of perfect equality, that the unlettered
receive literary education in so far as the daily toil permits it, and
that the lettered members do not hesitate to take up the pickaxe
and the shovel. He will find there that, besides agriculture, the
inmates are under the obligation to learn the art of spinning and
weaving. By exploring the records of its past, he will discover that
its members helped with medicine the people of the surround-
ing villages during the influenza epidemic, that they helped the
famine committee to distribute grain among the poor, that they
distributed again for the same agency several thousand rupees
against manufacture by the needy weavers and thus added to the
production in the country, that through their labour several
women, who were but the other day earning nothing, are able, by
spinning cotton during their leisure hours, to earn a few cop-
pers daily. In short, he will find that [some] of the items in the
comprehensive programme sketched by "Pennsylvanian" are
being worked there to the utmost extent of the capacity of the
satyagrahis. This is the silent moral revolution going on in our
midst. It suffers by advertisement and it is not without some hesi-
tation that I have placed before the public the constructive work
that is being done by life-satyagrahis.
Let me add further that the advent of satyagraha has, to my
knowledge, weaned many an anarchist from his blood-thirsty doc-
trine. He has found that secret societies and methods of secret
murder have brought nothing but a military and economic bur-
den on this unhappy land, that it has tightened the coil of the
Criminal Investigation Department, and that it has demoralized
and wrecked the lives of hundreds of youths who have been led
astray by it. Satyagraha has presented the rising generation
with a new hope, an open road and an infallible remedy for most
ills of life. It has armed that generation with an indestructible
and matchless force which anyone may wield with impunity.
Satyagraha tells the youth of India, self-suffering is the only sure
road to salvation—economic, political and spiritual.
For the most part, satyagraha is "evil resistance" and "civil
assistance". But sometimes it has to be "civil resistance". Here
I must call to my assistance another illustrious countryman of
"Pennsylvanian", Henry Thoreau. He asks,
Must the citizen ever for a moment, or in the least degree, resign his
conscience to the legislators?
He answers,
I think that we should be men first and subjects afterwards.
It is not
desirable to cultivate a respect for the law so much as for the right. 1
I think that the position taken up by Thoreau is unassailable. The
only question is that of the remedy to be applied for vindicating
the rights of conscience. The remedy in vogue is that of inflicting
violence on those who wish to wound your conscience. Thoreau
in his immortal essay shows that civil disobedience, not violence,
is the true remedy. In civil disobedience, the resister suffers the
consequences of disobedience. This was what Daniel did when
he disobeyed the law of the Medes and Persians. That is what
John Bunyan did and that is what the raiyats have done in India
from time immemorial. It is the law of our being. Violence is the
law of the beast in us. Self-suffering, i.e., civil resistance, is the
law of the man in us. It is rarely that the occasion for civil resistance
arises in a well-ordered State. But when it does, it becomes a duty
that cannot be shirked by one who counts his honour, i.e., con-
science, above everything. Rowlatt Act is legislation that affects
the conscience of thousands of us, and I respectfully suggest that
an appeal should be addressed by Englishmen to the Govern-
ment that they withdraw an Act that hurts the self-respect of the
nation and that has roused such unanimous opposition, rather
than that I should be asked to refrain from civil resistance in res-
pect of it.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 22-8-1919
