30. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
July 14, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. I am likely now to get the Ashram post
regularly.
Your taking cold baths I do not mind so long as the body
reacts immediately. There should be no chill felt. The full bene-
fit of a cold bath according to the Indian style is dependent upon
vigorous rubbing as the water is being poured. This is followed
by equally vigorous rubbing with a dry towel till all the parts are
thoroughly dry. But please do not try unboiled water. My case
here is different. I get the same water, which is strained and stored
in a separate earthen pot. The whole water supply for the jail is
filtered.
My constipation has almost altogether abated. This was due
to my having reverted to milk in the morning instead of curds. If
I find the heating of milk or hot water necessary, I shall not hesi-
tate to take either or both. But I am hoping that it will not be
necessary. Fresh fruit does not appear to be necessary for me. I
am not losing weight. Last week it was between 103 and 104 lb.
I do not consider this a bad weight. You will thus see that there
is no cause for anxiety on my account.
You ask for the Gita translation. I should love to do it. But
just now what little time I do get is given to the translation
of the Bhajanavali also undertaken for you. I am going at a snail's
pace. I therefore do not know when that will be finished. The
Gita translation is a big task. You will agree I may not suspend the
spinning for it. For the spinning is applied translation of the Gita
if one may coin that expression. But if I have long enough of this
quiet, I shall certainly undertake the translation.
We cannot have at the Ashram the worship of the kind you
refer to. Of course, we have the little samadhi near Magan Kutir.
But nobody save a few look at it. The inmates of the Ashram have
no living faith in that kind of worship. For the worship of the in-
visible, the intellect is ready but the heart does not respond. We
have, however, to plod in that direction. As pointed out in the
12th chapter, that way is undoubtedly hard to tread but it is not
impossible. It will come. Everyone is subconsciously recognizing
the worth of the Ashram prayer. It has been the sole solace of many.
Those that attend it are not scoffers. They are not wittingly irreve-
rent either. The spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. They are
all striving. And no one who has honestly striven has ever been
known to have failed. Ours is, you should remember, a somewhat
original attempt. We have no solemn-looking building for prayer.
We have simply the open space. But it is a sound thing especial-
ly as we represent the famishing millions. For us the sky must be
an all-sufficing roof and the four directions our limitless walls. But
we shall take time before we outgrow habits handed down from
generations, if not ages. And yet, if we are to break through all
bonds of race, class and creed, we can have but the openest of
house of prayer and in the way we are having it. Am I clear?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5401. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9635
