59. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[About September 25, 1925]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. The coconut for Nimu should be sent to Amreli for
religious reasons. It seems better if it is not sent to the Ashram. This is just
my feeling. If the same feeling persists, it can be made use of in future.
Ramdas is independent. He has set up a house in Amreli. He finds peace
there. Therefore, I would feel happy if the coconut is sent there. I would like
that the marriage, whenever it is to take place, should take place at Dr.
Mehta's bungalow. However, I will abide by the wishes of Nimu's grandfather.
I feel that its performance at Dr. Mehta's bungalow will add to the solemnity
of the occasion.
It is good that Nimu has started menstruating. We will be happy to get
her married the moment she reaches the age when she can bear the burden
of children. If her grandfather is indifferent, I would like to influence Nimu
from today itself to postpone her marriage. We seem to believe that Radha,
Moti and others have reached the age of marriage. However if their minds
are pure, age is of no consequence. Take the case of Miss Schlesin. I find
such women here too. Only we believe that the girls should be married off
the moment their bodies are filled out. But the experience of the whole world
shows that it is not true. Sixteen is the minimum age. Average age should
be 20 years. At that age, one is mentally mature. I wish I am able to talk to
Nimu as freely as I am able to talk with Ramdas today. Now I would not
write anything more. I am happy that we all think of Nimu's good. If we
find that she is getting impatient, we will solemnize her marriage soon as
we did in Rami's case. I decided to do that after ascertaining Rami's desire
myself. I hope you know my programme.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32852
1 Ramdas and Nimu got married on January 27, 1928. The letter, however, appears
to have been written about the same time as the one to the addressee dated 'before
September 23, 1925', vide Vol. XXVIII, p. 216.
50
