457. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
September 6, 1934
MY DEAR CHILD,
I held up your letter all these days in the hope of being able
to send the answer myself. But I must deny myself that pleasure
and dictate this letter if I am to overtake the arrears.
If proof were needed God is proving for me His greatness
and goodness every day. You remember the hymn "Count your
many blessings". I think it is in Moody and Sankey's Hymn
Book. I can't even count the blessings, they are so many. For
even the so-called sorrows and pains He sends descend like bless-
ings. If we knew His love, we should know that He has nothing
but blessings—and never curses—for His creation.
I hope Tangai is quite free and both the children are flour-
ishing. You must have now received the spinning-wheel. I hope
that Menon is well-settled.
I am flourishing. My weight has gone up from 94 to 101 lb.
I am going through a fair amount of work and taking regular
exercise.
Mira is doing good work in London. She expects to be back
in October. Andrews was here for over a week and he has now
gone to Simla. He will come once more to Wardha before sail-
ing, most probably on the 6th October, for London. He was
looking quite well. He has brought a Welsh blacksmith with him
from South Africa. Mr. Jones, that is his name, has recently
joined the Oxford movement and considers himself a changed man.
We all liked him very much. When Andrews goes to England,
he will go back to South Africa.
Pyarelal and Mahadev are here. Ba has gone with Ramdas
to Sabarmati where Ramdas is to have rest and cure for his
ailment. Devdas was here for a few days. He left yesterday for
Bombay. He is likely to come back for the Working Committee
meeting on the 8th. This, you will admit, is a fair family budget
of news. You must write more regularly than you have hitherto
done.
I don't expect to move from Wardha yet for some
time.
413
With love to you all,
BAPU
MRS. ESTHER MENON
TANJORE
From a photostat: No. 20130. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also
My Dear Child, pp. 106-
