110. LETTER TO S. V. KOWJALGI
November 6, 1935
DEAR SRINIVASARAO,
I have a vivid recollection of our meeting at Bijapur but
none of your letter. All my 'secretaries' were not secretaries but
youngsters who were doing their very best to share my burden.
Mahadev himself was in the Belgaum jail. But to show how much
I value your letters and your co-operation, whenever you can give
it to me, I hasten to reply per return.
1. The story of Rama and Ravana is to my mind an alle-
gory. In my preface to Anasaktiyoga I have explained what I
understand by 'incarnation'. What Rama used were spiritual
weapons, i.e., satyagraha against the material weapons of the
ten-headed Ravana. There is intrinsic support in Tulsidas's Rama-
yana for this interpretation.
2. The verse you quote from the Bhagavad Gita, in my opi-
nion, emphasizes the interpretation that I have put upon the
whole teaching of the Gita, namely, that when a man has lost
his egotism and his intellect remains untarnished, what though
he should kill all life. In other words, such a person would be
incapable of killing.
3. My interpretation of the version of Kamadhenu is that
the rage of Vishwamitra was impotent to touch even a single
hair of the Kamadhenu. It is an illustration of the famous saying
that God is the help of the helpless.
4. Eating of animal food as a matter of habit is not incon-
sistent with the observance of ahimsa, even as eating milk and
vegetable which have also life is not inconsistent with the practice
of ahimsa. I have elsewhere argued that practice of absolute
ahimsa by embodied life is an utter impossibility.
5. Perhaps your question is not properly put. There can
be no question of conquering evil. Evil will always retain its qua-
lity but what we endeavour always is to induce our companions,
even as we try ourselves, to rid them and us of evil. Is not his-
tory replete with instances of men and women, the most evil-
minded, being reformed by an appeal to their higher natures? I
have not entered into an elaborate argument because I assume that
you will take the trouble of procuring a copy of my introduction
to Anasaktiyoga. It is translated into Marathi—I believe also in
Kanarese. An English translation was published in the pages of
Young India, but so far as I am aware it has never been pub-
lished in book form as yet.
I hope you are keeping well.
Sjt. S. V. KOWJALGI
ADVOCATE, BIJAPUR
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 6569
