135. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
[DURBAN,]
September 21, 1913
SIR,
There is evidence in the special article from Pretoria on the
Indian position which you published in your issue of Saturday
last that its writer has been in the know. It will, therefore, be
accepted by the public as a weighty pronouncement on behalf
of the Government. You will, therefore, perhaps permit me to
correct some of its most glaring errors. The writer contends that
two of the four things in dispute were granted by the Government.
This is only partly true. The Free State difficulty is that of the
legal racial bar. The last telegram from Mr. Smuts lends colour
to the suggestion that the difficulty is removed. But in reality it
is not. What is required is an admission in the same way in
which it was made about the point raised regarding the right of ex-
indentured Indians, that the new Act does not in law require any
declaration not required from any other immigrant, from an Indian
who may, under the Act, enter the Free State. This is quite diff-
erent from saying that such declaration will only be taken upon an
Indian entering the Union. The point is that, so far as immi-
gration only is concerned, an Indian should be able to enter on the
same terms as a European. Administrative differentialism there
undoubtedly will be. But that will regulate the number of en-
trants, not the legal mode of entry. The point is somewhat techni-
cal from the nature of the case. The struggle has been directed
hitherto towards guarding against a fundamental change in the
British Constitution which is based upon the theory of equality.
The letter of the Indian contention was granted in 1910 after four
years' continuous suffering on the part of my countrymen. But
the spirit of it is missed even now in the new Act by reason of
the ambiguous Free State clause.
The second difficulty not solved is the marriage question. Your
correspondent asserts that I have asked for legal recognition of
polygamy, and therefore, a subversion of the marriage law of the
country, which is based on the Christian doctrine. A glance at
the correspondence between the Government and myself, publi-
shed in Indian Opinion, September 13, will show that I have not
asked for any such thing. I have asked that the legality of mar-
riages of Indians celebrated in South Africa should be recognized
in the same way as those celebrated in India will be, under the
new Act. I directed attention to the flaw in the wording of the
marriage clause in the new Act, and showed two ways of dealing
with it, i.e., either by slightly amending the new Act or by simi-
larly amending the marriage laws of the Union without in any
way interfering with the monogamous nature of marriages. The
writer at Pretoria has raised the question of the meaning of "mono-
gamous marriage". The point will be soon decided by the Supreme
Court. If the phrase does not mean what it was meant to mean
when the marriage clause was passed, the blame will be that of
the Government. They have raised the issue, not the Indian
community. Millions of Indian unions in which the husband has
married only one wife are, to the lay mind, monogamous marriages.
If the phrase means anything else, the Government have misled
the Senate, the Imperial and Indian Governments, and the Indian
community. It will not be denied that this marriage question is
one of the highest importance to us. I am sure the Europeans
of South Africa will permit us to cherish the honour of our woman-
hood as much as they cherish that of theirs.
As to the £3 poll-tax, I note that your correspondent does
not seriously contend that it is a new point. He has only to look
at the reservation clause in the correspondence of 1911 to see that
it cannot be treated as a new point. It is new in the sense that
it was not included in the recent negotiations. It could not well
be as the discussion turned only upon the new Act. Had there
been a settlement on the basis of the negotiations, the community
would have continued to urge the removal by way of petitioning,
etc., but the negotiations having failed, the way was open for the
community to include this matter of simple humanity in the strug-
gle. Lord Ampthill has declared that the Union Government gave
Mr. Gokhale a definite promise that the tax would be removed.
If the Government intend to keep the promise, they have but to
say so, and there will be no struggle on that point. If they do not
intend to keep it, Indians would have no right to exist side by
side with a free and self-respecting community if they have no
decency, and moral strength, to suffer imprisonment, or worse, in
order that a promise given to their distinguished countryman may
be fulfilled, and their poor, helpless countrymen freed from a
burden which ought never to have been imposed on them, and
for which the sin must, I fear, be shared by the free Indian popu-
lation of South Africa almost equally with the Europeans.
Lastly, your correspondent's advice that we should accept
thankfully what has been granted, and what has been denied as
being of little importance, and then press forward the redress of the
balance of grievances by way of petitions, etc., and his suggestion
that, then, we may be blessed with a special law such as the
Natives' Land Act, whereby we may have a reserve set apart for
us where we can buy land, etc., remind me, if he will forgive me
for the analogy, of Ӕsop's justice-loving wolf. We have petitioned
in vain all these years. Right after right has been taken away
from us. And an Indian reserve means that the substantial right
at present enjoyed of owning and buying land in Natal, and the
Cape, and a modified right of possessing land in the Transvaal
should be surrendered, and we must allow ourselves to be penned
in an enclosure, and then bless the Government for this grace as a
reward for not offering passive resistance, which involves suffering
for nobody but ourselves, but which, if it ensures nothing else, at
least saves us from a surrender of our manhood.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 25-9-1913
