206. LETTER TO NAZAR AND KHAN
RAJKOT,
June 3, 1902
DEAR MESSRS NAZAR AND KHAN,
I now enclose herewith a memo of expenditure on account
of the Natal work. You will notice that it amounts to Rs.
378-7-9, a trifle over Rs. 375 realized from the draft. Of late,
South African work has increased considerably. I returned from
Calcutta at the end of February, and since that time I have
engaged a clerk on the usual terms, namely, that he gets copy-
ing charges which are for the most part paid by the clients. At pre-
sent I am supposed to be taking rest, nor would there be much
work for me in Kathiawar even if I opened a regular office.
The real use I can make, therefore, of clerical assistance is with
reference to public work. Now about 100 sides of type-written
matter have been already copied, not including carbon copies,
besides a lot of Gujarati correspondence and other work. As
copying fees for this work, I have so far paid only Rs. 15.
The usual charges here are half a rupee per each written side.
I think I am understating the work when I say that he has had
to devote on an average 3 hours per day. Under the circum-
stances, I consider the payment to be very small. I should
like to be able to pay him at least Rs. 40 for the whole of the
work up to date. Moreover, the work continues. Had I got
funds, I should have been able to distribute literature more
widely. As it is, I am obliged to work as if I had no funds.
I should very much like to subscribe to one or two papers, for
instance, India, Englishman, etc., which are not to be had in the
Rajkot Library; also to directories. Soon after reaching Bom-
bay, I invested in a typewriter Rs. 200. The machine has been
wholly used for public work. I have, therefore, to submit the
following three propositions to the Congress:
1st. It should vote the balance of my account and Rs. 25
extra for clerical fees, i.e., Rs. 28-7-.
2nd. It should buy over the typewriter, to be taken over
by me whenever I am in a position to do so, at the same price,
unless it is sooner taken away by the Congress from me.
3rd. The Congress should vote a further sum of £25 to
cover future expenses.
If all the three propositions are accepted, you will have
to send me £25, and the cost of the typewriter plus Rs.
28-7-. I am thoroughly aware that any expense beyond £25 is
undertaken at my own risk and, at the time of buying the
typewriter, I had absolutely no thought of making the propo-
sal I am now making, as I did not then expect my pecuniary
position to be so bad as it is. It is, therefore, entirely at the
option of the Congress whether to accept or to reject the first
two proposals, by which I mean the Congress must not think
of sanctioning them, because they are my proposals. If, on
their merits, they appear to be reasonable and if it was a matter
of buying a new typewriter, the Congress would still invest in
it, then alone should the 2nd proposal be considered. I may also
state that the clerk working with me is my nephew and, but
for the volume of work, I should not have thought of paying
any clerical charges to him. He is not a volunteer who may be
expected to work to any extent without pay. He has no source
of income except through me. As to the 3rd proposal, if it is
accepted, it will enable me the better to carry on the public
work, whenever any expenses are necessary.
I herewith enclose a copy of the Presidency Association
Memorial1, and my letter to the Englishman and an article for
the Voice of India. I am daily expecting at least 100 copies of
your Immigration Memorial4, as also a few photographs and
copies of the coronation address, not to say copies of other
memorials, South African Blue Book, etc. I should very much
like to possess Bird's Annals of Natal and the latest report of
the Superintendent of Education. The Government Gazette and
The Natal Mercury weekly I ought to receive without fail.
Yours truly,
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 3976
