661. LETTER TO SHALIGRAM SHUKLA
PATNA,
April 21, 1947
BHAI SHUKLA,
What is this telegram ?1 Do fasts have to be undertaken for such
things even now???
Yours sincerely.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 This was from Ananddas, Secretary, Raipur Ashram, informing Gandhiji
about the addressee's fast for Harijans' entry into a temple owned by a
Congressman; vide also p. 395.
396
662. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
April 25, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
Many thanks for your letter and the pamphlets. I must make time
to read the latter.
It is impossible not to admire your courage in surviving your cruel
disability and retaining your mind unimpaired. Mine was no mere social
call. It was a pleasure to meet you and listen to you. I never expected
you to return that call. You have but to tell me that you would like
me to see you again and I would gladly do so.
I must confess that I had never realized until I came to Bihar the
extent of damage to life and property by man become fiend for the
time being. Let us hope that the awful scene will never be repeated
in Bihar. My opposition to the formation of colonies is restricted to
the Government co-operation even to the extent of land acquisition.
I would have no objection to affected Muslims congregating in Muslim
areas. There should be no check on free movement or congregation.
Your legal acumen should have prevented you from making the
sweeping remark that I had ever denied the right of self-defence. That
right does not and ought not to carry with it the licence to bear arms.
A moment's reflection would show you its futility. What you want
probably to convey is that it is the right of the citizen, however humble
he or she may be, to demand protection by the State against the thieves,
robbers and miscreants. A Government that fails to perform that duty
forfeits all claim to govern. Let me add, too, that neither during my
stay in England nor for 20 years in S[outh] Africa did I ever know
a Westerner feeling incompetence to defend himself without arms when
and if the occasion arose. Like several superstitions this one you name
seems to be confined only to this unhappy land of ours. Your gibe
at the ministers and incidentally at me, though wholly irrelevant to your
argument, is well deserved.
I am wholly at one with you in your desire that the Congress and
the League should live at peace with each other.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Extracts from this letter have been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVII, p. 354.
397
663. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
PATNA,
April 28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
Of course there could be no question of annoyance caused by your
letters. You are too courteous to cause any. Where frankness is the
common article of exchange nothing but good can be the result in the
end.
If any of my actions were based on the attitude of the ministers
I should be of little use here. I have come, if I can, to serve the Muslim
minority in Bihar as I was in Noakhali to serve the Hindu minority.
In so doing my fond belief was and is that I should serve the majority,
too. Thus I was and am against pockets promoted by authority in either
case and so against firearms. That way lies strife, not friendship whose
roots are firmly fixed in love, not fear. Man can but perish in the attempt.
Success is from God.
If the Hindus are to be considered as a hostile community for all
time, I confess that the segregation is the safest policy. That is the
logic of Pakistan which I have opposed, knowing full well that I might
find myself in the minority of one.
When ministers and I cannot live without armed guards, you
undoubtedly prove our cowardly impotence but do not sustain your
argument for possession of firearms by impotent men. Fancy me
carrying a pistol for self-defence ! ! !
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 This letter, except for the first paragraph, has been reproduced in Vol.
LXXXVII, p. 376.
398
664. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
PATNA,
April 29, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
In acknowledging your kind letter of even date, I must say that
my impression was that our correspondence was meant for knowing
each other better. But I have no objection whatsoever to your releasing
the correspondence to the Press. I wish to add that what I have said
to you about pockets and firearms I have said publicly many times
in Bihar and elsewhere.
You are less than right when you say that "the policy of the
Govt. . . for good". My policy is no firearms to civilians in the ordinary
course and perfect protection to every citizen be he poor or rich. If
I know anything of the Government of Bihar, they do not want Muslims
or anyone else to surrender to the Congress or leave the Province
for good.
From the original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 The second para of this has already been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVII,
p. 381.
2 In which the addressee had desired that the correspondence between him
and Gandhiji should be released to the Press so that the Muslims would know
about Gandhiji's views that they would neither be helped to form 'pockets'
nor be granted licences for firearms.
3 The full quotation from the addressee's letter read : "The policy of the
Government supported by you should help Muslims to decide either to
surrender completely to the Congress or abandon the Province for good."
399
