223. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 1, 1937
CHI. PRABHA,
I have your letter.
You shouldn't have stopped taking
milk. To observe mourning one may give up eating delicacies,
but one must eat whatever is essential. If one who has taken
the vow of aswada is observing it properly, he would be eating
nothing to please the palate and, therefore, would have no need
to give up anything. Moreover, if birth and death are the same
thing, and indeed they are, why mourn the death of the dear
ones? Or why rejoice at their birth? Please, therefore, start
taking milk immediately you get this letter.
If you wish, you
can make use of this letter. Moreover, our duty to the departed
consists in taking up and carrying on their work, and that all of
you are doing to the best of your abilities. The burden cannot
be borne by you alone, even if you wished. And if you give
up milk and become weak, your capacity for work will diminish,
and one may say that you will to that extent be less able to
carry your share of the burden. Reason with yourself thus and
resume taking milk and fruit.
Come here when you can stir out. And let it not be so
late that I may not be here when you come. Never mind, how-
ever, if your coming is delayed by work. We shall meet if and
when God wills.
I am not as weak as you suppose. I am able, more or less,
to attend to all my usual work. I can eat sufficiently well, too.
I do less physical work.
We are having two fairly serious patients here these days.
There are other minor illnesses, too, from time to time. Parnerkar
and Chimanlal are in bed. Parnerkar is better and will leave
bed in a few days. But Chimanlal's ship is in mid-sea. He has
typhoid. Today is the fourteenth day. The temperature has still
not come to normal. That means it will last for 21 days at
least. He is being looked after chiefly by Sharda and Bhansalibhai.
One cannot yet say that Ba's leg is completely healed.
Lilavati keeps indifferent health. She will most probably be ope-
rated upon tomorrow for tonsils.
Amtul Salaam is, as you know, a permanent patient.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3506
