69. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
October 22, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your having become considerably reduced does not perturb me a
bit. Your letters show me that your mind is vigorous. The vigour of
mind is possible only in a healthy body and I am anxious for you to
have a healthy body which need not necessarily be a strong, i.e., a
weight-lifting body.
I must congratulate you on having a relation who has to be arrested
for an imaginary political crime.
Gordon has been regularly sleeping and supping and breakfasting
at the Farm now for a week. For the weekend he has not been to
Town at all.
Albrecht has gone to Town. I think he wanted a change. But he
is to inquire about a siphon for one of the bores. I agree with him
that we should have one hole working. There seems to be great scarcity
of water just at present. He returns on Monday.
The fencing Inspector wrote two days ago suggesting that the fence
should be completed without delay. All the standards were completed
on Wednesday. For part of the work the wires are also in. The work
is going forward. We hope to finish it by the end of the week.
I have Chhaganlal's brother 1 , who arrived with him on the Farm
as a patient.
We still continue saltless; I entirely.
I think that in your absence, in view of Heymann's, I should have
written to the Lapins. It cannot do them harm to pinch themselves
a little to pay even a friend. They have not taken it at all amiss.
They have sent me a guarantee for Hilt's rent. For the moment
I forget the guarantor's name. But I have told them that they may
accept the guarantee if they consider the guarantor to be a good man.
I hope to send you the July account that you want.
I do not think I am going to India at all. The invitation was not
formal. I have therefore cabled Pro£ Gokhale saying I would rather
that he withdrew my name from discussion. 2
Dr. Mehta writes saying you are almost sure to go to India.
I hope that you have been getting I.O. from London.
With love to you and all,
Yours.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
