4. LETTER TO G. S. ARUNDALE
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
August 4, 1919
DEAR MR. ARUNDALE2,
I have read and re-read your kind letter for which I thank
you. I am publishing the letter in Young India together with this
reply.
Much as I should like to follow your advice, I feel that
I am incompetent for the task set forth by you in your letter. I
am fully aware of my limitations. My bent is not political but reli-
gious and I take part in politics because I feel that there is no
department of life which can be divorced from religion and because
politics touch the vital being of India almost at every point. It is
therefore absolutely necessary that the political relations bet-
ween Englishmen and ourselves should be put on a sound basis.
I am endeavouring to the best of my ability to assist in the pro-
cess. I do not take much interest in the reforms because they are
in safe hands and because reforms cum Rowlatt legislation mean
to my mind a stalemate. Rowlatt legislation represents a poi-
sonous spirit. After all, the English civilians can, unless Indian
opinion produces a healthy reaction upon them, reduce the re-
forms practically to a nullity. They distrust us and we distrust
them. Each considers the other as his natural enemy. Hence the
Rowlatt legislation. The Civil Service has devised the legislation
to keep us down. In my opinion, that legislation is like the coil
of the snake round the Indian body. The obstinacy of the Govern-
ment in clinging to the hateful legislation in spite of the clearest
possible demonstration they have had of public opinion against
it makes me suspect the worst. With the views enunciated above,
you will not wonder at my inability to interest myself in the re-
forms. Rowlatt legislation blocks the way. And my life is dedicated
among other things to removing the block.
Let there be no mistake. Civil resistance has come to stay.
It is an eternal doctrine of life which we follow consciously or
unconsciously in many walks of life. It is the new and extended
application of it which has caused misgivings and excitement. Its
suspension is designed to demonstrate its true nature, and to
throw the responsibility for the removal of the Rowlatt legisla-
tion on the Government as also the leaders (you among them)
who have advised me to suspend it. But if within a reasonable
time the legislation is not removed, civil resistance will follow
as surely as day follows night. No weapon in the Government
armoury can either overcome or destroy that eternal force. In-
deed a time must come when civil resistance will be recognized
as the most efficacious, if also the most harmless, remedy for securing
redress of grievances.
You suggest the desirability of unity. I think unity of goal
we have. But parties we shall always have—and we may not find
a common denominator for improvements. For some will want to
go further than some others. I see no harm in a wholesome
variety. What I would rid ourselves of is distrust of one another
and imputation of motives. Our besetting sin is not our diffe-
rences but our littleness. We wrangle over words, we fight
often for shadow and lose the substance. As Mr. Gokhale used
to say, our politics are a pastime of our leisure hours when they
are not undertaken as a stepping-stone to a career in life.
I would invite you and every editor to insist on introducing
charity, seriousness and selflessness in our politics. And our dis-
union will not jar as it does today. It is not our differences that
really matter. It is the meanness behind that is undoubtedly ugly.
The Punjab sentences are inextricably mixed up with the
Rowlatt agitation. It is therefore as imperatively necessary to have
them revised as it is to have the Act removed. I agree with you
that the Press Act requires overhauling. The Government are
actually promoting sedition by high-handed executive action.
And I was sorry to learn that Lord Willingdon is reported to
have taken the sole responsibility for the—in my opinion un-
warranted—action against The Hindu and the Swadesha Mitran. By
it, they have not lost in prestige or popularity. They have gained
in both. Surely there are judges enough in the land who would
convict where a journalist has overstepped the bounds of legiti-
mate criticism and uttered sedition. I am not enamoured of the
Declaration of Rights business. When we have changed the spi-
rit of the English civilian, we shall have made considerable head-
way with the Declaration of Rights. We must be honourable
friends, or equally honourable enemies. We shall be neither,
unless we are manly, fearless and independent. I would have us
to treasure Lord Willingdon's advice and say "no" when we mean
"no" without fear of consequences. This is unadulterated civil
resistance. It is the way to friendliness and friendship. The
other is the age-worn method of open violence on honourable
lines in so far as violence can be allowed to be honourable. For
me the roots of violence are in dishonour. I have therefore
ventured to present to India the former, in its complete form call-
ed satyagraha, whose roots are always in honour.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 6-8-1919
