7. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Tuesday [June 22, 1909]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I wrote last night and I hope that the steward posted my letters
all right. You will be surprised to learn that the train is as filthy as
it can be. I notice great deterioration on 1906. The Natal trains are
much cleaner.
I am nursing my co-delegate. His left eye is bad. He is having
salt-water wash.
I hope you will get all the wood, salt and all the moveable plants
from Orchards as also anything else that may have been left there.
I suggest that the bath, the plants and the other unnecessary articles
should be sent to the auction room. I wish too that you would come
to a decision about the motor. And why not get rid of the jewellery?
Architectural study ought to receive serious attention. You should
get all the books from Pretoria. Read again and again. The Light of
Asia, Trine's book (presented by Chh.) and Blavatsky's Voice of the
Silence.
I hope you will stick to the resolution to make unfermented bread
at home. Even if you consider the other to be better, you will soon
perfect the baking of unfermented bread. It will be good self-denial
if you would go home and lunch. Skating should not, in my opinion,
be resumed for the time being. You have undertaken far too serious
work to admit of skating.
Why not read aloud, together with Call, something from Trine or
Voice of the Silence or some such work. The Song Celestial I must
not forget.
If you see the Binions, please remember me to them.
Will you write to the people at Phoenix regularly? It would cheer
them.
Treasure the thought that men are wicked not wilfully but because
they cannot help themselves. They, therefore, deserve pity and not
contempt. God is in them just as much as in good men. The latter
1 The dates in this and other letters to the addressee supplied in square
brackets without a footnote, are as indicated by him in the source.
2 Hajee Habib ; vide p.1S and also Vol. IX, p. 270.
3 Madame H. P. Blavatsky, founder of The Theosophical Society
4 An English rendering of the Bhagavad Gita in verse, by Edwin Arnold
11
know Him, the former do not. The latter therefore have greater need
to be cautious as to their conduct. It (conduct) should be even like
the shining of the sun. He shines equally. But those who put themselves
aslant from Him or are further away from Him naturally do not get
the same warmth as those who put themselves directly under Him.
Enough of philosophizing.
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy :
National Archives of India
