106. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY,]
Ashadh Vad 0 [July 25, 1911]
CHI. HARILAL,
There should have been a letter from you from India. You
met Chi. Chhaganlal there, and he is now already here. I do
hope there will be one by the next mail.
Chhaganlal has brought news that Revashankerbhai advised
you to join some commercial class in Bombay, deprecating [the
idea of your going to] Ahmedabad. Chhaganlal also told me that
you, on the other hand, continued to prefer Ahmedabad, up to
the time he left. I still consider Ahmedabad to be better. It
serves our purpose better. Though English may be less easy to
learn in Ahmedabad, Gujarati, Sanskrit, etc., can certainly be done
well there. I personally do not like Bombay at all. You may,
however, do what you think best.
I see from Chanchi's letter that Manilal is suffering from a
serious illness. Please try if you can to persuade him to come here.
Let him and Bali both come. Open air and nutritious but simple
food is the only remedy for a tuberculosis patient. Please write to
Chanchi not to expect regular letters from me. The burden on me at
present is especially heavy. I go to Johannesburg only on Mondays.
This is how things go on: physical labour on the farm up to
10 a.m.; teaching work at the school from 1.00 to 4.30 p.m.; meal
at 5.30 p.m. and office and other correspondence at night. As I
do everything single-handed, I have no time left and I do writing
work till late at night. It is 9.45 p.m. now as I write this and I
have more letters to write yet.
Mr. & Mrs. John, Rambhabai Mrs. Phillip, Mr. K. Naidoo
and his wife are at the the Farm. There are five boys and two
girls in my school. But as they all belong to different standards,
even these few are too many.
I am still on saltless diet. I personally feel better for it and
as for Ba, it appears her very life has been saved. So far as I
can see, she is a new woman altogether. Even the children take
saltless diet on alternate weeks. It is possible they might, by and
by, adopt it for good. Mr. Kallenbach has also started the experi-
ment of saltless diet. I have a feeling that it purifies the blood
to a very high degree.
Manilal is at Phoenix. It seems to me his mind is quite at
peace there.
I saw Mr. Smuts again as Mr. Quinn's comrades have not
yet been released. I still hope that they will be. Only two persons
remain now. Smuts talked about the new Bill also. I found him
quite amenable, in conversation at least. Perhaps he might even
repeal the tax on women in Natal. I took occasion to raise this
issue as well.
Let me know how Chanchi and Rami are doing. You may
send both here whenever you feel inclined to. Take the money
required from Revashankerbhai. Ba simply longs for them. I
told her that as you were in India the decision regarding their
coming here should be left to you.
Could you read anything while on board ship? Was your
luggage inspected on your landing at Bombay? Give me all such
details.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9535
