77. LETTER TO MINISTER OF EDUCATION
DURBAN,
September 5, 1905
TO
THE HON. THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION
SIR,
We, the parents or guardians of Indian children studying in the Higher
Grade Indian School, beg respectfully to submit the following for your
consideration and relief.
We have come to know that it is the intention of the Government
to change the Higher Grade Indian School at Durban into a school for
Coloured children generally, and to observe no distinction as to girls
and boys.
We humbly submit that the decision to open the school for all
Coloured children is unjust to the Indian community, and is a depar-
ture from the assurance given by the then Minister of Education, as also
Sir Albert Hime and Mr. Robert Russell, that the school will be reserved
for Indian children only. It was established when the Government deci-
ded not to admit Indian children to the general schools in the Colony,
and we understand that even then a question was raised as to establish-
ing a school for all Coloured children, but after mature consideration
the Government decided to give a school to the Indian children alone,
and it was on that account that it was given the name it bears today.
Moreover, the term Coloured children is an elastic term. Everyone knows
the meaning of the expression British Indian, but there is no fixed mean-
ing for the term Coloured person, and seeing that the Government have
1 Vide Vol. III, pp. 205 and 236.
2 Vide Vol. III, p. 199.
adopted a policy of making distinctions, it is only fair that British Indians
should have in the largest town in the Colony a school reserved for them.
The Superintendent of Education, the other day, was pleased to say that
the Indian parents did not object in the other places in Natal to such
a mixture. We respectfully submit, however, that it is hardly fair to
draw an analogy from the small townships of Natal. It is Durban which
contains the largest free and well-to-do Indian population, and it is, there-
fore, only natural that the difficulty about such matters would be felt
keenly in Durban.
As to the question of non-separation of girls and boys, we can only
say, as parents having had considerable experience, and speaking for Indian
sentiment, that the decision is calculated to give rise to such legitimate
complaint. There are not only practical serious objections to such a course
being followed, but in many instances there is also the religious senti-
ment to be considered, and we doubt not that the Government will be
pleased to give full consideration to such sentiments.
In conclusion, therefore, we hope that the instructions regarding the
two matters referred to would be withdrawn, and that the Government
would be pleased to carry out the assurance given to the Indian com-
munity when the Higher Grade Indian School was established.
We have the honour to remain, &C.,
ABDUL CADIR,
AND 99 OTHERS
Indian Opinion, 21-10-1905
