149. LETTER TO V. K. KRISHNA MENON
SEVAGRAM via WARDHA (C. P.),
INDIA,
August 8, 1945
DEAR MENON 2 ,
Panditji has sent me your letter to him.
I am not frightened of the word 'machine'. Therefore, if a
life-giving machine can be made in India and will do the work
of the spinning-wheel more quickly and better, I would have it
and pay a tempting prize to the inventor.
You should be informed that a fat prize was issued to the
inventor of such a machine. The terms were advertised here
and in foreign countries. There was only one Indian inventor.
I sat at his machine and found it wanting, but I let the board
of judges who were previously appointed give their judgment
which, I was sorry, was hostile to the inventor.
I may also inform you that a well-known Manchester engi-
neer as also an American told me that the machine of the type
I have conceived was not a possibility and that the wheel we
have was the best possible for home use. One spindle could not
do more work than our wheel gives.
I may add by way of information that we have increased
the speed from one to five. And we are able to spin up to 80
counts largely and in exceptional cases we have gone up to 150
counts.
Your experts do not seem to know their work or they will
not want from here the things they do. Count of the cotton
need not be more than 20. Exceedingly complicated machinery is
required for very fine counts. Your experts may ignore them.
All varieties of cotton can be had from Manchester. But the use
of Surti cotton is favoured for counts higher than 10, rozio for
inferior counts.
Now I give you my opinion. I fear that the labours of your
experts will be fruitless. Let them go to Manchester and study
the spinning machines in Manchester. They will soon discover
that what they can give will be an indifferent copy of the old
type spinning-jenny which may be used in villages but to no pur-
pose. We do not want to go from the town factory to the village
factory.
You will be wrong if you suspect that I wish to discourage
you. I simply share with you my opinion based on extensive
experience. For, if anybody can produce a machine analogous
to the Singer sewing machine I should dance with joy. It is
said that his love for his wife was so great that he would spare
her the drudgery of working her needle with the hands. He
presented her with his humane machine. I would like to wel-
come another such Singer, only not for one woman but for the
starving millions of India.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI V. K. KRISHNA MENON
165 THE STRAND
LONDON, W. C. 2
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
