167. LETTER TO ANANDANAND
MUSSOORIE,
October 20, 1929
No one has so far asked me about a satyagraha in Poona.
Ultimately a satyagraha has to be launched. Our movement is
not so vigorous that we can achieve our aim while mischief-
makers are still inactive. There are many to incite the
untouchables. And since the demands of the latter are just, we
cannot oppose them either. Under the circumstances, our duty,
it seems to me, is to remain neutral and go on with our work.
I should not be surprised if we had to resort to satyagraha on
a limited scale as we did in Vykom. But I see little possibility
of it in the present atmosphere.
I do not at all insist on my suggestion regarding the
Navajivan Trust. I should be happy to let your name be there.
But if, as you say, Mohanbhai's name will do, I have no objec-
tion. It appeared to me from the language of the draft that
you and I were regarded as the original owners of Navajivan.
If that assumption is correct, either you must be there or, if we
1 Inferred from the contents of the wire. Gandhiji was in Mussoorie
from October 17 to October 24, 1929. The rest of the tour programme
also fits in with Gandhiji's itinerary in October, 1929.
2 Although the source does not mention the addressee, it is clear from
the contents that is was Anandanand.
3 Vide pp. 88-.
97
SV:II. 7
go as far back as the first stage, Shankerlal should be there.
According to your interpretation of the sentence, it can be
only Mohanlal. In that case, why should my name be there?
I do not remember anything about my name being there. I am
writing to Mohanlal. Let him do what the law requires, and
nothing more. Let Mavalankar examine the legal position and
include the name or names he considers necessary.
I shall find it unbearable if next year you are not in India
or not by my side. You seem to attach so much importance to
fate that individual effort and will have no place at all. Fate
is only the fifth wheel. Hence, if the four wheels are all right,
the fifth would hardly be needed. This indifference does not
become you at all. You are at present giving most useful service
to Jamnalalji and Jairamdasji. Both are workers worth helping
and serving. Before that work is finished, I wonder what
January will demand of us. I consider your contribution of very
great value in giving that account. I am hoping that even if
unwillingly, you will be at your place at that time.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32578/60
