115. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
October 24, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have all your letters and they were all welcome.
You have inquired where the straying letter could have
gone. I have not suppressed any. So you must get it in due course.
I am still without your weight.
I admit your analysis of Bhansali's case.
He is too good
a man to resent any friendly criticism. You should therefore talk
to him freely and see what you can do with him. Similarly Chhote-
lal. He must be broken in. Probably he will listen to you. I
am so glad you are looking after all these sick people and report-
ing to me daily. I shall look forward to your report of your visit
to the dairy and the pinjrapole.
The little rest I have taken is not even prevention. It was
merely precaution. As a matter of fact I paid for the rest by
having to do two omitted places during the Tiruppur visit. But this
harmless interruption was a good test for your nerves. No news,
even untoward, should affect you. You should not say to your-
self, 'How nice if he had not gone there or taken more rest.' It
should be enough for you to believe that I am taking all the care of
myself that my nature will allow me. There is no doubt that I
want rest. But who will give it to me? Do we get all we want?
If we did, where would our faith have any play at all? Sufficient
to know that not a blade moves but by His will. He will take care,
if we will but trust Him, not after the manner of those who will
take all the care that money can procure and then trust. That we
must take some care is true. But men of trust will not do violence
to their own nature and go out of their way to take precautions
and adopt remedies which ordinary men have no means to com-
mand. The formula therefore is the less care the better and no
more than the least of us can procure by reasonable effort. Judged
by this standard, the care that I take of myself and that is being
bestowed on me is out of all proportion and inconsistent with
my profession of faith in God. You will thus see that everything
I do in this direction appears to me to be exaggerated and I
often feel that it would be a great benefit, if I could be neglected
for a time. As it is, I am wrapped in cotton wool.
It is very likely that there will be another interruption and I
shall have to go to Delhi for a day or two. I may know in the
course of the day.
Love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5289. Courtesy: Mirabehn
