368. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
21-24, COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER, RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 13, 1905
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. It reassures me about Anandlal. Still I am
anxious to know from him why he wants to live alone. If the people at
Rustomjee's are slow, you should hurry them on. M. K. Patel has not
yet paid. I think I will receive the money some time next month. The
£6 you saw in the notice I have explained to you are part of the subs-
criptions I brought from Cape Town. I have told you that the three
items on the list represent subscriptions brought from Cape Town, and
the names of the persons who have paid, including the advertisers, have
been already sent to you. Did you not receive them? £1/14/- repre-
sents two more subscriptions collected by Mr. Gool. One of the subs-
cribers is Wilson. The other name is one I did not receive through Luche-
ram who brought the money. Lucheram has received the parcel but
has not yet paid. The £5 are not to be paid to the Press by you. I
have explained why I have transferred the amount to the Press. It is part
of capital expenditure. You need not therefore bother about it. I hope
the men who were ill are better now. For the shooting by Sam, gentle
persuasion and chaffing are the only remedies. I am afraid nothing more
can be done. With reference to Kitchin, I suggest that you should go
over to him and ask him to explain why he seems to be doing nothing.
I know he won't resent it and in any case it is better that you should under-
stand him thoroughly. Never mind about the weekly statement. You
are only to print two more copies of the magazine. I do not know whether
we will be able to recover the full amount. I am however hoping that
we will. Having gone so far I feel that we ought to print the 12 num-
bers. You are now printing the eleventh and there will only remain
the twelfth to be published. For the rest, if they want us to publish them,
we will require a guarantee. I am glad you have received the Gujarati
letter about my lectures. Print it in full in the next issue and print also
my letter. It shows that the paper is being eagerly read, and that is
what we want. Misunderstandings will sometimes happen. That however
need not make us flinch from our duty. Let that letter be printed first
1 "Sam" was Govindaswami, engineer in the Phoenix settlement and a shikari.
2 Vide "Mr. Gandhi's Clarification", 13-5-1905.
and underneath my explanation. There was some talk of the same nature
here also, and though I have been trying to explain it, the letter you
have sent me enables me to give much fuller and more public explanation.
For the time being, you may expect 32 sides of the scribbling paper in
Gujarati per week from me. Why was a bill sent to N. Sen? Was it upon
advice from Madanjit? You should write to the gentleman telling him
that the account was sent because Madanjit wrote, if that is a fact;
otherwise tell him that it was sent in inadvertence and that the management
apologise for it. I enclose for your perusal as also of Kitchin, West and
Bean, if they have seen Mrs. Besant's letter, copy of my letter to her, and
even if they have not seen her letter, you may mention the fact to them
and show the copy. Evidently, Bean supplies for you Polak's place. He
says it is well that he went to Phoenix if only for making your and
Maganlal's acquaintance.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten original : S. N. 4239.
