130. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
November 28, 1928
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I have your letter of the 15th instant. I waited all these days
for a confirmation from Dr. Bidhan Roy or Subhas, but I have
none up to the time of dictating, that is, 28th morning. I wired
on Monday to Dr. Bidhan. There is no reply. Meanwhile I have
seen a cutting which I send you herewith. They are evidently
inviting local Governments' co-operation. Evidently now all dis-
tinction has vanished and the Exhibition will be a more
spectacular display than an instructive effort designed to edu-
cate the poor cultivator and the other public. There is a gratui-
tous mention there of khadi. But there is no room in this Exhi-
bition for me or khadi in the real sense. Evidently it will not
exclude either foreign cloth or foreign anything. I cannot say I
am not grieved over this, but I do not want you to carry the
matter any further. I write this letter merely for your information.
I do not seek your intervention for a mechanical change of opi-
nion or for a mechanical respect for my wishes.
I must cut
my way through these grievous difficulties with patient toil. After
all Dr. Bidhan and Subhas represent a definite school of thought.
Their opinion is entitled to my respect as I expect theirs for my
own. That which is in the interest of the people will prevail
in the long run. Who can decide beforehand which is the correct
opinion in terms of the multitude?
I see you are having no end of difficulties with Mussalman
friends regarding your report. But I see you are unravelling
the tangle with consummate patience and tact. May your great
effort be crowned with full success.
From your note I gather that the Convention will meet not
on the 22nd December but on the 26th, 27th and 28th, the dates
on which the Muslim League is to meet. Or, am I to understand
that the Convention will formally meet on the 22nd and conti-
nue its session till the 28th? I do not see the slip referred to in
the note. Hence the little confusion in my mind. Surely, you
do not want me to be in Calcutta all these days.
From our conversation at Sabarmati I had understood that
you would want me for the Congress and not the Convention. For
myself I do not know what possible service I can render at the
Convention. There is utter confusion in my mind created by the
kaleidoscopic scenes going on before one in the country. All I
can say is that I do not envy your position. But I know you are
as much at home with such things as I am with the charkha.
And if you will agree to the arrangement, I should be content to
remain at the wheel and leave you to the joys of meandering
through the intricate paths of diplomacy. But my fate is in your
hands until you give your decision. Meanwhile I drink in the
peace and the silence that Jamnalalji has provided for me in
Wardha.
You will have seen the appeal about Lalaji Memorial. After
much telegraphing to the Punjab friends, I decided that there
should be no more signatures to the Memorial than the three that
have appeared. It would have taken a long time to have got the
consent of all the men who were mentioned as signatories. They
insisted upon at least your and my name appearing together with
the three. But I vetoed the proposal anticipating your approval
of the veto. You will however please do whatever you can for
the Fund, due regard being had to your taxing appointments.
I see that you have to begin with the first letter of the alpha-
bet about Kamala's treatment. I am glad, however, that she will
be in Dr. Bidhan's capable hands, and he will have Sir Nilratan
at his beck and call in case of emergency.
Yours sincerely,
Encl. 1
PANDIT MOTILAL NEHRU
ANAND BHAWAN, ALLAHABAD
PS.
Since dictating this I got Dr. Bidhan's wire to which I have
sent the enclosed letter.
From a photostat: S.N. 13302
