575. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 6, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the mail from you in due time. I understand what you
say about Champa. If it is necessary to get the bungalow painted,
you may do so. Let me know how much it will cost to put up a
stone fence. At the present time whom else need you ask for permis-
sion ? The brothers are in no fit state of mind to think about such
matters, and so it is I who will have to decide. But as I am dic-
tating these lines Mahadev reminds me about the necessity to
secure permission from the Government. He believes that that is
what you have referred to. I do not think you mean that. All the
same, you should ascertain whether such permission is neces-
sary for putting up a stone or brick wall. In that case, we shall
have to decide two questions: whether, if the expense is too much,
we should incur it, and, if the Government's permission is neces-
sary, whether we should apply for it at the present time.
I hope Mohan's fever has now completely left him. Even
then, it will be necessary to nurse him carefully for some time.
I cannot overcome my fear about Kusum. She wants to follow
our advice, but cannot control her mind. I have written a letter
to you about her and Bhau, which I suppose you will have got
before you get this. After writing that letter, I also wrote a post-
card to Kusum. If you have not already discussed with Bhau the
subject about which he wrote to me, do so now. I have still not
heard from Dr. Talwalkar. Ramniklal's and Joshi's letters were
received, but they were kept back here. I had detailed informa-
tion about Jamnalal. His health cannot be described as very good.
8 p.m.
Read my letter to Ratubhai. Persuade him to go to Rangoon
immediately. After reading Bhau's letter this is what I think.
The food which prisoners get in South Africa is wholesome from
the point of view of health and self-control.
In the Ashram, we
serve at breakfast whole wheat flour boiled in water and with
jaggery mixed in it. Here they give to every prisoner gruel
of five tolas of jowar flour with salt.
This experiment seems
worth trying there. Perhaps we may not be able to digest five
tolas of flour. We can start with 2½ tolas. Salt is better than
jaggery. Moreover, by replacing jaggery with salt we shall put
ourselves in the same condition as the prisoners. Rice may be
served on alternate days instead of daily as now. It follows that
dal also should be served on alternate days. In the jails in
South Africa, they served dal only on two days in a week, and
that too with one meal only. Vegetable should be served daily.
Mostly it should be leaves. It would be better if only one
vegetable was served every day. It may change from day to day.
In South Africa, they served in the evening the same kind of
gruel which they did in the morning. I am sure that there
would be no difficulty if we followed the same practice. Discuss
this suggestion with others. The food which the well-to-do out-
side and we in the Ashram eat certainly does not keep us healthy.
In jail a good proportion of prisoners maintain good health. Why
cannot we make suitable modifications and discover a diet which
would be conducive to self-control and help to preserve our health?
Just now our chief motive for doing this should be to live in
the same way as the prisoners do and thereby learn greater self-
control. Even if we adopt these suggestions, we shall retain ghee
and milk, which prisoners do not get. I am at any rate convinced
that we do not need rice very much, and also that, if we consume
milk and ghee, we do not need much dal either. If whole wheat
flour, milk and green vegetables are available, we need little else.
Yes, I do believe that some fruit in the diet is essential. It is
desirable, and even necessary, that everybody should get sour
lemons, tomatoes, radish, carrots, radish pods, etc., in small quan-
tities and uncooked. Besides ghee, we may use fresh oil also. If
you feel interested in these suggestions, discuss them with other
people. Introduce, by way of experiment, such changes as appeal
to you. And the rest you may discuss with me in your letters. Actu-
ally, I have been thinking about many other changes. I have
mentioned here only a few more important ones from among
them. If you wish, I will discuss the others too. If you ultimately
decide to introduce any of these changes, you will have of course
to discuss them with the others. However, if you feel that even
a tentative discussion of them will upset the people, you may
leave them aside. I would certainly not press you to experiment
with any changes, since I cannot be there to help in implement-
ing them. I go on making such suggestions to you, knowing that
they are not likely to frighten you.
In all there are 46 letters, 41 tied in a bundle and 5 separate.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8264. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
