47. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
June 16, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
I have not yet received your booklet.
Mahadev will go
through the Press cutting. Do something about the swelling and
cure it.
You did quite right in not running up to Vimal's elder bro-
ther, but you yourself should feel so. The knowledge that he is
under the care of your brother and that the latter is looking after
him properly should be enough for you. If you have some special
remedy for his illness or if you think that your very presence will
cure him, then it may be your duty to go. That is, if you can
become free from your work you should go in such circumstances.
You should go, however, not only for the sake of Vimal's brother
but for any person who may be ill and whose illness is likely to
be cured by your presence. It is only thus that one learns to
overcome the weakness of one's heart. Let us hope that the child
is all right now.
I think that it would be desirable to fix the maximum number
of hours for work, if that is possible. But it seems to me that the
limit would be different for each person. In an institution in
which all the members regard one another as members of a
family and everybody has the same sense of responsibility, it
would not only be impossible, but may even be improper to fix
a uniform limit for all. How can we frame a rule which would
not permit a person, whose health is good enough, who is himself
willing and who has no other work of service to claim his time,
to give all his time to the service of the institution? The conclu-
sion which I draw from this is that, if we exercise discretion in
all our work, do it calmly and selflessly and without hurry, no
one would feel the burden of work. We feel work to be a burden
only when we do it under compulsion. Work done willingly
and cheerfully is never felt as a burden. But those who have
a demoniac nature are impelled by their selfishness to take all
manner of work from their body and then break down. Such
persons have no peace of mind and we should never take them
as examples.
The line about women which you have quoted has no other
sense but what I have explained. It is true only for lustful
men. There is no injustice in saying that for immoral men, women
are a mine of evil, just as for the greedy, a mine of gold is like
hell. For the world, however, it is not so. Gold is useful in
many ways.
BAPU
[PS.]
I was glad to hear that the child was all right.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7502. Also C.W. 4979. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
