199. LETTER TO J. W. PETAVEL
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 24, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. I shan't get tired of you, because it is not
an easy thing to tire me out; but soon you will have to give me
up as a bad case. For even your latest letter does not give me
the bread I want.
Which is the brilliant successful model colony referred to in
your article? I wish I could persuade you to write less and do
more. I have told you what I am doing at Sabarmati. It seems
to me to be along the lines suggested by you without the Ame-
rican . . .1 which is your ideal but not mine. You seem to me
to build on insufficient data. For instance, what is the use of your
telling me that Germans grow 70,000 grains out of one grain,
whereas, we in India grow 70 out of one. For, what applies to
Germany does not apply to India and will not for generations
to come. I wish too that I could cure you of the habit of string-
ing together all the distinguished names you can think of, with-
out regard to the relevancy of such stringing. Will you not, like
a scientist, appeal to cold reason testing every fact for yourself and
enabling the reader to test your tests? Surely you should by this
time know that authorities are not required in support of sound
propositions except by way of some little stimulation, and they
are worse than useless when they are invoked in aid of proposi-
tions of doubtful value.
If I was the editor-in-chief of your magazine, nine-tenth of
what I read in the specimens you sent me I should score out, and
I would require you to rewrite fortifying it with concrete facts, and
then I would perhaps still further condense it. Just think what
a saving of time it would mean for the busy reader and saving of
expense in printer's ink, compositors' and proof-readers' salaries,
etc., and the matter thus printed would pass muster even in scien-
tific scale and if it was seasonable, it would sell like hot cakes.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14198
