230. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
DURBAN,
December 30, 1913
SIR,
Your first leader in today's issue of your paper invites a
statement from me, which I hope you will permit me to make.
You imagine that a more potent reason for delaying the con-
templated march is "to be found in the fact that the mass of the
local Indian community could not be relied upon to join in the
resuscitation of a form of conflict which recoiled most injuriously
upon the Indians themselves". There are other inferences, also,
you have drawn from the delay, with which I shall not deal at
present. I, however, assure you that you are wrongly informed
if you consider that the mass of the local Indian community is not
to be relied upon to join the march, if it has ever to be under-
taken. On the contrary, the difficulty to-day is even to delay it
and my co-workers and I have been obliged to send special mess-
engers and to issue special leaflets in order to advise the people
that the march must be postponed for the time being. I admit
that speculation as to whether the mass of the local Indian com-
munity will or will not join the march is fruitless, because this will
be, if it has to be, put to the test at no distant date. I give my
own view in order that the public may not be lulled into a sense of
false belief that the movement is confined to a few only among the
community.
The chief reason, therefore, for trespassing upon your courtesy
is to inform the South African public through your columns that,
whilst the great National Congress that has just closed its session
at Karachi was fully justified in asking, and was bound to ask,
for full citizen rights throughout the British Dominions for all the
King's subjects, irrespective of caste, colour, or creed, and whilst
they may not and ought not to be bound by local considerations,
we in South Africa have repeatedly made it clear that, as sane
people [we] are bound to limit our ambition by local circumstances,
we are bound to recognize the widespread prejudice, however un-
justified it may be, and, having done so, we have declared— and I
venture to re-declare through your columns— that my co-workers
and I shall not be party to any agitation which has for its object
the free and unrestricted immigration of British Indians into the
Union or the attainment of the political franchise in the near future.
That these rights may come in time will, I suppose, be admitted by
all; but when they do come, they will not be obtained by forcing
the pace, as passive resistance is undoubtedly calculated to do,
but by otherwise educating public opinion, and by the Indian
community so acquitting itself in the discharge of all the obligations
that flow from citizenship of the British Empire as to have these
rights given to them as a matter of course. Meanwhile, so far as
my advice counts for anything, I can only suggest that the efforts
of the Indian community should be concentrated upon gaining or
regaining every lost civil right or every such right at present with-
held from the community; and I hold that even this will not
happen unless we are ready to make an effective protest against
our civic destruction by means of passive resistance, and unless
through our self-suffering we have demonstrated to the European
public that we are a people that cherishes its honour and self-
respect as dearly as any people on earth.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 31-12-1913
