442. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 12, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your weekly post. I found Smt. Dhanvanti's letter,
but did not find Valjibhai's article. If you did send it, it seems to
have been lost in the office here. I hope he has kept a copy.
If it has not been left behind there, write to Valji and inform
him, so that time may be saved. He should know that this is
a jail.
Vaseline will help Amina better than ghee can. She should
thoroughly mix a little boric acid powder with it.
I cannot take the final decision about Dhiru, since I do not
know him well.
Only you and others there who have known
him for many years can do so.
He has studied under Panditji.
Probably Narahari also knows him well. He is working at pre-
sent under your direct supervision. If what he writes to me can
be trusted, it is our duty to let him go. But we cannot do that
if we have the slightest doubt about him. Whether or not Santi-
niketan is a suitable place for him may be doubtful, but we have
no choice in the matter. Besides, there is no doubt that they
teach painting well there. Whether Dhiru will use his skill
well or not will depend entirely on his character. I cannot judge
whether he is a boy of good character, whether he is hard-work-
ing and whether he has any aptitude for painting. After writing
a long letter to me, he has kept silent. I don't feel very happy
about that. But it is possible that he has not written again be-
cause of shyness or out of respect for me.
lt is desirable that everybody should keep silent for some
time after prayer or talk only in whispers. A person may speak
about Ashram work, however. In army barracks, soldiers are
not permitted to talk after the bell for retiring is sounded. In
any case there should be no murmuring immediately after the
prayer. This is necessary for the good of the boys as well as of
of the Ashram. This rule is strictly enforced in jails. Were it
not so, life in a jail would be intolerable. In jails even lights
are generally put out at a fixed hour. And talking in loud voices
is never permitted. If, therefore, you can introduce a rule that
people should be silent or talk only in whispers, you should do
so immediately.
BAPU
[PS.]
I suppose you have read Dr. Sharma's letter. Welcome him
heartily when he comes. His daughter also should be welcomed.
Give him the necessary facilities for his experiments. His letters
carry a very good impression of him.
I have had no comments from you recently regarding the
effect of the changes in food. Let me know the results. No-
body should be forced to accept these changes. If anybody desires
some modification, grant his request within our limits. Chhotu-
bhai has written to me about this. Read my reply to him.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8354. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
