65. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Thursday [January 27, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Received your letter. I understand what you say about Mr. Cordes.
I also admit that you can see his drawbacks better. But what I want to
say is that he is a good man despite those drawbacks. You should think
of his merits only. More of this when we meet.
<§<ffa": ~~ ' lNT-W fCf~q- llf'iFfT l1TerCfT 'TTq-~T 1
~PP:rl1!?ft Cfm~
~~~:
ucf+re-1:fT gam;:r: 11
O<fTm 11\f41 en) '4 : ~91lf ~cft q-ro:scrr 'Jf1l:'JITm: 12
I had written to you about this verse. I do not remember the
fourth line. There are likely to be some spelling mistakes. I have no
time to recollect it. Indra is marked with holes all over his body;
Vidura is impure; Madhava is a cowherd; Vasishtha is the son of a
prostitute; the bee lives in the mud; fire is omnivorous; the ocean is
salty; the Pandavas belong to the caste of bastards. Thus, no one
is without blemish. You have done well in letting me know your views.
Please be careful in giving instructions about allowing credit for
Indian Opinion. We can find some remedy for the difficulties you mention.
The best course I can see for the present is that when some subscriber
has to be discontinued in view of [our new] rule, it should be done in
consultation with Purshottamdas, Thaker and you. A subscriber may be
placed on the 'suspense list' if he is found to be worth continuing
after a month. You may open a separate account for the suspense list.
Please place this suggestion before Mr. Cordes. It is better to put all
the names sent by Chi. Chhaganlal on this list.
The introduction of the rule of allowing one month's credit could
be physical force (selfishness) as well as soul-force (altruism). To which
of the two categories it belongs depends on the motive behind making
the rule.
Your idea of not taking anything from charity is very good. In
fact, it is not charity. It would, however, be proper for us to regard it
as such. But we had better not raise the question under the present
circumstances. Do see that the amount you have indicated gets credited.
It is good for you, for the present, to draw £4 [a month]. I had
thought of it when I took the decision. I had also taken into consi-
deration Chi. Chhaganlal's prospective visit to England. I had thought
about Rajkot, too.
I rejoice to read about your brahmacharya vow. Your vow for one
year is also good and you have all my blessings for it. You will expe-
rience a different strength when you have passed through it.
It is better for Santok not to think of going to India now.
I have already communicated to you my views about it.
I felt sad when I read Chi. Chhaganlal's description of the Ser-
vants of India Society. It is a matter for regret that a great man like
Prof. Gokhale is engrossed in it. I believe he will come out of it, for he is
1 Vasishtha was born to Urvashi, one of the celestial nymphs who were free to
accept love from whomsoever they chose.
2 The correct reading is \fuqm\q~: i.e., the God of love is bodiless. He was
burnt to ashes by Lord Shiva with the fire emitted from his third eye when the
former tried to distract him from his penance. Gandhiji mentions bhamro (bee) instead
of kamal (lotus).
3 The five sons of Pandu and heroes of the Mahabharata
4 King Pandu, unable to beget progeny himself because of the curse of a Rishi,
asked his wives Kunti and Madri to have progeny by invoking the gods. Thereupon,
Kunti had Yudhishthira through Yama, Bhima through Vayu and Arjuna through
Indra, while Madri had Nakula and Sahadeva by the grace of the Ashvini
Kumaras.
5 Founded in Poona by G. K. Gokhale in 1905
honest. It is simply an indifferent imitation of the West. Is it proper
for the servants to have servants? And who are the servants? Why
was it necessary to engage them? Why do they have others to cook for
them? What do these 'servants' think of religion? Why should there
be large buildings in India? Why should not huts be enough? It is like
digging up a mountain to kill a mouse. When will the mission under-
taken by Prof. Gokhale end? How much money will it cost? What a
superstition that only an M.A. or B.A. could become a 'servant' ! It is
like the castor-oil plant passing for a mighty tree in a barren land. I
do feel that the aims of Phoenix as well as the way of life there surpass those
of the Society. There are quarrels amongst us but these are found every-
where. When we begin to make syrup out of sugar, a lot of dirt is seen
in it, but we do not regard dirt as syrup. We are preparing here a
kind of syrup, and dirt is bound to be seen till the syrup is ready. What
we are doing here is the real thing; what goes on in Poona is, leaving
aside the motive, unreal. The motive is good, but what is being done is
bad. I have written this letter in the midst of great pressure of work.
The condition of my mind at present is that of '~fu ~fu '1. Even Phoe-
nix is '~fu'. Yet, comparatively, it is better than the pomp and show
of Poona. Doctor Mehta has been able to grasp this inner signi-
ficance. Please do not take this to mean that either Prof. Gokhale or
his associates are not worthy of our deep respect. But ours is no blind
reverence. According to the standard indicated by me in Swaraj2, the
work of Mr. Gokhale's 'servants' cannot be regarded as proper. It is
likely to add to our slavery. If I tried to turn East into West, I also would
sigh like Gokhale and lose heart. My present state of mind is such that
even if the whole world were against what I have written, I would not
be depressed. This I say not out of pride; it is the statement of a fact.
We do not aspire to improve India; we want to improve ourselves. That
alone can be our aspiration, the rest is all false. He who has not rea-
lized his self has not known anything. The servants' knowledge of
English has become a camouflage for them. That Chhaganlal could
not answer their question about Phoenix only shows his timidity. That
was but natural. With a little thought, he could have seen that the
position taken by the 'servants' was materialistic and not spiritual. We
have to rid ourselves of the fetish of literacy and mundane knowledge.
Despite these views of mine, there is nothing wrong in publishing
in Indian Opinion some portion of the description given by Chhaganlal.
We shall learn from it. Let us emulate Ravana's energy and turn to-
wards the inner spirit.
You may share this letter with whomsoever you choose in Phoenix;
then send it to Chi. Chhaganlal, as I shall have no time to write to him.
I wanted to leave on this Saturday but now I see that it is not
possible. I do not think I shall be able to leave before the 15th of
February.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 4926
Courtesy: Radhabehn Chowdhri
