102. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 16, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I am able only today to reach your letter of 8th March.
What I meant about a Selection Board was this. You should
appoint a small and efficient committee consisting of, say, a man
like Thadani and someone from St. Stephen's College and another
person as Secretary with you and Thakkar Bapa as members ex-
officio. This Committee would invite applicants for the David
Scheme Scholarships. It will examine the applications and recom-
mend them to the Board. The Board will, if it accepts the recom-
mendations, grant the scholarships. This Committee will also be
invited to frame a scheme giving conditions under which scholar-
ships should be given describing the qualifications of the candi-
dates and it will be under these conditions that applications would
be invited. I would suggest the Committee keeping in touch with
Mr. David in so far as he may be willing to assist the Committee
with his informal guidance and advice. So much about the Selec-
tion Board.
With reference to the donations, I am not satisfied with what
you say. I had the fear that there might not be an adequate
response to an appeal for such donations. I had said as much to
Mr. David when I told him why even though I liked his scheme
I was reluctant to back it publicly. I advised him therefore to
consult you and to consult the Bombay Board which he did, and
both of you warmly took it up. You even advertised it in the draft
constitution. I therefore felt encouraged after having waited for
a long time to bless the scheme in the Harijan. I do feel that there
must be some earmarked donations apart from the general collec-
tions. I do not like the idea of setting apart sums from the gene-
ral collections already made. We must draw, if we at all can, some
sanatanists among the donors. Anyway, that's my idea, and that's
also Jamnalalji's, Sardar Vallabhbhai's and of all of us. I have
already approached Janaki Devi to give the scheme Rs. 2,500/-
and I am presently going to write to others. I would like to include
your name among the donors and publish it.
Before writing anything in the Harijan, I shall await your
considered reply to this.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20592. Also C.W. 7932. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
