197. LETTER TO HAKIM AJMAL KHAN
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 26, 1926
DEAR HAKIM SAHEB,
You must pardon me for not writing to you in Urdu. My
right hand is supposed to take rest from writing. To write in Urdu
with the left hand is a laborious task. And just now when I am
supposed to do minimum of work, I do not want to give a lot of
time to write to you in Urdu. Hence this dictated letter.
So you have been drawn into having to look after me as if
you had not worries enough without this additional burden. I
have your last telegram. Let me explain my own position. I
am in no mood to leave the Ashram for a cooler place and there-
fore I am in no hurry to leave it. I am bound by promise to
Jamnalalji and other friends that I should be ready at their ins-
tance to leave Sabarmati any day for a place to be appointed by
them. But if I am to select the day of departure, I would like
to leave when the Ashram school closes for a brief vacation. I
would not like to leave a 30 minutes' class I am taking and which
is no tax on me. Moreover there are small things which I would
like to finish before I go. Thirdly, and from the point of view
of health, what is most important is that the weather here is de-
lightfully cool. It is unusual for this part of India at this time
of the year but copious rains having fallen in Marwar, they have
made the atmosphere in Gujarat exceptionally cool. One needs
to use blankets in the morning and throughout the day there is no
oppressive heat. This kind of weather is likely to last for some
time. It is therefore really speaking most agreeable for me at the
present time. Even as I am dictating this, a cold wind is blowing
upon me. And I cannot imagine a better climate anywhere else.
I am walking well at least an hour daily. I am eating well and
speaking well. I am putting on weight at the rate of nearly one
pound per week. I would therefore not like to leave the Ashram
whilst these favourable circumstances last. Moreover, if it is at
all possible, why not remove me when Mussoorie is a little
warmer than it is today and then start for Mussoorie instead of
taking an intermediate stage for a few days. All this might have
been necessary if I was very delicate in health and could not
bear the heat here. I am neither delicate nor is there any heat.
Now, I leave the thing in the hands of friends who are for the
moment controlling my movements.
With you, I suppose, you have little right to say what I should
do and should not for my health. For, you are much more deli-
cate than I am. From all accounts that I have received, I per-
ceive that you have lost almost all you have gained in Europe and
that you are paying no attention to your health, will give yourself
no rest, and will see friends and patients at all hours of the day,
even night. Unless therefore you mend your ways, I propose not to
listen to you at all in the matter of precautions about health. I am
a follower of the motto "Physician cure thyself".
Won't I would [sic] like to unburden myself about the present
position in our country. I am distraining [sic] myself. What is
the use of idle paper discussion? I therefore watch, wait and
pray and hope also that where we see darkness about us God is
preparing to dispel that darkness.
Where is Khwaja? Has he left the Jamia and returned to his
practice? Who is in charge of the institution now? Where is
Shwaib? He has not acknowledged even Anasuya Bai's letter?
I have not written to him expecting him to write to me when
he was free from the affairs of the delegation.
Yours sincerely,
HAKIMJI AJMAL KHAN SAHEB
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 19385
