150. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[BOMBAY,]
Khilafat Day [October 17, 1919]
SIR,
The following order was served upon me yesterday:
Whereas under Rule 3 of the Defence of India (Consolidated) Rules,
and was further pleased to order him to return to and reside within the
limits of the Bombay Presidency;
And whereas the necessity for this order has ceased to exist;
Now therefore the Lieut.-Governor is pleased with the sanction of
the Governor-General hereby to cancel the said order with effect from
this day, the 15th Oct. 1919.
I am naturally thankful for it in that it enables me to visit
the Punjab and to render such service as I may be capable of ren-
dering. At the same time, I cannot help saying that it was not
with unmixed pleasure that I received the release order. The
order of internment and externment was no discredit to me; my
conscience was absolutely clear. When it was served upon me, it
appeared to me to be an act of criminal folly on the part of the
Government. And now, though the release order is creditable
to Government, it cannot recall the precious lives for whose loss
the prohibitory order must be held responsible. Moreover, so
long as the Rowlatt Act remains on the statute-book, the release
order can be no joy for me. In the internment order I had a ready-
made weapon for offering civil resistance. I hear people saying that
satyagraha is as dead as Queen Anne, and that Mr. Montagu
will never repeal the Rowlatt Act, although he is quite sure that
the Act will never be enforced. Those who make the first state-
ment do not know what satyagraha is and how it works. Those
who make the second do not know the power of satyagraha. He
who runs may see that satyagraha is slowly but surely pervading
the land. So far as Mr. Montagu's supposed declaration is con-
cerned, the strongest man of South Africa had to yield to that
matchless force. It was in 1909 that General Smuts, backed by
Gen. Botha and the European opinion of South Africa, said that,
although the Transvaal Asiatic Act would not be enforced, he
would never formally repeal it, but in 1914 he proved his strength
by repealing that Act and removing the legal racial bar from the
Immigration Law. I have not the slightest doubt that Mr. Mon-
tagu and the Viceroy will yield to the same ancient force and
repeal the Rowlatt Act long before the expiry of its time limit.
But whether they do or not the lives of the satyagrahis are dedi-
cated to securing among other things the repeal of that Act.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 18-10-1919
