75. LETTER TO SHASTRI MAHASHAY
December 21, 1925
DEAR SHASTRI MAHASHAY,
I had to make my choice—to write to Gurudev directly or to
Ramanand Babu or to you. At the last I have made my choice
and I leave it to you to show this letter to Gurudev and Ramanand
Babu.
I had R. Babu's article in The Modern Review on the charkha
read out to me. I must own that it has deeply pained me. I
know that he is too good wilfully to misunderstand anybody.
It is my misfortune that what I thought I had written with the
purest motives should be understood as being otherwise written
even by men like him. I should not pardon myself if even
Gurudev so understood my article.
I can but explain my position and ask every friend in Shanti-
niketan to accept my explanation. Gurudev's title was not used
in ignorance. I knew that he had not renounced the title but
had asked to be relieved of it. He was not so relieved. And
Andrews and I had a discussion over it and we both came to the
conclusion that the title not having been taken away, we, Guru-
dev's friends, should make no fuss about it. We also felt that it
would be courtesy even to make use of the title now and then.
I know what poison has been emitted over these boycotts. I have
therefore gone out of my way to describe titled personages by
their titles in order to show that the use of titles was no crime.
It was thus out of regard for Gurudev that I used the title. It
was used so automatically that I knew that I had used it, only
when Mahadev drew my attention to it, on receipt of Rama-
chandran's letter.
As to jealousy. Let R. Babu and the other friends know that
not one but several Bengali friends and some Gujarati friends and
even others mentioned the matter in that light. Let me also add
that I tried to disabuse them of the prejudice. When I dis-
covered that the belief was fairly general in certain circles, I
thought I must refer to it in the columns of Young India.
It surprised me to find R. Babu mention the Poet's other
qualifications. I take leave to say that they are not to be com-
pared with his matchless poetry. As a reformer I should cross
swords with him. But who can equal him as a poet? There
are many reformers in the world today, but he is the only Poet
outdistancing every other in the race. He is a great schoolmaster,
but himself has told me his pedagogy is his plaything. To men-
tion his other qualifications, however great they may be, side by
side with his poetry is to ignore the unquestioned supremacy of
his poetry. At least that is what I think.
Lastly pray believe me when I assure you that I wrote
that article in no unloving, unfriendly or critical spirit. I wrote
it to disarm criticism and to testify that his differences with me
could not possibly diminish my regard and affection for him. So
please all of you regard me as one of you, incapable of mis-
understanding the Poet, or his mission. I must not be deserted
or misunderstood by you. Do please ask R. Babu to let me have
a line to say that he accepts my explanation. And will you get
an assurance from the Poet that he at least did not misunder-
stand me?
You may share this with anyone you like.
With love,
Yours,
M.K.G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
