270. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[PHOENIX,]
Shravan Vad 9 [September 5, 1912]
CHI. HARILAL,
I have your letter. I am surprised. I cannot recall a single
month during which I did not write to you. I am certain that my
letters to you have miscarried. You complain that there has been
no letter from me and say you are sad on that account. We, in the
absence of letters from you. . . .3 l e t us see what happens at the
address. Ba, Devdas and I have come over to Phoenix. I brought
Ba over because she was very ill. Devdas [, too,] was very keen [to
come here]. The understanding with him is that he should con-
tinue at Phoenix till my next visit, learn composing while still
attending to studies and live on a salt-free diet for 28 days in the
month. For the present at least, he does all this.
I have made further changes in my way of life, which I hope
to describe when I have the time.
Mr. and Mrs. Polak will stay in Durban for the present. I
have advised Mr. Polak to start practice. Let us see what happens.
Since the Immigration Officer here is strict nowadays, Mr.
Pragji has not landed as yet. He will probably do so tomorrow.
Mr. Sorabji continues to write.
Manilal is busy with his studies.
Ramdas, Mr. Kotwal,
Jekibehn, Ani etc., are on the Farm.
Mr. Kotwal and I also live on one meal a day. After hearing
from Chanchi about your one-meal practice, I, too, felt strongly
inclined to adopt it. Mr. Kotwal offering to join me, the idea was
immediately put into practice. Follow any course that you like, so
long as you are mindful of your health. I shall not forgive you
if you ruin your health. I cannot help feeling that the time and
money spent on French are being wasted. I can give you no idea
of how much better it would have been if you had spent this
valuable time on Sanskrit. The atmosphere, however, in which
you move nowadays being corrupt, you thought of French. What a
good thing it would have been if you had taken up Sanskrit!
Though that might have delayed your passing the examination
by a year. Knowledge of Sanskrit opens the doors to all the
Indian languages. These doors, you went out of your way to shut.
I make these observations, since you opened the subject of French
again. I should be happier if you would reconsider the matter
even now and start on Sanskrit, sacrificing a year and spending
Rs. 8 instead of Rs. 7 on private coaching. Do as you will, however;
I do not wish to stand in the way of your joining any standard you
choose. Treat my advice as no more than that of a close friend.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have not been able to understand why Chanchi did not
come. Cable when you send her so that I can arrange for her
landing. It was Chanchi who gave the news about Rami.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9542
