72. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
June 19, 1932
I consider yours to be a scientific experiment, and therefore I
have been watching you all along and have desired to follow your
work in full detail. You are a seasoned worker and will en-
counter many more difficulties in the future.
This is the usual
pattern of every great work: once in a while we feel that the line
is now clear and we shall be able to make rapid progress. We then
relax a little, but all at once we notice a deep ditch in front of
us. Therefore you must settle there permanently. The one thing
needful is infinite patience with self-confidence at the root of
it. Self-confidence means an unflinching faith in one's work. Once
this faith is acquired, there is no need to be anxious about the
numerous errors we are unconsciously bound to commit from
time to time. We must not permit ourselves to be paralysed
by the fear that we are perhaps on the wrong path.
I consider
your experiment to be scientific, yet I think it is not perfectly
scientific now; but your work shares in all the characteristics
of a scientific experiment, and you have the patience needed in
carrying it out. I had noticed one defect in you before, but I think
you have remedied it intelligently. Or perhaps your devotion
to truth has helped you to remedy it without being conscious of
it. That defect was this: you were satisfied with incomplete data
and drew hasty conclusions from them. But this is no longer the
case. A scientific experimenter has profound confidence in himself
and is therefore never down-hearted. At the same time he is so
humble that he is never satisfied with his own work, and is not
guilty of drawing hasty conclusions. On the other hand he mea-
sures his progress off and on and declares emphatically that the
result of 'x' can be 'y' only. Our workers are generally lacking in
this humility of the real man of science. I was therefore not
surprised when I found that you were not an exception to this
rule. But I do believe that you have the power of persevering
till the end. Ardently wishing that you may not suffer even from
this little limitation, I gently drew your attention to it many
years ago. In order to succeed you must first collect a band of
fellow-workers around you. They are bound to be gradually at-
tracted to you in view of the work you are doing. In order to at-
tract them you must cultivate the quality of tolerance springing
from generosity. Co-workers cannot do everything that we are
doing or we want them to do. But if they are well-intentioned
and diligent, we should not despise their assistance. Only thus
can we hope to build up a team. In the absence of such an ac-
commodating spirit some of us have to plough a lonely furrow.
One thing more about your work. You should cultivate a
desire to take tips even from those who are working on other lines.
It is a mistake to suppose that a scientific experiment can be per-
formed in one particular manner, and those who fall into such
error stand to lose a good deal. We for ourselves may follow a
method which we think to be right or perfect, but if others do not
recognize its perfection or notice defects in it, we should let them
go their own way. We thus increase our power of comprehension.
I cannot say anything about your present method of work.
As I am partial to you, it seems to be all right from here. But if
I am able to see you actually at work, it is possible that many ideas
would occur to me and I would place them before you for consi-
deration. I cannot picture your work accurately from this distance.
It would therefore be an impertinence to offer any suggestions.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 234-
