240. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
October 24, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
I regret that I have to trespass upon your courtesy again with refe-
rence to the Asiatic Registration Act. Your report of today's happen-
ings on Von Brandis Square bears evident traces of inspiration.
I pass by the description of Indian pickets as "pickets of coolies"
as merely an ignorant description of inoffensive and honourable men.
I still maintain that neither the pickets nor any other Indians have
exceeded the limits of moral suasion in preventing registration. The
Indian referred to by your reporter was in the witness-box today, and
certainly said that there was no molestation. He was taken hold of by
the arm, and, when he said that he wanted to go to the registration
office, he was allowed to go. That was his own evidence, corroborated
by his co-registrant and the accused. I do not know whether this can by
any stretch of imagination be described as "roughly collared outside the
office". The men—there were two Indians—who were met by the accused
Indian, who, by the way, was not a picket, did not know what the law
was. All they knew was that they got a letter from their master to go to
some office in Johannesburg to sign. Why should any exception be taken
to people at least informing such men of the trap into which they were
about to fall? The opinion of the registration officer that Dr. Mathey's
client must have been intimidated because he did not appear to register
may, perhaps, be counter-balanced by another and more probable
opinion — that the client has listened to the remonstrances of his friends,
and not been intimidated. I am free to admit that there are many Indians
who, but for the pickets, would allow themselves to be registered. The
real thing they fear is not intimidation but Indian public opinion. These
are men who know the law to be bad, but who cannot rise superior to
their worldly ambition, and they would undoubtedly register if there
were no pickets. To mention the priest case in connection with the matter
betrays either very great ignorance or equally great prejudice on the
part of your reporter, because that case was entirely a religious quarrel,
and the priest who was assaulted, in giving his evidence, himself expressed
exceeding regret that he had ever filed his affidavit. I do not wish to
defend the Dervish who committed the assault, but I fancy that all
communities have such men and all are proud of them. They do not
live for a nationality but for a principle.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 25-10-1907
