569. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 5, 1945
CHI. JAWAHARLAL,
I have long been intending to write to you but can do so
only today. I have also been wondering whether I should write
in English or Hindustani. In the end I have decided to write
in Hindustani.
I take first the sharp difference of opinion that has arisen
between us. If such a difference really exists people should also
know about it, for the work of swaraj will suffer if they are
kept in the dark. I have said that I fully stand by the kind
of governance which I have described in Hind Swaraj. It is
not just a way of speaking. My experience has confirmed the
truth of what I wrote in 1909 . If I were the only one left who
believed in it, I would not be sorry. For I can only testify to
the truth as I see it. I have not Hind Swaraj in front of me.
It is better that I redraw the picture today in my own lan-
guage. Then it would not matter to me whether or no the pic-
ture tallies with that of 1909 nor should it to you. I do not
have to establish what I had said before. What is worth know-
ing is only what I have to say today. I believe that if India,
and through India the world, is to achieve real freedom, then
sooner or later we shall have to go and live in the villages-in
huts, not in palaces. Millions of people can never live in cities
and palaces in comfort and peace. Nor can they do so by kill-
ing one another, that is, by resorting to violence and untruth. I
have not the slightest doubt that, but for the pair, truth and
non-violence, mankind will be doomed. We can have the vision
of that truth and non-violence only in the simplicity of the
villages. That simplicity resides in the spinning-wheel and what
is implied by the spinning-wheel. It does not frighten me at all
that the world seems to be going in the opposite direction. For
the matter of that, when the moth approaches its doom it whirls
round faster and faster till it is burnt up. It is possible that
India will not be able to escape this moth-like circling. It is
my duty to try, till my last breath, to save India and through
it the world from such a fate. The sum and substance of what
I want to say is that the individual person should have control over
the things that are necessary for the sustenance of life. If he
cannot have such control the individual cannot survive. Ulti-
mately, the world is made up only of individuals. If there were
no drops there would be no ocean. This is only a rough and
ready statement. There is nothing new in this.
But even in Hind Swaraj I have not said all this. While I
appreciate modern thought, I find that an ancient thing, considered
in the light of this thought looks so sweet. You will not be able to
understand me if you think that I am talking about the villages of
today. My ideal village still exists only in my imagination. After
all every human being lives in the world of his own imagination.
In this village of my dreams the villager will not be dull-he
will be all awareness. He will not live like an animal in filth
and darkness. Men and women will live in freedom, prepared
to face the whole world. There will be no plague, no cholera
and no smallpox. Nobody will be allowed to be idle or to wallow
in luxury. Everyone will have to do body labour. Granting
all this, I can still envisage a number of things that will have
to be organized on a large scale. Perhaps there will even be
railways and also post and telegraph offices. I do not know what
things there will be or will not be. Nor am I bothered about
it. If I can make sure of the essential thing, other things will
follow in due course. But if I give up the essential thing,
I give up everything.
The other day, at the final day's meeting of the Working
Committee, we had taken a decision to the effect that the
Working Committee would meet for two or three days to work
out this very thing. I shall be happy if it meets. But even if
it does not meet, I want that we two should understand each
other fully. And this for two reasons. Our bond is not merely
political. It is much deeper. I have no measure to fathom that
depth. This bond can never be broken. I therefore want that
we should understand each other thoroughly in politics as well.
The second reason is that neither of us considers himself as
worthless. We both live only for India's freedom, and will be
happy to die too for that freedom. We do not care for praise
from any quarter. Praise or abuse are the same to us. They
have no place in the mission of service. Though I aspire to live
up to 125 years rendering service, I am nevertheless an old man,
while you are comparatively young. That is why I have said
that you are my heir. It is only proper that I should at least
understand my heir and my heir in turn should understand me.
I shall then be at peace.
One thing more. I had written to you about Kasturba
Trust and Hindustani. You had said you would write after
thinking things over. I find that your name is already figuring
in the Hindustani Sabha. Nanavati reminded me that he had
approached you and Maulana Saheb and that you had appended
your signature. That was in 1942. That was long ago. You
know where Hindustani stands today. If you still stand by that
signature, I wish to get some work out of you in this regard. It
will not involve much running about, but some work will be
called for.
The work of Kasturba Memorial Trust is rather complicated.
I realize that if what I have said above is going to irk you
or is irking you, you will not feel comfortable even in the
Kasturba Trust.
The last point concerns the sparks that are flying about
in the conflict with Sarat Babu. I have been pained by the
episode. I have been unable to trace it to its root. If what
you have told me is all there is to it and nothing more remains
to be said, then I do not have to inquire further. But if an
explanation seems necessary, I very much want to hear it.
If we have to meet to thrash out all these matters, then we
should find time for a meeting.
You are working very hard. I trust you are in good health
and Indu is well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Gandhi-Nehru Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
