195. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
July 30, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
Not many visits have been paid during the last week and yet a very
great deal of work has been done. Lord Ampthill has been doing very
well; he was in touch with Sir George Farrar, General Smuts and Lord
Selborne on the one hand and Lords Crewe, Morley, Lansdowne and
Curzon on the other. He himself seems to be very hopeful. I send you
copy of my long letter to him.
Sir Muncherji, too, wrote asking for an interview with Smuts and he
has promised to send him an appointment as soon as pressure upon his
time has been removed. This interview was invited when it was un-
known what definite action Lord Ampthill was taking. Arrangements
were also made for beginning a public campaign on a gigantic scale. I
have it sketched out in my mind, but, in view of Lord Ampthill's work,
everything remains in suspension.
We saw Lord Morley on Monday; he gave us about half-an-hour.
Sir Charles Lyall was present at the interview; it was private and infor-
mal. He wanted to know whether the feeling in India was keen on the
matter. I told him it was and I told him also that the reason why a meet-
ing had not been held in Bombay was that Sir Pherozeshah feared vio-
lence. No one could be prevented from attending the meeting or from
making bitter speeches. The question, in my opinion, shows that he is not
satisfied that the feeling in India is keen, or rather, invites an emphatic
expression of opinion from all over India. However, he has promised to
pass on the substance of the interview to Lord Crewe and even to see
Smuts. You will be surprised to learn that he did not know that General
Smuts was in London, and he had forgotten everything about objections
to the Asiatic Act.
On your side, you should have meetings, if they will hold meetings;
if not that, representations should be sent from various bodies and, if you
can get sufficient volunteers, you may have a brief petition signed by
thousands. I hope you have had the petitions to Dadabhai Naoroji and
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 Vide Appendix XVI.
3 (1845-1920); Anglo-Indian administrator
4 The original has "to".
5 Vide Appendix XV.
the President of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce translated in the princi-
pal languages and widely distributed. In each place, if you are properly
supported, you should be able to get volunteers. They should then take
up these copies and distribute them. They can be posted near mosques,
temples, theatres and such other places.
I expect a cablegram from you today, after which I will hope to
send you a brief cable. If, however, I do not receive one from you to-day,
I may cable independently either tomorrow or Monday. Mr. Anglia
and the other two arrive tomorrow. Mr. Abdul Caadir is still staying
at the same hotel with us. I hope you will secure Indian directories and
a suitable English-into Gujarati and Gujarati-into-English dictionary
and other books of reference or study which are not obtainable in
South Africa. You may also discuss our scheme of education with Profes-
sor Gokhale; he, being a very great educationalist, may give helpful
hints. You ought to be able, with Chhaganlal1, to fix up an agency in
Bombay, and you may be able to come to some definite understanding
with Natesan also for propagating our views and ideas.
Millie arrived on Saturday. Pater went to Southampton, but he did
not return with them. They were received by Mater, Maud, Hajee
Habib, Hoosen and myself. Sallie could not come because she had to
attend to her business. Both Millie and Celia, as also Waldo and baby,
were looking very nice. I think they look all the better for the voyage.
They had a good time on board. Celia went to find Amy and then direct-
ly went to the apartments; Millie came to the hotel with baby, as the
arrangement was that Celia should come with Amy to the hotel, but
she, in her excitement, did not take in the name of the hotel where I
am staying and went to Hotel Cecil and, afterwards, directly to the apart-
ments. Waldo has a slight touch of cold, nothing serious about it.
There was an at-home at Miss Smith's; Millie and Maud were
there. I think both of them enjoyed it; it was rather good and there was
good company. There were a few Indian ladies also. Millie became
chummy with one of them—Mrs. Dube. She is Hindustani though she
was partly brought up in Bombay; she speaks English very nicely. Millie
will come into closer contact with her.
She does not like the apartments she is in and will probably take a
small house partly furnished, either in Cricklewood or near Kew. I
have suggested to her that she should have Hoosen with her; it would
be mutually satisfactory. Hoosen is going on splendidly; a better youth
it will be difficult to find, but he is somewhat dreamy, he has not the go
that I should expect a youth of his age to have and does not give himself
enough exercise, but, as he is not self-willed, he will easily accept a gentle
guidance from Millie, with whom I have discussed what should be done
for him. Amy is also staying with Millie. I understand that Amy has
grown wonderfully, but she is not a steady girl and she causes some
anxiety to Millie. I sent a cablegram on Monday to Daphtary, Mora-
lity and the Presidency Association regarding you. I am curious to
know whether the cablegrams were acted upon.
I attended a great suffragette meeting last night; met Mrs. Pan-
khurst also. I am sending you their weekly Votes for Women. We have a
great deal to learn from these ladies and their movement. I have other
pamphlets which I thought I would send on to you, but, on second
thoughts, I should send them to Johannesburg or Phoenix. I will get
another set for you; you will then have it next week.
Mrs. Ritch's progress continues to be steady. This time I hardly
think there can be any relapse.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4970
