603. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
May 29, 1932
CHI. BHAU4,
I have your letter. Send me only as much [portion] of
Vinoba's discourse as you conveniently can. If possible, write
in ink. Did you take it down while Vinoba was discoursing or
did Vinoba himself write it out? Training in takli is progressing
well. It will be very good if all the Ashram inmates learn it.
The silence period was lengthened from one minute to
five minutes in order to give people greater peace. It appears
that all the people were much too distracted. Concentration will
be greatly helped if all observe silence with a willing heart.
To meditate upon the image of a living person is not proper.
The object of concentration is expected to be, and ought to be,
perfect, but how can we call any living person perfect? The
illustrations in the Ramayana and similar works are worthless.
But why do we need a concrete image? God is without form
or attributes. Why not concentrate one's thoughts on Him? If
that is impossible, a form or an imaginary figure, may be
meditated upon. Why not meditate upon the Gita? It has
been compared to the kamadhenu. Let us meditate on this; we
can gain much from it. However it be, meditation upon living
persons is harmful; so it should be avoided.
Write to Rameshwarji that I have already sent him three or
four letters.
Krishnadas informed me that Vinoba had started grinding
flour and that Jamnalalji had lost 20 lb. in weight.
Here are some remedies for constipation. They can all be
tried simultaneously.
1. Drink hot water with salt and lemon-juice in the morning;
Salt can be substituted by jaggery or honey.
2. Sleep with an abdominal mud-pack at night.
3. Give up pulses for some time.
If you do not benefit with this treatment within three days,
follow it up by eating only boiled greens for the next three days.
Eat them hot. Tandalja is the best among the greens. You can
take salt and lemon-juice on it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6729. Also C.W. 4472. Courtesy:
Bhau Panse
