178. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
September 7, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter from Tirupur. You now know all about our peace
talks. I have regained the weight I had lost here. I weighed
104 lb. last Friday. I have dropped the dried fruit also. The
sour limes remain. I take vegetables in the place of dried fruit.
Sweet potatoes and raw tomatoes are standing vegetables. The
former are roasted. A green vegetable is boiled—generally it is
cabbage or marrow or the like. This change accounts for the
restoration of the weight and constipation no longer worries me. If
the change proves successful in the long run, the cost is consider-
ably reduced. Let us see. I have made no hard and fast rule
about the avoidance of fruit. But just now it is no deprivation
whatsoever and possibly a gain in health.
My mastery over the wheel is increasing. The fatigue is no
longer felt. I see that if you concentrate on the puni end whilst
the thread is drawing, then on the point of the spindle when the
thread is being shifted to the cone and then on the cone when
it is brought there, you avoid breakage if the puni is sound. I
hope shortly to increase the speed appreciably. It is better even
now. But there is much room for improvement. Anyway, just
now it is the wheel that absorbs my attention to the exclusion of
other studies. Kaka is still at your wheel. He is getting on
slowly. The carding-bow is quite all right. I have no difficulty
in adjusting it. Ever since it has been with me the gut broke
only once and that too after Kaka too began to work on it. He is
absolutely new to it but is an extremely careful worker. Then too
I deliberately cut it where I saw it had worn out. Kaka had
devised a new catch for holding the spindle whilst unwinding. It
is fixed to the box. The spindle is mounted on it and the thread
is held between the left hand fingers. The result is that it winds
tightly on the winder. There is saving in time too. On your
wheel of course the spindle remains on the holders whilst the un-
winding is done. The catch was wanted for the box.
I hope you have had some rest somewhere. Do not rush.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5410. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9644
