156. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
ON THE SHIP,
March 23, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got four of your letters together. I am replying to them
on the ship. The deck is just above the steering chain; it, there-
fore, shakes and I cannot write comfortably. It is only this time
that I am having real experience of deck journey, but I cannot
spare the time to give a description of it.
I don't mind your having set up a khadi managing body.
You are vigilant and have faith in khadi; I have, therefore, no
fear. Carry on as you think best. You are likely to make mis-
takes, but I will not blame you for them even in my thoughts.
Didn't Maganlal make mistakes? Lakshmidas, too, has made
some. Man is said to be an image of error. If you have sincerity
of purpose, complete vigilance, unsparing work and ceaseless
effort to make yourself efficient, then any mistake which you make
despite them is pardonable and must be tolerated.
You should certainly publish lists of the articles we make, it
is our duty to do so.
Sulochanabehn has produced a very good impression on
me. We should know how to make her feel at home in the Ashram.
I approve of the idea of Vasumati and Sulochanabehn living in the
same room. Give them what you can and accept what services
they give. Meet their wishes as far as you can.
Your idea of starting a carding class for a short duration is
good. You may write whatever you wish to about the matter
in Navajivan. Do not, for the present, invite trainees from other
provinces. However, if any qualified candidate wishes to join the
class, do not refuse him admission. Take care and see that what
appears in the Gujarati Navajivan about this matter is not reproduc-
ed in Hindi Navajivan. I don't write anything on the subject
from here. You should write a note there and print it under your
signature.
You did right in sending Romain Rolland's letter to Mira-
behn.
Have a talk with Shankerlal about keeping the Maganlal
memorial in the Ashram. Personally I like the suggestion. Perhaps
some will feel that our rules stand in the way of this. Will Dr.
Mehta's bungalow suit for the purpose? Discuss this matter with
me when I come.
I sent the draft constitution of the Cow-Service Society long ago.
You have my suggestions about how to run the Bal Mandir.
You need not now consult me before making any changes or
additions. It would have been a different matter if I had been
there. In my absence, however, you can make any changes which
are consistent with the principle.
Gangabehn's work is beyond comparison. Her sincerity and
her industry should be our envy. She has practically dedicated her
life to the Ashram. We should know how to bear with her
temperament.
Caution Mama whenever necessary. If even then he commits
any mistake, the responsibility will be his. Place before him clearly
every doubt you have.
I feel worried about Totaramji's eyes. Perhaps his diet re-
quires some change. He should live on milk, raisins and lime,
or should fast and drink plenty of water. Even the eyes are inti-
mately connected with the stomach. Which organ is not?
I cannot reconcile myself to the frequent journeys to Broach.
It may be necessary to be a little strict in this matter. I know
that it is difficult, especially for you, to be strict. You may,
therefore, leave the problem to me, if you so wish.
I know Lakshmidas's views. I do not wish just now to
prevail upon him to change them. After knowing his views on all
subjects, we may, if necessary, follow a different course. That will
not hurt him. He has had wide experience and suffered many
times through his errors. He is a votary of khadi and an efficient
worker. We should, knowing this, attach the utmost importance
to his views but follow a different course when that seems neces-
sary to us. It would be wrong not to do so. So long as we are
doubtful about the correctness of our views, we should, rather than
act upon them, respect Lakshmidas's experience. I return his letters.
I still hope to be able to return to the Ashram on the 28th
evening. Padma has decided to leave Delhi.
I have sold for a hundred rupees my spinning-wheel, the one
I carried with me when travelling. So have another made for me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5394; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 61-
