167. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
Unrevised
July 10, 1936
BHAISHRI HARIBHAU,
I have had exhaustive talks with L. and S. L. has
nothing in her. She did not impress me favourably. S. did.
He admitted that they had both been infatuated with each other
and remained so. The situation even now is the same. Accor-
ding to S. the infatuation arose out of blameless service. L.
kept mum on the point. She was willing to undergo medical
examination but I seriously doubt whether she would stand before
, Presumably this was the telegram to Lady Fazl-i-Hussain.
2& The names have been omitted.
133
a doctor if she was really taken to one. S. assured me that
the two of them did not reach the last stage of intimacy as they
thought of you and me. I saw L.'s father at Beawar. From his
talks I inferred that he had no knowledge of this illicit relation-
ship and I also did not think it necessary to put him wise about it.
Her father did not impress me at all. From one of your letters
I gathered that you were satisfied that he was really not L.'s
father. But another letter of yours seems to show that you have
now changed your opinion. According to L. he is indeed her
father. Having examined the whole thing I, have given this deci-
sion:
(1) L. should go to M. and live as his wife.
(2) If she does not wish to do so and can remain free of
passion, she should observe brahmacharya.
(3) If she cannot control her passion she should marry some
other young man.
She should have kept her relations with S. pure until
marriage. Both claim that they have been pure. I, therefore,
do not think it is proper for them to associate with each other.
However, if they cannot live without each other's intimate com-
pany, they should do so openly. But in that situation, they
cannot expect my blessings. They can then stay neither in the
Ashram nor in an institution with which I am closely connected.
I fear L. cannot live without S. It is my opinion that she
is suffering from hysteria caused by sexual desire. S.'s con-
tact is tainted with passion and aggravates the hysteria.
Now you may do what you think proper.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
