402. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got today the post despatched by you on the 7th and des-
patched today's post from here after reading it.
Parachure Shastri had joined the Ashram for a three-year
course of training with a view to doing Ashram work. His aim
and mine was that he and his co-workers should work according
to the ideals of the Ashram. Though, unfortunately, he had to
354
leave before completing the period, he did Ashram work to the
best of his ability and that is why I look upon him as an inmate
of the Ashram. Here the phrase "inmate of the Ashram" is not
interpreted literally. The meaning which I have given to it is
wider, and not narrower, than the literal meaning. Did you read
what I wrote in my letter to Duncan? According to me, he
has already become an inmate of the Ashram. If he were to
find himself in a difficult plight anywhere while doing public
work, I would invite him to the Ashram. Wherever he goes,
he will keep up his connection with the Ashram. I believe Para-
chure Shastri has done so. Some workers at Chinchvad also
may. I would not say that about everyone who joins the weav-
ing school. Some of them give up the Ashram way of life al-
together after they have learnt weaving and work only for a liv-
ing. If you are still not convinced, ask me again.
I accept all your criticism of Narahari's letter. I had ob-
served the harshness of his language which you have noticed. But
I ignored it and paid attention only to his motive and his sugges-
tions. I read it as I would have done if it were written about
me. I would ignore harsh language used by anybody about me.
I, therefore, paid no attention to Narahari's harsh language about
you. Moreover, I know his temperament. Your dharma is to
disregard the language used about you. If your correspondent's
motive is not malicious and if his suggestions deserve consi-
deration, we should think about them. This is the way of non-
violence. It is the swan's manner. "The creator has made all
things, animate and inanimate, full of virtues and defects. The
good follow the example of the swan and accept the milk of
virtues and leave the water of defects." Unless one acts thus,
one cannot attain goodness and truth or preserve them for long
even if attained. We may observe other people's defects, but it
is for the spotless Brahman alone, and not for an imperfect man,
to judge them. Man is described by some as an embodiment of
imperfections. You must not, therefore, get disheartened. I close
this chapter here for today.
I have already written to you about . . . 1. I have no hope
that any of them will continue to live in the Ashram. They
cannot endure the strict discipline of the Ashram rules. I, there-
fore, believe that they have decided to leave the Ashram after
considering their capacity. They have also no respect for you
and no faith in you, but I would not mind that. I would urge
you, too, not to mind it, but when the truth is that they lack
the strength or the will (the two things, ultimately mean the
same) to observe the Ashram rules, both they and the Ashram
would feel suffocated if they continued to live in it. I think both
. . .1 and . . .2 can support themselves. If . . .3 were not ill,
she, too, is fully capable of supporting herself. Perhaps their
capacities will grow outside the Ashram and they will do quite
well. They cannot conform to the mould of the Ashram life.
If you believe otherwise and can tempt them to continue to live
there, I should certainly be happy. I feel that their leaving the
Ashram means my doing so. It has a serious implication for me,
but their remaining in the Ashram against their will or in an
unnatural manner would be unbearable to me and also contrary
to dharma.
We could not do anything here except keep a fast to mark
the commencement of the National Week.
I have not received Valji's article mentioned in your letter.
Perhaps I will get it tomorrow.
BAPU
[PS.]
In my ignorance, I have committed myself to the Board here
to supply 25 Gandiva spinning-wheels at 12 annas each. After
making the promise, I asked Lakshmidas the price of the wheel
and he informed me that it was a rupee and a half. But I must
supply 25 spinning-wheels. I had written to Keshu about this
in one of my letters. But he has now left. I don't know if there
is anybody now in the factory who can attend to such work. If
the spinning-wheels cannot be manufactured there, request Laksh-
midas to manufacture and send them. If they cost more than 12
annas each, he should recover the balance from the Ashram. Each
spinning-wheel must be fitted with a spindle-bearer, a spindle
and a spring. The spinning-wheel which I had made in jail is
there. The new ones should be as simple. They need not be
varnished. There should be a hook at the top, so that the spinn-
ing-wheel can be hung up on a wall after the work is over. The
hook can be made of tin sheet. Or a hole may be made and a
string may be tied into a loop. The wheel need not have a steel
axle. The one sent to me by Keshu does not have it. In the
spinning-wheel which we used in the beginning, there were only
two nails in the wheel. I have done plenty of spinning on such
a spinning-wheel. It will be enough if they are not carelessly
made and if they work smoothly. The freight will be paid by
the Board. Wherever you get the spinning-wheel manufactured,
they should be ready soon. If you have not followed any point,
ask me to explain. Show this letter to Lakshmidas.
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 26 letters in all.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8353. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
