354. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
October 8, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,
I got your letters.
Mixed dinner parties with Harijans are not a necessary part
of the movement against untouchability, but they are a consequence
of it. I am glad, too, that they take place. Though opposition
to them is only to be expected, no one will be able to stop them if
such dinners have become a popular movement. There is no argu-
ment whatever based on dharma in support of ideas of pollution
through food, etc.
While we do not encourage image-worship in the Ashram, we
do not forbid it either. Temples in one form or another will always
remain as long as Hinduism flourishes. Antyajas should have
the right to enter all temples recognized as such by the Hindus.
It cannot be otherwise if we wish to root out the very idea of a
certain class of people being Antyajas. Hence, not only is there no
contradiction of Ashram principles in an Ashram inmate encoura-
ging temple-entry, but on the contrary it is his duty to encourage
it. From a religious standpoint, this issue is very important for the
Antyajas. It is going to be a test for the Hindus.
I think it necessary that Ashram inmates should be permitted
to go, or should go, to work outside for anti-untouchability work.
All Ashram inmates are intended and trained ultimately to go out to
work among the people. No inmate of the Ashram who wishes to
worship Ganesh or any other deity should be stopped from doing so.
However, as an institution we should, in my opinion, remain equal
towards all religions and, therefore, should not permit a public
temple with an idol in the Ashram. Our public temple is the open
prayer ground with the horizons in the different directions as its
walls, the sky as its roof and formless God as the idol in the temple.
If we followed any other course, we would be required to provide
for a mosque, a fire temple, a church, a synagogue and so on. At
present the number of Hindus is indeed greater, but we do wish
that followers of other faiths also should join us in course of time.
An attitude of equality towards all religions requires us to keep in
view from now the necessity for all such places of worship. If
we do that, however, we might not be able to keep up our attitude
of equality, and therefore, the golden rule for us to follow in this
as in other matters is to exercise self-control. Think over all this
carefully and understand it fully, and ask me again and again till
you have done so. I shall not get tired of answering your questions.
I have now regained sufficient strength to attend to such duties.
I have forgotten how Sundarabai and Deshpande came to
know each other. The religious issue arose because of the previous
marriage that was believed to have taken place. I only suggested
it as an ideal that there should be no marriage between a teacher
and his pupil or between one teacher and another working in the
same institution. There is certainly no religious objection to such
marriages. If any two persons wish to marry, we may not encourage
them but we certainly cannot prevent them. I am writing this as
a general rule only; I have forgotten what actually happened in
this particular case. The ideal which I have explained has also not
been sufficiently explained to people. Nor is any warning given to
persons joining the Vidyapith. How can we, then, apply the prin-
ciple in this case? In such instances, though sticking to our ideal,
we should adopt a liberal attitude.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 236. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare
