181. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 23, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your letter and the cuttings. Unless you make time
for the operation I know you will never have the time. This always
happens with busy people, and, therefore it is necessary to consi-
der matters of health as real matters of business. I do not write
this as a philosophic truth, but as a practical truth which I have
enforced in my own life and in that of others. I hope, therefore,
that you will set apart a month or so for the treatment and make
an appointment with the doctors beforehand with the fixed reso-
lution of keeping that appointment.
I note what you say about the work in Calcutta.
About Mr. David's scheme I hope to hear from you further.
I shall certainly write something in the columns of the Eng-
lish Harijan about the Hindi edition as soon as I find the Hindi to
be up to the mark. I have written fully about this to Thakkar
Bapa, as also to Viyogi Hari. I need not, therefore, repeat what
I have written to them. You will give to it what time it is pos-
sible for you to give, and make it brimful of instructions and in-
formation so that no workers would care to be without it.
You suggest that I should send the money due to the Central
Board to your firm in Bombay. How should I save the commission
thereby, unless you have meant that I should send notes through
someone going to Bombay? If I do that, it would mean my
having to run some risk of the money being lost. I have not
that courage.
As to the denunciation of the Yeravda Pact by the Bengal
Council, I have not felt much disturbed and I am not quite certain
that counter-propaganda is necessary at the present moment. In
no case can the Pact be revised unless all the parties to it agree.
It will be time enough to apply our minds to the Bengal opposition
when the parties are regularly consulted. I was consulted and I
have sent my opinion of which I send you a copy. But you and
Satisbabu know much better than I can what to do in Bengal.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 20671. Also C.W. 7933. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
