85. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 18, 1928
MY DEAR BROTHER,
I had just received your letter. Your matter-of-fact description
of your sister and her death tells more than an adjectival descrip-
tion could have of the grief you have felt over the loss of one who
was not merely a sister to you but a friend in need. But I know
I do not need to commend to you God's care and mercy. You
have enough and independent faith in you and therefore do not
stand in need of prompting from without. Whilst I share to the
full your condemnation of the English officials, I cannot like you
exonerate the Nawab for his heartlessness even in the face of death.
I hope you will win your High Court case.
I understand and appreciate what you say about the Jamia.
But I fear that unless you give Dr. Zakir Husain a free hand, the
Jamia will collapse. There are risks to be run either way. If you
keep the unmanageable large committee of control, Dr. Zakir
Husain and his associates must starve. If you give the control to
a small body who can be easily approached and brought together
by Dr. Zakir Husain and have not an equivocal constitution like
the present one but an unequivocal emphatically non-co-operation
constitution, there is just a chance of tiding over the difficulty.
You will now decide between the two courses, or you may think
of a third. The Ajmal Fund which after all is small enough
cannot be parted with unless the Jamia is put upon a firm and
on an acceptable footing. Dr. Ansari was coming here for this
purpose and if he could have come, it might have been better for
us three to meet. As it is I would not worry you to come to
Ahmedabad just to discuss this point without Dr. Ansari. You
have stated your view with absolute clearness, and I do not expect
to be able to influence your decision, and I know that whatever
you do in Delhi would be done according to the best of your
judgement and belief.
Your remarks about Motilalji make painful reading. I am
unable to pass any judgement, but I do feel that he is incapable
of wilfully coming to a perverse decision. Do you expect me or
want me to do anything in this matter? If you do, do not hesi-
tate to tell me what and if I can see eye to eye with you and
have the ability to do it, you may depend upon my doing it.
Yours sincerely,
MAULANA SHAUKAT ALI
SULTAN MANSION, DONGRI, BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 13465
