329. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
February 6, 1933
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,
I enclose herewith letter from Shrimati Mirabai (Slade) dated
28th ultimo and handed to me only this day. It speaks for itself.
Being in answer to an anxious enquiry from me, the letter might
have been given to me earlier. Since this letter was written the
usual weekly letter was received in which she stated that she was
examined by the Civil Surgeon who had recommended her for trans-
fer. Miss Slade had repeatedly complained to me in her weekly
letters about the stenches and the stifling atmosphere of Arthur Road
1 The letter was released to the Press from Karachi on February 6, 1933.
237
Prison and recurring attacks of headache, giddiness, eruptions and
the like. But I felt, as she had felt, that as a prisoner she must
suffer the hardships of prison life. It might however be held par-
donable, if not even right, in cases causing anxiety about health,
for prisoners to bring to the knowledge of superior authority the
condition of their health. Acting in accordance with that rule I
have approached Government before now, wherever I have felt
the necessity of bringing to their notice cases of prisoners in whose
welfare I have been interested as if they were my own nearest
relatives. The letter enclosed gives a true picture of Miss Slade's
health, and her attachment towards me. It has been a privilege
to me to enjoy that affection. She came to me with the fullest
consent of her late mother and the reluctant consent of her father
the late Sir Edmond Slade who never cut off the annuity that he
used to give to her. I hardly need to say anything more about
her family connections which are better known to Government
than to me.
You will notice the dread she has of being sent away to a place
further away from me. I wish she was less sensitive, but her
sensitiveness has to be taken into account as it so quickly affects
her body. I therefore suggest her transfer to the Female Yard
attached to this Prison. From all the accounts that I have heard
of the Yard, it is airy, roomy and much cooler than Arthur Road
Prison. She will certainly be happier there.
I suggest too that she be examined by specialists in view of
what she says about her glands and the condition of her tonsils.
I would gladly name my doctors if Government would entertain
their names, but I have no desire to press the point. I should
be entirely satisfied so long as she is examined by specialists.
It grieves me to have to approach the Government over a
delicate and personal matter. But I entertain the hope that per-
haps the Government may even appreciate the fact that I have
brought this matter to their notice. I shall be thankful for an
early decision.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800 (40) (3), Pt. IV, pp. 29-31
