405. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
May 25, 1928
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,
I have your letter. There should be nothing between God
and us, if we are to be nearest to Him. Love between husband
and wife is a hindrance, for that love as we understand it, is
necessarily exclusive and necessarily personal.
2. Faith in God cannot be reasoned out. It does not come
from the head but from the heart, and, things of the heart are
spontaneous and instinctive. Our very weakness and limitations
should inspire faith in the Perfect and the Limitless. And if we
have that faith, we would necessarily be without troubles, mis-
eries and the like.
3. Why do you say that you are not serving the public
cause because you are drawing Rs. 50 per month? Everyone who
serves the Charkha Sangh undoubtedly serves the nation. It
would be foolish to expect in this poor country to work without
even being fed. That other people have no regard or love for
you because you are not a flourishing lawyer is no cause for
sorrow. But it is a good cause for congratulation, if you can be
happy without wealth and public esteem.
Why should Babu Vindeshwari Prasad seek your protection?
If he has the conviction that it would be right in giving up his
practice, he should delight in earning his starvation wage as mil-
lions of our countrymen are doing. If he is repentant that he
gave up his practice, he should resume it.
As for your children the true education that you can give
them is to bring them up as honest labourers. And that educa-
tion can profit them and the country; and, instead of your child-
ren being a burden on you, will be a blessing to both.
I hope your wife has completely recovered. Let me say that
the Ashram constitution is undergoing a drastic revision and at
the present moment, the desire is not to take any more for at
least one year. Therefore, if your wife should desire to come
here during the next one or two months, please write to me be-
fore you think of sending her.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 51
