390. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[July 31, 1933]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Your responsibilities are heavy indeed. But I see that God
gives you the strength to meet them.
Bhai Apte's letter is enclosed. I knew that some correspon-
dence was going on with Sharja.
She has asked for freedom.
Have a talk with her and see if you can take the responsibility.
If she observes discipline, I don't see any harm in accepting res-
ponsibility for her.
Mahadev is likely to be arrested at the same time as I am.
Even if that happens, the programme should remain unchanged.
Anybody who is free tomorrow should discuss all the matters with
Jamnalalji. He is not to court arrest just now. He should take
possession of the Ashram funds. Any secret funds which he finds
should be kept openly. I have looked into the accounts and find
that there are no sums which the Government can confiscate.
All such sums which we had have already been spent. They
represented the contributions for satyagrahis. All the same, the
Government is welcome to confiscate whatever there is. All sums
are earmarked for specific purposes.
If Bali comes there, have a talk with her and come to a clear
understanding. If Anasuyabehn shows the slightest reluctance,
Manu should go to Wardha. If she is very eager to go to
Rajkot, let her do so.
So far as I know, Keshu will definitely go to Wardha. Santok
also wants to go there. She wants to take Radha with her and
hopes to do to the best of her ability any work which Jamnalalji
might give her. Discuss this with her fully.
Send away Balbhadra to Da[kshina] Mu[rti]. Since Rama
Joshi has forbidden Dhiru Joshi, make what arrangements you
think proper for him. Probably Ramnarayan will keep him till
you decide finally. Rama Joshi will have to be given fare to
Poona and back. Ask her. See that she is not displeased.
Totaramji should look after the Ashram for some time. After
that, even if the Government does not take possession of it he
should abandon it.
Prabhavati should be given what she requires for going to
Banaras or Bihar.
I don't remember anything more just now. If you wish to
ask about anything, you may.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8391. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
