115. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
AHMEDABAD,
Bhadarva Sud 11, August 28, 1917
CHI. RAMDAS,
I still have two of your letters to answer. Do not give up
the morning prayer. And I want you to remember Indian dates.
I have to go to Champaran again. Take care of your health.
You write nothing about it. You will have received my previous
letters.
It does not cause me pain that your thoughts are turning
towards marriage. I shall certainly help to the extent I can if
you will accept my choice. I am looking around for a girl. No
money must be spent on marriage. There will be some little
expenditure, but that hardly matters. One thing is certain. You
must marry only after you have begun to earn. I do not think
it will be difficult for you to find some means of livelihood. My
advice is this: for the present you should with a steady mind
continue to work for Indian Opinion. Make the position of the
paper sound. Only when you find that it can carry on without
you should you come away. If you can find independent means
of livelihood there and can side by side work for Indian Opinion,
there can be no objection to it. Consult Mr. West. See that
your name is not disgraced. Whatever work you may choose to
do it will not pain me so long as it does not degrade you. My
happiness lies in your satisfaction. You may fearlessly pour out
your feelings to me.
Your criticism of . . . 1 appears to be mistaken. If he goes
to what are (to him) innocent dances and if no expenditure is
involved, there can be no harm. It is true that I do not easily
believe bad things said about a person I have come to trust. It
is a virtue, not a failing. Still, you must write to me whatever
comes to your notice.
Tell Miss Schlesin to write to me. I am awaiting her arrival.
Tell her also that there are some ten letters from me she has not
answered.
Remember me to all the others. Visit Mr. Phillip and Mr.
Doke. Of course if you are already back from Johannesburg that
is another thing. In that case write to them. Write to Capetown
too.
Also, tell Nagarji and Bhaga - or write to them - that these
days I have no time at all to spare.
Mr. Polak is leaving for England in a couple of days. I am
going to Bombay to see him. Ba and Devdas will not accom-
pany me this time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Motana Man, pp. 31-
1 Omission as in the source
