646. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 28, 1935
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter written on Rentia Baras Day. It looks very
nice indeed that you are taking part in the uninterrupted spin-
ning programme in the national school. Thanks to Amtussalaam's
efforts, here also spinning is going on daily for 16 hours. Sixteen
persons give one hour each by turn. The spinning starts at 5 a.m.
and goes on up to 9 p.m. About 3,500 rounds are spun daily.
I have suggested some changes in this programme, and my sug-
gestion that one spinning-wheel should be kept systematically
working day and night is being discussed.
It seems you have not correctly understood my article. I did
not give up the practice under pressure from anybody.
When Morarji and Chandulal came here to express their
views, their arguments had no effect on my mind or could not
make me give up the practice. But when I was faced with the
problem of how to save the young man, my attitude changed
immediately. I have done many things in my life with the
motive of saving other persons. Nor have I accepted it as a
principle never to yield to popular sentiments, though I do oppose
doing anything merely to respect such sentiments. My rule is this:
Whenever respecting popular sentiments does not involve violation
of moral principles or loss of self-respect, they should be respec-
ted even at some cost to oneself. For instance, if it was not for
popular sentiments, I would most probably wear no clothes. I
would see for myself in such practice many moral benefits besides
benefit to my health. It would strengthen my self-control. But
out of respect for popular sentiments I refrain from taking this
very desirable step.
I learnt about Jivanlal's resignation only from your letter.
You should have given more details. If I am required to decide
about it finally any details given by you would have been useful.
Now I myself will write to you and ask you for information
that I might need if the matter comes before me. You must have
received my previous letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5535
