452. LETTER TO SHEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
September 17, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Here are my answers:
1. I have simply cited the instance of George Muller as I
have heard. I believe in the possibility of a heart prayer being
answered in the manner George Muller's is supposed to have been.
It does not mean that George Muller did not work for his daily
bread. He prayed for the support of a philanthropic institution
which he conducted. His life otherwise was a most strenuous
life. But it is said of him that he never stretched forth his hand
for begging except to God.
1 Dadabhai Naoroji
2. I have not studied the miracles from the miraculous
standpoint. I neither believe nor disbelieve them. I hold that
they ought not to affect our conduct one way or the other.
3. I think it is highly probable that the period of our life
is fixed, that is to say, the number of breaths we are to take,
but that it is possible for us to regulate the duration of breaths
and thus apparently prolong life. This is a question of which I
have not made any study and I do not allow it to worry me. I
have, therefore, given you not my own experience or positive
belief but that belief of some people which has commended itself
to me.
4. They have no doubt a cooling effect. But they are also
in a way stimulants. But you should know that at the present
moment I am not myself discarding at least goat's milk. But my
belief in the advisability, wherever health permits, of avoiding
milk and its products-curds, etc.,-for the sake of making brahma-
charya easier to practise remains unchanged.
5. It is a fact that I forgo the last meal if I have not been
able to take it before sunset. It is a good rule for a brahmachari
to follow.
6. I do take walking exercise regularly. I keep myself fit
for work by regular habits and by a proper selection of food and
observing moderation in the quantity I take and by exercising
restraint upon the other senses.
7. Monday is a day of silence for me. I do edit Young
India at least partly on Mondays but, since the operation, I have
not been fasting on Mondays. I do recommend a weekly fast to
young men who lead busy lives and who are not particular about
the quality and the quantity of the food they take. A weekly fast
wisely managed is a help rather than a hindrance to the per-
formance of all work, especially when it is mental.
8. A teacher best serves his pupils by living an absolutely
exemplary life in every particular and by completely identifying
himself with his pupils.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SHEWAKRAM KARAMCHAND
TEACHER
M.A.V. SCHOOL
OLD SUKKUR
From a photostat: S.N. 19697
