124. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
August 12, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
[RAND DAILY MAIL]
SIR,
You have commenced your special article on the Asiatic Act with
the inflammatory heading, "Indians Will Not Pay Debts". The restrained
language in this article shows that it is not ill meant. At the same time,
1 Gandhiji addressed a meeting of the Hamidia Islamic Society held on August
11 at which it was decided to send telegrams to Pietersburg and Potchefstroom
Indians. Presumably, he was responsible for the drafting of these telegrams.
it would certainly have been better and more serviceable to your readers
if you had refrained from giving currency to what appears to be a fiction,
until you had seen the leaders of the British Indian community, whose
opinion, evidently, you did not know.
I may now be allowed to state that there is not, so far as I am aware,
a single Indian of standing who has ever made a statement to the effect
that every Indian "who is thrown into prison for passive resistance or
loses his trading or hawking licence shall refuse to pay his debts". This
would be quite contrary to the spirit of our struggle. We have under-
taken it with a view to suffering ourselves, placing our sole reliance upon
God. It would, therefore, be wicked if we were to cherish the thought
and to repudiate our just debts. It is our belief, whether we be Mahome-
dans or Hindus, that all debts that are not paid in our present life will
have to be liquidated with severe penalty in our next. On the great
Judgment Day, we shall have to answer for our delinquencies, non-
payment of debts not being the least of them.
We do want to exert pressure from every side. We undoubtedly
want Imperial protection no less than the sympathy of the Colonists
and even the Government, but we have no desire to do so by means
that cannot be called scrupulously clean and honest. Our one and only
weapon of defence against what we consider to be an unwarrantable
attack on our personal freedom and honour is to show the people of
South Africa and the citizens of the great Empire, of which we claim
to be members equally with the whites, that we are men enough to
suffer for what we conscientiously believe to be a great wrong.
I have seen as many of my fellow-merchants as I hurriedly could.
They are Messrs M. C. Camroodeen and Co., M. S. Coovadia, M. A.
Karodia, A. F. Camay and Co., Amod Moosajee and Co., M. P. Fancy,
Mahomed Oosen and Co., and Jussab Ebrahim, and between us we have
paid, during the last month and up to today, roughly speaking, £18,000
to the European wholesale houses whether here or in London. Some of
us, in order to prepare for contingencies, have even paid our debts be-
fore maturity. It is true that many of us have cancelled orders in view
of the struggle. This is only fair to the wholesale houses and to our-
selves. We are sorry that, by our so doing, the latter have to suffer in
common with us, but that is inevitable.
I am, etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA,
MANAGING PARTNER OF SULIMAN ISMAIL MIA AND CO.,
AND ACTING CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Rand Daily Mail, 13-8-1907
7‒11
