392. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
August 16, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,
I got your letter. I did not write my letter to you in order
to discontinue your medicine but I wrote it to tell you that
I had succeeded in getting possession of it. I do not worry
whether the pain will be cured or not. I wished to use your oil
because I knew that you had mixed your love with it. I will con-
tinue the massage till the bottle is exhausted and will not be in
a hurry to stop it. How can I take sun-bath in this season? I
will certainly take it as soon as the sky clears permanently. I have
not tried cold packs, but I did apply mud-packs prepared with
cold water. They did not help. The real difficulty is that the
exact cause of the pain cannot be ascertained, and so we cannot
be certain about the treatment either. The pain is not in the
muscle but in the bone of the elbow. It is in the left elbow and
is felt only when the bone is pressed or when the arm is moved
in a certain manner. Otherwise I am not aware of it at all.
Personally, I believe that this is a symptom of old age. If it is
so, treatment is useless. However, the remedy suggested by you is
completely harmless and I will not, therefore, discontinue it. I
very much wish to request you to come over, but, since I have
stopped seeing visitors I must obtain special permission for you
to see me in your capacity as a bone-setter. I do not feel like
doing that, for it means asking a favour and I would feel hurt
if it was refused. For the present, therefore, I think it best to
let things go on as they are doing.
There is no trouble so far in my right elbow. The right
thumb used to give pain when writing.
I think it was cured
merely through rest. I will give it more rest if it again starts
paining. Mahadev massages it daily. I have filled this letter with
the story of my pain. But it is not as serious as all that. I have
written at such length, however, because I know that you like to
hear the story.
Andrews had gone to Germany to see the grandson 1 of
Gurudev there. He has now left us.
I must prescribe for your lumbago. The only remedy for it
is fasting, steam-bath and hip-bath. It is my experience till now
that if these measures do not cure it, nothing else will. Fasting
is an art. [Dr.] Mehta in Poona has some experience in the
matter. Have you met him at any time? I have had no per-
sonal experience of him, but had it in the case of a Sindhi
friend's wife who was put under his care. Her complaint was of
course of a different nature. I have mentioned her case just to
fill the letter. Apart from fasting, and hip-bath, we have in the
last resort the supreme remedy of surrender to the Lord.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7551. Also C.W. 5026. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta
