353. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
April 9, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,
All of us had been eagerly awaiting a letter from you. It was
a full one. I am very happy that the food in this jail has agreed
with you. I had heard about Janakibehn and Kamalnayan. If
Vinoba has not taken a vow to the contrary, I think it is neces-
sary that he should drink milk. Even in that jail he seems to have
adopted a strenuous programme. In order to be able to keep
it up, I think he should drink milk. I am convinced that there
must be some vegetable food which has the beneficial properties
of milk but is free from its noxious one. But those vaids who are
sufficiently well-read in their science to be able to discover it
have never thought about the possibility of there being such a food
and the task is beyond the capacity of laymen like us. Or perhaps
we can discover it, if we give all our attention to this one problem.
It is my firm conviction that it would be improper for any of us
to do so. It is therefore our duty to cling to the task which has
fallen to our lot unsought. I cannot help thinking that it is not
proper for Vinoba to let his weight fall so low.
A fine group seems to have formed there with you. I envy
you your 'C' class. I had felt very happy when I heard that you
were placed in that class. I did not at all feel afraid that it
might affect your health. I have never doubted your ability to
safeguard your own health and that of your companions. Had
288
you not been placed in 'C' class, you would never have got the
experience you are now getting.
Tell Pyarelal that, as I have fully replied to the letter which
Kusum wrote at his instance, I don't dictate anything here. He
will probably get that reply before you get this letter. Let me
know if he does not. All three of us are very well. For the past
two months, my diet has been bread, almonds, dates, one vege-
table and a sour lime. This keeps me all right. I never feel the
need for a laxative or an enema. I am engaged at present in
writing the history of the Ashram. Writing letters takes up a good
deal of my time. In this small circle, we talk about you several
times daily. Convey our regards to all. Write to me whenever
you can.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2897
