212. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
OPPOSITE HIGH COURT,
BOMBAY, FORT,
August 6, 1902
MY DEAR DEVCHANDBHAI 1 ,
I did not wish to suggest that Mr. Indrajit should be given
any responsible work at all. His wish is to act as junior counsel
in addition to your paid junior. All he wants, I suppose, is to
be able to say that he appeared as Junior Counsel in a Privy
Council case and possibly to gain some practical knowledge.
I have taken up a room from Payne, Gilbert, Sayani and
Moos for office, and a part of Keshavji Tulsidas' Bungalow in
Girgam Back Road for residence. That is all the progress I
have made so far.
I have just finished the welcome draft work that Shukla sent
me while I was in Rajkot, and am now free to lounge about
the High Court letting the Solicitors know of an addition to the
ranks of the briefless ones.
Mehta, on my going to him for a blessing, gave me a curse
which as he said might prove a blessing. He thought, contrary
to my expectations, that I would be foolishly wasting away in
Bombay my small savings from Natal. Wacha, I have not yet
been able to see. Gokhale is not here. The Solicitors, whom
I have seen, say that I would have to wait long before I could
get any work from them. The Chief Justice is very anxious for
the advancement of the junior barristers and only last week estab-
lished a moot society for their benefit.
Such briefly are the circumstances under which I find my-
self. The work is uphill. But I do not despair. I rather appreci-
ate the regular life and the struggle that Bombay imposes on
one. So long, therefore, as the latter does not become unbear-
able, I am not likely to wish to be out of Bombay.
I am very glad to learn that Manilal is doing so well.
It is true that my nephew at first sent disappointing reports
from Benares: that they provide only two meals per day does still
appear to me to be a drawback. But it is yet too soon to pass
judgment one way or the other. He will be able to send me
more reliable reports after he has become used to his totally
new surroundings.
If the rains fail in Kathiawar this time also, the outlook must
be very serious. I am afraid the joshis and other weather pro-
phets are good only for evil reports.
Please show this to Shukla.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a facsimile of the original: Mahatma, Vol. I, between pp. 64 and 65
