16. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
SABARMATI,
September 22, 1927
MY DEAR BROTHER,
I have now two letters from you to acknowledge. I am sorry
you are still having trouble from the Transvaal friends. I hope,
however, that you will not allow their defection to disturb your
peace. I am watching things here and I would ask you not to
worry over the notices that Aiyar and Co. may be able, now
and then, to secure in the Press here of their activities. I sup-
pose, I may safely say that no real stir will be made in India on
the South African question unless I stir. That much credit, some-
how or other, I still retain, and it is likely to survive your term
of office. And so long as the Union Government continue to co-
operate with you and do not reject your advances, I do not see
what useful purpose can be served by my making a stir here.
The result of the Pragji and Medh case is unfortunate. I
think that they are right in rejecting the offer of a temporary
certificate. I do not attach any importance to C.I.D. reports
about Medh. If he did anything criminal they should prosecute
him, but not use against him C.I.D. reports. He may not be a
perfect human being, but I do not think that he is in any
way worse than the average Indian there or, for the matter of
that, here. The way I look upon the case is this. The under-
standing of 1914 was that there should be no colour bar, at least
in theory. Therefore the Immigration Law, to read, does not show
any colour bar. In practice six men were to be admitted annually
on the ground of educational qualifications, and, so far as I re-
collect, the question of domicile was not to affect them. For,
they carried their qualifications in their own persons. As I am
writing from memory I am writing under correction. You will,
however, examine the position for what it is worth. I do hope
that a way will be found of accommodating them.
I am glad you like Phoenix and I should feel happy if it
could really become, on occasions, a resting place for you. Andrews
described what might have been a serious accident as Kallenbach
was driving you from Pretoria to Johannesburg at break-neck
speed, and one of the tyres of his fashionable motor burst. I
wish you could persuade Kallenbach to come to India, if only
to see me and return to his business. Miss Schlesin has given me a
fascinating description of her interview with you. When I was in
Madras I tried to seek out Mrs. Sastri, but I learnt that she was
at Lucknow.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 167-
