506. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
NEW DELHI,
July 29, 1947
CHI. BHANSALI,
You must not assume the entire responsibility for Pushpa.
In fact you ought not to assume any. You are under my
discipline. You should, therefore, assume only as much of that
responsibility as I entrust to you. In doing that lies your
good, as also mine, and that of Pushpa and of the Ashram too.
It is indeed a good thing that you have lost the capacity to
judge people. There was a time when you possessed it in good
measure. But you were more inclined to see the defects of men
and of institutions. You know the results of doing that. And so
you became a sannyasi, wandered about and submitted yourself
to a great many hardships. And now you are back where you
were. I see nothing but God's hand in this. I think it will be
best for you to assume no responsibility not entrusted to you
by me. That is your real dharma and only by acting in that
way can you keep a watch on the Ashram. I have also explain-
ed to you the meaning of keeping a watch. It means that
you should maintain the highest standard of purity in your own
conduct so that everybody else may look upon you as the ideal
to be followed. I know of no better method of keeping a watch.
To notice and point at people's defects does not mean keeping
a watch. You are sometimes swayed by emotion and act thought-
lessly. I heard that you undertook a fast once again. There was
no need at all to do that. To permit Pushpa to slacken in the
least degree in the observance of rules will be tantamount to
betraying her. It was I who admitted her to the Ashram at
some risk. I pained her parents by doing that. She has not
succeeded in becoming a perfect devotee. She has realized that
she is far away from that sublime state. But her wilfulness . . .2
have not yet vanished. She has still not realized the importance
of abiding by the rules. You should, therefore, humbly renounce
your claim to be Pushpa's elder brother or father or guardian.
She must observe the Ashram rules with the utmost punctiliousness
and become one with it as sugar becomes one with milk.
Till she merits such a certificate, I shall not be relieved of my
worry on her account. I owe a responsibility to her parents.
Even if her renunciation in giving up her intention to marry
the person whom she wished to marry was not the result of
selfishness or wilfulness, she has yet to demonstrate that it was
an act of supreme self-abnegation. I don't have to explain this
to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 823. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave
