386. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 15/18, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
You must have received my postcard about the cable to be
sent to America. Bali and others came and saw me. I was
happy that they came.
I think henceforth we should not permit Harilal to stay in
the Ashram. I have written to him directly to tell him that he
would not be permitted in future to stay there. I have sent the
letter through Jamnadas. He begs to be allowed to stay at a
place for a few days, and spend them in his habitual pleasures.
And then he goes and seeks shelter elsewhere, using the name of
the place which he has left. We let him stay in the Ashram so
long in the hope that slowly he would change his ways there.
But on the contrary, he became worse.
You seem to have celebrated the National Week very well
indeed. I hope no one will fall ill in consequence of all that
strain. There is one more point in this connection to which I
drew your attention once. Let me do so again. Instead of over-
straining ourselves during this Week and, when it is over, spending
a few days in rest and then resuming our old life, I think it would
be much better if we utilize the Week to learn to be more vigi-
lant and then keep up afterwards the increase in production
which we effect. In the language of the Gita, work done in the
former manner would be an instance of demoniac work and work
done in the latter manner an instance of God-like work or the
first rajasik work and the other sattvik work. Here we celebrated
the Week as I have suggested. Mahadev started carding and
spun a little more than he had been doing. But I doubled the
quantity of yarn spun daily and, if my right hand does not fail,
I intend to keep up the increase.
Even if some of the inmates who fall ill in the Ashram stay
elsewhere permanently, we should not mind the expense on their
account. Did we not start the Ashram in Almora for this very
purpose? Why cannot we start similar institutions at other places
too? If we do, then whenever we see that the air and water of
the Ashram do not suit a person, as in the case of Jamna, he or
she can go and live in one of those institutions. It will not be
very expensive to maintain such institutions, and, moreover, we
shall be able to start work in those areas. This is what we did
in Wardha. In the beginning, we sent Ramniklal or somebody
else there. But we had started the Ashram in Wardha in order
to keep it up, and so, when Ramniklal fell ill or found it diffi-
cult to work there-I forget what actually happened-we sent
Vinoba. We don't have another Vinoba, but I think we can spare
one of the workers from the Ashram and carry on the work at
the new place. If we can find a place on the sea-coast, we should
prefer it. But perhaps this is a long-term plan. Even then this
at any rate we can do immediately: find a suitable place on
the sea-coast and send some of the inmates there, at the same
time making up our minds that if anybody does not improve
even after trying two or three such places, he or she may die,
but we will not go further than this in providing external help
for their illness. Whether we do or do not decide just now to
fix any such limit, we must help those who keep bad health and
who require change of air to get it. Our letters in which we have
expressed our views about calling Padma back to the Ashram
seem to have crossed.
It seems she, too, wishes to return.
Ascertain the views of Sitla Sahai and Sarojinidevi and do what is
necessary. Jamna should either return to Bombay or select one
of the places from Bardoli, Sasvane, Chorwad, Porbandar, Veraval,
Mangarol, Ghogha and Gopanath. I think the fact that Bombay
suited Jamna means only that sea-air suited her. If this infer-
ence is incorrect we shall know through experience.
Any of the
places which I think will suit Jamna will, I believe, suit Tilakam
too. I knew of course from the very beginning that the expense
on account of Krishnamaiyadevi, Padma and Radha was beyond
the means of the Ashram, but, as we have tolerated many other
improper things, my mind tolerates this expense too.
I do feel
ashamed of it, of course. I shall await a report from you of the
views expressed on the issues raised by the question of lezim
exercises and the final decision arrived at. The person who ex-
ercised his influence on behalf of Chandrakanta has not done her
good. If there are any important letters from abroad, which you
think should be sent to me, make copies of them and send them
to me. The rest need not be sent. If any correspondents have
asked for autographs [inform them that] they cannot be sent.
I have not yet received the bottle containing the preparation of
almonds and dates. I think I know now how to make it.
I am informed by the jail authorities that Kaka, Narahari,
Prabhudas and Manibehn keep good health. I have received no
letter from them.
Silence Day, April 18, 1932
I got a letter from Mahavir directly. I have written to him
and told him that he should send a budget of the likely expendi-
ture and fix the last date up to which he will stay. I have
asked him, in deciding this, to remember that our means are limited.
It seems that Nimu and the children do not keep good health in
Lakhtar. I, therefore, think that it will be better if you call them
back there. It seems the children find the heat at Lakhtar too
much. Compared to Lakhtar, Sabarmati is certainly cool. If they
prefer Vijapur, she may go and stay there. But even if you feel
that she should stay at some place other than the Ashram, I think
you will be able to decide finally only after she returns there.
Like the thumb of the right hand, the elbow of the left hand
too pains. The doctor, therefore, has advised me to give rest to
the left hand. I have not felt any pain so far when drawing the
thread with the left hand. It is other movements which cause
the pain. As a precaution, however, from yesterday I have started
using the right hand to rotate the wheel and the left hand to draw
the thread. Thus working the wheel with the left hand, I spun
95 rounds yesterday in three and a half hours and 85 rounds to-
day in two and a half hours. There is no difficulty of a mechanical
nature in making the necessary change in the Gandiva wheel for
this purpose. All that is necessary is to remove the spindle to the
other side and fix the wheel on the left hand side. What effect this
change will have on the [left] hand will be known only after
some time. I had been spinning 375 rounds every day in the week,
and I had wanted to keep that up. But I have had to give up
my intention for the present. If, however, I get used to spinning
with the left hand, that will be no small advantage. I therefore do
not feel unhappy about the rounds spun being so few. My pur-
pose in mentioning this is to induce people there who may have
sufficient enthusiasm to learn to use their left hand as much as they
do the right. In Japan, the people are taught from their very child-
hood to use both the hands equally well. This practice will
give nearly if not exactly twice as much advantage as we have
now. If our left hand gives as good service as the right, the latter
will get proper rest every day, and if the right hand ever becomes
disabled we would be able to do all the work with our left hand.
This is no small advantage. If this suggestion appeals to anybody
there, he or she should start using the left hand to do some of the
work which we normally do with the right hand. The activities
which immediately come to my mind in this connection are writing,
spinning and eating. If, however, we think a little about the mat-
ter, we shall be able to think of many things which we normally do
with our right hand and which we can, with a little reflection and
without much effort, train our left hand to do.
The stock of cotton with me is about to be exhausted. If,
therefore, you have some cotton of good quality, please send two
pounds of it. There are in all 39 letters today, besides this letter
to you and "Watching the Heavens-II".
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8220. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
