114. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
Wednesday [July 30, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your two letters in one cover. Have written to both B.
Alexander and Mrs. N. Kallenbach.
Your statement of figures is somewhat rosy. But if the loan can
be raised and the office fixed up as you suggest and Mountain View
safely let on a lease subject to the right to you to sell and cancel
the lease if necessary, you may come out all right. I certainly think
that the £500 for the material on the Farm should be somewhere
included in your figures. It is as well. The money need not be paid
now, especially while the struggle is considered probable. But the matter
should be kept in view.
1 From the date of the preceding item, which was written on "Monday Night"
Have you been able to fix up John of the Farm ? And what of
D. Pollock ?
My advice still will be to let the Farm go if there is a buyer for
the full value.
Manilal is regaining himself. He works out his hours. He eats very
well. I am eating well, take a long time over my meal and am not
satisfied. I am very weak. The after-effect has been the worst with
me. The ringing noises in the ears were there before but they are
very persistent. I am not capable of great physical effort. But I think
I shall slowly regain my strength. The mental capacity is still great.
The mind seems never to be fatigued. It is an effort now to get up
at 4.30 a.m. Today I got up at 5.45 a.m.
Jeki works away nicely and cheerfully. Did I tell you that Manilal
had reverted to one meal ? Raojibhai, Maganlal, Ramdas, Devdas,
Dahya, Sivpujan and Revashankar also have one meal. Mrs. Gandhi
is still bed-ridden. She is purely fruitarian. It is hard for her.
Here is the 6th verse.
There shall be freedom from indulgence in the passions rising
from the five senses and there shall be no attachment to the working
of the senses. The soul must move without being limited by the
bondage of place, time and matter, subject only to the working out,
without attachment, of its own previous actions.
Of course you will not hurry to come here so long as you are
enjoying peace there and attending to and winding up your affairs in
the spirit of the above lines, i.e., with sufficient detachment.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
