90. LETTER TO KAKA KALELKAR
[MOTIHARI,]
January 24, 1918
The accused is either guilty or not guilty. If the former, he
should go to jail by way of penance; if the latter, he should do so
by way of a lesson to the magistrate. If every accused who is inno-
cent were to go to jail after declaring his innocence, it would come
about ultimately that an innocent person would hardly ever find
himself in jail. So much from the common-sense point of view.
The Professor's case has several special features. His riding a horse
too fast was not the reason why it was instituted. That merely
furnished a pretext. The motive behind the case was to discredit
me anyhow, and through me the agitation. The assumption be-
hind the step was that, though I could not be touched, my enemies
would be pleased if others associated with me were. At a time like
this, it was necessary that the Professor should go to jail and show
what he was made of. The people here, moreover, are very much
afraid of going to jail. This was a fine opportunity to rid them of
their fear. It would not have been right to miss it. For the Professor
as well to refuse to go through the experience [of imprisonment],
which had offered itself to him unsought, would have been
to throwaway a golden opportunity. Satyagraha means fighting
injustice by voluntarily submitting oneself to suffering. The judg-
ment of the court was naked injustice. The Professor, undertaking
to suffer by submitting to imprisonment, offered satyagraha. It is
not for a satyagrahi to prefer an appeal. There is no room for
[legal] defence in pure satyagraha. What we see is not pure satya-
graha, but its diluted variety. Such dilution is a measure and a
sign of our weakness. When we have pure satyagraha, the world
will see its miraculous power. I am quite confident of this. From
this point of view of satyagraha, therefore, there was no question
at all of preferring an appeal. However, the desire to adhere
to pure satyagraha was but a secondary consideration in deciding
against an appeal. The case was so trivial, as it seemed to me,
that we have been able to expose both the partisan spirit and the
stupidity of the magistrate by not magnifying its importance
through an appeal. Moreover, no lawyer came forward to gua-
rantee success in the appeal, if made. I suggested to them that
they could file one on their own responsibility, telling them also
that, if they lost, I would certainly blame them. There could be
no appeal in this case. Revision was possible. In a revision, the
superior court never goes into questions of fact. It only sets mat-
ters right if there has been an error of law. There was no scope
for legal technicalities in this case. You will see that, in what we
have done, the requirements of both satyagraha and the justice
that obtains in what the world calls its practical affairs have been
met.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
