147. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON SATYAGRAHA
MOVEMENT
MADRAS,
March 23, 1919
Satyagraha, as I have endeavoured to explain at several
meetings, is essentially a religious movement. It is a process of
purification and penance. It seeks to secure reforms or redress of
grievances by self-suffering. I therefore venture to suggest that
the second Sunday after the publication of the Viceregal assent to
Bill No. 2 of 1919 (i.e., 6th April) may be observed as a day of
humiliation and prayer. As there must be an effective public de-
monstration in keeping with the character of the observance, I beg
to advise as follows:
(i) A twenty-four hours' fast counting from the last meal on
the preceding night should be observed by all adults, unless pre-
vented from so doing by consideration of religion or health. The
fast is not to be regarded, in any shape or form, in the nature of a
hunger-strike, or as designed to put any pressure upon the
Government. It is to be regarded, for the satyagrahis, as the neces-
sary discipline to fit them for civil disobedience, contemplated in
their Pledge, and for all others, as some slight token of the intensity
of their wounded feelings.
(ii) All work, except such as may be necessary in the public
interest, should be suspended for the day. Markets and other
business places should be closed. Employees who are required
to work even on Sundays may only suspend work after obtain-
ing previous leave.
I do not hesitate to recommend these two suggestions for
adoption by public servants. For though it is unquestionably the
right thing for them not to take part in political discussions and
gatherings, in my opinion they have an undoubted right to ex-
press upon vital matters their feelings in the very limited man-
ner herein suggested.
(iii) Public meetings should be held on that day in all
parts of India, not excluding villages, at which resolutions pray-
ing for the withdrawal of the two measures should be passed.
If my advice is deemed worthy of acceptance, the responsi-
bility will lie, in the first instance, on the various Satyagraha
Associations for undertaking the necessary work of organization,
but all other associations will, I hope, join hands in making this
demonstration a success.
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 24-3-1919; also a photostat: S. N. 6469
