351. LETTER TO SATCOWRIPATI RAY
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE STATE),
May 19, 1927
DEAR SATCOWRI BABU,
I got your letter day before yesterday after that day's mail
was closed. I could not possibly over-take your letter yesterday.
You have my deepest sympathy with you in your troubles.
But I have much fear it is out of my power to help you in the
direction desired by you. All the same please let me have a full
description of your property, where it is situated, what is its
extent, whether there are any buildings on it and if there are,
their dimensions. Possession of this information will be useful for
me. But your case is not out of the ordinary. I know many
who are passing through the same difficulty. It is also one of the
things we have to go through in our march towards our goal.
And I want you to bear your troubles with philosophic calmness
as I know you will do.
But why do you say insolvency is not to be thought of?
Honest insolvency is no crime if a borrower [borrows] in good
faith for investing in a prosperous enterprise. Suppose that through
no fault of my own the enterprise fails and the loaner knew that
I had no other means of repayment. Surely if he is impatient,
insolvency is the only honourable course left open for me even if
I desired as I should to repay the loan in spite of insolvency. For,
insolvency would be the only way of my doing further business.
As a lawyer you know the genesis of insolvency law. It was
created to protect honest but unlucky enterprise and to encourage
trade and enterprise. No doubt the golden rule is not to borrow.
But so few of us follow the golden rule. The next best therefore is
not to accept a defeat but to seek the protection of the insolvency
court and open a new leaf, and if successful, in the next enter-
prise, repay of one's own free will the original loaner. There are
such celebrated instances of men having deliberately become in-
solvent and then repaid their creditors. In my own practice, I
advised one of my nearest clients1, who because he had taken part
in the satyagraha movement, was forced into the insolvency court.
I called a meeting of the debtors. They were unbending. I
challenged them to do their worst. The consequence was insol-
vency. But after the insolvency, the client paid the creditors in
full to their agreeable astonishment. They apologized and they
showed their sincerity by giving him afterwards unlimited credit
which they had no occasion to regret. I therefore strongly advise
you to meet the creditors, place the position frankly and fearlessly
before them and tell them that you will repay if you earned.
If they don't listen, let them make you insolvent, or if the in-
solvency law here admits of voluntary surrender you may even
surrender voluntarily. Then you will have breathing time and
then if you do not want to resume practice, you will join the
Khadi Service. Khadi Service will never give you Rs. 25,000.
But if the movement goes forward with a leap, khadi will become
a commercial proposition, and when it does become that, there
will be a moderate amount of money in it also. This may seem
to be all far-fetched; not so to me. I regard khadi as a far
sounder proposition even from a commercial standpoint than the
least that can be made by our merchant princes. After all sound
commerce is of slow growth. But my confidence in khadi is such
1 A. M. Kachhalia; vide Vol. IX, p. 157.
that, though it is of slow growth, in the long run, it will prove to
be the shortest route to healthy commercial prosperity of individuals
as it certainly will be of the nation.
I do not want you [to] succumb therefore under the in-
fluence of false pride or [a] false sense of honour. I want you to
be a pattern for others, and therefore please follow my advice and
get rid of the burden which is evidently bearing you down. Then
make a firm resolution not to borrow a single farthing henceforth.
Public workers must not borrow. And insist upon your numerous
family dependants to work for their livelihood and let them all
work for khadi, and if they don't want to do that, the male
members may make their own choice; females may grumble but
will submit to the inevitable. This regulation of family obligations
is also a necessary corollary to national uplift. We must break
through this family crust if we are to grow to our national height.
These falsely assumed obligations I know are hampering the
progress of individuals and the nation in a way very few things
are doing. It is wrong, I almost want to say immoral, to support
men and women who have some capacity for work. Even a rich
nation, if it made an attempt to support one half of its members
without taking any work from them, it will go to the dogs. But
we are doing infinitely worse and still expect to become a strong,
self-reliant and self-respecting nation; it is an impossible proposi-
tion.
Do let me know your final decision and do not hesitate to
write to me as often as you like. It will be a terrible thing if
you are lost to public work.
Yours sincerely,
SATCOWRIPATI RAY, ESQ.
27, KALIDAS PATITUNDU LANE
KALIGHAT
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 12579
