51. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
May 4, 1935
CHI. KANTI,
Kanu had written as foolish a letter as you have done, and
I hope that your doubt will be resolved as quickly as his was.
Man daily dies a living death and cries when real death comes.
Man himself is responsible for being miserable. I do not want to
bury either of you here. This time, too, I cannot understand why
Mahadev had to answer your letter. I have deliberately decided
not to give either of you charge of the kitchen, so that I might be
able to take one of you with me when I go on a real tour. I
may not be able to take both of you, though I am thinking of
taking both. I am sure you will both understand, if owing to
chance or exigencies of work I am not able to do as I wish. This
year I do not want to travel at all. I wish to put things here in
order. I will go on tour next year if I am alive-alive in both
senses. For isn't imprisonment also a kind of death? In English
they call it 'civil death', that is, death in the eyes of law. Isn't
that always there as my lot?
I reprimanded Bal, just as I reprimanded you. He wanted me to
write, and so gets letters from me. You in your letter kept me free
from the obligation of replying and, therefore, I write less often
to you. How often do I write to Devdas? I write according
to the need of the other persons.
Do you know the meaning of your statement that my words
leave you dumbfounded? It means that you feel yourself miles
away from me. Is it your fault or mine that you could not recog-
nize the love behind my harsh words? As a votary of ahimsa, I
should believe it to be mine, but as a father I would say it was
yours. How strange it is that I should have to weigh my words and
restrain my language when speaking to you lest you feel offended?
From the beginning you have had a tendency to rudeness
and bad manners. You have tried hard to overcome it and
succeeded in a great measure, yet some traces are still left. There
is nothing of that kind in this letter to me. But there was some-
thing of it on that day on the terrace.
I had pacified myself of
course. It is strange that Harilal should think you have lost your
value in my eyes. I am a little hurt, too, for he knows very well
that you mean much to me. For myself, I feel that I am tending
you carefully like a flower . Your work has given me nothing
but satisfaction. Your intelligence is impressed on your face. I
have been trying to argue with Devdas that he is making some
mistake. What does the letter also which I have written to
Ramachandran prove? Let me assure you that you really mean
a great deal to me. It is a matter of shame for both of us that
you hesitate to come to me. There is no reason whatever for this.
Cardamom, oil or toothpaste, none of the three is necessary.
The ashes of burnt cow dung, powdered fine like flour and mixed
with salt, and a neem twig will keep the teeth very clean. Coconut
oil is a perfect hair-oil. It is improved still further by the addition
of a few drops of lime juice. Instead of cardamom, the neem leaf
is a fine mouth-purifier and one that is used by the village people.
In your relations with the girl whom you wish to marry,
you will have to cultivate the virtues of Bharata. I hope that
your marriage will provide an example of self-control.
I wish that you should feel no discontent whatever, not even
about studies. If you can endure the hardships of life in this
place, you will become a man. Even otherwise, however, you
will surely grow up to be a successful man of the world. While
living with me Prithuraj became lean and as soon as there was
an abundance of money his weight went up to 135. This is a
great lesson to me. Live with me in perfect cheerfulness. I would
rather bear your staying away from me than that you should lan-
guish with me.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised the letter. If you do not understand any
point in it, ask me again. If I have omitted anything, get me
to write about it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7296. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
