535. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 5, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I have taken up for reply both your letters of 8-2-'35 and
30-3-'35. How is Kisan now? Is she doing anything? How does
she keep herself occupied?
Do you still go on with your self-chosen occupation of plough-
ing the fields and working the water-lift?
You should try and persuade those over whom you have in-
fluence to save the expenditure on births and deaths. All may not
listen to you, but a few certainly will.
You had a good discussion with Nariman. It is true that most
people follow ahimsa only as a policy. But there are a few at least
like you who strive their utmost to follow it as a dharma. Ulti-
mately it is such ahimsa that will work.
There will be an army even after the country has become
free. I don't feel that my ahimsa is sufficiently strong to convince
the people that there will be no necessity for an army. If the
army remains, military training also will remain. But this is only
speculation. It is not inconceivable that, if we really and truly
win freedom through ahimsa, we may not need an army after-
wards. There is no limit to the power of ahimsa, as there is none
to that of the votary of ahimsa. The latter does nothing of his own
will. All his actions are prompted by God. That being so, how can
he say in advance what God will prompt him to do at a future
time? There is thus no question of compromise in this matter. It is
only a question of recognizing the limit of one's strength. My killing
a snake through fear is no compromise but merely an exhibition
of my lack of strength. One might say that God has given me only
so much strength and no more, or that I have not purified myself
sufficiently—have not done adequate tapascharya—to make myself
fit for greater strength. A compromise, on the other hand, is a
deliberate and voluntary act.
A perfect satyagrahi means a perfect avatar of God. Do you
doubt that such a perfect avatar can shake the whole world? It
is no exaggeration to say that this world is a laboratory for pre-
paring the ground for such an avatar. If all of us prepare our-
selves for a partial manifestation of the Divine, we may rest assured
that the perfect avatar will come some day. If you have such faith,
you will not need to ask about the necessity or otherwise of an
army.
The Government may indeed be a machine, but is not the
machine controlled by an engineer?
There is no harm in atten-
ding a music or dance performance, provided there is nothing
obscene in it. But I would certainly mind going when somebody
else pays for us. It may be possible to pay for one person, but who
will pay for the millions? We are among the millions. In this matter,
however, everyone should act according to his or her own strength.
Preserve carefully Mahadev's article about bread. The prob-
lem of keeping the wells clean is a big one. It will be a great
achievement if you can persuade the people to stop using the
steps on wells wherever they exist.
Write to me in detail the method of straining oil so that
I may try it.
Don't mind if your weight is increasing. Acid things are
necessary in one's food. I have introduced here both tamarind
and onions.
If Sushila has been appointed an Examiner, she should share
her fees and set a question paper that will be easy to answer and
that will test originality.
My remark about menstruation is correct. Such freedom
from passion takes a very long time to acquire. Passion is so
subtle a thing that we are not always able to recognize it.
It would be proper for Europe to carry on an agitation for
the release of Jawaharlal.
The disregard of the Assembly voting does not fill me with
disappointment. This contingency was taken into account. Entering
the Assembly was necessary and remains so.
I keep silent about Hindu-Muslim unity because I can do
nothing about it. When the Elephant King had realized his help-
lessness, he started praying and his prayer was answered. My
condition is like his. My prayer continues. Let deliverance come
when it will. Why should an anasakta be impatient to know
its exact time?
We have a large number of newcomers here. Cooking has
been drastically simplified. Everything is cooked in steam. Con-
tainers for all the three articles of food are put into the cooker
at the same time. This saves a lot of time. Cooking now prac-
tically means only making rotlis. I am trying to discover some me-
thod of simplifying this work too.
The oil-press is still working. We continue the cleaning of
the neighbouring village every day. I visited it only once. Mahadev
goes there daily.
You can come when you get time and wish to do so. You
may come to Indore, too, if you wish.
I think this is enough.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10369. Also C.W. 6808. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
