285. LETTER TO SIR BENJAMIN ROBERTSON
7, BUITENCINGLE,
CAPE TOWN,
March 4, 1914
DEAR SIR BENJAMIN,
It strikes me that, with reference to Mr. Polak's note, I
should mention perhaps the manner in which relief can be
granted in the several matters.
Immigration. Relief can be easily given in the administration
of this Act, as there is one Act applicable to all the Provinces and
it can be done by altering the regulations in the desired direc-
tion. Inter-provincial visiting and travelling permits should be
granted for the asking and either without a deposit or with a
small deposit and no more than a shilling stamp to cover the bare
cost.
Certificates of identity should be of a permanent duration even
as the Transvaal certificates are— why should the Transvaal have
an advantage over the other Provinces in these matters?
The question of the withdrawal and return of children should
be definitely fixed.
Proof required from wives who would be administratively
admitted should be definitely stated. Indeed, it is necessary to go
through the regulations clause by clause with Mr. Gorges and then
discuss them with General Smuts.
Dealers' Licences. This is a difficult question. The three Provin-
ces have three different laws and they are not administered direct-
ly by the Union Government. The control is partly in the hands
of the Provincial Governments and partly in those of the
municipalities. Each municipality has its own policy and bye-laws.
The utmost that can be done is for the Government to address
circulars to the responsible bodies warning them of the danger
of following a sweeping policy. This method was successfully
adopted by the late Mr. Escombe who was himself the author of
the Natal licensing law of 1896. And the local administrations will
not fail to note the changed attitude of the Union administration
if it ever changes for the better.
1 Sir Harry Escombe (1838-99); leading advocate, who pleaded for Gan-
dhiji's admission to the Bar of the Natal Supreme Court; was Prime Minister
of Natal for a few months in 1897.
The Transvaal Gold Laws. In this the Union Government can
give definite relief by accepting the meaning that I have ven-
tured to give to the expression 'vested rights' which they have pro-
mised in their dispatches to respect. By 'vested rights' I under-
stand the right of the Indian and his successors to live and trade
in the township he was living in and trading, no matter how often
he shifts his residence or business from place to place in the same
township.
Law of 1885 Transvaal. The Government can safely and easily
administer the Law in a liberal or, rather, just spirit by granting
the benefit of a freehold title in Locations or Wards fixed under
the Law. In this connection I would state that it would be a
most dangerous thing for the Government to de-proclaim old
established Locations.
Education. The Government have sadly neglected this matter.
The wretched schools in Natal and the few at the Cape and the
Transvaal serve no useful purpose. The vernaculars are neglected
and Indians are becoming dis-Indianised, without becoming
Europeanised in the proper sense.
Future admissions. The number of future admissions of new men
needed for the wants of the community has not yet been fixed save
for the Transvaal. I have suggested at least 40 for the Union.
This is far below the average of the past five years.
Everyone of these points is covered by the 5th clause of the
Passive Resistance declaration. They can hardly be tackled by
the Commission. But, in my humble opinion, they can be best
dealt with by a full discussion between you and General Smuts.
The whole weight of the Government of India will have to be used
in our behalf if real peace is to be enjoyed by the Indians of
South Africa and the Viceroy so far as the S. A. question is con-
cerned.
May I trouble you to send me a copy of this letter? I have
no typing assistance here.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of a copy of the original: S.N. 5945 & 5954
