94. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
"MOUNTAIN VIEW",
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 12, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
I hope you duly received the cable I sent you. As there
was no certainty about a settlement being arrived at and as your
wires were imperative, it was thought best to send Polak to you.
There is up to the time of writing no definite information from
General Smuts. In reply to a personal letter his secretary tele-
graphs saying owing to the crisis General Smuts has no time to go
into the points raised by me. There are internal dissensions too
in the Cabinet.
In the event of a settlement, I have suggested to Polak that
he should unreservedly place himself at your disposal. If you can
use him for your own secretarial work, he will, I know, feel
honoured and he can be spared. If you think that he may be
the Secretary of the London Committee, you may appoint him
as such.
Regarding his expenses the position is this. Mr. Rustomji
has advanced for his start nearly £250. His monthly expenses I
am paying out of the little I have still left with me. Mrs. Polak
and the rent of his office need at least £35 per month. His passage
and other expenses have already come to roughly £50. If it is at
all possible, I have therefore asked him to suggest to you that
£300 at least should be sent to me for the time being.
But if the raising of the money means any mental [strain]
or trouble to you, may I beseech you not to trouble about the
funds. I shall manage somehow or other till his return. In my
cablegrams I felt bound to place before you my position. But
the cablegrams need not worry you at all. All I care for is, sel-
fishly, to see you alive for some years at least. And nothing would
grieve me more than to find that our troubles hastened your depar-
ture from this earth. Nor is it at all necessary in the event of the
struggle reviving, for you to go to India in August or before your
health is restored. I have spoken to the passive resisters and they
have all asked me to tell you that they are not frightened by the
prospect of prolongation of the struggle. I personally feel that
but for a Cabinet crisis and but for strikes, the struggle, if it is
revived, will be sharp and swift.
I hope you will be able to read my horrible writing.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 929
Courtesy: Servants of India Society
