101. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
SABARMATI,
Thursday [June 28, 1928]
CHI. RAMDAS,
I received your letter. There can be no discourtesy in anything you write.
Rather, I welcome such letters from you.
1 From the contents, chiefly the reference to shifting of the joint kitchen to the
hostel kitchen; vide Vol. XXXVI, p. 432.
2 From the postal cancellation mark; also, June 28 in 1928 corresponded to a
Thursday.
LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
83
In my view, [Jayadevji's] misbehaviour was serious enough. But it would
not be right to ask him to leave for that reason. So far, we have not sent
away anyone. With what face, then, can I send him away ? I have not
sentenced myself to leave any time when I may have been guilty of some
lapse. Nor would I be pleased if a superior or an elder relation sent me away.
How, then, can I all at once send away anybody else for his lapse?
It is possible that the work I am doing may continue only so long as I
live. Even so, what? I should do what seems clear as daylight to me and not
leave the burden of making changes in it on those who come after me. They
will do what they are able to do. If they wish to introduce changes, they will
do so, or would wind it up altogether if they so wish. The Ashram cannot
exist without a common kitchen for all.
[How can I agree to your going for formal education? But then you know
you are quite free to do as you please]. I keep you tied to myself with the
soft string of love. You have to stretch it just a little to break it. As for me,
I do not need to test its strength. All that I am doing is to hold on firmly to
one end of it, lest it might break altogether if you stretch it a little too
strongly. . . .3
Manilal has not enough money to be able to ask you to join him in S.
A. 4 It seems rather that he is in debt. I am unhappy that he has still not
repaid the money he owes to the Ashram. However, I will never stand in the
way of any of your good resolves.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
