63. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
March 11, 1933
MY DEAR VERRIER,
This time too there was unavoidable delay in replying to
your two letters. As if this was all God's design, Alla came in yes-
terday to change the scope of my letter. I wanted this to be a
mere thanksgiving letter. But Alla's talk has not made it quite
possible. She said she had a copy of your letter to me. But she
was not satisfied. She insisted that there was a promise made by
you. She does not want the marriage now but she does not want
to be the liar. She wants you to be the liar! I gently suggested that
neither need be one and that in matters of love making mistakes
was the most common thing in life and that whilst you had never
meant marriage, she who wanted it might easily have interpreted
every word and gesture of yours to mean marriage. She would not
have it that way at all and yet was loath to accuse you of untruth-
fulness. I told her that you were incapable of lying and that if
there was the slightest suspicion of your having meant marriage
you would make the admission. You will now tax your memory
and if there is anything to correct in the light of what Alla has to
say, you will do her the reparation. I think that she ought not to
go there yet for some time. Though you and Mary have taken
the sacred and most momentous resolution1, it must have been a
terrific strain on your nerves. Mary does not even seem to have
recovered from the shock. Though your first letter to me is joint,
Mary does not seem to have quite assimilated the truth of the dis-
solution of the intended tie. My whole heart goes out to her.
I have no doubt that such things mean much more to woman than
to man. But M. must realize that before God there is no sex
or we are all women, His brides married to Him in an indissolu-
ble tie. If she has realized the beauty of this immortal marri-
age, she must dance with joy that she is free from the bondage
of the human marriage. The human marriage is good and neces-
sary if the flesh is weak but if the flesh is strong it surely is
hindrance for the servant of humanity that M. has become. Let
her remember too, all sacrifice to be true must bring inner peace
and joy. She must not therefore brood over what was to be and
what was a concession to the flesh. Let her sing out the praise of
God for enabling you both to triumph over the flesh. And since
she has chosen to be my daughter she has got to write to me
without reserve and pour out her heart to me.
But till you are both composed and have tested yourselves
Alla must not go there and must not be induced to do so. She
herself does not want to go until the so-called promise matter
is cleared up.
And now I know that my whole heart is with you. My
spirit is watching you, praying for all the strength you need.
These months must have been terrible for you. May Truth,
which is God, shine through your lives.
All my love to you and Mary.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 20541
