106. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Monday [February 21, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter.
For the present take such work from Parasram as he can do.
Ask Panditji to be ready. He should take a train from Sabar-
mati on the 5th morning to save time and money, and join me
at Jalgaon by taking the Tapti Valley route. It will do if Manilal
also takes the same train. But they may, if they want to, travel
via Bombay. Panditji should write to Nanabhai about the prepara-
tions to be made. The marriage ceremony is to be performed
on Sunday at 10-30 a.m.
I was under the impression that Ganesh's Christian name was
John. Because of this and because I had forgotten the name
Ganesh, I wrote John. Give him this new letter in which I refer
to him by the name of Ganesh. And if the fellow can take a joke
and would not mind his name being forgotten, give him the one
which carries the name of John too. Otherwise destroy that letter.
Now I do not have to worry about Rukhi.
I feel we must not let the common mess close, though those
who want to, may drop out of it. Cooking and social activities
must be carried on together.
We are bound to devote the minimum amount necessary for
the tannery and the [water] lift. The funds for cow-protection have
to be used for the tannery. I remember a resolution to this effect
adopted at Wardha. If not we will pass one on the 11th. We
must take up that activity which involves no risk of loss.
For the lift too we shall collect the amount needed. But I shall
decide about it after I reach there on the 9th.
The amount from Mirabehn comes in regularly. All of it
is to be spent at the Ashram. Since a year is over, we can now
utilize the amount. Only you have to be careful that we do not
suffer any loss on account of an error in accounts or some other slip.
Are you now in a position to meet the demand for lifts and to
set them up? I have deliberately omitted to publish anything
[about the lift]. Write to me if you want it to be publicized so
that I can prepare an article for the next issue. Let me know what
I may write. Have you now trained people to work the lift? I
believe I must mention the minimum weight of the animal that
should go with each. Why can we not use an old buffalo? Why
not a good or pliant bull? There should be no error in our calcu-
lations. I am afraid, we might have to depute our men in all
places for quite some time. But it will be all right if you have
given thought to all this.
The same applies to hides and skins. Let me have a copy of
the pamphlet about this. I will publish it after examining it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
A special letter for the Ashram is enclosed.
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 7762. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri
