158. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
November 20, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
I had got your letter. You must have got mine. After writing
to you, I discussed the matter with R. I have not been able
to convince him. He says that there must have been some mistake
in what S. saw and that the same charge was levelled against
you regarding your relations with P. Ultimately it was proved
that there was nothing in it. All the same, says R., he will make
a full inquiry. But he adds: "Suppose my sister has fallen, is it
not S.'s duty to bring her mother to her senses? Was it right
for her to run down to you? Have we, who have brought her
up, who have given her love, and separation from whom has made
her shed tears, ceased to be of any value? If you order, I will
certainly bring S. before you even to tell her this." In these
circumstances, how could I insist any further? Now it is for S.
to show courage. She should boldly prove P.'s misconduct, and
having shown that she cannot reform P. she should try to come
to me. P. may have gone astray but all the others cannot be
like her. Don't become impatient. It is not proper that you
should give up hope of P. Her love for you has not diminished.
If it has, cannot the betrothal be cancelled even after it has
been made public? But he does not even dream of such a step.
You have become a part of that family. You should believe
that there is still room for further inquiry in this matter. How-
ever that be, I do not want you to let this affair trouble you or
take your time. Whatever type of woman P. may be, S. is
certainly not going to be affected. It will be enough if she
remains engrossed in her duty. Write to her and ask her to write
to me as frankly as she does to you. If she is afraid that some-
one might read her letters, I will tear them up after reading
them, as I do R. K.'s. Her letters are given to me unopened, as
also others which are marked "Private", "Personal", or anything
to that effect. I want that not you but I should worry about
S. You are also not right in believing that it was wrong to have
made your betrothal public.
I hope you are well.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Jawaharlal arrives tomorrow.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7354. Courtesy: Kantilal
Gandhi
