724. LETTER TO SURENDRA MASHRUWALA
December 2, 1933
CHI. SURENDRA,
I have your letter.
Yes, for the present you may build up your health. You
may go after Jamnalalji returns from the hill-station. There is
no doubt that just now there is no other duty for us except that
of serving the Harijans and going to jail. Even in respect of
these two I see that very few would now remain who would
choose the second course. Hardships in jails are likely to increase
now. Life in jails requires the utmost degree of physical and
psychological tapascharya. Only a handful of us, therefore, would
be ready for jail-going now. Those who do not understand
the religious meaning of suffering in jail have no place in
jail at all.
There is no escape from undertaking fasts unto death.
Whether it comes today or tomorrow is another question.
The above portion was written at three sittings. This is the
fourth. It is 3.30 in the morning. I am with Jethalal in his
Ashram at Anantpur. The solitude of the hour is perfect.
Mirabehn and Om are sleeping on one side. There is no sound
except of their breathing. Now to resume the question of the
fasts. They, too, will come by and by. They will commence
when we are fit for them. Today foolish people are freely using
this most effective weapon, but everywhere I hear stories about
their fasts. Fortunately, few people can remain hungry for a
long time. Hence the number of those who merely copy the
example of others is insignificant. But their cases demonstrate
that when used without one's being qualified for it the weapon
has no value at all. It is such a wonderful weapon that it can
never do harm. When an unqualified person resorts to it, it will
harm his health a little, that is all. Such people cannot even
prolong their fast to the point of death. My purpose in writing
all this to you is that we have nothing to think or do except
cultivating fitness. We should not even wish that the fasts should
commence. We should be ready, that is all. While I am alive,
no one else need on his own resort to a fast for the service of
440
the Harijans or in connection with satyagraha for any other
object. Tell Durbari that he can write whenever he wants. He
need have no hesitation at all. If he throws himself into
service heart and soul, many of the difficulties will solve
themselves.
How do you use your time these days? What is your diet?
You must drink milk and eat ghee as you need to build up
your health. Do not count the cost. They will be easily available.
Therefore accept them. If we do not get them, we should not
feel disappointed. But when they are available, we should regard
it our duty to accept them. When you have cultivated indif-
ference to taste, it is unnecessary to feel hesitant in such
matters. If you do not get either of the two things in jail,
are you not going to do without them? "He whose understanding
is secure, who is undeluded, who knows Brahman and who rests
in Brahman, will neither be glad to get what is pleasant, nor
sad to get what is unpleasant." The body has been rightly
compared to Chintamani. If we look upon it as an instrument
[of service] given by God, we are duty-bound to take proper
care of the God-given instrument. Even in jail you should not
hesitate to inform the authorities about your physical condition.
After thus taking the necessary steps for the protection of the
body, we may sing, 'Let this body perish or survive.'
It is now four o'clock and the others have got up. Prepara-
tions have started for the prayer and so I must stop.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 10735. Courtesy : Gomatibehn
Mashruwala
