487. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 29/December 1, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
This is time after the morning prayer 29-11-1930. It is
fairly cold. But I do a little writing after the prayer and before
walking out on the bugle of 5.30.
I am glad you were better when you wrote your letter. We
can only learn really in everything as in the matter of health-
keeping by making repeated mistakes and profiting by them. This
is an introduction to my confession rather than a warning to you.
Last Thursday I suddenly developed a bad stomachache. I could
have avoided it but stupidly did not. As you know I have been
lately living on curds. They agreed very well though the bowels
could be moved only by the enema. But as you saw the weight
was going up and I was otherwise fit. So I continued the curds
and then too the thick part. That induced further constipation
despite the enema. That was sufficient warning to stop at least
curds or better still all food for a day. I would not and suffered
for the day. I voluntarily brought out what I had eaten and in a
few hours the pain subsided. Nothing but raisin water the next
day and I was quite fit though at once I lost 3 lb. in weight.
It is ever thus with me. My weight beyond 95 is evidently an
uncertain quantity probably made up of poisonous matter. I
determined too to get rid of the constipation if it was at all
possible, so I have continued the stopping of curds. (Here is the
bugle and I stop for the time being). To resume at 8 p.m.
And I am now taking cooked leaves and tomatoes and dates or
raisins. The bowels have moved naturally, strength has been
maintained and the weight has suffered no further reduction.
Yesterday I added sweet potatoes and today 12 almonds. No one
need be alarmed at this change. If I feel weak or lose weight
steadily, I shall at once revert to milk and shall feel all the better
for the milk fast. If on the other hand the change agrees it will
be a source of additional joy. Therefore you should all rejoice
over the change. If it works, it is well. It is well also if it does
not. I shall take no risks.
So Kaka left and he wept as he left. We had come so
close to each other. Within two hours of his departure they
350
sent me Pyarelal and of course he has taken possession of me. I
put him on your wheel. He spun 83 rounds. It went practically
as I had set it up. We have now concocted some improvements
on the holder. He is at one such whilst I am writing this.
Somehow or other I can only think of the wheel and all it con-
notes. The Gandiv too is undergoing considerable improvement.
I hope to try the improved wheel tomorrow. I will have a
movable wheel and will have a spring for tension. If it works
well, the output must increase. I am gradually getting control over
the takli. My speed on your takli went up to 87 rounds per hour.
But Vinoba says I must first try the steel takli and he has sent
me two and I am trying to work at it. I haven't yet got the
result expected. But I am daily gaining confidence and hope
soon to be able to pull 100 rounds per hour on the takli. (As
it was 9 p.m. I had to stop here. I resume at 4.30 a.m. after
prayer Sunday.) I understand about the Kumarappa differences.
If Mahadev is gone Kaka has now come. He may be of help in
adjusting differences. The golden rule is not to fret if things go
contrary to one's wishes and to yield where resistance is useless or
likely to be misunderstood, where there is no principle at stake
and where in an organization responsibility is not solely one's
own. The virtue of charity comes into play only when one comes
in contact with a variety of opinion and conduct. Strict and even
harsh with ourselves, charitable and even lax with regard to others.
In the end, we find that we are neither strict regarding ourselves
nor lax regarding others. The fact is we do not as readily ob-
serve our own blemishes as we are to detect those of others.
Hence the terrible truth "Pluck the beam out of thine own eyes
before you remove the mote from thy neighbour's" or Burns's (Is it
not?) "O that we could see ourselves as others see us." In prac-
tice I have found that it is best to search about ourselves and
to assume the truth of friends' criticism of ourselves and to take
them in the first instance at their word when they disown guilt
or defect. But enough of this morning sermonizing. You will
act as the spirit guides you.
Love.
BAPU
8.45 p.m. 1-12-30
[PS.]
Pyarelal began well on the Bihar wheel. But it proved a
failure. I fitted up the other Gandiv and it worked splendidly
without a hitch. Through the favour of the Superintendent I
have got the Gandiv with my improvements incorporated. It
promises to work well. I have just tried it. The food experiment
continues.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5422. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9656
