121. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 19, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,
After I had written a letter to you [today], I got your letter
of the 16th. Hence this second letter.
I have already written to you regarding Ahmedabad. Our
letters crossed each other.
Karsandas had written to me about Gokhale's death anni-
versary. I do not at all wish to cheapen Gokhale's name. The
country is not ready yet to celebrate the 19th in a manner be-
fitting his greatness. History will appreciate the purity of his cha-
racter and the greatness of his services. I don't think they will be
appreciated in our lifetime. I don't mind "Anti-untouchability
Days" being celebrated independently. This is my firm view.
Don't you think it is based on very good reasons?
The Sangh has not yet reached its destination. On the con-
trary, several swords are hanging over it. Rajaji, of course, is hold-
ing an umbrella over it, but it is the Sangh's lot to pass through
an ordeal just now. So what can an umbrella avail? However, you
may consult Hariji and other principal fighters. If they agree, you
may proceed further, otherwise bury Rajaji's letter deep under
the ground. I had passed on to Ghanshyamdas the letter which
I had received from him. He is not particular about the name. If
I wish, he would agree to change it. Personally I do wish [that it
should be]. But time is all-powerful. He swallows our desires
alive, like a snake and makes even a Mahatma like me look
an alpatma. Hence I have held my tongue. You have strong shoul-
ders. If you wish, you may take up the responsibility. As for the
name the saying is, "With great love, we name the child Hari,
and it dies in infancy." The Sangh will not succeed or fail be-
cause of its name. It will be judged by its work. If it works in
the manner of the Yamaraj3, I have no doubt that it will swallow
the demon of untouchability alive.
You are wrong. You yourself should have humorously adver-
tised the Holloway ointment. There are persons who will bear
witness to its efficacy. If you do not like doing it or have no time,
forget about it.
I have got some free time and so could indulge in this bit of
light talk.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1105
