327. LETTER TO JUGALKISHORE
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 27, 1928
MY DEAR JUGALKISHORE,
I was glad to receive your letter after such a long absence.
I was wondering how you were faring at the P. M. V.
My plan about the spinners' register is not half as ambitious
as you think, though we cannot be too accurate nor too insistent
on every worker coming in the closest touch with the spinners and
yet, strange as it may appear though we represent spinners above
everybody else, our workers are least in touch with them! But
even if we do not come in such close contact with them and
understand their lives as we understand our blood-sisters, we
should at least know who and where they are, who are sup-
plying us with their yarn. I have therefore said that we should
trace the residence and names of every spinner whose yarn is re-
ceived in the bazaar. Let us at least have that very rudi-
mentary contact with them. This does not require the elaborate
register mentioned by Satis Babu in his Manual. Even he is not
able to enforce that register when he buys yarn at the Feni
Bazaar. His register was and is in complete operation at his
Atrai Dept. where he brought into being the spinners for the
first time and kept touch with them. The largest quantity of yarn
however received by him is at the Feni Bazaar. My register there-
fore is really a census register to be taken once for all or periodi-
cally. You see therefore you do not require the staff suggested by
you for my simple measure.
Nobody has complained that the Gandhi Ashram will not
give this list. I think I saw the argument advanced by Dhiren
about the difficulty of tracing every spinner and I wrote combating
that argument and showing a way out of the difficulty. The
difficulty raised by Dhiren was not raised by him alone. It is a
difficulty common to almost all and all are gradually getting over
the difficulty.
I quite agree with you that in order to establish a living con-
tact with the spinners, we must have women workers. Tell Shanti
Devi I would like her to make a start.
Now about your scheme. I like the general idea. How far
you can give effect to it there, I do not know. Because after all you
want honest and able teachers who know their work. We have not
too many as yet. But make out your scheme and send it to Jamna-
lalji unofficially in the first instance and see how it appeals to him.
Tell me how Bharat is doing there and how spinning is going
on among the students.
By this time you know about Maganlal's death.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13204
