329. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
PATNA,
April 26, 1947
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have been working under such heavy pressure that I could
not find time even to write a letter to you and send it with
Sita. I meant to write yesterday but could not. I read just
now Manilal's letter which you had sent to Kishorelal and which
the latter had forwarded to me. Such is my condition. God,
however, has preserved my health so far and will preserve it as
long as He wants to take work from me.
Since Sita had come and met me, she herself told me that
there was no need for me to write a letter, but that an oral
message would suffice. I agreed with her. I have discussed the
matter with her as fully as possible. There is no need whatever
for you to worry about her. You must have seen the letter she
wrote to Krishnakumar and the one I wrote to him. You will
learn everything from them. Please therefore do not worry about
her at all. And as Kishorelal suggests, it is now desirable that
you should go and join Manilal. If you wish, you may come
and see me. I shall have to go to Delhi on May 2. You may
come and see me there if you like. But it is very hot now. If
you wish to escape the heat and don't wish to come, you may
not. We may discuss the more important problems through cor-
respondence and should be satisfied with that.
I am returning Manilal's letter. My heart endorses the dif-
ferent view which you two have taken. Since I am the property
of the masses, they have a perfect right to search me inside
out. But, even so, if the masses seek to press their point of view
on me, I would feel suffocated.
About Kishorelal and others it is a different matter. They
are, after all, co-workers who seek guidance from me. If they
disapprove of any action or views of mine today, they should
have the right to discuss them fully. The painful thing in this
matter is that their approach and mine to the question seem
different. Conduct based on such [different] approach is bound
to be at variance [with their views] and cannot but give pain. My
ideas and conduct are not new. I can say that they go back
361
to fifty-five years ago. It is possible that I might not have been
able to express my ideas clearly in my writings or talks. I
don't say positively that I have written on the subject, only
because if I could spare the time to go over all my writings I
might be able to quote the statements I have made from time to
time. But what is to be gained by doing so? The action has
already been abandoned for the present. As for my views, Kishore-
lal and I have been discussing them [through letters]. That
discussion need not be stopped, nor need it upset anybody. If
there is any error in my reasoning, the discussion may help to
remove it. Or, if there is no possibility of either of us changing
his view, we will put up with the difference in our views and
also in our conduct. I am hopeful that that will not be the
outcome. One or the other will correct his error and both will
come to the same view. I am hoping, however, that Kishorelal
and others who are non-co-operating with me partially will
withdraw their non-co-operation.
I hope you are all unperturbed.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5000
