480. LETTER TO K. F. NARIMAN
July 17, 1937
MY DEAR NARIMAN,
Sir Govindrao has sent me a copy of his letter to you. In
the covering letter he gives me an extract from your letter to
him. From your letters to the Working Committee and from
your letter to Sir Govindrao I see that, in your excitement, which
has become chronic with you, you have lost even your legal
acumen. The more I think of this wretched quarrel, the clearer
I am becoming that your grievance is wholly imaginary and that,
by allowing the agitation to continue, you are harming yourself
and the public interest. I would strongly advise you to take
legal advice, and frame your indictment in a proper manner which
anybody can understand.
I wholly endorse Sir Govindrao's re-
mark that your charge is too vague for any lawyer or judge to
understand or decide upon.
In your reference, you are bound to refer to the charge of
Sardar Vallabhbhai having secretly poisoned the minds of the
voters directly or indirectly in connection with the election of
the leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party. How I wish
that you could see that you have made mountain out of a mole-
hill. Assuming that you were utterly innocent of the defeat of the
Congress candidate at the Bombay election of 1934, and yet the
Sardar persisted in believing that you were not innocent, and
actuated the voters against you, how can you make that a cause
of serious grievance? These things will happen in public life.
Do we not often suspect the bona fides even of our companions
and act upon those suspicions? In your letter to Sir Govind-
rao, you say that your claims were defeated because of the alle-
gations against you.
Has a public worker any claim to any-
thing? Had Jawaharlal any claim to the Presidentship of the
Congress? He may even try his level best to get elected, but
why should he brood over his defeat? Would he be justified
in making that a cause of grievance against those who were res-
ponsible for his defeat? And yet is it not this that you are
doing, or is there anything more?
But Sardar Vallabhbhai has generously come forward to
submit to an inquiry into your charge. You resent this offer
and make that an additional grievance. What he believes about
you he has frankly told you and he undertakes to give the
grounds of his belief to any impartial judge. He tells you and
the public that he never asked anyone to vote against you,
and challenges you to prove the contrary. What more can he
do? That you have failed to be elected is surely nobody's fault,
not even yours. Bombay is not the Bombay Presidency. If you
have the ambition of leading Maharashtra, Karnataka and
Gujarat, the field is still open to you. The golden way is through
utterly selfless service, surely, not through a baseless and hysterical
agitation for which you must be held responsible.
The target of this agitation remains unharmed. The Sardar
has no parliamentary ambition. He has no ambition for leader-
ship either. Nature has endowed him with certain qualities
and he uses them. You won't find him going to the Press and com-
plaining if he loses hold on the populace. Therefore, why won't
you see and realize that in the end you will be the only loser?
Therefore, take the inquiry and let the judge or judges go into
the whole matter, and if you do not want it, then bravely and
honourably declare that you had not weighed and valued things
properly, and that now you see quite clearly that Sardar
Vallabhbhai had nothing to do with your defeat. For, that is
so far as I can see, the whole of your allegation. I think I told
you in the course of our conversation that if you convince me
that Sardar had poisoned the minds of the voters against you,
I for one would cease to have the intimate public connection
that I have with him. He has told me repeatedly what he has
said in his statement which, as I say, was made at my in-
stance.
You will regard this letter as coming from a friend who
wishes well to you.
Yours sincerely,
A. I. C. C. File No. 747-A, 1937. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
