60. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Thursday, January 20, 1910
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Received both your letters. I am not likely to go there for the pre-
sent. Manilal has been arrested he will be released on Friday. Let us
see what happens after that. I think it is better for me not to go there
so long as arrests continue here.
It will be all right if, as you suggest, you arrange for physical exer-
cise, etc., for Rama . I did not rebuke you in connection with Mr. Cordes;
it seems there was some misunderstanding on your part. And my im-
pression remains the same despite your letter. I had never thought of
Rama staying either with him or with Willie for the whole day. During
the day when he is not busy, let him go wherever he pleases. I wish he
dines and sleeps with Mr. Cordes. I cannot think that Mr. Cordes
has no love for Ramdas. I know Mr. Cordes' drawbacks; none of us
are without any.
If you do not know the verse ~1jT~!: ~'!il llllfllV, I shall send it to you.
The sun has spots. Take it that his heart is not wicked. The rest will
follow automatically.
There is still a lot of old history concerning our family. Parmanand-
bhai alone knows it in detail.
It is worthwhile to spare time, if possible, from the press work for
the children to take exercise.
It is desirable not to give more than a month's credit for Indian
Opinion. You should only take a limited risk. Let the amount be debited
to your account. It will not be deducted from your current allowance.
You should never take liability for more than ten subscribers. Even
that is perhaps too much. However, whatever liability you have taken
upon yourself in the Cape Colony is binding on all, as you did not know
the new rule. The new rule is, I believe, very good—at least for the
present.
We will have to carry many [fresh] burdens; it is, therefore, better
to cut down these. This [not allowing too much credit] seems to be
the prevalent practice of newspapers. As people gradually get used to
it, they will follow it of their own accord. We pay the licence fee in
advance because of compulsion, i.e., physical force. That we shall take
the subscriptions in advance will be on the strength of soul-force. That
soul-force consists in making Indian Opinion interesting and for that the
only course open to us is to put in maximum effort. The subscriptions
will then come in automatically. I have no time now to dilate upon
this.
There is a letter from Veerji in which he says that he intends to
open an office in Durban and work there. It will be good to entrust
work to him. I am writing a letter to Mr. West. Did you read my
last letter to him?
Please consider fully before you take the new vow of brahmacharya.
It will be better to get Santok's consent. Kavi has mentioned in his
1 Cordes's son
21111FnT; vide footnote 2 to "Letter to Maganlal Gandhi", p. 137.
3 Parmananddas Ratanji Gandhi, Gandhiji's cousin
4 Not available
5 The reference is perhaps to "Letter to A. H. West", p. 127.
6 Shrimad Rajchandra; vide Vol. I, p. 90.
writings a number of conditions for the observance of brahmacharya which
are worth considering. This is one of the most difficult vows. Even
Lord Shiva strayed from the path; so we can succeed only if we are un-
remittingly mindful of it. But when I think of a married man practis-
ing abstinence in regard to his wife, when I think of my own case
in particular, I am bewildered. In this connection, my fate has been
[singularly favourable]. I was saved because I had to endure com-
pulsory separation from Ba. Had we lived together all along since
1900, I can hardly say I would have been saved. I wish you to get all
the benefit of my experience.
As I won't be going down there for the present, you may ask me
whatever questions you want to.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Jayashankar Vyas's wife has passed away. All of you may please
write a letter of condolence to him. I had Chi. Chhaganlal' s letter to
Mr. Polak in which he has raised the question of household expenditure.
Let me know your requirements after the change we have made. What
amount will you two brothers get out of the profit this time? According
to Chi. Chhaganlal, your requirement will be Rs. 30 a month and
Dr. Mehta has already agreed to pay that amount. But we want to take
as little as possible from him. Please think this over and let me know.
As I am not going there just now, I am dealing with this matter in a letter.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5182
