49. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
BIRLA MILLS, DELHI,
December 31, 1934
CHI. PREMA,
It is about 6 a.m. now, but it is pitch dark outside. My
hands are stiff with cold. It is waste land all around where I am
staying. A Harijan Ashram is to be established here. Two rooms
have been built for special use. In addition, there are three or
four tents.
I got your letter. You may go on asking me any questions
that you like.
I will reply to as many of them as I can when
I get time.
How is Kisan? She was to come and stay with you for
some time. What happened about that?
I am sure your work will go on and you will receive
monetary help as and when needed.
Since you have unshakable faith in the power of Ramanama,
you will certainly experience the truth of your faith. Go on re-
peating it even if you see darkness all around. If you do that, all
will be well with you.
The small size of land holdings is a big problem. It will
present difficulties even when we have power in our hands. Just
now our experiments are intended to find out what we can
do without power. Even small plots can be profitable if they
are cultivated intelligently.
We can demonstrate this only
through experiments. But our own superficial knowledge in this field
is a handicap. That is why we do not take up directly problems
relating to agriculture. Our present aim is to popularize such
crafts and industries as we can think of and as would be easy
for the villagers to learn, so that we may teach cultivators to shed
their lethargy and may also promote the application of intelli-
gence to crafts. The rest will follow.
I am certain that the people's condition was better formerly
than it is today. This can be proved. In the past, the country
drew wealth from outside. Land holdings had not become frag-
mented to the extent that they have today, and wealth was not
drained out of the country as it is today. Nature did her work
in her own way. Now we interfere with her work without full
knowledge of her laws, and we do this in an organized manner.
The result is that we are completely impoverished.
Ramarajya is certainly an imaginary ideal, but it can also be
proved that something approximating to it did exist in former
times. It is true, however, that at no time in the past were
untruth and poverty completely absent and they are not likely
to be so at any time in the future.
The practice of retiring into mountain caves was undoubtedly
inspired by despair about the world. It may have had some use
in the past, but it has none today. To give one's life in the
service of one's fellow-beings is as good a thing as living in a
cave.
Our attitude towards other people should be the same as to-
wards ourselves. Though we may remain unattached to things con-
cerning ourselves, we shall certainly feel cold and heat and try to
relieve cold with heat and heat with cold. If we don't succeed, how-
ever, we shall not sit down and start crying. That is non-attach-
ment. Our attitude to others shivering with cold should be the
same. We must try to relieve their suffering. Seeing them shiver-
ing, we will give them or share with them what we have. If
they still continue to shiver, we will suffer with them but will
not lose our patience and resort to violence or untruth. That
will be non-attachment on our part.
Khadi both is and is not a means of livelihood. It has been
described as Annapurna.
Excepting violence, I think there are many things in Russia
which seem worth accepting. It is possible, however, that the
changes which now seem realizable only through force will not
be accepted by people voluntarily in the very same form. But,
then, it is not right to draw inferences, as all of us do, from
what we read. We should think about our problems independent-
ly for ourselves. The person who is affected by a problem can
solve it best.
It is impossible to eliminate inequality completely. But we
can bring about the maximum measure of equality only by follow-
ing the path which I have shown. It is not a new truth I
am holding up before the country but an old one (though per-
haps in a new manner).
Cultivators can derive great hope from the fact that, by en-
gaging themselves in subsidiary industries in their spare time, they
can add considerably to their income.
The economic interests of cultivators should be safeguarded
through proper organization. We can explain to them that
economic betterment will not be possible unless they learn to
organize.
The law of karma is easy to understand. It is similar to
the law which we learn in mechanics. When several material
forces operate simultaneously, we see only one result of their
operation. That is also how karma operates.
You may, if you wish, go to a very small village. But it
will be enough if you stick to the present place. If you can
achieve complete success in one place, it will have the same effect
that a right angle has. At present we have no right angle.
I shall be here up to the 20th.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10365. Also C.W. 6804. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
