109. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
SABARMATI,
February 20, 1919
As I am not still quite out of the wood regarding my health
and as, if am to obey doctors' orders, I must not undertake any
activity requiring considerable exertion, I thought I would re-
frain from such activity till I was better. But the events that have
recently happened impel me to submit the following for His Excel-
lency's consideration:
I feel tempted to write about the Rowlatt Bills, but I am
checking myself for the moment and awaiting the course of the
Bills and the agitation about them in the country. I wish to con-
fine myself today to a matter that specially interests me—the case
of the Brothers Ali.
You will recall that I made a submission about them on the
New Year's day of 1917 . Though the Viceroy may not feel in-
clined to interfere in the matter, he should know the present
position from the popular standpoint.
After the exchange of the final letters between us, I entered
into correspondence with Sir William Vincent. The result was
that a Committee to advise the Government about the Brothers
was appointed. This Committee has duly reported to the Gov-
ernment but so far as I am aware, although nearly two months
have elapsed after the submission of the Committee's Report, the
Government's decision has not yet been pronounced. I wrote to
Sir William Vincent about it on the 12th instant. I have been
informed on behalf of the Brothers that from the manner in
which they are being treated in the matter of their requests for
visits to certain places for urgent business and other circum-
stances, they infer that the decision is likely to be adverse to
them. I have read most of the correspondence between the Bro-
thers and the Committee. I have read the communication em-
bodying the charges against them. I have read their reply. I must
assume that the memorandum of charges supplied to the Brothers
was exhaustive. The impression left upon my mind is that the
Brothers have been interned and subjected to numerous hardships
1 Private secretary to the Viceroy
2 This is obviously a slip for "1918"; vide Vol. XIV.
without the slightest justification. The charges in my humble opi-
nion did not warrant action under the Defence of India Act. I
submit that under a free Government they would hold in it a promi-
nent position instead of being treated as a danger to it. They
are brave, perfectly straightforward, they are out-spoken, God-
fearing, and able men, commanding the respect alike of the Maho-
medans and the Hindus. It would be difficult to find through-
out India better specimens of joint Hindu and Mahomedan
culture. In a position which to them is exasperating, they have
evinced wonderful self-restraint and patience. Their very virtues
seem to have been regarded as an offence. They deserved a better
treatment.
I must disclose one fact to Lord Chelmsford although it hurts
my sense of modesty. They have ever since the meeting of the
Muslim League at Calcutta in the December of 1917 implicitly
accepted the advice I tendered to them, and so have the leading
Mahomedans, who would, but for my advice, gladly have carried
on a powerful and embarrassing agitation long ere this. I advised
them that if relief was not granted, satyagraha—I abhor the ex-
pression "passive resistance", as it very incompletely expresses the
grand truth conveyed by the easily understood Sanskrit word
"satyagraha"—should be resorted to. I assured them that I was
in communication with the Government about the Brothers' re-
lease. As a satyagrahi, I told them that before engaging in a pub-
lic agitation about it, we should know the Government side of
the question, and we should exhaust all milder remedies and be
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of impartial observers the
untenability of the Government position before embarking on
satyagraha in which, once it is undertaken, there is no turning
back. I feel thankful to the Brothers and to the gentlemen, with
whom it has been a privilege to be associated, that they have abi-
ded by my advice, though the delay has almost reached a danger-
ous point. I do most earnestly trust that the Government will
by releasing the Brothers prevent a powerful agitation in the
country.
I shall anxiously await your reply.
I hope that you are enjoying the best of health and it would
so please me to learn from you that Lord Chelmsford is keeping
good health in spite of the great strain under which, I know, he is
working.
With kind regards,
N. A. I.: Home: Political—A: July 1919: No. 1 & K.W.
