380. LETTER TO PYARELAL
Tuesday, 1.30 a.m.
CHI. PYARELAL,
I am writing this is pencil. You must make do with it. I had
intended to write sooner, but I have had to endure a lot of pain during
the day. For Sushila I have taken mother's place. As a mother
becomes distraught when the daughter is out of her sight, so is it with
me. But only when I am thus moved will I be entitled to take some
service from Sushila.
But Sushila is altogether disorganized. She may be a genius.
But a genius moulds others in his own image. He is not moulded by
others. I am trying to mould Sushila after myself. But at times I
wonder if Sushila is not wholly unaffected. I would consider my
efforts in vain if she were observing punctuality, which I am inculcating
in her with so much care, only to please me. What I am hoping is that
what Sushila is learning from me will remain with her even when she
is away and that it will influence mother and the rest of the family too.
Your way is of course different. But if Sushila became genuinely
strong, may be even you would start observing rules for her sake. I
do not at all approve of your working till midnight. It is not as if I was
letting you do it because I am in need of it. It is because I am afraid
of you. What if Pyarelal should feel hurt and throw up everything?
So I do not say anything. But I think you are going too far in making
even Sushila keep late hours. I know that nobody else can give you
the satisfaction she can give. You can take work from her at fixed
hours during the day. I would even like it. She can give up the night
massage and work for you at night till 9.30. I see many minutes and
hours of her time being wasted. But how far can I control her? With
that thought in mind I do not interfere.
The purpose of writing this is only to know what you wish about
Sushila. I shall abide by your wish. If you approve of what I am
doing and if she follows it with interest and knowledge, I shall need
all help from you. It would be beyond me to tolerate her again going
to bed at 12.15.
Let me also make another demand. After dinner everybody
should go to sleep. And you should not work at night. I shall be
255
256
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
content with what you can give during the day.
Both you brother and sister should consider this carefully and
inform me about your decision. Sushila should not feel that I am
putting on her more than necessary pressure so that she loses her
independence. There is certainly this much difference between
Mother and me.
It is Sushila's duty to remain within the limits
Mother lays down. It is not her duty to offer anything to me.
Whatever she offers she should offer with her whole heart--nothing at
all to please me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
