177. LETTER TO W.J. WYBERGH
May 10, 1910
DEAR MR. WYBERGH 3 ,
I am exceedingly obliged to you for your very full and valuable
criticism of the little pamphlet on Indian Home Rule. I shall with
very great pleasure send your letter to Indian Opinion for publication,
and shall treat this reply likewise.
I entirely reciprocate the sentiments you express in the last para-
graph of your letter. I am quite aware that my views will lead to many
differences of opinion between my staunchest friends and those whom
I have come to regard with respect and myself, but these differences,
so far as I am concerned, can neither diminish respect nor affect friendly
relations.
I am painfully conscious of the imperfections and defects you point
out in your letter, and I know how unworthy I am to handle the very
1 Vide also "Mr. Royeppen", p. 259 and "Joseph Royeppen", p. 261.
2 Not reproduced here
3 Member, Legislative Assembly, Transvaal
4 Vide Appendix V.
important problems dealt with in the booklet. But, having had the posi-
tion of a publicist practically forced upon me by circumstances, I felt
bound to write for those for whom Indian Opinion caters. The choice lay
between allowing the readers of Indian Opinion, anxious though they were
for guidance, to drift away in the matter of the insane violence that is
now going on in India, or giving them, no matter how humble, a lead
that they were asking for. The only way I saw of mitigating violence
was the one sketched in the pamphlet.
I share your views that a superficial reader will consider the
pamphlet to be a disloyal production, and I admit, too, that those who
will not distinguish between men and measures, between modern civili-
sation and its exponents, will come to that conclusion. And I accept
your proposition that I discourage violence only because I think it to be
both wrong and ineffective, and not because the object sought to be
attained is wrong, that is to say, if it were ever possible, which I hold
it is not, to detach the object from the means adopted to attain it. I hold
that Home Rule obtained by violence would be totally different in
kind from that obtained by the means suggested by me.
I have ventured utterly to condemn modern civilisation because
I hold that the spirit of it is evil. It is possible to show that some of its
incidents are good, but I have examined its tendency in the scale of
ethics. I distinguish between the ideals of individuals who have risen
superior to their environment, as also between Christianity and modern
civilisation. Its activity is by no means confined to Europe. Its blasting
influence is now being exhibited in full force in Japan. And it now threa-
tens to overwhelm India. History teaches us that men who are in the
whirlpool, except in the cases of individuals, will have to work out their
destiny in it; but I do submit that those who are still outside its influ-
ence, and those who have a well-tried civilisation to guide them, should
be helped to remain where they are, if only as a measure of prudence.
I claim to have tested the life which modern civilisation has to give, as
also that of the ancient civilisation, and I cannot help most strongly
contesting the idea that the Indian population requires to be roused by
"the lash of competition and the other material and sensuous, as well
as intellectual, stimuli"; I cannot admit that these will add a single
inch to its moral stature. Liberation in the sense in which I have used
the term is undoubtedly the immediate aim of all humanity. It does
not, therefore, follow that the whole of it can reach it in the same time.
But if that liberation is the best thing attainable by mankind, then, I
submit, it is wrong to lower the ideal for anyone. All the Indian Scrip-
tures have certainly preached incessantly liberation as an immediate
aim, but we know that this preaching has not resulted in "activity in
the lower worlds" being abandoned.
I admit that the term "passive resistance" is a misnomer. I have
used it because, generally speaking, we know what it means. Being a
popular term, it easily appeals to the popular imagination. The under-
lying principle is totally opposed to that of violence. It cannot, there-
fore, be that "the battle is transferred from the physical to the mental
plane". The function of violence is to obtain reform by external means;
the function of passive resistance, that is, soul-force, is to obtain it by
growth from within; which, in its turn, is obtained by self-suffering,
self-purification. Violence ever fails; passive resistance is ever success-
ful. The fight of a passive resister is none the less spiritual because he
fights to win. Indeed, he is obliged to fight to win, that is, to obtain the
mastery of self. Passive resistance is always moral, never cruel; and
any activity, mental or otherwise, which fails in this test is undoubtedly
not passive resistance.
Your argument tends to show that there must be complete divorce
between politics and religion or spirituality. That is what we see in
everyday life under modern conditions. Passive resistance seeks to re-
join politics and religion and to test everyone of our actions in the light
of ethical principles. That Jesus refused to use soul-force to turn stones
into bread only supports my argument. Modern civilisation is at present
engaged in attempting that impossible feat. The use of soul-force for
turning stones into bread would have been considered, as it is still
considered, as black magic. Nor can I hold with you that motives
alone can always decide the question of a particular act being right
or wrong. An ignorant mother may, from the purest motives, ad-
minister a dose of opium to her child. Her motives will not cure
her of her ignorance, nor, in the moral world purge her of the
offence of killing her child.
A passive resister, recognising this
principle and knowing that, in spite of the purity of his motives, his
action may be utterly wrong, leaves judgment to the Supreme Being,
and, in attempting to resist what he holds to be wrong, suffers only
in his own person.
Throughout the Bhagavad Gita, I can see no warrant for holding
that a man who can only control "the organs of action" but cannot help
"dwelling in his mind on the objects of the senses" had better use the
organs of action until the mind, too, is under control. In ordinary
practices, we call such use an indulgence, and we know, too, that, if we
can control the flesh even while the spirit is weak, always wishing that
the spirit were equally strong, we will certainly arrive at a right corres-
pondence. I think the text you have quoted refers to a man who, for
making a show, appears to be controlling the organs of action, whilst
deliberately in his mind dwelling on the objects of the senses.
I agree with you entirely that a pure passive resister cannot allow
himself to be regarded as a martyr nor can he complain of the hardships
of prison or any other hardships, nor may he make political capital out of
what may appear to be injustice or ill-treatment, much less may
he allow any matter of passive resistance to be advertised. But all
action unfortunately is mixed. Purest passive resistance can exist only
in theory. The anomalies you point out only emphasize the fact that
the Indian passive resisters of the Transvaal are, after all, very fallible
human beings and yet very weak, but I can assure you that their object
is to make their practice correspond with pure passive resistance as
nearly as possible, and, as the struggle progresses, pure spirits are cer-
tainly rising in our midst.
I am free to admit also that all passive resisters are not fired with the
spirit of love or of truth. Some of us are undoubtedly not free from
vindictiveness and the spirit of hatred; but the desire in us all is to cure
ourselves of hatred and enmity. I have noticed, too, that those who
simply became passive resisters under the glamour of the newness of the
movement or for selfish reasons have fallen away. Pretended self-suffer-
ing cannot last long. Such men never were passive resisters. It is neces-
sary to discuss the subject of passive resistance somewhat impersonally.
If you say that physical sufferings of soldiers have vastly exceeded those
of the Transvaal passive resisters, I agree with you entirely; but the
sufferings of world-known passive resisters who deliberately walked into
funeral pyres or into boiling cauldrons were incomparably greater than
those of any soldier it is possible to name.
I cannot pretend to speak for Tolstoy, but my reading of his works
has never led me to consider that, in spite of his merciless analysis of
institutions organised and based upon force, that is governments, he in
any way anticipates or contemplates that the whole world will be able
to live in a state of philosophical anarchy. What he has preached, as,
in my opinion, have all world-teachers, is that every man has to obey
the voice of his own conscience, and be his own master, and seek the
Kingdom of God from within. For him there is no government that can
control him without his sanction. Such a man is superior to all govern-
ment. And can it be ever dangerous for a lion to tell a number of
other lions who in their ignorance consider themselves to be merely
lambs that they, too, are not lambs but lions? Some very ignorant
lions will no doubt contest the knowing lion's proposition. There will,
no doubt, on that account be confusion also, but, no matter how
gross the ignorance may be, it will not be suggested that the lion who
knows should sit still and not ask his fellow-lions to share his majesty
and freedom.
It has indeed occurred to me that an anti-Asiatic league which
from pure though entirely misguided motives wishes to deport Asia-
tics from the Transvaal, because it may consider them to be an evil,
would be certainly justified, from its own view-point, in violently attain-
ing its object. It is not open to passive resisters, if they are not weak, to
complain of such, in their opinion, high-handed action, but for them
deportation and worse must be a welcome relief from having to sub-
mit to a course of action which is repugnant to their conscience. I hope
you will not fail to see the beauty of passive resistance in your own
illustration. Supposing that these deportees were capable of offering
physical violence against forcible deportation, and yet from pure choice
elected to be deported rather than resist deportation, will it not show
superior courage and superior moral fibre in them?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 21-5-1910
