214. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
LAHORE,
[December 7] 1919
MY DEAR CHILD,
I have your two letters including the long one. You have
done well in sending it. As I have already said, you have come
to the Ashram not to lose your Christianity, but to perfect it.
If you don't feel the presence of God at the prayer meetings,
then remember that the names Rama and Krishna signify the
same as Jesus to you.
You should most decidedly not attend these meetings and
you should pray in your private chamber. The prayer meetings
are not meant to force anyone into a position. They are meant
for free men and women. The children must attend. Those who
abstain from sheer laziness must attend. But for you, no one can
misunderstand your abstinence. You will therefore please do that
which gives you the greatest peace. The Ashram is nothing if it
does not enable you to realize God more and more fully day by
day. If on Sundays or any other days you would go to Church,
of course you shall do so.
I am so glad you have given me that long and beautiful letter
and enabled me to enter more fully into your heart. Your coming
is a joy to me. It will be a greater joy, if upon experience you
find it gives you peace, health and real joy and if it thereby enables
the other Christians to see that God and Christianity can be found
also in institutions that do not call themselves Christian and that
truth is the same in all religions though through refraction it appears
for the time being variegated even as light does through a prism.
I feel like you that it is too early for you to go to Madras
even to meet Miss Petersen. Will she not come to the Ashram?
She ought to. Let her come and see it in its new habitation and
feel its progress if there is any made. Please give her my love.
I do hope you have now completely recovered. You should
not trifle with your body. You cannot take the liberties that those
born on the soil can. You must therefore insist on the comforts
your body needs.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat of the original in N.A.I.; also My Dear Child, pp. 45-
