12. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR AND DUNCAN
GREENLEES
March 8, 1933
CHI. MARY AND DUNCAN,
I like your letter very much indeed. Before I argue to the
contrary, let me say what I have told Narandas and I think I
made clear to both of you, that you should not be treated as the
other learners who come to the Ashram, that you should take only
such part in the Ashram work as you like and can digest and that
you should use your time as may seem most profitable to you from
your own standpoint.
Now for my own opinion. The Ashram is a place where the
idea is to enforce literally the maxim 'to labour is to pray'. This
labour was interpreted by Thoreau and Tolstoy to mean physical
labour and Tolstoy adopted Bondaref's maxim of bread labour
being God's law for all mankind. I read the same thing in the
third chapter of the Gita. I have tested the truth of the interpreta-
tion in my own life and in the lives of many companions and I
have felt that our lives have been incomplete and unsatisfying
exactly to the extent that we have failed to carry out the inter-
pretation in practice. Therefore I would say that, so long as
the routine of the Ashram appears to be a slavish following of it,
the spirit of the Ashram is not imbibed. I confess unhesitatingly
that so few have imbibed the spirit.
Many follow the routine
mechanically and, therefore, slavishly. I do not grumble over the
mechanical following, because even that is better than people
idling away their time and I am not without hope that even those
who are mechanically following the routine will some day detect
the spirit and the beauty behind it. So many Englishmen and
women, especially missionaries, make, in my opinion, the tre-
mendous mistake of directing the activity of others without them-
selves taking a direct part in it. They, therefore, remain untouch-
ed by the activity itself and often become blind guides. As I am
dictating this, illustrations from life crowd in upon my mind. I
would, therefore, say that if you can appreciate and understand
the spirit of my remarks and feel the truth of them, then follow
the routine patiently, intelligently, whole-heartedly, till it becomes
a part of your nature, lies light upon your mind and seems to
9
speak to you its message. Then, but not till then, are you really
able to write anything serious for public service. Not even every
good thought is worth giving to the world unless it is repeatedly
tested on the anvil of experience. All true labour is both conta-
gious and infectious. I wonder if I have driven my meaning
home. If I have not, you must reject all my argument without
the slightest hesitation and do exactly as you feel you should, so
as to get the best out of your experience of the Ashram.
With loving blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5996. Also C.W. 3321. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
