411. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
JORHAT,
April 16, 1934
BHAI MUNSHI,
I have your letter.
It has helped me. Your criticism of the
definition is correct. You have shown how the certificates which
I have been receiving for the draft are superficial. At present I
am working in such a hurry that I get no time for second thoughts.
The mistake which you have discovered should have been
evident to me.
I am returning the draft to you so that it
may help you in further scrutiny, and I am also sending a copy of
the revised draft. If you notice any mistake in that too, do point
it out.
If Lilavati can devote herself blindly to small industries without
thinking about other things, the venture may succeed, otherwise
they will be going round and round like the bullock at the oil-
press. The only difference will be that there is an observant oil-
man following the blind bullock and so some oil is extracted. But
in this case the oil-press of swadeshi will go on working and there
will be no result at the end.
Mill-cloth, sugar mills, etc., are excluded from my definition,
and khadi, jaggery, etc., are protected. We can, and should,
manage only these. It is not a small field. Small industries would
be crushed if mixed up with big ones.
Some change in the de-
finition occurred to me even as I was writing this.
I have made
it by adding an adjective, intended to exclude intoxicating sub-
stances. I do not know whether or not you smoke. My son Harilal
does.
One day when the matter came up for discussion, he said:
"I smoke Madras cheroots, not foreign cigars."
In spite of
his generous encouragement, the Madras cheroot would be ex-
cluded from my definition.
The cheroot will find its way out,
as today it is doing.
I too entertain the fear which you do regarding Council-entry.
I have other fears too.
But I think that the thing has come to
stay. The Congress will always have in it a party favouring it. I
have come to believe that it would be impossible and improper
to ignore it. I, therefore, have made up my mind to give all
possible help in strengthening it. But this will not go well with
civil disobedience. From prison, I can give little direct help. The
strength which it may receive from the fact of my imprisonment itself
will be another matter.
My hopes are pinned on you and Bhula-
bhai. I do not know who else might go.
I don't feel inclined to
press anybody. Hence, Rajagopalachari, Rajendrababu, Jairam-
das, etc., will probably stay out. I have not discussed the subject
with anyone. As a result of my decision regarding civil disobe-
dience, they are free for the time being to do as they like.
Possibly
Jawaharlal also may be tempted. If firm-minded, capable, selfless
and devoted workers join, Council-entry may do some good.
But
most of such people would not be interested in the goings-on of
legislatures. The democracy of my conception is a different thing
altogether. It can be moulded outside, not inside the legislatures.
The latter will take the right shape when such democracy has
come into existence outside them.
Today everywhere democracy
waits on legislatures and nothing is done. I want to have legis-
latures that will follow the wishes of the people.
I do not see at
present the right atmosphere for such legislatures.
I think that it
is being created. Civil disobedience has succeeded in no small
measure. I do not regret a single step taken in connection with
it. Every step has been taken at the right time for it is my firm
conviction that it was not I that took the decision every time but
that it was Satyanarayana who prompted my decisions.
I let
myself be led by Him.
1 God in the form of Truth
Council-entry will remain a permanent feature of the Congress
like civil disobedience and constructive work. It will not receive
step-motherly treatment. But I do not know just now how far
I shall be able to interest myself in it. Constructive work has
already become part of civil disobedience.
I can see my way
clearly in that sphere. But it is the love of friends and circum-
stances that has dragged me into the Council-entry programme. I
regard myself qualified for the first two. Not for this. Let us
see what happens.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My address is still Patna.
From Gujarati: C.W. 7537. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
