188. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised
November 1, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Your several letters to hand. I see you have handed to
the Press the two resignations. They should clear the air a bit.
I do not follow the Hindu Sabha activities. They are vicious.
It is most unscrupulous if they are making use of my name in
connection with shuddhi . If you have any literature please pass it
on to me. I think that the nationalist Press so called or real
has not welcomed its activities and has been known often to con-
demn it. I do not know anything about the embargo on M.
A. K. Azad's book. As to the Harijan activities, the complaint is
wholly unjustified. My conscience is absolutely clear. So far
as you and I are concerned, we can clear our minds and hands
by exchanging letters, if you like. I do not know what aggressive
action is possible or desirable beyond an emphatic condemnation
of specific acts.
As to Gorakhpur, I do not see what can be done. I am
finding it hard to get funds for your workers and the Dal people.
I am still talking about both. Baba Raghavdas told me he was
trying grain collections for the peasants in distress. He is under
promise to send me authentic details of persecution.
Nariman was here yesterday. I have advised him to see
you and told him that you were my political chief! What else
could I do? I stand thoroughly discredited as a religious maniac
and predominantly a social worker. I told him that if I felt
convinced that the A.I.C.C. members desired discontinuance of
C. D. and a council-entry programme, I would at once ask you
to convene a meeting of A.I.C.C. I do not do so because I be-
lieve that the majority will insist on a C. D. programme and I do
not want to invite the ordinance sword for it. I have told him
too that I would not resist any programme that the A.I.C.C. might
want though I could not give my approval to the suspension
of C. D. I believe Kelkar's attitude to be honest and consistent.
He frankly dislikes N. C. O. and C. D.
He would not join the
terrorists or whatever they may be called. Then for a man of
political activity, council-entry is the only programme such as it is.
Hopeless inactivity is the worst of all and should be discoun-
tenanced.
I think I have now covered all the points raised in your letters
and even not raised. It is nearing 4 a.m.
Hope Mother's progress continuing. Herewith note for
Kamala.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
