92. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
November 12, 1923
TO
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
At the time you told my companion, Mr. Abdul Gani, that
the prison rules did not permit you to let him have diet that cost
more than the authorized scale, I informed you that your predeces-
sor had allowed all my companions and me to regulate our diet.
I further submitted to you that it was awkward for me to enjoy a
facility Mr. Abdul Gani could not enjoy and that, therefore, my
diet too should be so reduced as to be brought in harmony with
the regulations, and the scale allowed to Mr. Abdul Gani. You were
good enough to suggest that, for the time being, I should continue
the present rations and that I might discuss the matter with the
Inspector-General, who would shortly visit the prison. I have waited
now for over ten days. I feel that if I am to keep the peace of
mind, I should wait no longer and, in any case, I have nothing
to discuss with the Inspector-General. I have no complaint what-
soever to make against your decision regarding Mr. Abdul Gani.
I recognize that you are powerless even if you were minded to
help my companion. Nor is it my intention to seek any revision
of the prison regulations regarding diet. All I am desirous of doing
name of love of country, I command you to give up those parts of my pro-
gramme or alter them accordingly." There is, however, no evidence that this
message was actually sent by Gandhiji.
Vide Mahadev Desai's article "Delhi
Congress", Young India, 4-10-1923, C. Rajagopalachari's "Notes", Young India,
20-9-1923, Pandit Sunderlal's "Our Immediate Duty", Young India, 1-11-1923,
and finally, V. S. Srinivasa Sastri's statement to the Press reproduced in
Young India, 17-1-1924.
is to avoid my favoured treatment. You have kindly suggested
that my diet scale might have been considered by your predecessor
a medical necessity. I know, however, as a matter of fact, that
such should not be the case, for my diet has been the same more
or less from the time of my admission to this jail; and what is more
to the point, my companions and I have, as has been already men-
tioned, been hitherto permitted to regulate our diet without regard
to cost.
I propose, therefore, to discontinue oranges and raisins as from
Wednesday next. My diet will still exceed the authorized rate.
I am not sure that I need 4 lbs. of goat's milk, but unless you will
kindly assist me to further change my diet so as to reduce the
cost to the authorized rate, I shall reluctantly continue to take the
4 lbs. of milk and sour limes not exceeding two.
I need hardly assure you that I contemplate the reduction in
no querulous spirit. I fully sympathize with your decision regard-
ing Mr. Abdul Gani. I propose to make the change purely for
my inner peace, and in this I ask for your sympathy and approval.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
No. 827
From a photostat: S.N. 8038; also Young India, 6-3-1924
