302. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
July 7, 1933
CHI. VINOBA,
I have put a heavy responsibility on you, but you have the
strength to shoulder the burden of any responsibility which may
be thrust on you, or, in the words of the Gita, can pass on such
responsibility to God. I hope all the persons whom I have sent
to the Ashram have settled down there properly. Just now, how-
ever, I wish to write to you about four European men and women.
All the four are to be trained for Harijan work and as long as
they maintain connection with us, should keep away from politics
completely. Cultivate close relations with all of them and ap-
point somebody who knows English to look after their needs.
Marybehn and Duncan are straightforward persons and are not
likely to create any difficulties for you. But that cannot be said
about N. and Amalabehn (i.e., Dr. Spiegel). If N. maintains
good health, she is likely to be very useful. I am not sure about
Amalabehn. She is rather obstinate and her capacity is limited.
Her intentions are very good but she is very slow in acting on
them. She goes on making all kinds of plans. All four will re-
quire milk in their diet. I think oil will not agree with them.
Ask them and ascertain their requirements. Tell them and others,
too, that just now I cannot write to them. Whether or not I shall
be able to write after some time, God alone knows. Write or dic-
tate a thoughtful letter to . . .1. I hope you keep good health. I
also hope that Manu is not ill. Balkrishna's and Chhotelal's
health does not seem to be satisfactory. I hope Ramdas has settled
down there, and that the climate there agrees with Nimu and the
children. Vidya Hingorani, who has come there, has delicate
health and is rather of a sensitive nature, but she is a woman of
very pure character. She has cultivated bhakti of a very high
order. I am sure Lakshmibehn is looking after her properly, and
so I don't write more about her. I hope Vatsala has got over her
fear, and that Madalasa is progressing. I also hope your con-
tacts with the Harijans are becoming closer day by day. I have
not forgotten the idea of chain-fasts. It is still in my mind. I
constantly feel that our atonement will not be complete without
such a step. I don't mean to say that it will be complete even
with it, but I do believe that, if the right type of men and women
join in the fasts, the movement for the removal of untouchability
will make rapid progress.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3085
