84. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
8 p.m., January 1/6, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
This week, too, I have not received your packet so far. It
must have been posted as unregistered parcel and, if so, I shall
probably get it tomorrow. But I started writing the Ashram
letters today, or rather yesterday.
I had a letter last time from Danibehn from Bombay. My
reply to her is enclosed. She is from Marwar, it seems. If you
know, inform me whether that is so. I have given her address in the
letter itself, thinking that you may not have it with you. Last
week there were a few remarks in pencil by way of criticism of
Anasaktiyoga by a Maratha friend; the remarks were unsigned.
If you remember the name, let me know it.
We were both weighed today. My weight came to 100 and
Pyarelal's to 122. I have lost a pound; it is not worth taking
note of. The weight may increase or decrease by a pound or
two even if the time of weighing changes or according as one is
weighed before or after passing stool. If a person gets himself
weighed immediately after drinking water, his weight will be found
to have increased. If he gets himself weighed after passing urine,
there will be corresponding decrease in his weight. So long as I
myself feel quite fit, pass stool without difficulty, have an appetite
and eat well, there is no reason at all for concern. If I can
carry on like this for six months, the experiment will have succeed-
ed. I have made an important change, which I describe here for
those of you who may be interested to know about it.
Almonds are soaked in hot water and the peel is removed.
They are then crushed into a paste. This is mixed with four
ounces of water and the mixture is boiled till the water evaporates
and a butter-like jelly is left behind. I eat it with vegetables.
It not only tastes good but seems to be more easily digested than
almond paste not boiled in water. It is possible that, even if the
almonds are crushed into very fine paste but the latter is not boil-
ed in water, the stuff remains undigested and passes out with
stool. But I have no doubt that the jelly which I eat is digested.
Even a person with a very delicate stomach may be able to digest
almonds cooked in this manner. The jelly may again be mixed
with water and turned into milk. It will, of course, have no taste.
One can add a little jaggery or sugar, or even lime juice and
salt, to the liquid. I don't advise anyone just now to make this
experiment. But the information which I have given may perhaps
be useful to anyone who is interested in making such experiments
or cannot digest milk. Apart from this change, my diet remains
what it was. The quantity, too, remains unchanged.
I hope to reach very high speed on the Gandiv spinning-wheel.
I had never been able to reach 200, let alone 255, per hour be-
fore now. On the takli I have not been able to go beyond 75-80
rounds. I cannot spin even 75 comfortably. I spin about 60
comfortably. But I can say that my hand has now set well on a
bamboo takli. It still seems a hard task for me to spin 100 rounds.
2 o'clock, Saturday
I got your packet yesterday. Since it was a parcel and they
do not carry packets during holidays, two days were wasted.
But I see that it cost you only three annas to send the packet as
a parcel, whereas, if it had been sent as a letter, the postage
would possibly come to as much as a rupee. You may, there-
fore, follow whichever method you think right. I have mentally
reconciled myself to getting the packet on Fridays and adjusted
my programme accordingly. Here they are very careful in hand-
ing over the packet immediately to me after examining its contents.
They are equally careful in dispatching the packets from here.
Who is Palibehn? Her question is the same as Premabehn's.
I need not, therefore, write separately to her. Send her a copy of
my letter to Premabehn, or show it to her if she is in the Ashram.
45-
As regards printing extracts from my letter, what I have
written about yajna can certainly be given below Chapter H.
Any other portions which seem useful can also be printed. But
where and in what manner is for you to decide. You can in-
clude such material in the Gitabodh in footnotes at relevant
places or as independent extracts.
Keep the Doctor informed about Ratilal and deal with the
latter tactfully so that he may keep to the right path. Look
upon him as an animal, uncultured and enslaved by passion.
When he is overcome by passion, he goes mad. There are many
kinds of passion; Ratilal is enslaved by three: for sex, for eating
and for spending money extravagantly. He becomes mad when
these passions are not satisfied. Running away from the Ashram
has a beneficial effect on him in some measure. He calms down
after a few days. God alone knows how he will end up. Sometimes
such persons even attain jnana. He is certainly not wholly wicked.
The quantity of spinning which you are able to do seems
much indeed to me. One can do with the left hand any work
which the right hand does. Bhau can spin on the takli equally
well with either hand.
It will not be bad if Kanu goes to Wardha and learns Bhau's
skill, and also gets some experience of the place. If there is any
other boy, besides Kanu, who can and wishes to go, I see no harm
in sending him.
Your body seems to have changed altogether. Personally, I
am confident that ultimately it will become purer in its functioning.
Will not Parnerkar leave the Ashram for a while and go
somewhere else to improve his health?
The fact that the bull was brought back and the manner of
its being found were a miracle indeed.
Do you follow our method or some other method in pre-
paring mava from milk? Do you experience any difficulty in sell-
ing it? If that is so, you may write to Ghanshyamdas, Maha-
virprasad, Jivanlal and others and they will probably buy it up.
If you can supply it regularly, even an advertisement in a news-
paper will help.
Do not give up walking. It is a practice worth clinging to
at any cost. If you follow fixed rules in your work, you can
include many things in the day's programme.
Devdas had written a letter to me; what has been done in
regard to it? I have requested that he should recall the contents
of the letter and write again to me. I have received no reply
to this.
6.45 p.m., Monday, January 5, 1931
I have acknowledged having received the leather for sandals.
The address of the lady to whom letter No. 82 is addressed is
known to Ramnarayan (of Ajmer). If you send the letter to
Martand or somebody else, he will post it.
Read my letter to Kashinath. I need not add to what I
have written in it.
Jivandas is in Sabarmati Jail. Does anyone visit him? If
not, somebody should go and visit him. Tell him that I often
remember him.
Blessings from
BAPU
January 6, 1931
[PS.]
I started this letter on the first and I described the position
with regard to my experiment in diet as it was on that day.
I
had a feeling of indigestion on Saturday night and on Sunday
diarrhoea started. But this time I suffered no pain at all. There
was no griping even. There were frequent motions. They con-
tinued even yesterday, but the number was less. I am writing
this at 5 a.m., after prayer. I think the motions will be much
fewer today. My work was not interrupted in any way. Yester-
day I sat up for exactly ten and a half hours and finished all
the work. This time there were a good number of other letters
too. Of course eating has been stopped. The cause of diarrhoea
seems to be jowar and bajra. I shall know it by and by. I have
not decided how to resume eating. There is no cause at all for
worry. I have informed you because I thought I must. At
present I take lime juice with jaggery and soda bicarb.
I will
write again tomorrow.
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 83 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
