41. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Sunday night [May 7, 1911)
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have written a great deal. My right hand is tired. It is intensely
cold. I am therefore trying the left hand. I had intended to give you
a long letter but just as I commenced your letter, there was an
interruption. I shall, therefore, be brief Why feel grateful to me when
I was bound to [do] what I could to contribute to your joint happiness.
After all on that memorable boxing day (was it not), I gave Millie to
you or you to Millie, so far as the outside world is concerned. It was
at my instigation that you separated. It was nothing but my duty to
1 For Gandhiji's interview earlier on in the day with General Smuts, vide Vol.
XI, pp. 32-.
2 From the contents; vide also Vol. XI, p. 67.
3 Vide also p. 32-.
50
bring you together as soon as the opportunity offered itself. No more
therefore of thanksgiving. You do your duty and if I succeed in doing
mine as well, we shall be fairly quits.
Now that you are there, I shall not write to Millie except when
some special occasion demands it.
I have your promise that you will neither worry Sally nor Maud.
They are both grown-up women and will not take even advice if not
offered in a most tactful manner. I shall need their certificates before
I say that you have at the end of your visit there, discharged your
duty just as well as you did in India. I feel sure that you will not
be impatient with the young Indians whom you will meet there.
Herewith a copy of translation of Harilal's letter. What a fine boy
and yet how mad! He had left details of his movements with Joseph
with instructions to inform of them if he found me inquiring. He is
in Delagoa Bay. I have wired to him asking him to wait there and
to confer with me before leaving for anywhere else. I understand his
desire is to bury himself somewhere in the Punjab and study there.
He has wired saying he is writing to me. I shall therefore hear from
him tomorrow.
Have not yet received final letter from Smuts.
With love to you all,
Yours.
BHAI
[PS.]
Monday
I have your radio message which I suppose you sent just to tease
me. No news yet from Harilal but Joseph had a letter from him
describing his journey to D'Bay.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
