596. LETTER TO BISWANATH
September 14, 1935
MY DEAR BISWANATH,
Neither Baba nor Ma should have suppressed you. You have a
perfect right to write to me as you have now at last done. You
have a double claim upon me. First because you are in an orga-
nization of which I am the head and secondly because you are
connected with two persons who have for many years accepted
my word as law. In writing your letter, therefore, you have not
only recognized your unadulterated right but you have also per-
formed the duty which you owe to me. That you have grievously
erred in your writing does not in any shape or form diminish the
value of your letter. On the contrary, the value is enhanced in
that you have dared to tell me what you hold to be unadulterated
truth although it may appear bitter to me and although I may
consider it to be the reverse of truth. Very often we mount to
truth by wading through errors so long [as] they do not appear to
us to be errors. Your attachment as distinguished from affection
for khadi has led you into a maze of errors. All-India Spinners'
Association is the head and the associations affiliated to it are the
branches. The head has rights which branches do not and cannot
possess. What appeared to me at one time a sound policy under
given circumstances may prove unsound under altered circumstan-
ces or on a fuller perception of even same circumstances. I would
be an unworthy head of an organization if I sacrificed its interests
for a seeming consistency. Again the liberties that Baba and Ma
have allowed me to take with them and their creation I may not
take with others. I would never be afraid of being misunderstood
by them. Everyone of my actions in connection with Pratishthan,
therefore, you have to interpret in the light of my relationship
with Baba and Ma. It is a relationship of their creation. So much
for the Pratishthan.
Now for my new experiment. Since you admit that I am
the creator of the khadi movement I must have the right to
regulate its growth and even to destroy it. He who creates
1,2& Satis Chandra Das Gupta and his wife Hemprabha Das Gupta
419
can also recreate. And if I found that I made a mistake in
fashioning my creation I must have the right to refashion it in
any manner I like so long as I carry with me my associates in
nursing the creation. You would admit that I would be a traitor
to my own creation if for fear of the judgment of fellow-workers
like you I fail to act up to my own judgment if it abide in
spite of the criticisms of fellow-workers. I think this covers all the
points that you have raised. You may write to me as often as
you like till I have convinced you or till you despair of my ever
succeeding in convincing you.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I shall regard your letter as purely personal as desired by
you.
SJT. BISWANATH
KHADI PRATISHTHAN
SODEPUR, NEAR CALCUTTA
From a photostat: G.N. 2729
