39. LETTER TO P. S. TO LORD WILLINGDON
LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
August 22, 1919
DEAR SIR,
I write this for submission to His Excellency on a somewhat
personal matter of urgency.
Probably the name of Miss Esther Faering, of Danish extrac-
tion and, up to recently, if not still, working as Superintendent of
a Girls' School belonging to that mission in Tirucoilur, has been
brought to His Excellency's notice. It was probably two years
ago that she, along with another Danish lady1, visited my Ashram
at Ahmedabad. Both the ladies took a special fancy for the Ashram
and its ideals. Miss Faering has since then met me three or four
times and she has visited the Ashram, I believe, once after her
first visit. She has been a fairly regular correspondent and I be-
lieve she is attached to me like a child to its father, simply be-
cause, in her opinion, I represent in action the ideals she would
fain enforce in her own life and is ever trying to. She loves India
as her own motherland and I know it would be a terrible
wrench to her if she is ever banished from India, as she dreads
she might. Latterly, it seems she has been a suspect, very much
shadowed. It was her intention some time ago to leave the Danish
mission, if she could. I think I succeeded in weaning her from
the desire. I told her that it was her duty to fulfil her contract
with the mission, so long as she was permitted to do so. I have
just heard that she is no longer in the mission. If this is true
and if she is permitted, I would be pleased to take her into the
Ashram where she would be associated with me in my non-political
work. I believe her to be as truthful and straight a person as
is to be found anywhere. She ever lives in the fear of God and
does her best to live a Christian life. As her desire is to pass
her life mostly in the midst of the people of India, I advised her
to become naturalized. I know she took steps in the direction
and I revised for her the petition for naturalization. But I do
not know whether she has sent it. I can only hope that His
Excellency will meet her and form the same opinion about her
that I have. If any undertaking is required about her, it can be
easily given. If an assurance is necessary, I wish to assure His
Excellency that I have not the slightest desire to avail myself of
her services in the political field. As probably Lord Willingdon is
aware, the largest part of my work is social and moral or religious.
My most intimate associates take hardly any part in my political
work. The inmates of the Ashram are engaged in agricultural,
industrial and educational work, and if Miss Faering comes to the
Ashram, she will take part in these activities, and if need be, I
will undertake, in no other.
Miss Faering knows nothing about this letter but I am sending
her a copy for the consolation that I am not unmindful of my
duty to her as a privileged friend, as also for her endorsement of
the undertaking I am promising herein.
I tender my apology for troubling His Excellency on a matter
of a partly personal nature.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of a copy: S. N. 6823
