397. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
Makar Sankranti, January 14, 1948
CHI. DEVDAS,
I have been through your letter early in the morning after
the prayer. I also understand the little talk we had yesterday.
I The addressee's letter dated January 13, 1948 read: "Your statement
has been written in haste.
Quite a few improvements could have been made
in it. I had wished to tell you my views about the propriety of your
fasting. But as I had no hint of the oncoming fast, I made no attempts
to tell you these. . . . My chief concern and my argument against your fast
is that you have surrendered to impatience, whereas your mission by its very
nature calls for infinite patience.
You do not seem to have realized what
a tremendous success your patient labour has achieved. It has saved . . .
thousands of lives and may still save many more. . . . B y your death you
will not be able to accomplish what you can by living. I would, therefore,
beseech you to pay heed to my entreaty and give up your decision to fast."
My statement was not issued in haste in your sense of the word.
In one sense it was, because I took less time in drafting it than
I normally would. The reason for it was the four days of reflection
and prayer that preceded it. That statement was the result of
reflection and prayer, and so it cannot be called a hasty one
either in my language or in the language of anyone who knows.
The statement certainly needed some polishing for improving
the expression and making the language more refined and I
made the changes the moment you suggested them. I did not
want to hear either from you or from anyone about the pro-
priety of my fast. That I have listened to you so far is a sign of
my modesty and patience. You got the notice the moment I
thought about it. Your main anxiety and your reasoning are
meaningless. It is true you are my friend. It is true that you
have risen high. But you can never cease to be a son and so
your concern is only natural. However, your reasoning displays
shallowness of thought and impatience. I consider this act of
mine as the extreme limit to my patience. Is patience that kills
its very object patience or stupidity? I can't claim credit for
what has been achieved since my arrival in Delhi. It would be
sheer conceit on my part to do so. That one or more lives were
saved through my efforts has no value for the world. Only the
All-knowing God can see its value. It is nothing but igno-
rance to say that "one who had been patient from the begin-
ning of September has ceased to be so all of a sudden." It was
only when in terms of human effort I had exhausted all re-
sources and realized my utter helplessness that I laid my head on
God's lap. That is the meaning of the fast. Read and think
over Gajendramoksha which is considered the greatest epic. Per-
haps then you will be able to value my action. The last sen-
tence of your letter is a beautiful expression of your love. The
origin of that love is ignorance or attachment. That this at-
tachment is universal does not make it enlightenment. So long
as we are unable to leave aside the question of life and death
it is an illusion to think that we can do a particular thing only
if we are alive. Strive as long as you are alive is a beautiful
thing to say but bear in mind that striving has to be in a spirit
of detachment. Now perhaps you will understand why I cannot
comply with your request. Rama who has prompted me to go
on fast will bid me give it up if He wants me to do so. In
the mean time you, I and all of us should realize and have
faith that it is equally well whether Rama preserves my life or
ends it. I have only one prayer: 'O Rama, give me strength
during the fast so that desire to live may not tempt me into
premature termination of my fast.' Preserve this letter which
I have dictated to Manu after deep thought and read it from
time to time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Dilhiman Gandhiji—II, pp. 297-
