304. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
WARDHA,
December 18, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I have been trying to come into close contact with Bhai
Madhavji. I have formed a good opinion about the couple and
have high hopes of them. They have been voluntarily observing
complete brahmacharya for a year and a half. The desire for service
has awakened in Madhavji for quite some years. He is full of
enthusiasm. He is a capable businessman and we shall, therefore,
be able to utilize his ability. I have advised him to understand
the work of all the departments. My advice to you is that you
should give him work so that he should at any rate become profi-
cient in all the processes up to spinning. He will require agricul-
tural work for at least some time daily. I also believe that he will
be able to look after the store. And he is bound to know book-
keeping. His wife is a fine woman, but how she acquits herself
there the future alone will show.
Chandrakanta and her mother are getting ready. Now the
mother, too, has agreed to take her meals in the common kitchen,
so that there will be no problem of a separate kitchen for her and
of paying a salary to her. I had a letter from Chandrakanta,
which I am sending with this to be filed. I will send her
mother's letter too.
I will leave this place on the 21st., 22-23 in Delhi and 24 in
Lahore. Letters intended to reach me on 22-23 should be addres-
sed C/O Lakshminarayan Gadodia. You should get this letter on
the 20th. Post letters on that date to Delhi, as also on the 21st.
From the 22nd onwards, to Lahore.
Do not mind if Lilabehn has started cooking her meals in
Budhabhai's house. I believe that Bhansali will certainly not stay
on after he has recovered. Since Lilabehn has started cooking
separately, I should not be surprised if he goes and lives in
Budhabhai's house.
I did not see any letter from Ayodhyaprasad. Carry out what
you have suggested about him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4165
