246. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 28, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDASJI,
I hope you received my letter in Hindi which I wrote the
day before yesterday, i. e., 26th. I do think that we ought to
find out a means of dealing with the basti problem in Calcutta
as a whole, and not piecemeal. When therefore you next go to
Calcutta I suggest your having an informal meeting of the princi-
pal Municipal Councillors. No matter what vested interests have
grown up, they should be attacked and the problem dealt with.
From what you write to me, the cheapest method evidently seems
to be to demolish these bastis. The opposition to the introduction
of a more humane method of carrying night-soil seems to me to be
perfectly useless. Improved methods must in the beginning stages
mean more expense, but undoubtedly less in the end. The ques-
tion behind all the difficulties that arise resolves itself, as a rule,
into apathy on the part of those who profess their appreciation of
the necessity for reform, but are not prepared to sacrifice anything
for it. You must therefore turn this apathy into active sympathy,
and a way out will be quickly found.
As to the Hindi Harijan, I wrote to you the day before yester-
day telling you that the only articles that were found worth read-
ing were yours, except the first. Your style is pleasing, simple,
idiomatic. Your method of dealing with the subject is plain, direct
and easily understandable. Of course the translation of my arti-
cles was faulty, but that difficulty will now be got over by send-
ing translations ready-made from here. The Hindi will have to
be polished there. This ought to reduce expense and improve
the paper.
Pray do not worry about the David Scheme. I just told you
how I came to write about it. But I quite understand your diffi-
culty. If it becomes necessary, we must naturally fall back upon
the Central Fund. But let us for a while wait and see if we can
get even half a dozen subscribers with the full amounts. I do not
despair; only I never get time to frame nice letters. But I will
do so one of these days. When I have one or two names I pro-
pose to announce your name with these. There was no question
of your letting me down by your enthusiastically taking up the
Scheme.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
[PS.]
You would remember our discussion about Ramanand San-
nyasi. After that, I had written to him that I had received com-
plaints concerning his character. I enclose his reply. He now
writes to me that you have asked him to produce Urdu Harijan.
BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7935. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 20732
