322. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Thursday, Sravana Sud 4, August 12, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,
I have your letter. I acted upon your telegram as soon as I
could. You must have got the spinning-wheel by now. I forgot
to give instructions about slivers, and they may not have been
packed. There can be no comparison between Mrs. Besant and
the Maharani. I have done no injustice to the latter. Mrs. Besant
is a public figure and, if she bought a spinning-wheel, she would
do so because she understood its value. On the other hand the
Maharani, even if she took up spinning, would do so as an
amusement. Impartiality does not rule out discrimination. I
have explained only one reason. You yourself have given a second
reason in your letter, in your description of the Maharaja. I
know much about him. His life is none too pure, and he has
an extremely unsteady mind. He is not at all dependable. He
hopes to get something done through me, and I am not in a
position to satisfy his hope. I smell this hope even in his readi-
ness to start spinning. I have, therefore, cautioned you and
left it to you to decide what is best for you to do, so that you
may not do the slightest injustice to the Maharaja.
I understand your reason for wishing to stay on there. Stay
on by all means, and come here only when you are quite strong
again. You may go to Simla any time you wish to, but, whether
you are in Simla or Mussoorie, you should always carry on public
work. Only in this way will you succeed in promoting the sale
of khadi. And see that you attend to everything yourself. I have
suggested to Chhaganlal that he should reserve for you the
khadi which in your letter you have asked him to send to you.
In view of what I have written to you in this letter, to which
place do you now want the khadi to be despatched?
Pyarelal has written to Mahadev what he wrote to you.
Arrangements will now be made to send the money from here.
Harilal is still here. Balibehn comes occasionally.
BAPU
CHI. DEVDAS GANDHI
THE OAKS
MUSSOORIE
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12243
