73. LETTER TO VICEROY
[August 1, 1920]
SIR,
It is not without a pang that I return the Kaiser-i-Hind gold
medal, granted to me by your predecessor for my humanitarian
work in South Africa, the Zulu War medal granted in South Africa
for my war services as officer in charge of the Indian Volunteers
Service Corps in 1906 and the Boer War medal for my services as
Assistant Superintendent of the Indian Volunteer Stretcher-Bearer
Corps during the Boer War of 1899. I venture to return these
medals in pursuance of the scheme of non-co-operation, inaugu-
rated today in connection with the Khilafat movement. Valuable
as these honours have been to me, I cannot wear them with an
easy conscience so long as my Mussulman countrymen have to
labour under a wrong done to their religious sentiments. Events,
which have happened during the past month, have confirmed me
in the opinion that the Imperial Government have acted in the
Khilafat matter in an unscrupulous, immoral and unjust manner
and have been moving from wrong to wrong in order to defend
their immorality. I can retain neither respect nor affection for such
a Government. The attitude of the Imperial and Your Excellency's
Governments on the Punjab question has given me an additional
sense for grave dissatisfaction. I had the honour as Your Excel-
lency is aware as one of the Congress Commissioners to investi-
gate the cause of disorder in the Punjab during April of 1919 and
it is my deliberate conviction that Sir Michael O'Dwyer was totally
unfit to hold the office of Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab
and that his policy was primarily responsible for infuriating the mob
at Amritsar. No doubt the mob excesses were unpardonable. In-
cendiarism, the murder of the five innocent Englishmen and the
cowardly assault on Miss Sherwood were most deplorable and un-
called for but the punitive measures taken by General Dyer, Col.
Frank Johnson, Col. O'Brien, Mr. Bosworth Smith, Rai Shri
Ram Sud, Mr. Malik Khan and other officers were out of all propor-
tion to the crime of the people and amounted to a wanton
cruelty and inhumanity, almost unparalleled in modern times.
Your Excellency's light-hearted treatment of the official
crime, your exoneration of Sir Michael O'Dwyer, Mr. Montagu's
dispatch and above all the shameful ignorance of the Punjab
events and the callous disregard of the feelings of the Indians be-
trayed by the House of Lords, have filled me with the gravest
misgivings regarding the future of the Empire, have estranged me
completely from the present Government and have disabled me
from tendering as I have hitherto whole-heartedly tendered my
loyal co-operation. In my humble opinion, the ordinary method
of agitating by way of petitions, deputation and the like, is no
remedy for moving to repentance a Government, so hopelessly in-
different to the welfare of its charge as the Government of India
has proved to be.
In European countries, the condonation of such grievous
wrongs as the Khilafat and the Punjab would have resulted in a
bloody revolution by the people. They would have resisted at all
cost the national emasculation such as the said wrongs imply. But
one half of India is too weak to offer a violent resistance and the
other half is unwilling to do so. I have therefore ventured to sug-
gest a remedy of non-co-operation, which enables those who wish to
dissociate themselves from the Government and which, if it is
unattended by violence and undertaken in an ordered manner
must compel it to retrace its steps and undo the wrongs commit-
ted. But whilst I pursue the policy of non-co-operation in so far
as I can carry the people with me, I shall not lose hope that you
will yet see your way to do justice. I therefore respectfully ask Your
Excellency to summon a conference of recognized leaders of the
people and in consultation with them find a way that would placate
the Mussulman and do reparation to the unhappy Punjab.
I remain,
Sir,
Your faithful servant,
M. K. GANDHI
NOTE
I understand that P.S.V. will send us the K.I.H. medal for storage. No
other action is needed.
JOHN WOOD 2
N.A.I.: Foreign: Political; File No. 100: 1921
