30. LETTER TO W. HOSKEN
JOHANNESBURG,
September 19, 1908
WILLIAM HOSKEN, ESQ., M.L.A.
JOHANNESBURG
DEAR SIR,
We, the undersigned, are deeply grateful to you for the kindly
interest you, as a lover of the Empire and a Christian gentleman, take
in the present bitter struggle that Asiatics are engaged in.
You have told us, at the meeting called by you at your office to-day,
and attended by Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Pollock, and ourselves, that
General Smuts genuinely regrets the persecution which the Asiatic
communities, the majority of whom are British subjects, are undergoing.
We appreciate this sentiment. You also said that General Smuts thinks
that there would be no insuperable difficulty in meeting our request.
We, therefore, beg to state as follows:
A promise should be given by General Smuts and the leader of the
Progressive Opposition that the Asiatic Act will be repealed during
the next session of Parliament, and that the status of highly educated
Indians will be safeguarded in terms of the request made by the British
Indian Association.
As to the latter question, in order to show our bona fides, we would
be quite satisfied with the entry, per year, of, say, six such Indians.
The great point, therefore, is that they should be able to enter under
the general education test. There should be no legal distinction. We
do not mind an administration of the law such that only the above
number can enter. Precedent for such administration is not wanting.
The Cape and Natal are doing so at present. In our opinion, such
discretion is given under the Immigrants' Restriction Act, but if General
1 Ex-President of the Association of Chambers of Commerce of South Africa.
He was sympathetic to the cause of British Indians; vide Vol. VII, pp. 108 and 476
and Vol. VIII, p. 27.
2 Party in the Transvaal Parliament
Smuts holds otherwise, we have no objection to the Act being so amended
as to give the widest discretion to him.
These are the two chief questions outstanding. As a matter of
fact, the two are even one, because, if Act 2 of 1907 were repealed, the
Immigrants' Restriction Act would not come in the way of highly educated
Indians entering the Colony. We separate the question, because we
wish to show that we have no desire to take any undue advantage of
the facility provided under the Immigrants' Restriction Act, but that
we are quite sincere in our declaration that we have no desire to have
unrestricted Asiatic immigration into the Colony. All we say is that,
if the resident Asiatics are to be treated justly and if the whole Asiatic
nations are not to be insulted, educated Asiatics should be treated under
the general immigration law, and should not be called upon to submit
to any registration Act.
The other questions, namely, those of restoring registration certi-
ficates to those who have burned them, and the reinstatement of
Mr. Sorabjee are, in our opinion, administrative details, and can be
easily arranged when the main points are solved.
We would mention that, whilst the new Act which has just received
the Royal sanction, is very reasonable, there are one or two flaws—
for instance, in connection with the claims of those who are already
in the Colony and who have entered bona fide, they cannot be called upon
to submit to a three years' residence test, because some who have not
given such proof have already been granted registration certificates.
It is also felt that, unless the widest latitude is given in the regulations
with reference to the giving of thumb-impressions on application for
licences, that particular section would cause the greatest irritation.
We assume that all those who are now suffering imprisonment
will be discharged simultaneously with a settlement going through,
if such a fortunate result is attained.
In conclusion, we beg to mention that we have no desire to defy
the Government, and we wish to remain in the country with peace
and honour and in obedience to the general laws of the Colony. We
have been obliged, most reluctantly and in obedience to a higher call,
to oppose most strenuously the Asiatic Act. We need not, at this stage,
go into the reasons for it, but we ask that our opposition to that Act
may not be interpreted to mean defiance.
1 Asiatics Registration Amendment Act (1908). Speaking on the Bill in the
Transvaal Parliament, Hosken had said that, while he thought "the Bill provided
for all points raised" and hoped that the Indian people would accept it, he differed
on one point: the education test. He thought that not to give "residential permits either
to teachers of religion or to any other qualified person" was such a narrow interpreta-
tion that he could not agree to it. He was, however, one of the members who
supported the Bill.
We beg to add that the leaders who are at present at the Volksrust
gaol, and who represent the flower of the Indian community in South
Africa, as soon as they were sentenced, sent us the message that they
were prepared to suffer to the utmost, but that we should not mind their
sufferings but continue the struggle until what we think we are justly
entitled to is granted.
In accordance with your desire, we would treat this communication
to be strictly confidential, and any message that you may convey to
us will also be so regarded.
With our renewed thanks for your kindly interest and for the assu-
rance conveyed by General Smuts.
We remain, etc.,
A. M. CACHALIA
ESSOP ISMAIL MIA
IMAM A. K. BAWAZIR
LEUNG QUINN
C. K. T. NAIDOO
FOO KIMSON
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten original: S.N. 4879
