527. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
GAUHATI,
January 11, 1946
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I got your wire. Your decision not to come over is per-
fectly correct. It was my dharma to send you the wire that
I did. I had explained to you what your dharma was at the
time of your father's death. You have adhered to that. May
you be blessed. I daily get news about Kanchan's progress.
I am dictating this in the early hours of the morning.
I had
a wire from Sushila yesterday, saying that Kanchan was im-
proving. She gives the credit to penicillin. I believe that
Sushila has nursed her very well indeed. She has stayed behind
entirely for the sake of Kanchan. Let us see now what happens.
Perhaps this serious illness may bring about a complete trans-
formation in Kanchan. She is simple-hearted but is very much
of a child also. As she grows in age, she does not corre-
spondingly grow in understanding. Can it be that you are the
cause of that? The people around us believe so, and hold me
also jointly responsible with you. I do not admit the charge.
But that is another matter. I have mentioned the thing in
case you would like to think over it.
Manibhai must have arrived there by now. We had in any
case decided to summon him there, and because of the deve-
lopment regarding Kanchan I felt it my dharma to send him
there and asked him to proceed immediately if he was free. I
have had very little experience of him. But Shantilal, who has
lived at Sevagram for some time, and Ishvarlal Desai, husband
of Nirmala, Mahadev's sister, have given me the impression that
he is a man of uncommon ability. Narahari has had experience
of him and seen his worth. You will, therefore, find Manibhai
of the greatest help. He is a capable man at any rate.
I have been insisting on the account books being kept in
English entirely for the sake of Jehangirji. If he is not keen on
that, you may by all means have them kept in Hindi or
Marathi. Can it be so arranged that the months and the dates
are entered according to the Gregorian calendar, so that Jehan-
girji can check them?
You can show this letter to Dinshaw. You may show him
any letter of mine.
Give the accompanying letter to Manibhai. Give Doctor the
letter I am writing for him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati ; G.N. 8618. Also C.W. 7204. Cour-
tesy : Munnalal G. Shah
