403. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
CHI. MUNNALAL,
What about the curd today? Three day's stale curd cannot be
served. You should calmly have a talk with everyone. Do not write
to the doctor. Tell me whatever you have to say. The doctor is
himself disturbed and is old. He must be spared.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 8515
268
236. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
Q.
Is it possible to recite Ramanama from the heart even while talking to
someone, doing arduous mental work or when mentally perturbed? If people do so
even under such conditions, how do they manage it?
A.
Experience tells us that whatever the situation a person may be
in, even if he may be asleep, if he has formed the habit, and if
Ramanama fills his heart, recitation of Ramanama will continue as
long as the heart beats. Otherwise, it may said that he utters
Ramanama only with his lips, or if occasionally it enters the heart, it
certainly does not reign in the heart. When Ramanama rules the
heart, it is needless to ask how the recitation is carried on. For, when
the Name has found a place in the heart, recitation is superfluous. It
would be correct to say that those whose hearts are thus permeated
by Ramanama are few. I have no doubt that Ramanama does indeed
possess the power attributed to it. Not everyone can have Ramanama
inscribed in his heart by merely wishing it. It requires a tireless effort
and also patience. How can one find the philosopher's stone without
patience? Ramanama is superior to it.
Q. 2 Is it from a certain mental weakness that one sees so many layers of the mind,
or is it necessary for the mind to pass through all these stages before reaching a state
of steadiness? Why is it that even in the waking state dreamlike visions come and
go? How is it that phantoms of things never experienced in life appear in the mind
or echo in the heart?
A. Before arriving at steadiness of mind almost everyone has to pass
through stages enumerated in the question. That is to say, those who
have in the former life striven without achieving success will not
need to pass through agony in the present birth. When the mind is
calm but one still has dream-like experiences, it only means that
1
In this section of undated items, letters and notes from Gandhiji to
individuals have been put together in the alphabetical order of surnames, as it has
not been possible to establish conclusive evidence of the period to which they
belong. However, an occasional inference as regards the date of an item is ventured
in a footnote to the title.
178
