101. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
August 3/5, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
You need not have written the letter despite the pain in your
hand; or you should have dictated it to Radha or somebody else.
It is God's grace that even in this condition you could go on with
the yajna of spinning. How did the hand slip? It must be com-
pletely all right by now.
Ask the person who bakes our bread to write to me and
explain the process. How does he make the yeast? How much
does he add to a given quantity of flour? When does he knead the
flour, and after kneading it how long does he let it remain? Let
him give all these details. There is a bakery adjoining our cells.
They make quite good bread from maida4, but cannot produce fer-
mentation in whole-wheat flour like that which we use. So they
were asking me. This need not be published.
The fact that Mirabehn got her letter late indicates my sub-
ject state. I will play on the pipe as long as I can. You should
not, therefore, be surprised if my letters stop. I will go on writing
them as long as I can with self-respect. Can a prisoner write letters
at all? He and his relations and friends should know that he has
no rights with regard to the outside world. Be that as it may,
both of us are doing fine.
The . . . behn's affair was a painful one. I am not at all sur-
prised by such occurrences now. Our experiment does carry with
it such risks. Since you will be reading my letter to . . . behn and
others, I need not write more here. In such situations we should
show the utmost charity. God is the only witness of secret sins. We
should never persecute those whose sins become known. We may
explain to such persons their duty as we understand it and leave
them to God. You did right in not giving . . . behn the permis-
sion asked for. I do hope that both . . . behn and. .3 will
see their error one day.
If Amidas has confidence in himself and knows how to make
the experiments, you need not interfere with him. Personally I
feel that 72 lb. weight is too little. Dates are not enough. I think
there will be no harm if he takes curds or milk at the same time.
Show this to him. If he has no experience in this matter, he should
be guided by my advice. If he feels cold, he should not be obstinate
and avoid using a covering. If he does not feel cold, there will be
no harm in keeping the body uncovered. Ask him to write to me.
If Damodardas continues to spit blood, he must go to a place
like Panchgani. He may return after he is all right. It is my expe-
rience that persons who suffer from such a disease do not get well
in the air on the banks of Sabarmati. Instead of going to Panch-
gani or some such place when it is too late for recovery, if he goes
now when the disease is under control he will get well in a short
time and return to Sabarmati.
In my letter to Giriraj, read what I have written concerning him.
Write to Jamnalalji, Kishorelal and others that there is an
understanding [with the Government] that I cannot write to other
prisoners. I got Kishorelal's letter. If his experiment in diet suc-
ceeds, I would envy him. Ramniklal's matter is settled quite satis-
factorily now. I cannot write to him either. Write to Narahari
and tell him that he enjoys the fullest grace of God, otherwise he
would not again and again get such opportunities for service.
It is not likely to help me even if you send me a spinning-
wheel made of bamboo. I am a lame duck in so far as spinning is
concerned. I love it, I work hard and pay great attention to it but
the speed simply does not increase. How can I blame the spin-
ning-wheel which I use? I have not been able to see where my
stupidity lies. When I was out of jail, no one took the courage to
explain it to me. I was satisfied with drawing 160 rounds and
did not pay sufficient attention to increasing the speed. I see my
error now. But every fool has the words 'too late' inscribed on his
forehead. If now I let you send a bamboo spinning-wheel, that
would be our illustration of the saying "a dull student needs a lot
of pens to use". I don't want that. I must suffer the consequences
of my folly. I am patiently observing, and improving my method
wherever improvement is possible. Moreover, I can increase the
speed if my physical strength improves. If it does not, I shall be
content to live as Rama wills. Ultimately, the blame will be His.
If I do my best, He cannot blame me. His law ever prevails with-
out exception, and since He is the first to obey His law, and does
that perfectly, we need have no fear. Being as great as He is, if
He were to act wilfully, wouldn't we be utterly destroyed?
Tuesday morning
Next among our observances comes brahmacharya. As a matter
of fact all observances are deducible from Truth and are meant
to subserve it. The man who is wedded to Truth and worships
Truth alone proves unfaithful to it if he applies his talents to
anything else. How then can he minister to the senses? A man,
whose activities are wholly consecrated to the realization of Truth,
which requires utter selflessness, can have no time for the selfish
purpose of begetting children and running a household. Realiza-
tion of Truth through self-gratification should, after what has been
said before, appear a contradiction in terms.
If we look at it from the standpoint of ahimsa, we find that the
fulfilment of ahimsa is impossible without perfect brahmacharya.
Ahimsa means universal love. If a man gives his love to one
woman, or a woman to one man, what is there left for all the
world besides? It simply means, "we two first, and the devil take
all the rest of them." As a faithful wife must be prepared to sacri-
fice her all for the sake of her husband, and a faithful husband for
the sake of his wife, it is clear that such persons cannot rise to the
height of universal love, or look upon all mankind as kith and kin.
For they have created a boundary wall or one has been created
round their love. The larger their family, the farther are they from
universal love. We see this in the whole world. Hence one who
would obey the law of ahimsa cannot marry, not to speak of grati-
fication outside the marital bond.
Then what about people who are already married? Will
they never be able to realize Truth? Can they never offer their
all at the altar of humanity? There is a way out for them. They
can behave as if they were not married. On this path I have
known nothing as beautiful as such a relationship. Those who
have enjoyed this happy condition will be able to bear me out.
Many have to my knowledge successfully tried the experiment.
If the married couple can think of each other as brother and sis-
ter, they are freed for universal service. The very thought that all
the women in the world are his sisters, mothers or daughters will
at once ennoble a man and snap his chains. The husband and wife
do not lose anything here, but only add to their resources and
even to their family. Their love becomes free from the impurity
oflust and so grows stronger. With the disappearance of this im-
purity, they can serve each other better, and the occasions for
quarrelling become fewer. There are more occasions for quarrel-
ling where the love is selfish and bounded.
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a consideration of
the physical benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary
importance. How foolish it is intentionally to dissipate vital energy
in sensual enjoyment! It is a grave misuse to fritter away for
physical gratification that which is given to man and woman for
the full development of their bodily and mental powers. Such
misuse is the root cause of many a disease.
Brahmacharya like all other observances must be expressed
in thought, word and deed. We are told in the Gita, and expe-
rience will corroborate the statement, that the foolish man who
appears to control his body but is nursing evil thoughts in his mind
makes a futile effort. It may be harmful to suppress the body,
if the mind is at the same time allowed to go astray. Where the
mind wanders, the body must follow sooner or later. It is neces-
sary here to appreciate a distinction. It is one thing to allow
the mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different thing al-
together if it strays among them in spite of ourselves. Victory will
be ours in the end if we non-co-operate with the mind in its evil
wanderings. We experience every moment of our lives that often
while the body is subject to our control the mind is not. This
physical control should never be relaxed, and in addition we must
1 III. 6
put forth a constant endeavour to bring the mind under control.
We can do nothing more, nothing less. If we give way to the
mind, the body and the mind will pull in different ways and we
shall be false to ourselves. Body and mind may be said to go to-
gether so long as we continue to resist the approach of every evil
thought.
The observance of such brahmacharya has been believed to be
very difficult, almost impossible. In trying to find a reason for this
belief, we see that the term brahmacharya has been taken in a nar-
row sense. Mere control of animal passion has been thought to
be tantamount to observing brahmacharya. I feel that this concep-
tion is incomplete and wrong. Brahmacharya means control of all
the organs of sense. He who attempts to control only one organ
and allows all the others free play is bound to find his effort
futile. To hear suggestive stories with the ears, to see suggestive
sights with the eyes, to taste stimulating food with the tongue, to
touch exciting things with the hands, and yet at the same time
to expect to control the generative organ is like putting one's
hands in the fire and expecting to escape being burnt. He, there-
fore, who is resolved to control the one must be likewise determined
to control the rest. I have always felt that much harm has been
done by the narrow definition of brahmacharya. If we practise simul-
taneous self-control in all directions, the attempt will soon be possible
of success; nay, only then will it be possible. Perhaps the palate
is the chief sinner. That is why in the Ashram we have assigned the
control of the palate a separate place among our observances. We
shall discuss it next time.
Let us remember the root meaning of ' brahmacharya'.
'Charya' means course of conduct; 'brahmacharya', conduct adap-
ted to the search of Brahman, i.e., Truth. From this etymological
meaning arises the special meaning, viz., control of all the senses.
We must entirely forget the incomplete definition which restricts
itself to the sexual aspect only.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 45 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
