385. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON SOUTH AFRICAN
QUESTION
[BOMBAY,
July 3, 1919]
TO
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
SIR,
The Times of India has led the way in showing that in the midst
of sharp differences between us—the English and Indians—there
are points of contact on which we can act with unison. Such is
the South African Indian question. Notwithstanding our preoccu-
pations, we may not—dare not—forget this big question.
Even whilst the Maharaja of Bikaner was hoping and appeal-
ing to the Dominions' statesmen that the Indian settlers in the
Colonies would receive fair and liberal treatment, a scheme was
being hatched by the responsible officials of South Africa to de-
prive the Indians of the Transvaal of vested rights in breach of
the compact of 1914, to which the Government of India was wit-
ness, if not party.
The Bill, which is now being discussed in the Press and which,
according to the latest papers received, has passed the committee
stage of the Union House of Assembly at the end of May last, vir-
tually deprives the Indians of the Transvaal from [sic] holding
fixed property even as shareholders of companies or as mortgagees,
as they have hitherto successfully and legally done. It further de-
prives them of the right of obtaining new trade licences throughout
the Transvaal. This means that Indian settlers, if they are not now
efficiently protected, will be reduced to the status of menial ser-
vants, no matter what their capacity might be. It was bad enough to
restrict so as almost to prohibit fresh immigration. It is intolerable
to confiscate the economic and material rights of legally admitted
immigrants and their descendants.
The duty of Englishmen residing in India and Indians is,
in my humble opinion, clear. We can create such an emphatic
public opinion that we can shame the Europeans of South Africa
into doing the right thing. We can also by our united protest streng-
then the hands of the Government of India in its endeavour,
which it will make as trustee effectively, to protect the Indian set-
tlers of the Transvaal from impending extinction.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 4-7-1919
