128. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[February 28, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL,
This should reach you on Wednesday.
Maganlal writes to me that you would board the train in
Bombay. You have to leave there on Friday. On Saturday
morning I shall be in Poona. Leaving there at 10, I shall join
you at Kalyan. I have a meeting at Poona in the morning.
Herewith letters from Nanabhai and Sushila, for your infor-
mation. I think you should honour their wish to have you at
Akola for some days. Vijayalakshmi would naturally want to
know you; she is your mother-in-law.
You should not be angry nor should you worry over what
Sushila writes about jewels and dresses; I have tried to encourage
all the good traits she has cultivated. But I have not bound her
to anything. You will influence her the way you would like to,
and take such liberties as you please with her consent.
The vow to be taken at the time of the marriage ceremony
is available with Panditji. I wish you would get it in advance,
think over it and understand it. May you be always ready to
observe the vow and may God grant you the strength for it.
I know marriage begins a new life. Therefore though I do
not get the time to write to you more often or at greater length,
I am always thinking about you.
Even if you stay over at Akola I must leave on Monday. I
have plenty of work waiting for me at the Ashram.
Make a note of whatever you want to ask me or tell me,
because after this meeting we may perhaps not meet again, may
be never in our lives. In the month of March, when you will
proceed to South Africa, I do not know where I may be wander-
ing. I see therefore that whatever you have to ask should be
done mainly on the train. On Sunday we shall be busy with
the wedding ceremony. Of course there may not be much fuss.
There would be a solemn atmosphere on the day and also peace
all round. But I am a busy man and it is quite likely that we
shall get little time to ourselves.
In his letter Nanabhai asks for Panditji to go there a day in
advance. Panditji may do so if he can. Just the same I am
dropping a line to Nanabhai assuring him that this should not be
necessary. He [Panditji] should however spare a day if possible.
Bring with you two copies of the Gita, two of the [Ashram]
Bhajanavali and a couple of taklis.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1124. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
