214. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SUNDER BUN, JUHU,
June
11, 1944
CHI. MIRA,
This is after much debating for 48 hours within myself and sleepless
nights over my duty towards you on our differences and towards doctors
regarding treatment.
It hurt me yesterday when Ammajan told me that you had doubt
about my willingness to part with the money that you gave me from
time to time. The fact is that you having parted with the money even
resented it standing in your name in the Ashram books and insisted
on the money being made part of the Ashram funds and the expenses
on your account being treated as from the Ashram funds. I felt a
delicacy in mentioning that it could be retransferred to you without any
deduction. I, therefore, allowed Ghanshyamdas to tell you that you could
have the money back whether the condition of the Ashram funds
permitted the return or not. So when you told me that you would be
glad to have the money, the measure of esteem in which I held you
went down. It is due to you that I should not withhold this fact from
1 In Devanagari
you. But this is not written to affect your decision. The return of the
money is irrevocable.
The second thing I want to tell you is the things I have been hearing
from reliable sources about Prithvi Singh. They are terribly disturbing. 1
He has been using questionable means to extort money. He made,
without success, indecent approaches to two girls of Kathiawar.
The girl whom he has married was engaged to a person who was
her benefactor. Nanabhai who was the person to bring him to me and
who testified to his complete change from violence to non-violence has
been sadly disillusioned.
His profession of non-violence when he came to me and in his
letters from the jail appears to have been a deep-laid plot to deceive
me and through me some day or other to secure his release from the
life of hiding which was worrying him. Thus, my prejudice is deepening.
I should love to know from experience that the prejudice has no basis.
It is generally believed that the Communist Party is exploiting you
through him. I am carrying on correspondence with Joshi. This you
can see from Pyarelal.
In the circumstances my advice to you is that you should hold your
project for a season and judge the situation and watch developments.
I do not know how Devdas and those who are connected with you
will be able to guide you or interest themselves in your activities.
Anyway I shall have to let the public know somehow or other that
I am not at the back of any of your activities which are being undertaken
in spite of my disapproval.
This letter is my last warning. I shall trouble you no more. God
be your only guide. 2
[P.S.]
There is nothing withheld from the office staff. I am keeping a
copy of this letter and enclose herewith a typed copy. Please give me
a copy of the letter I wrote to you before this.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Vide also pp. 121-.
2 For the addressee's answer, vide Appendix I.
