373. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 26, 1927
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I had your letter as also your telegram. To the latter I
sent a reply from Krishnagiri which I hope was duly received.
Having been in the interior of Mysore and continuously touring,
I am considerably in arrears.
I have at last decided to issue a small note on Dr. Ansari's
statement. Having championed his election, I thought that I
could not observe absolute silence. I shall watch the move-
ment of the barometer and wherever I can do anything or write
anything to purpose, I shall not hesitate.
So far I am not inclined to favour Jawaharlal's election, that
is, assuming that Dr. Ansari retires. It is highly probable that he
will take up the attitude suggested by you and me and merely
become an impartial chairman. Nothing more will then remain
to be done. If, however, a fresh election does become necessary,
I shall watch events and Reuter's cable will inform you of the
result. Please however send me your address in London so that I
may write or cable in case of need. But I want you to leave India
with a light heart, as I know you will do without any coaxing
from me. Evidently we have not yet reached the freezing point.
I am fixed up in the South almost for the rest of the year. I
send you herewith a copy of my programme up to the end of
September though it will be safer probably to use the Sabar-
mati address from where telegrams are quickly repeated and letters
as quickly redirected.
I hope you will have a nice time in Europe and return in
time with Jawaharlal before the Congress week. You will please
ask Indu whether she ever thinks of her old Indian friends and
among them a frequent visitor to Anand Bhawan who would
drink nothing but goat's milk and will eat all the choicest fruits
leaving none even for little children.
Yours sincerely,
PANDIT MOTILAL NEHRU
ALLAHABAD
[PS.]
I am enclosing copy of my Young India notes. I have sent
a copy to Dr. Ansari too for approval.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: S.N. 12875
