31. LETTER TO H. O. ALLY
HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,
October 27, 1906
DEAR MR. ALLY,
George has seen me after his interview with you, and also Dr. Old-
field. I am delighted that what I feared was a relapse was, after all,
a blessing in disguise. I am delighted also that, when he saw you, you
were looking hale and hearty. When I think of it, I do feel that our
stay here would have been incomplete without George. Who [else]
would have been the link between US? The idea you have suggested
about a gathering has been uppermost in my mind. As you may
imagine, I have not been at all idle. I have been seeing people here
and there. A suggestion has already been made that there should be a
meeting in the House of Commons which should be addressed by
both of us. I do want you to be present at these gatherings, unless
adverse circumstances prevent it. I would not think of addressing
these gatherings without you. I know full well the value of your
presence as also of your speech. The interview with Lord Elgin is
not likely to come off before the week after next, that is to say, not
for the next 8 or 9 days. I have just returned from a visit to
Sir Muncherji and Sir George Birdwood. The latter paid a friendly
call at the Hotel and enquired about you. I am only sorry that you
are not with me during these visits; you would have seen a great deal
of the public men here, and obtained an insight into the working of
British institutions. However, I believe sufficiently in predestination,
and I, therefore, take comfort in the thought that even in your
absence from these meetings there may be some good lurking. It may
be that, when you suddenly appear to address a gathering, you would
lend a charm to it which would not have been possible if you had seen
the members individually, but whenever there is a public function,
even though it may be inconvenient, you shall always attend. There
1 Peace Preservation Ordinance
2 The original has, "George, who would have been. . .".
3 Vide "Meeting at House of Commons", p. 105.
are likely to be two such gatherings. Mr. Polak is trying to have a
gathering by an educational society. I beseech you to keep yourself
religiously away from cigars. Certainly, have as much as you like of
the hubble-bubble. Follow Dr. Oldfield's instructions implicitly. I
am certain that no other doctor could restore you to health with the
same amount of despatch as Dr. Oldfield. I feel, therefore, that you
are in the safest hands. I sent you a budget of letters today, and a copy
of Indian Opinion. South Africa has certainly given the very best inter-
view possible, and you will see how the Editor has veered round to a
moderate expression in his editorial columns. You might not have
seen his violent articles 3 or 4 weeks ago. The editorial this morning
was, therefore, quite refreshing reading. Please command me if you
want anything more, and do not hesitate to send any suggestions you
wish to send.
I did not ring off this morning after you told me you were well.
It was the silly girl at the exchange who did it. I then tried to have
the connection restored, but failed, and then gave it up, because I want-
ed to be ready to meet Reuter's agent. I had a long chat with him
at the Hotel. He saw immediately that the Ordinance was practically
useless and tyrannical. These are, of course, mere words, but who knows,
they may do good in the end.
Yours sincerely,
H. O. ALLY, ESQ.
LADY MARGARET HOSPITAL
BROMLEY
KENT
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4411
