379. LETTER TO DR. G. V. DESHMUKH
April 7, 1933
DEAR DR. DESHMUKH,
I am very grateful to you for your most exhaustive and
learned reply to my query. I liked it so much that although
the editing of the ensuing number of the Harijan was finished, I
made room for your letter. Of course you may hand the corres-
pondence for publication in the local Press.
There is a domestic matter on which I want your advice. As
you know, Sardar Vallabhbhai has some trouble about his nose.
It has worried him all these many months, but just now the irri-
tation has gone almost beyond endurance, as it seems to us on-
lookers. As you know it is not his habit to complain, but we,
his companions, know what it all means to him. The prison
medical men have undoubtedly done whatever they were capable
of doing. But their remedies have brought no relief. I notice
that he has, constantly to clean his nose, and there is always some
discharge coming out. He uses a big towel for the purpose and
in 24 hours it is fairly dirty all over. By a big towel I mean a
bathing towel that is used in middle class Hindu households.
It has appeared to me that if he cleaned his nose with warm water
3 or 4 times a day he will not have so much discharge and will
not have the trouble he has in cleaning the nose. But he has been
told by a doctor here that washing the nose is likely to dry it.
All the affected part is therefore likely to cause greater discom-
fort. Though I did not have the same class of disease as Sardar
Vallabhbhai has, the only way I have kept myself clean and
free from any trouble has been to wash out the nose constantly,
sometimes taking in the water and bringing it out through the
mouth. At one time I used to have a nasal douche with a little
permanganate solution added to the water and sometimes a few
grains of chinosol. I do not know whether in your opinion wash-
ing of the nose with simple warm water or with anything added
to it is likely to give relief to the Sardar. If you have any other
suggestion to make you will please make it. I would ask you
not to publish this information. I have simply written to you
for my own satisfaction.
331
There are one or two more questions of a public character
and regarding public health which I would like to ask presently
if I am not unduly encroaching upon your time.
Yours sincerely,
[Ps.]
You say that everything except the skin and fat should be
buried for manure. But entrails are used for making guts and
other purposes. And do the fresh bones become decomposed as
early as they would be if they were pounded after being dried?
What is the practice in the municipal slaughter-houses?
DR. G. V. DESHMUKH
39 PEDDAR ROAD
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20859
