153. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
SINHGADH,
Vaishakh Vad 1 [May 4, 1920]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I got today the post you sent me. As you have had no time,
however, to write to me, I shall say something on the basis of what
I heard from Mahadev, wishing to give you as much peace as I
can.
1. Why did I at all inquire about the car? This itself
shows my growing weakness.
2. There was much waste of time and money in what we
did over Gurudev and Fatima . The result was nothing
or almost nothing.
3. It is not true that work comes seeking me and I don't
go seeking it.
4. Sarladevi had her meal sitting on the cushion bed on the
floor and I also take my meals sitting there. Where is
the need for all this hurry? Would it take more time if
she and I had our meals at the right place? Even if it
did, would it matter very much?
5. I am no more as scrupulously firm as I used to be.
6. India and the Ashram have lost by my activities outside
the Ashram.
7. Indeed, I should leave everything else and, confined to
the Ashram, lose myself in its activities like the school,
etc. No one will now charge me with accepting defeat.
S. About Radha's marriage.
9. The power which was mine, in virtue of which everyone
was obliged to listen to what I said, has disappeared.
I think it is natural that these and similar doubts should arise
in your mind. Especially when I am so far away or, even though
living in the Ashram, am like one living far away, my numerous
activities are bound to perplex people.
I inquired about a car since in any case we have introduced
many unwanted things. Economically, I saw that a car would
be an advantage. We certainly use cars a good deal. The
question was whether we could accept a car as a gift. I did not
think it quite proper to give an immediate reply on my own.
For two days I struggled hard against the idea but, thinking
of Lyall1, I softened and thought that I would accept the gift
if you also desired that I should. Actually, I am so little in love
with a car that I have often wished that Anasuyabehn's car might
break down. It is true, however, that now I am not opposed
[to using a car] as much as I used to be. I think, therefore, that
you would be perfectly right if you believed that it was my
weakness to have inquired about the car.
About Gurudev, I was a mere witness. I submitted to the desire
of you all. Left to myself, I would not have gone in for arches, etc.
I would have thought out a way of honouring him which would
have cost little effort. I don't feel either way about what happen-
ed. I believe it was our duty to give him a fitting welcome.
I don't think the students lost anything by being busy in this
work. They merely followed the duty of service. These facts need
to be borne in mind. Moreover, Gurudev is an exceptional man.
He has poetry, goodness and patriotism in him. This is a rare
mixture. He deserves to be honoured. What simplicity his is!
All that was done for Fatima seems perfectly right to me. If
we remember that Imam Saheb is a Muslim, we shall see that
we did nothing much. Every step was taken after full thought. If
you admit that we were bound to celebrate her marriage, you
will see that everything we did was right. Imam Saheb could
have observed still greater simplicity. It would have been excellent
if he had given her no ornaments, but how can we expect so much?
I especially want to satisfy you on this.
You may be sure I don't go seeking work. Which activity,
do you think, did I go out of my way to take upon myself? If
I had not joined the Khilafat movement, I think, I would have
lost everything. In joining it I have followed what I especially
regard as my dharma. I am trying through this movement to
show the real nature of non-violence. I am uniting Hindus and
Muslims. I am coming to know one and all and, if non-co-operation
goes well, a great power based on brute force will have to sub-
mit to a simple-looking thing. The Khilafat movement is a great
churning of the sea of India. Why should we be concerned with
what it will produce? All that we should consider is whether the
movement itself is a pure and worthy cause. I cannot leave any
field in which I have cultivated some strength. My moksha lies
through them. If I refuse to work in these fields, I shall not suc-
ceed in giving anything through the Ashram either. It was for
this reason that Doke described me as a pathfinder. He had
intended to name his book 'Pathfinder' or 'Jungle-breaker'. He
kept the present name at the instance of Polak.
Even by establishing the Ashram I have shown a path. It
is for you and others who are working in it to follow the path
and reach the destination. Meanwhile, if it is given to me to
live longer and have some peace, I may, on the basis of my
matured experience, prepare a better scheme for the Ashram; that
is another matter. However, you are free to engage me in the
fullest discussions about this.
On that day Sarladevi was the only one left to take her meal
and therefore had it where she was sitting. Ordinarily she used to
have her meals in the dining-room. For myself, since I fell ill I
have my meal wherever I happen to be when it includes no cereals.
I do this for my convenience; it may also be attributed to my
weakness. Your complaint is right, of course.
My staunchness has not disappeared. My ideas have grown
stronger and more piercing. My indifference to worldly pleasures
has increased. What I used to see but dimly has now become
clearer to me. I have grown more tolerant, so that I am less
particular about others [doing what I want them to do ].
It is impossible for me to answer the question whether India
and the Ashram have gained or lost through my outside activities.
If I could think of a way, I would certainly confine myself to the
Ashram, but the thing is not entirely in my hands. I should like
it if you can convince me with argument and hold me down [to the
Ashram].
It is quite true that I have lost my former fire. My illness
has disabled me. I have myself observed that, ever since I lost the
strength to stand beside you all and work, I have lost my fire.
The steel-like strength of my body having given place to softness,
I put up with many things. Did anyone ever see me going for a
change of air? Well, that is what I do now. When I think of
the expenditure which has been incurred over me I get still more
nervous. I feel ashamed when travelling second class. My soul
suffers on such occasions and, to be sure, it loses its lustre.
There is no way out of this. My best time is over. People may
take now what they can from my ideas. I have ceased to be the
'ideal man of action' which I used to be. I am to be pitied for
being in this state. There is no exaggeration in this. I have given
expression to these feelings often enough, off and on.
But in the midst of all this, neither you nor I need despair.
We should be able to see our defects and, wherever possible, should
correct them. You have learnt a great deal through my 50 years
of life. Cherish it. Build on it, bring credit to yourself and me.
When you experience any difficulties point them out to me. Over-
come those of them which you can by your own effort. Don't lose
heart. If you find anywhere in this letter that I have misunder-
stood you, do not brood over the thing, but immediately seek a
clarification.
I want you to be perfectly at peace and cheerful. Shamaldas
has wired to me for money. I am saying no to him. We simply
cannot give him any money.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 5786. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chowdhari
