233. LETTER TO AMRITLAL
April 8, 1927
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL,
You must have seen my letter 1 to Amritlal Bapa. I want you
to look into it. After all, his speech has been drafted by you.
I want this matter to be settled purely on the basis of principle.
We must not let my personal feelings interfere with it. And if it
is a question of my feelings I am all for what suits the atmo-
sphere in Kathiawar and is ultimately good for its people. I
am for khadi because I see advantage in it; but how could it
prove beneficial if the climate is against it? Oxygen is vital for
our breathing but what is it to the trees? And you all are the
life of Kathiawar. If I cannot convince you all about a thing,
either I should not do it at all or do it in a different way.
I am aware of your ability. I very much appreciate some
of the things you do. I count you among those serving the
motherland. You have courage which you should exercise to en-
courage others and contend with me, if you have to, without
hesitation. Do what you want to do, not what I want you to.
That alone will be the right thing. Surely we cannot shine in
borrowed feathers.
At the moment I can take no interest in activities other than
khadi or similar constructive work. Being thus engaged, if I have
any more to live, it might some day occur to me to offer battle
within the limits of satyagraha and if the struggle does not come
off in my own lifetime it will be taken up by such of my successors
as can do it.
Bloody revolutions just do not appeal to me. I never wish
to kill even a venomous snake, not to speak of a venomous man.
I know the world has gone in for bloody revolution too for win-
ning freedom. I wish to spend all my life trying to prove its
futility. I take delight in this only and so I never lose patience.
All the ways that occur to me are but ways of peace. That for
me is the straight and therefore the shortest path. You should
lend me your support only if it appeals to you and to those who
look to you for guidance; otherwise, it is best to leave me alone
as it has been said: "One's own dharma is superior to"1, etc. Lying
in a sick-bed, I get more time to think and therefore I am trying
to clarify our views and my own.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
