146. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PRETORIA, Box 1156,
Sunday [January 18, 1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your two letters.
As to the handwritten letter, all I wish to tell you is that I sensed
your fear. You need not fear at all however. The result has been and
will be contrary to that you have feared. All is gain for you and me.
I see that our difficulties in India will probably be less than we had
expected. But as you say, you want me to discuss this when we meet.
So I shall say not more.
1 From the reference to the interview with Smuts, which took place on Friday.
January 16; vide Vol. XII, pp. 324-.
2 From the contents; vide also the preceding item.
157
I was pained to see P. K. Naidoo's letter. I look to you to soothe
them. The complaint is not without foundation, I fear, and Miss Schlesin
is probably at the back of it. But you are just the one to deal with
the crisis.
I endorse all you say regarding Indian Opinion. And if the paper
can be turned out there, certainly it should be. In the new circumstances
that we have found, West's presence is certainly not needed in Durban
now. If the struggle revives we shall have to see. We could at any
time get our stuff printed at the Mercury office. The current number
is undoubtedly horrible— nothing of it was printed at Phoenix, is it
not so? I have already suggested to West that he might now shift to
Phoenix. Neither Mr. Andrews nor Mr. Pearson require guides. In all
these matters however you should take the initiative. Consult me by
all means where necessary but you may ignore me too when there
is no time for consultation.
I am pining to come down and nurse Mrs. Gandhi. But I feel that
I dare not do so just at present. I must treat this as of primary
importance. General Smuts now knows my domestic position and he
may hurry forward if he likes. In any case it cannot be long delayed
now seeing that the industrial crisis is now practically over. Meanwhile
Mr. Andrews is moving forward. He has got a wonderful grasp of
the central position and he is pushing it forward with all the spiritual
force he possesses.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
