330. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA
August 15, 1927
CHI. BALKRISHNA,
I cannot help writing to you today.
I do not like to interfere much in your course of thinking or
way of work because you arrange your thoughts with great care.
But very often the experience of elders helps even one who arranges
one's thoughts carefully. I sometimes get into an argument
with you with a view to helping you. I think we needs must stay
in society in order to build up our character and we have even
to bear with our leaders' temper. New principles do not come up
every day before a philosopher; but conflicts of duty do crop up
every day-ponder over the difference between the two. It is when
duties conflict that a soldier obeys his general and he puts his
own reason aside. The intelligence of one who always indulges in
its exercise obstructs his self-realization. When a leader is not
deliberately immoral, it is non-violence to submit to his intelli-
gence. Non-violence is humbler than even a mango tree. It is said
that a mango tree bends as it grows up. When non-violence grows
fully, it acts like a cipher. Instead of attempting to prove its own
point, non-violence lets everyone else prove his. Hence it has
been sung: "When non-violence is established, in its vicinity all
hatred is given up." Who can hate a cipher and how?
You will lose nothing by subordinating yourself to Maganlal.
Both yourself and Maganlal will benefit by submitting to his
mistaken orders, whatever they be, because we have in doing so
accepted a principle. Your subordinating yourself to him will
be a means of correcting his error. I have experienced this thing
myself many times. I have corrected the errors of my associates
by subordinating myself to them and who knows how many errors
of mine my associates daily correct by subordinating themselves
to me? But what if they were to analyse my errors before me
every day and annoy me? If that were so, where would they and
I be today?
1 Yogasutra by Patanjali
Think deeply over this letter. Do not again come back impa-
tiently running to me. I wish and I pray that you may have
peace.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
