51. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
SABARMATI JAIL,
Silence Day [March 17, 1922]
CHI. MAHADEV,
Maybe this will be my last letter to you for a long time to
come. Rest assured that you are rendering service by being there.
My real service begins here. I shall exert myself to the utmost
to observe the jail rules with my whole being, to shake off likes and
dislikes, and if I really become purer every day in jail, that will
have its effect outside also. Today there is no limit to my peace
of mind, but when I am sentenced and visits from people stop, I
shall have still greater peace of mind.
It may be asked, if we can render greater service in this man-
ner, why not go and live in a jungle. The answer is simple. To
go and live in a jungle suggests moha for it implies desire on
our part. To a Kshatriya whatever comes unsought is dharma.
The peace of jail life which one gets without seeking may do one
good. How wonderful is God! I purified myself thoroughly in
Bardoli, did not allow any impurity to enter into me in Delhi,
but on the contrary, purified myself still further by putting be-
fore the people the same thing in a language which would appeal
to them, for I showed thereby my tenderness together with my
firmness. Even afterwards, through Young India and Navajivan,
I carried on self-purification. I wrote an article on ahimsa and
another entitled "Death Dance". Thus when the process of self-
purification had reached the highest point, I offered myself for
arrest, singing the song of Vaishnavajana . If this does not con-
stitute the good, what else can?
It is my desire that no one should now deliberately seek im-
prisonment.
Translate this letter to your teacher Khwaja Saheb5, to your
comrade Joseph and others.
1 The date is given in the addressee's hand.
2 Attachment to false values
3 Vide pp. 54-.
4 A devotional song attributed to Narasinh Mehta, a poet-saint of Gujarat.
Vide Vol. XIX, p. 72.
S Khwaja Abdul Majid who taught the addressee Urdu in the Naini Jail
6 George Joseph, a barrister of Madura, was on the staff of the Independent,
Could it be even dreamt of that Shankerlal should be arrested
with me? But God may do anything.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 7997
