44. LETTER TO J. C. GIBSON
JOHANNESBURG,
January 6, 1910
DEAR MR. GIBSON,
I enclose herewith a memorandum, showing what would finally
close the bitter and exhausting Asiatic struggle that is now going on in
the Colony.
It has been brought to my notice that the Indian community is be-
ing charged with two things: firstly, that British Indians have conti-
nually shifted their ground as to their demands; secondly, that the
movement here is entirely engineered and controlled from India.
As to the first, here are a few facts. About the month of Septem-
ber, 1907, that is to say, before imprisonments had commenced and the
compromise was effected, a public document was addressed to the
Colonial Secretary, signed by several thousand Indians, in which occurs
the following sentence: "We respectfully submit that nothing short of
total repeal of the Act can meet the difficult situation that has arisen."
So that repeal of the Act was the goal always aimed at. Total repeal at
the time or at any time before the passing of the second Registration
Act would have restored legal equality under the Immigration Act.
When the compromise was effected I contend that repeal against
voluntary registration was definitely promised. This promise was
alluded to by General Smuts in his Richmond speech two days after
the compromise. He stated that the Asiatics had asked for repeal, and
that he had told the leaders that, until every Asiatic was registered, he
would not repeal the Act.
When I was assaulted, a document for publication was drawn as
between Mr. Chamney and myself, to the effect that the Act would
be repealed if voluntary registration was completed to the satisfaction
of the authorities. At the meeting of the Executive Council, after the
burning of the certificates, a compromise became impossible because the
essential point of repeal, namely, legal equality as to immigration, was
not granted; and a final settlement was not arrived at in London only
because of this point remaining undecided. The following is Mr. Dun-
can's testimony—and Mr. Duncan ought to know what he is speak-
ing about—to the effect that we have never shifted the ground. Writing
in the month of February last in the State 3, Mr. Duncan said:
The position of the Indian leaders is that they will tolerate no law which
does not put them on an equality with Europeans in regard to restriction on
immigration. They are willing to see the number of Asiatics limited by
administrative action. They insist on equality in the terms of the law itself.
In this article, Mr. Duncan has examined the charge of shifting, and
has come to the conclusion that there has been none.
As to the charge of the movement being engineered and controlled
from India, I can only state that it is absolutely devoid of foundation.
Indeed, it is common knowledge among those who have at all under-
stood the agitation here that the complaint was that India was not
sufficiently awakened to the national importance of the struggle go-
ing on here. Hence it was that Mr. Polak was sent. Before the depu-
tation went to England, there never was any pecuniary assistance either
received or required from India. Today it is a world-wide fact that
the struggle is not only affecting Indian politics, but is being financially
supported from there. Every penny received is being publicly advertised.
We are receiving similar support now from England also.
In conclusion, I would state that, if my letter or the statement
hereto attached are not considered explicit, I shall be prepared to send
any other document, so long as it carries out the intention of the state-
ment, which is to secure repeal of the Act and legal equality as to
immigration. It has become necessary to mention one point as if there
were two points, because of the second Registration Act being in the
way, but the point is really only one.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
1 Not published and not available; vide Vol. VIII, p. 334.
2 Patrick Duncan, Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal before Smuts
3 Monthly organ of the Closer Union Societies
4 It left South Africa on June 23 and reached England on July 10, 1909.
[Enclosure]
STATEMENT
British Indians will be satisfied if Act 2 of 1907 is repealed, and the
Immigration Act is so amended as to enable any Asiatic immigrants
of culture to enter the Colony on precisely the same terms as Euro-
peans, and without the necessity for complying with any Registration
Act. This Amendment will allow the Immigration Officer the fullest
discretion as to the mode of setting the education test, and will give
the power to the Governor-in-Council to frame regulations limiting
the number of immigrants belonging to different classes or races, even
though they may have passed the education test. So far as Asiatics are
concerned, no amendment of the Immigration Act would be necessary,
were it not for the presence of the second Asiatic Act passed in 1908.
The amendment giving the Governor-in-Council the power to make the
regulations in the manner above referred to meets the objection that the
administration of the law would be so different from its wording. So
long as a limited number of (say, up to six) British Indians of culture
are admitted into the Colony per year under the education test, British
Indians will be satisfied. The granting of these two concessions will
finally close the struggle, and remove the question from the arena of Indian poli-
tics. The educated Indians who have entered the Transvaal will then
retire, and claim to enter, if at all, under the general test.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of Cd. 5363; also
Indian Opinion, 10-12-1910
