354. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Posh Sud 10 [January 10, 1911]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Received your letter. Remember this as an axiomatic truth that
even if a single satyagrahi remains, he will win. During this struggle
many successes have already been achieved. Being idol-worshippers,
we shall recognize our victory only when the Act has been repealed
and the colour bar removed. But for this, the battle is already won.
I read your views about weaving in your letter to Chi. Maganlal.
They are quite right. What is required for the present is that every
1 According to Hindu practice, only widows go without bangles.
2 Addressee's daughter
3 Addressee's mother
4 and 5 Addressee's sisters
6 Leung Quinn returned to South Africa from his visit to India in the first
week of January 1911.
intelligent person should learn the craft. I see no benefit in getting the
work done through hired labour. So that you are right in saying that
we should not adopt that course. This is all that needs to be done: The
person who weaves cloth after learning that craft must secure a rich buy-
er, who should make no profit from it, but should, on the contrary, be
prepared to sustain a loss. If this comes about, thousands, I believe, will
take to weaving.
Your views about Phoenix are, on the whole, correct. But you
should not think that the impression you have gathered from a distance
would remain the same when you view things at close quarters. This
much is certain: under the prevailing conditions, Phoenix is the best
place.
What Mr. Quinn told you about me is an exaggeration. It does
not mean that I have attained any particularly high stage of develop-
ment. It only means that Mr. Quinn, not having come in contact with
an ordinary person of good character, was enamoured of me on seeing
me. The adage, "Where there are no trees, the castor-oil plant passes
for one", fits the case.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5074
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
