266. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 16, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I do not think you have yet received advice from Phoenix that West
was suffering from a violent attack of pneumonia, so much so that he was
at one time given up, and that Miss West was suffering from enteric
fever. Both were looked after by Dr. Nanji. The news was very dis-
turbing. Manilal, however, told me that, if both of them were not well
by the time their letter reached me, I would receive a cable, and as
there was no cable, I take it that they are now both all right. How-
ever, these illnesses show that there is something irregular in the state of
things at Phoenix. I am writing a long letter asking West and Cordes
to go into the matter thoroughly. According to letter received from
Kallenbach, he was still in Durban. I notice that Chhaganlal and
Manilal nursed West lovingly, and that they alternately kept watch dur-
ing the night. Kallenbach speaks very enthusiastically about Manila's
nursing. All this shows that life at Phoenix has undoubtedly brought
the best out of the settlers. Chhaganlal, naturally under the circum-
stances, postponed his departure, and he tells me that he will not leave
now for some time, and asks me until further notice to correspond with
him at Phoenix, rather than write to him in India. I am sorry for you,
because you will now be without a reliable and steady secretary. Still,
Chhaganlal has undoubtedly done the right thing.
I have your cablegram; there was a very good cable in The Times
also. I send you a copy. Your meeting was evidently a very great
success, and that you surpassed yourself. I had expected nothing else.
The meeting came off just before the appointment given by Lord Crewe.
I am dictating this before seeing him. To-day is Thursday and we are
seeing him at 3.15. I shall, therefore, be able to give you a full descrip-
tion of the interview. I am glad that some subscription at least will be
raised. It will nerve the people for the struggle in the Transvaal, and I
am sure you have arranged for every steamer to be met and Indians
deported to be received. I hope too that you have found Manji's son,
and others who reached India before your landing. If they have not
1 Acknowledging this letter from Madras, Polak wrote: "I have heard all about
the Phoenix disasters. Cordes sent me a living picture."
2 This is not available.
3 The reference is to the public meeting at Bombay.
4 Manji Nathubhai Ghelani, a passive resister
all been traced, you should place yourself in correspondence with someone
in Kathiawar and Surat, and get them to give you the names as also
the condition of those who were deported.
Mr. Ali Imam of the All-India Moslem League is here. I have
not yet met him; the Natal friends have. They speak enthusiastically
of him. He will probably have returned whilst you are there. He is
a practising barrister in Patna. I trust you will get hold of him; even
go to Patna if necessary, also Aligarh.
Whilst there may be joint action, you should get the Anjumans to
move independently also, and lay stress upon the fact that Mahomedan
interests are very much involved in South Africa.
Your interpretation of the latest amendment suggested by me is
very accurate and I could not have explained it myself more clearly.
Your description of the prize distribution ceremony is amusing. It is
good that you survived the ordeal. The Gujarati papers, rather one of
them, makes you describe me as Kavi. Do please insist on Kaliandas
writing to me.
Millie has gone with Mater to Westcliff; she returns next Monday.
I do not think you need have the slightest worry about Waldo. I have
not considered the case to be serious enough to require medical advice.
I hate stuffing children with medicines. Dr. Mehta, however, will be
here shortly and if he has not the instruments, I shall procure them and
have Waldo examined by him. I think I have told you my opinion of
Dr. Mehta's ability, [ which] is very great. Anyhow, he will tell me exactly
what the matter is, and give a prescription also, if he thinks it advisable,
which may be used in case of need. I am thinking of sending Celia and
Amy to Westcliff for Sunday; they will return the same day. Millie and
I went over to see Mrs. Ritch last Sunday. Sallie gave me a walk from
the Hotel to Cricklewood—one hour and forty minutes taking it easy.
I came a little nearer to Sallie; more of that when we meet. Mrs. Ritch
is making only slow progress. You will see from copy of my letter to
Kallenbach sent last week what, in my opinion, should be done regarding
Ritch. I do not think that we want a Committee costing £500 per year.
If the weaker members want it, they can have it. I am revolving in my
mind a scheme whereby we may have some work done in London much
more cheaply, though it can never be so efficient as Ritch's. When I
have sufficiently elaborated it and discussed it with you, I feel sure that
you will like it very well.
Copies of correspondence with Lord Ampthill will tell you how
thoroughly he is still working.
Dictated later—Friday [September 17, 1909]
We have now seen Lord Crewe. The result of the interview is
embodied in a letter to Lord Ampthill, copy of which you will find
herewith. The agony, therefore, is now again prolonged.
I thought it would be better for me to reduce the purport of the
interview with Lord Crewe to writing, and am therefore sending you a
copy of it, or rather, I will, if I am in time for the mail.
I do not know whether they sent you also duplicates of cables that
are being sent to me. Anyhow, I give you copies of the cables received
during the week. The first cable you will find in copy of letter addressed
to Lord Crewe. The second cable is from the Chinese Association,
as follows:
Eighty Chinese arrested, including Chairman. Increasingly determined
passively resist utmost.
The second cablegram, dated 16th instant, reads :
Meeting held yesterday enthusiastic, determined continue, resolutions congratu-
lating released, reaffirming complete confidence delegates, efforts greatly appre-
ciated, afresh pledging their support, protesting Vernon's statement, which
until Government repudiates Asiatics interpret disclosure Government policy.
Request imprisoned Mohammedans special meal Ramzan refused.
I am basing a letter on both these cablegrams to Lord Crewe. I
do not know that I could give you a copy of that letter also, it may be
too late.
A paragraph from the letter received last week from Johannesburg
runs as follows. I am passing it on to Lord Crewe, but only cautiously.
If you make use of it, please be very careful; do not publish it, but the
chief workers may know what is passing in the Transvaal gaols. The
thing, in my opinion, is somewhat exaggerated, but that the Tamil in
question must have been brutally handled I believe implicitly, from what
I have seen myself. A native prisoner was almost done to death for
a similar reason. He bled so copiously that I saw the blood marks in
the whole of the passage. How the boy lived passes my comprehension.
One day when it was bitterly cold, the men were ordered to bathe. One of
them was disinclined to do so, and four native warders were then directed to
scrub him. They accordingly got hold of him, plunged him into the bath and
started rubbing him with a brush so vigorously that blood was drawn. A hospital
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 Vide" Letter to Private Secretary to Lord Crewe", pp. 398-.
3 Vide" Letter to Private Secretary to Lord Crewe", pp. 421-.
orderly chancing to pass at the time, ordered the natives to cease and the man
was taken to hospital and placed under medical treatment. This was received
by K. K. Samy, but as the information was not officially authorized, we
naturally cannot deal with it. I understand that the man lodged complaint
with the Governor of the gaol.
I have gone through your pamphlets fairly carefully. I want to
write to you about them, but I do not think I shall be able to do so this
week.
I am seriously thinking of advertising for the best essay on the
"Ethics of Passive Resistance", just as we did in Johannesburg, but I
have to consult Dr. Mehta on the point. If he gives the prize, we shall
have it. This will be done in the event of Lord Crewe's negotiations
failing.
Mr. Doke's book is still unpublished; it is likely to be in the first
week of October. For reasons I need not go into this week, I am think-
ing of buying out the whole of the edition, more for the sake of Mr. Doke
than anything else. He will be very much cut up if there is a fiasco,
and there might be. The publisher has not put his heart into it, and as
many copies will have to be distributed free of charge, I thought I
should pocket my own personal feelings and deal with the thing myself.
I fancy that Dr. Mehta will guarantee any deficit. I have already cor-
responded with him in the matter. You may, therefore, be on the look-
out for any bookseller who would care to take up the book. The best
thing will be, perhaps, for Kaliandas or Chhaganlal's cousin, or both of
them, to take the book personally to many people. In any case, there
should be no credit given to any booksellers on whom you cannot rely
implicitly.
I have cabled to you today. I feel that, if persistent pressure is put
from that side, it is possible to pull the negotiations through. There is
no longer any ignorance of the question on the part of Lord Crewe, and
if the Liberal Ministry does not go under within a short time, some-
thing may be done.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5104a
