517. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
May 11, 1932
CHI. DEVDAS,
Yesterday, the 10th, I got the letter you wrote on the 1st.
It was not delayed here. According to me, this delay is not too
long in the case of a prisoner. After all, what is the value of
his time? 1/ 1 3/ 2 rupees per hour, for I think daily expense on
account of a prisoner comes to Rs. 13. I think personally that
the weakness of my hands is a symptom of old age. Don't most
old people suffer from some weakness or other? We should remember
that this weakness was there even when I used to take milk. Had
it not been so, I would have perhaps got alarmed and resumed
taking milk. Has any of my experiments done me harm in the
long run? The only such case which I can remember is that of
the last experiment, that is, Gopalrao's experiment. I was hasty
in starting it and waited too long before giving it up. I persisted
in it even though people were falling ill one after another. From
the economic point of view the experiment was a good one and
Gopalrao had great faith in it. Excepting this one, my impres-
sion about all other experiments is that I had benefited from
them physically and spiritually. This time I am wide awake.
I don't attach too much importance to the experiment. After
I am released from jail, I think I shall have to take milk and,
therefore, here I wish to do without it only if I can do so
without harm. There is not the slightest cause for worrying
about my health, as I have maintained my weight.
I will certainly go through the Urdu books which you have
mentioned, when they come. This time I had intended to take
up Urdu at a somewhat later stage since I wished to do some
other reading before. But Raihana began writing a few Urdu sen-
tences in her letters to me and I thought that it would be good to
reply to her in Urdu. By and by I appointed her to be my Urdu
teacher, and asked her to send me the corrections in the Urdu
I wrote every week. Of course this cannot satisfy me. Hence I
took out from the jail library here Urdu readers and began to
study them. As my Urdu handwriting is very bad, I have now
1 The reference is to the unfired food experiment in 1929; vide Vol. XLI.
421
procured a copy-book and some tracing paper. I am now trying
to see how deep I can go into this study. On the one hand is
this Urdu, and on the other the Magan spinning-wheel. I am now
giving my whole self to the Magan wheel since I had already
decided to please Prabhudas and to test and utilize his abilities,
and since to add to this the doctors here insisted on my giving
complete rest to the left hand, which was possible only if I drew
the yarn with the right hand and rotated the wheel with my foot.
I find it difficult to move the wheel with the foot and to draw
the yarn with the right hand. But I am confident that I shall
succeed. Some time ago I felt that I had acquired the necessary
control, but lost it, today again I feel that I have partly regain-
ed it, though spinning in this manner takes quite a lot of time.
And third is Ruskin.
The study of economics, which was the
fourth, has been suspended for the present. The fifth thing is
Maithilisharan's Saket, which I wish to read carefully. Mahadev
and I have already read it once, and Vallabhbhai also has read
it. It seems to be a fine work. I am sure if you secure a copy
there and read it, you also will like it. For you it will be very
easy reading. I shall send the book to you from here if you
cannot get a copy from the Kalyan office. And the sixth is watch-
ing the stars. I have taken this up quite seriously. During the
day I read something on the subject and at night observe the parti-
cular stars carefully enough to be able to recognize them after-
wards. I wonder why I did not take serious interest in this subject
earlier. I always wished to do so, but the desire was not suffi-
ciently strong to make me take up the pursuit immediately. But
now I see that everybody ought to cultivate as much acquain-
tance with the denizens of the sky as he conveniently can. I
believe that millions of people can, without much difficulty, acquire
enough knowledge of them for their own satisfaction and raise
themselves spiritually. Anybody who tries to study the stars from
a spiritual point of view will easily experience true joy of the heart
and will be filled with greater devotion to God. I do not know
whether this is true of all, but I do know that such was the
effect on me and that is why I have kept up the practice.
Probably you get no opportunity to see the sky at night. When
do they lock you up?
We three sleep directly under the sky.
Opposite we see the Venus shining, to our right is the Great Bear,
and to the left the Swastika (the Southern Cross). Leo roars right
over our heads and Jupiter, too, is straight above us. I read in
Gujarati Hasan Nizami's Kavan Charit. It did not make on me the
impression it did on you. When I read it I was not prejudi-
ced against him, still I did not feel that his motive was pure.
His language seems to be good, but for anybody who wants to read
Urdu books for the sake of language there are many others equally
good. If one does not mind difficult words, Shibli's language has no
small power. I am sure you will like Upton Sinclair's Wet Parade.
There are many others of his books at the Ashram. I got only
two here, all the rest are there. As for Mahadev's view of your
capacity for losing books, you will know it from what follows.
You should not readily accept their "no" to your demand for a
spinning-wheel. Carry on a courteous fight for it. I will look
into the book on health when it arrives. Mahadev certainly did
not receive the letter written to him from Delhi. Lakshmi
writes to me regularly and so do I to her.
Mahadev mayor may not write to Durga a letter which
will be a letter according to you. But he asks me to add this
here: His charge against you about losing books referred to the
loss of as many as 80 books at the jail gate in 1930. It was
the goodness of the stranger that he delivered them to us, but
his goodness does not mitigate your carelessness. If Mahadev
had your company as he had twice formerly, he would have been
much happier. Sometimes when cooking he remembers you and
recalls the Lucknow days when you did joint cooking. When
carding he remembers you daily (since you helped him in carding
everyday). And he unfailingly remembers you whenever he gets
a good book to read (though he does not get much time to read,
despite his having a whole heap of books with him, for spinning
and carding take up four or five hours in the morning, then he
spends two hours with me, and writing the diary in detail also takes
up some time). He remembers you when recalling memories of
our stay in England, when singing bhajans at the time of prayer,
when taking soda-water in the evening, etc., etc. If you read
the Gitarahasya in Hindi why didn't you read it in the Marathi
original? If you can read the whole of Shibli's volume you can
make from it a beautiful book in Gujarati describing incidents in
the Prophet's life. Kaka, Narahari, Mani and Prabhudas, all four
of them underwent considerable suffering at Belgaum, but the
problems have been nearly solved now. I am in correspondence
with all, (though not as regularly as I am with you). But of
course how long will the thing last! Among newspapers, besides
The Times [if India] we get The Leader, The [Bombay] Chronicle, The
Hindu, and The Tribune. Mahadev does not get much time to read
them. You know his indifference in the matter, but he pastes a
good many cuttings. (It is Sardar who reads the papers to us
both.) The load of correspondence is getting heavier day by day.
In addition to the Ashram post, we get quite a good number of
letters from other places (that is, from England and America).
The entertaining letter which Romain Rolland wrote to an
American friend about our stay with him has been published in
India. You will find quite a good deal of useful material from
Mahadev's Diary and his album of cuttings-he keeps copies
of important correspondence too. Jamnalalji, Pyarelal, Vinoba,
and Manilal Kothari, all of them are happy in the Dhulia jail.
Mathuradas and Kishorelal are at Nasik, Ramdas, Chhagan-
lal, Surendra and others are here, Kanti and other youngsters are
at Visapur, and most of the Ashram women excepting Ba are
here-I am in fairly regular correspondence with all these.
Have you heard that Sardar's son, Dahyabhai, lost his wife?
For poor Yashoda, it was a real deliverance, since her life was
a living death to her.
The envelope containing this letter was made by Vallabh-
bhai. We thus try to save every pie. Blessings from us all should
always be understood.
BAPU
SJT. DEVDAS GANDHI
'A' CLASS PRISONER
DISTRICT JAIL
GORAKHPUR, U.P.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2016
