528. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
HARDWAR,
Silence Day, October 14, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have received here two days' post together.
You say you have enclosed Prithuraj's letter, but you forgot
to do so. I do not see it with your letter.
You should not be indifferent about your health. If you are
getting low fever, you are bound to feel exhausted. I feel like
sending you away to Mussoorie. After sending you there, however,
I cannot keep you long there and the visit would do no good.
I should like you to go to Wardha or Pudupalayam. If you think
you require a cold climate, go to Almora. I think it will be enough
if you merely go out of the Ashram. You should not think, either,
that you can leave only if Ramniklal reaches there. If Narandas
agrees, hand over the charge to him. I will persuade him if you
want me to do so. You should go away somewhere, somehow.
Never overtax your health.
I send the second letter from Chhaganlal, too, for your in-
formation. Slowly he will start writing directly to you. He has
always suffered from this kind of excessive diffidence. You should
tolerate it.
It is with my consent that the workers of the National
Women's Council use foreign silk thread for embroidery on khadi.
I have once written about this in Navajivan. There is no need
to write about it again. Some reader may exaggerate the im-
portance of the thing. We do use foreign thread for stitching
our clothes. Embroidery is one step further than the stitching of
dresses. At present we have reached the ground of khadi. In
beautifying that ground, we use foreign dyes and foreign thread.
Even so, I have opposed the proposal to stock such articles for sale
in khadi stores. I have not, however, opposed separate stalls for
such articles in exhibitions. No issue of principle is involved in
this; it is a question of practical wisdom, discretion and what is
feasible.
We must encourage, within certain limits, inter-provincial
marriages. I would regard it as essential that the husband and
the wife should learn each other's language. This was so in
Rukhi's marriage. In this case the husband does possess a fairly
good knowledge of Gujarati. I do not mind if the other mem-
bers of his family do not have such knowledge. When a man
and a woman marry at a mature age, the idea would be that
they should have a separate establishment of their own. The
members of the husband's family cannot stand in the way of
their doing so. The wife ought not to be made to suffer at their
hands. In this case, moreover, the two languages are nearly
alike. Hindi, again, being the national language, both know it.
In these circumstances, there is no possibility of any difficulty
arising for want of knowledge of a common language. I shall not,
however, elaborate this reasoning. It is of course necessary to
think before forming a connection with someone from another
province, but I see no need to ban such connections.
I had expected that I would get information about Kaki's
death in today's post, but there was none. I am sure I will
get some tomorrow. It is four days since Mahadev's telegram.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5458
