339. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
July 13, 1942
CHI. JAWAHARLAL,
I have read the resolution. I note that you have tried to
include some of my points. I do not desire any modification.
But I do desire that, as far as possible, all of us should
interpret the appeal in the same way. It will not be good if
we speak in different voices.
I stick to the hundred per cent support I gave you in what
you said about yourself. I have thought over the matter a great
deal and still feel that your capacity for service will increase if
you withdraw. And to that extent you will find satisfaction.
You may attend the Committee occasionally as I do or as
Narendra Dev does. This will ensure your help being available
and at the same time your fully retaining your freedom.
This is my plea about Maulana Saheb. I find that the two
of us have drifted apart. I do not understand him nor does he
understand me. We are drifting apart on the Hindu-Muslim
question as well as on other questions. I have also a suspicion
that Maulana Saheb does not entirely approve of the proposed
action. No one is at fault. We have to face the facts. There-
fore I suggest that the Maulana should relinquish Presidentship
but remain in the Committee, the Committee should elect an
interim President and all should proceed unitedly. This great
struggle cannot be conducted properly without unity and with-
out a President who comes forth with a hundred per cent co-
operation.
Please show this letter to Maulana Saheb. At the moment
it is intended for you two only. If you do not like either or
both of my suggestions, you may reject them. My motive in
writing this is only to help. Whether you approve of it or not,
it should not cause any unpleasantness.
The date and venue for the A. I. C. C. have not been indi-
cated in your draft.
As far as I am concerned, you are free to issue this appeal
to the Press.
It is not necessary to come here for a discussion of the
resolution. But it has to be as Maulana Saheb orders.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Gandhi-Nehru Papers.
Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
