52. LETTER TO ARDESHIR E. KATELI
DETENTION CAMP,
January 6, 1944
BHAI KHAN BAHADUR,
After the talk I had with my son Devdas today, I have
ascertained Kasturba's wishes which are as follows:
1. In case Kanu Gandhi cannot stay here during patient's
illness, he should be allowed to visit her for about an hour
daily so that he can sing her some bhajans and also do some
little nursing. As you are aware, the patient is insistent upon
having Kanu as a whole-time nurse.
2. The son and daughters of Jayabehn, whose names I
have already given, and Dhirendra Gandhi should be permit-
ted to come and sing and play to her, whenever they can come.
3. Including my father they were six brothers. Their des-
cendants and sons-in-law would, according to the common prac-
tice, be regarded as near relations. Such of them whose names
may be sent up by Devdas, Shamaldas or Jamnadas Gandhi,
should be permitted to come and see her. The idea underly-
ing this is that if some of the relations can see the patient
once a week, it would give her some mental peace. In case
they are given the permission, it is necessary that those who
can come should be able to see her all together. The patient
does not mind their number. On the contrary, the greater the
number, the more pleased she would be.
4. I must confess that the patient has got into very low
spirits. She despairs of life, and is looking forward to death to
deliver her. If she rallies on one day, more often than not,
she is worse on the next. Her state is pitiful. The aim behind
seeking permission for visits from relations is that they may give
her some peace.
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 Also called 'Kanaiyo'; younger son of Narandas Gandhi
5. I regard the experiment of having an ayah as having
failed. Shrimati Prabhavati Jayaprakash Narayan has done a lot
of nursing for the patient before. She is like a daughter to us.
Her father himself sent her to stay in the Ashram when she
was quite young. If she is sent here, she will be of great help.
I am,
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From the photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3925
