223. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
June 20, 1920
You have been pouring out your heart to me on the Khilafat
and other matters whereas I have been unable to reciprocate be-
cause of the great strain I have been undergoing just now. All
the same you know that you are ever in my mind. I know what
spiritual struggles mean for you. I hope you are keeping better
health. You wrote to me that you were very bad after your return
from Calcutta.
I wish you will not concern yourself about my position on the
Turkish question, i.e., you will depend upon it that I shall do
nothing blindly. I am committed to nothing on the Turkish ques-
tion so that upon proof of the immorality of a position being found
I could not retrace my steps. The unfortunate position in which
I find myself is that I thoroughly distrust Lloyd George. Somehow
or other I distrust the Armenian case as I distrust the Arabian case
and I am so prejudiced against the present British diplomacy that
I scent the foul hand of the deceitful diplomat in Armenia, Arabia,
Mesopotamia, Palestine and Syria. The position therefore I take
up is that as soon as I can remove my prejudice I shall retire from
the untenable position I may find myself in. I do ask for suzer-
ainty over Armenia, Mesopotamia, Palestine, Syria with proper
safeguards. You say the safeguards are nothing. I do not agree
with you. If the Allied Powers are themselves insincere and jeal-
ous of one another they may mean nothing. But if they are
sincere, the safeguards can certainly be effective. Britain claims
suzerainty over the Transvaal, but the Transvaal had no interfer-
ence with its internal affairs. Why should Armenia have to com-
plain if it has full autonomy with a Turkish Resident there? If
Britain only meant well by Turkey everything could be satisfactorily
arranged. If Turkey had joined the Allies, could Britain have dis-
possessed Turkey of Armenia, Arabia or Mesopotamia? Would
Britain then not have brought about reforms in Turkey by friendly
pressure instead of a victor's dictation? The insolence and hypo-
crisy of the Ministry bolstered up by equal insolence and hypocrisy
in the Viceroy's communique are really insufferable.
You consider Mahomed Ali's representation to be as unclean
as the Treaty. I do not agree with you so far as the condemnation
of the Treaty is concerned-I do think that practically the whole
of India is with Mahomed Ali. If you say that the condemnation
is not intelligent, is not based on knowledge, but is due to utter
distrust of Britain, I should agree with you, but the condemnation
is there.
I do not read newspapers as a rule, but look at the
enclosed in The Leader. Mahomed Ali certainly believes that the
whole of India is at his back in the condemnation. Nor is his
claim for suzerainty unclean, because he implicitly believes in the
correctness of his demand. He has broken no pledge, for his
claim was much higher than it is made today, whereas the Peace
Treaty is an abomination, a sin against God and man. Remem-
ber, too, that the Allied Powers, which simply mean England writ
large, speak from a consciousness of their brute strength. Poor
Mahomed Ali represents, as he considers, a weak nation and sup-
ports the cause of a Power that has been already sufficiently humbled
and humiliated. I am prepared to excuse some exaggeration in him.
I am totally unprepared to tolerate the shameless exhibition of brute
force. If only I could infect India with my belief in the weapons
of unadulterated suffering, i.e., self-suffering, I would bring down
this insolence from its pedestal in a moment and reduce to nothing-
ness the whole of the powder magazine of Europe.
Shaken as I was by this Peace Treaty, the Hunter Report has
taken away all my faith even in the good intentions of the Ministry
and the Viceregal Council.
Nor has Mr. Montagu come well
out of the ordeal. He has tried to serve both God and Mammon
and has failed hopelessly. If the British Constitution survives this
shock it will be due to some inherent vitality in it. Those who are
at the helm at the present moment have certainly left no stone
unturned to smash that constitution to pieces. Mahadeo just now
reminds me that you have cancelled by your wire the letter I am
replying to. That however does not alter the situation. I would like
you to realize with me the enormity of the double crime of the present
British administration or make me see my folly and correct myself!
I need not worry you about my views on caste. There, too,
my moral position need not cause you anxiety. You have mis-
taken my standpoint. Not to dine with a fellow-being out of re-
pugnance is a sin. Not to dine with him by way of self-restraint
is a virtue.
Do you know that Indian mothers impose the
restraint upon themselves of not sharing even the family meals? I
believe Narottam's mother does not dine at the common kitchen.
I consider that her self-restraint is unnecessary. It is possible that
it has some merit in it. It is certainly not sinful. I hold it to be
a virtue to restrict the area of my choice of a wife even as it is a
virtue to restrict myself to one wife rather than many. Surely you
must grant the necessity and the virtue of limiting one's indulgences.
The sin comes in when I limit the area of service, the area of
sacrifice. I have often thought that you have not yet realized the
full grandeur of the perfect theory of Hinduism, however debased
it may be today in practice.
My health is fair, but I am longing for perfect peace, rest
and solitude. I have just heard that the Turkish Peace Terms are
to be completely revised. There may be then some hope of my
stealing away for a few days.
Sir G. Barnes has invited me also to go to British Guiana.
I have told him I could not go whilst the Khilafat agitation is go-
ing on. Are you going?
I read your letter to the Imperial Citizenship Association on
East Africa. Evidently you wrote it under great stress. They
criticized it adversely. I remained silent but I could not help
sympathizing with the criticism. Your letter was scrappy and gave
hardly any information. They complained bitterly, too, that you
have not yet sent in any report on S. Africa. I do think as you
went as their accredited agent you owed them a full report.
Indeed your very first writing if only as a matter of courtesy was
due to them. I wish you would still mend the error in so far
as it is mendable.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary
