195. LETTER TO SIR RICHARD TOTTENHAM
DETENTION CAMP,
December 22, 1943
SIR,
This letter is to approach the Government about Shri Mirabehn
who, forsaking the easy life of her English home came to me 19 years
ago in search of things of the spirit for which her heart had been
yearning. I feel, therefore, a special responsibility for her welfare.
Now, she has been suffering for the last seven months from pains
in the region of the left shoulder blade, which often extend from the
neck to the tips of her fingers. She wrote to the Inspector-General
of Prisons describing her condition, and I understand her letter is before
the Government.
Lt. Col. Shah consulted the Civil Surgeon of Poona and the
treatment he advised was carried out but without substantial benefit.
The Civil Surgeon then very kindly consulted Captain Simcox, R. A.
M. C. of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, who had made a special
study of this condition. He immediately diagnosed her case as adhesions
for which he said four or five manipulations together with daily exercises
would be necessary. He gave her the first manipulation then and there.
Unfortunately he had to leave the same day for Karachi and is not
likely to return to Poona. Shri Mirabehn has done her best with the
exercises and the arm has considerably improved, but pains persist, and
whenever she is a little run down, has a slight temperature or a sore
throat, the pains return in full force and disable her for any work for
some days. She has become anxious lest the trouble may become
chronic, and permanently incapacitate her for an active life.
I would suggest that she be either transferred to wherever Captain
Simcox may be at present for completion of the manipulations started
by him, or that she be released on parole for getting available treatment.
I am sure the Government would not wish her to be permanently
damaged.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : India Office Library and Records. Courtesy : The British
Library, London
105
