399. LETTER TO SRIPRAKASA
February 14, 1933
MY DEAR SHRIPRAKASH,
Though doleful, the receipt of your letter was a matter of
joy for me. I have no doubt whatsoever that in the quiet of the
village surroundings you will soon recover your lost health and
repair your broken spirits. You are not an old man but being a
man of emotion and possessing a sensitive nature, you imagine all
sorts of evil. You have many years of active life and service in
front of you. Many people have gone through much more distress
of the body than you have and yet I see them today in possession
of sound health and bright spirits. Mens sana in corpore sano you
learnt in your youth and as soon as the body becomes healthy,
1 For the addressee's reply, vide Appendix XII.
the mind is bound to react.
Meanwhile therefore your first and
the last care is to regain your health and not to worry about the
future of the family, the country or the world. You cannot be
the architect of any of these but you can contribute your own
share to the advancement of all the three. In a true scheme of
life the real advancement of one conduces to the advancement
of all.
You may not write anything of your experiences of the events
happening around you. That must be a sealed book to me except
what I can gather through the papers that I am permitted to re-
ceive; nor, constituted as I am by nature, have I the slightest
desire to know them. A prisoner is civilly dead to the outside world,
and that is right. If he hankers after peeping into the forbidden
land he is like the departed ghost which according to our belief
misbehaves itself if it hankers after establishing communication
with the world he was made by the Angel of Death to leave. A
prisoner who misbehaves like the ghost fails to establish real commu-
nication with the world he has left and in the vain pursuit loses
the pleasure, such as it may be, which falls to the lot even of
the prisoner. Realizing this beautiful truth I have never mis-
behaved like the ghost.
I shall remember what you say about the spelling of your
name. It was Father who gave me the idea that you were a
stickler for the right spelling of your name. You have now repaid
him in his own coin and retort that he is a stickler, not you. I
have thrown the apple of discord between father and son. You
will now fight it out amongst yourselves. I do not mind because
I am out of harm's way, and since I have your permission I shall
continue to spell your name after my own fashion.
But if I am not concerned about your health I am much con-
cerned about Shivaprasad's. I now understand why he is silent
after having promised that he would send me weekly report about
his health. I am deeply distressed. I will write to him, but in
any case you will continue to give me such news as you may re-
ceive, and though you may not give me the news of the outside
world you must continue to write to me about your own progress.
Remember me to the children and give them the love of us
all and accept the same for yourself.
BAPU
Sriprakasa Papers, File No. G-. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
