17. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
7, BUITENCINGLE [STREET,
CAPE TOWN,]
April 8, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
I have your letter. I hope you are comfortably fixed up at
Mountain View. I hope, both you and Harold will do a bit of
gardening—Harold specially.
I will try to pass a day at Kimberley on my return. I shall
speak to Nooroodeen about the Konkanis.
Here is Botha's amendment4:
Nothing in this (28th) section or in any other section of this Act con-
tained shall repeal any of the provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the
Law Book of the Orange Free State Province.
Fancy this, after all his assurance to me! However, I am glad.
This amendment kills the Bill and General Smuts will be bound,
if he wishes to settle the question, to amend the Transvaal Act.
I have not been able to see any members today. Rev.
Allmett of Lahore has taken up my morning. He is Bishop
Lefroy's man and did something when Polak was in India.
As you will see from the enclosed5, I have made use of the BIA
wire as also the Natal Congress wire.
Sorabji again returns to the London visit. If I go at all, I feel
sure, I ought to be accompanied by a Mahomedan. It has a
threefold purpose. It will be a source of satisfaction to the
community here, it will give added weight to the representatives
in London and it will have a far-reaching effect in India. And
fourthly, if you like, it would be good training for Mr. Cachalia
who is certainly one of the rarest among the Mahomedans. But
if the Bill is not brought up next week, I do not see how I can
go at all. I should be in London at least a week before the
date of the conference. Unless I am to rush, not to go to Phoenix
at all and possibly not even come to Jo'burg, I think the visit
is impossible. Please consider all these practical difficulties.
Have you yet had any legal work? Have you taken your
oath as solicitor? Have you notified the Law Society?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5437
