139. LETTER TO SARLADEVI CHOWDHRANI
May 1, 1920
It is now nearly 5 p.m. I have hardly left my bed. I had a
most torturing headache last night and I remained in a comatose
condition up to 11 p.m. I slept fairly well after. I am free from
the headache but I cannot walk even a furlong. I ask you
however not to worry about me. I thought you should know my
condition, if only to keep you to the fortnight's limit if Jagdish's
marriage is then over or if it is postponed. If you would per-
suade Panditji, too, to come so much the better. He must see and
live the Ashram life.
Tilak Maharaj paid us a visit in the morning. He came in
with his son and son-in-law. The conversation was purely formal.
Dipak is getting on. He seems to like the place. His tastes are
clean. He is easily led. I shall put in with this what I succeed
in getting from him.
Revashankerbhai came in this morning. He brought some
luscious mangoes. I fretted to find that you were not here to share
them. This morning I got [up] at our usual time but turned in
again. I did not watch the sunrise. Had you been here I know
you would have dragged me to watch His Majesty coming in.
Padshah has been writing in the East and West. Perhaps the
cutting came in whilst we were yet together. I have dictated an
article based on it. It is rather good. You shall certify.
And now for a boon. I know you have granted many. The
appetite has grown with the receiving. You said you were shy over
working at the Ashram. Will you not get rid of your shyness by
commencing household work there? This I do not mind having
for my sake. It is not a matter of changing our viewpoint. It is
merely a matter of getting rid of one's disinclination. Great and
good though you are, you are not a complete woman without achiev-
ing the ability to do household work. You have preached it to
others. Your preaching will be more effective when people
know that even at your time of life and in your station you do
not mind doing it.
With love,
Yours,
LAW-GIVER
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
