217. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
August 13, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I hope you received my cablegram about the negotiations and the
new amendment. The enclosed copy will give you all the information
about the events of the week.
All I need add now is regarding your cablegram suggesting that
Mr. Dowd should go to India. I feel sure that such is not your own opi-
nion, but that you have merely transmitted the opinion of the Surat
friends. You will remember the public declaration that Mr. Dowd
made, that until the question was finished he would not leave the
Transvaal, even at the risk of his life. It is therefore highly necessary for
him, if for nothing else, for the sake of his honour, that he should return
to the Transvaal and challenge the Government to re-imprison him, but
other considerations, too, show that his presence is far more desirable in
the Transvaal than in India.
We want as many meetings there as
possible. All these meetings are of use only if the fire of passive resis-
tance is kept alive. You know as well as I do how effectively Mr. Dowd
Mahomed can contribute to the process. Then, again, we can't wait for
his arrival in Bombay before meetings are held. They should be con-
vened now whilst the deputation is in London; they may be even after
the deputation has returned to South Africa with empty hands, but we
need not hurry Mr. Dowd to India in anticipation of so prolonged a
struggle. Lastly, the negotiations are maturing hourly and there is
every reason to hope that they will be successful. If so, Mr. Dowd
Mahomed is not required in India for meetings in connection with the
1 Vide "Cable to H. S. L. Polak", p. 351.
2 This is not available.
Transvaal. If he is required in connection with the general grievances,
he can be sent after the Transvaal matter is closed. For that there is
ample time. I shall therefore be cabling tomorrow saying that Dowd
Mahomed's place is in the Transvaal at the present time.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5007
