59. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 11, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
It is 3.15 a.m., 11th, Saturday now. The day of my writing to
you has become upset owing to the uncertainty of the arrival of
your weekly letter. This week I had two from you. Last week's
was received only on Tuesday and this week's on Wednesday. But
yesterday morning I thought I had still to hear from you and I
devoted the morning to writing other important letters. And then
when it dawned upon me that there was nothing more to come
from you, I would not write to you during what you may call
office hours. I love to write this letter and such others in the
early morning.
I see that you are once more enjoying the company of birds
and animals. Frogs have somehow or other appeared to me helpless
creatures. They can't run, they can't fly and thus become an easy
prey to the wily cat. And they seem to look at you so appealingly
in their helplessness. The monkey on the other hand never excites
my pity. He is a most resourceful and mischievous fellow and takes
delight in overreaching you. He has no such thing as thankful-
ness in him. And yet I suppose all this is imagination or ignorance!
If we thrive on knowledge, we seem somehow to do so on igno-
rance and imagination too. 'It is folly to be wise when igno-
rance is bliss.' And the shortest and the oldest Upanishad says,
"He overcomes death through ignorance and mounts to immorta-
lity through knowledge." The original words are 3l~£IT and ~£IT,
meaning also respectively activity and inactivity, body and spi-
rit, attachment and detachment. They can be made to mean seve-
ral other things without doing violence to the text. It is a very
simple and lofty Upanishad and is also abstruse. It is an epitome
of all knowledge like the Gita. The latter is perhaps a commen-
tary on the former. An old commentator or rather the devotee
of the Gita compares the Upanishads to cows, the Gita to milk and
Krishna to the cowboy who milks them. But no more of this now.
I hope your progress continues and will not be interrupted by
the hot weather which is on us now. Make use of the earth ban-
dage on the forehead or a mere wet rag. It has a wonderfully
cooling effect. What cools the head cools the whole body. I came
across a potent sentence yesterday in an American book on the
eyesight, a book received from Gregg. It says that a lie heats the
body and injures the eyesight. It is true if you would give an
extended meaning to 'lie'. Any departure conscious or unconscious
from the laws of nature is a lie. A conscious departure from the
known laws is a lie that hurts our moral fibre, not so, or not to
the same extent an unconscious departure. But the body is in-
jured in every case. Writers on pranayama claim that the ability
to regulate and control breath, enables one to defy changes of cli-
mate. The Gita seems to lend support to the belief. This is a field
that needs reinvestigation in the light of modern knowledge.
Kuvalayananda of Lonavala is doing it.
Form your lips as you
would when whistling and slowly breathe the outside air and
you will have an immediate sensation of cooling. When lying flat
on the back, remember that the muscles of the back do not ex-
pand. Hence your breathing must be extra gentle. It is intended
to create a soothing effect on the system and relax it and rest it.
There is nothing apart from sleep to relieve tension of the mind
and body. Therefore the deep breathing should be taken whilst
sitting cross-legged with the body erect like a straight board. All
these exercises have to be gentle, deliberate and rhythmic, always
on an empty stomach.
Here the writing was interrupted for prayer and is now re-
sumed after a break of 25 minutes at 4.35.
I have always found Arnold's to be on the whole a more
helpful translation than any other. "Abstemious" is a wrong
word. "Spare diet" is a good expression. 3'f~q means less than
enough. What is enough is a matter of conjecture, therefore our
own mental picture. The man of truth knowing that man is always
indulgent to the body, said, in order to counteract the indulgence,
that he should take less food than what he would think was
enough; then there was likelihood of his taking what in fact was
enough. So what we often think is spare or meagre is likely even
to be more than enough. More people are weak through over-
feeding or wrong feeding than through underfeeding. It is wonder-
ful, if we chose the right diet, what an extraordinarily small quan-
tity would suffice.
I am glad Ba is prospering with you and learns Hindi and
makes you sing bhajans. Does Mridula sing? She ought to if she
does not. She must shed her shyness if she has any still left. How
otherwise does she pass the day? She should now be Ba's secre-
tary or letter-writer.
My weight now registers at 104. The food still remains fruit
and milk (raw). I am taking just now less than one lb. of milk. It
is the fruit that keeps up my weight. The elbows remain as they
are. No cause for anxiety. I have reduced the spinning to a
minimum—no fixed quantity. The count just now is anything
round 55 and 60. This from devakapas carded on Keshu's little
invention.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6266. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9732
