49. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
August 29, 1919
SIR,
I know that it can only be by patient efforts that one can
hope to remove the ignorance that must necessarily attach to all
questions arising a few thousand miles from us. "Eureka'" s letter
published in your issue of the 28th instant is a case in point. He has
raised many issues. I propose to confine myself only to the South
African. The question before the public today is not one of
emigration but that of the livelihood and status of those who have
legally settled in South Africa, and neither Lord Sinha nor H.H.
the Maharaja of Bikaner could give away inherent rights of citi-
zens of the Empire, nor did they do any such thing. Indians have
settled in South Africa for over 50 years; they are not known to
have lowered the standard of living. Will "Eureka" please re-
member that the first Indian settlers were imported by the Euro-
peans of South Africa? I refer to the introduction of indentured
Indians. I said in 1894, as I repeat now, that it was a criminal
blunder on the part of the greedy Europeans of Natal to have im-
ported indentured labour from India at miserably low wages when
they had 400,000 stalwart Zulus in their midst who would gladly
have worked if the employers had not wanted to make enormous
profits. Can South Africa, with any right on its side, starve the des-
cendants of the original settlers and the brethren out of existence?
It is purposeless for me to go into the question how and by
whom South Africa was won; but let me correct "Eureka" by infor-
ming him that it was aid sent from India under the late Sir George
White which saved Ladysmith and which probably turned the
fortunes of war. Let me further inform "Eureka" that the 10,000
troops that Sir George White took with him included many Indian
followers who were just as indispensable for the military operations
as any soldier. Nor is this all. When the fate of Ladysmith trembl-
ed in the balance, when the late Lieut. Roberts, fighting against
heavy odds, lost his guns at the battle of Colenso, I had the honour
to be in charge of the ambulance corps of nearly 1,200 Indians,
free and indentured, literate and illiterate, drawn from all classes.
Some of the men who are now in peril of losing the means of their
livelihood had the privilege of bearing the stretcher that carried
the dying Lieutenant. The corps served too at the reverse of Spion-
kop. We were engaged to work without the range of fire, not be-
cause we had objected but because the authorities would not risk
our lives, as we were not trained for military operations. But
Col. Gallway sent the message that, whilst we were not obliged to
work under fire, General Buller would be glad if we could remove
the wounded that were lying at the Field Hospital at the base of
the hill. There was danger of the Boers descending from the hill.
Without the slightest hesitation and indeed with gladness for the
opportunity, everyone of the men with me responded to the call
and removed the wounded to the base hospital at Frere Camp,
a distance of 24 miles. The wounded included the late General
Woodgate and the brave officers under him. The English news-
papers and the politicians were so enthusiastic about this purely
voluntary work of the Indians that even laudatory verses were
composed, whose refrain was "We are sons of the Empire after all".
Are these Indians of whom these verses were written now to sing
"We are helots of the Empire after all", for that is what Indian
settlers in South Africa would be totally reduced to if the English
and the Indian public of India do not make a great effort to ward
off the impending calamity. In my opinion, the case for the Euro-
pean traders of South Africa is so hopelessly bad that it has only
to be persistently, truthfully and calmly exposed to the whole of
the Empire and it must fall to pieces.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 3-9-1919
