415. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
MAHISHADAL,
December 29, 1945
CHI. KANTI,
It is 6 a. m. just now. It is pitch dark all around. The prayer
was over at 5. After the prayer, instead of returning to bed I
read or heard letters and started writing. I thus reach your
letter at 6 a.m.
Chi. Shanti will get well. Every householder passes through
such experiences, bitter, sweet, sweet and bitter.
I would like your doing whatever work relating to spinning
comes to you unsought at home. If you have skill, proficiency,
firmness of mind, purity of character, devotion to God and humi-
lity, then the work you do at home will be like the Ganga flowing
by your door-step. I will regard such work done during student
life as more than enough.
If by fulfilling your family obligations and doing service to
others while studying you have to take two years instead of one
to complete your studies you need not feel unhappy at all.
It would certainly be a matter of shame if studies were neglected
from lethargy or love of pleasures. Those who believe that it is
impossible to do public service during student life are mistaken.
The student's stage of life is also meant for increasing one's
capacity for service. If, therefore, the immediate opportunity for
service is neglected, the student's life becomes as it generally is
today, a selfish one instead of one dedicated to service. More-
over, present-day education by and large is antagonistic to the
spirit of service or patriotism. Add to this the burden of learning
through English. And the subjects of study also include some
which are unnecessary and exclude some which are essential, such
as spinning. According to me, spinning, which means both its
science and craft, should be introduced as the principal subject
right from the earliest stage. But that is not done anywhere. Our
boys, therefore, who study in Government institutions must deter-
minedly make good this deficiency, as you have been doing. If
that is not done, one would be guilty of the vanity of claiming
perfection. You should not, therefore, in any circumstances
298
abandon spinning and its science. Show and explain the whole
of this letter to Saraswati. It will help her to understand and
realize how much service, and nothing but service, is contained
in spinning. If she is still not able to understand, let me know.
I will try again to explain the point to her. Besides, you will
also have received my previous letter written from Sodepur.
I followed what you wrote about the politics there. You
should remain detached and go on doing what you can.
I could perhaps have revised the English of your report and
sent it to you, but the news you had given in it was so good
that I felt I must convey it to Jajuji and so sent on the report
to him. I do not very much care if your English is not of the
highest class. I am more interested in your being in the highest
class as a human being and acquiring wide knowledge of Indian
languages. I would, however, like it if at the same time you
could also write grammatically correct and chaste English. That
is why I dropped the hint in my letter.
Here I have been enjoying the highest peace. Tomorrow
I will go to Contai. The programme there, too, is for four days.
I expect to return to Sodepur on January 3. From there I will
leave for Assam on the 8th and return to Sodepur again on the
16th. We are a large party but we experience no difficulty on
that account.
Address your reply to Sodepur. I shall probably reach
Madras on the 23rd.
Blessings to the three of you from
BAPU
[PS.]
Harilal is in Bangalore with Nanjapa.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7381. Courtesy: Kantilal
Gandhi
