414. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
POONA,
October 31, 1945
CHI. MRIDULA,
I have your letter. You have laboured very hard. What for ? With
me you could have been brief because I do not any more have to
try and understand you. Or do I have to understand you further ? I
hope I can understand from your slightest hint.
There is one thing you must do. What can there be personal with
people like us ? Are you any more an individual ? If you continue
to be an individual, it is not for writing personal things, but to preserve
your individuality, which is done only when you reduce yourself to a
zero and remain a zero. If you do not know this, then follow my
experience if you can. Where there is 'I', there is no individuality. It
is only when 'I' is eliminated, that individuality can exist. Take the letter
'I' of the English alphabet. So long as it is straight, it appears like
a scare-crow. If it wants to efface itself and realize its individuality
it must turn itself into a cypher. This is philosophy. But you will see
what I mean.
I can understand your views about Bapa. Our experiences with
him have been different. Only time will show whose experience is right.
I am under no misconception that my experience being longer is right
and your experience being shorter is wrong. I know that even a long
experience can be wrong. We shall weigh our experiences on the scales
of time.
Kanu agrees that what I have written to the Kasturba Nidhi about
Bapa is correct, because Thakkar Bapa was instrumental in this. Had
he not involved himself, the matter would not have gone any further.
And Narandas is always clinging to him. He would like to continue
to work through him as before and be satisfied. His idea assumed the
gigantic size it did only after Thakkar Bapa joined in. Afterwards others
too played a major role. That in my opinion is a remarkable thing about
Bapa. He starts something and lets someone else take the credit. He
has shortcomings, no doubt. Who does not have them ? But in my
view, his faults have become insignificant in the face of his good
qualities. I wish you too would recognize this some day.
I am writing to Bapa to pay Lila Jog for three months. Now I
shall be able to find some time to send my letter to the newspapers.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 11248. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation
230
