87. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
October 31, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,
I have told Brijkrishna to write to you every day. He
alone knows how much love and interest he pours in what he
writes.
I cannot give you quite definitely the date of our departure.
We are trying to leave on the 9th from Kambalpur or Rawal-
pindi or Taxila. You should reach Delhi latest by the 10th. It
will be better if you can reach on the 9th.
I will not let you stay in Wardha just now. I like the
idea of a sea voyage, with Durga and Babla accompanying you,
unless Durga likes and wants to stay at Bulsar. I should like
you to make a trip as far as Singapore. You may even spend
a few days in Singapore. You should resume work on January
20 at the earliest.
If you wish to write anything in the mean
while, you may do so. I have no fear at all of your time being
wasted anywhere. And you will return to work a fitter
man.
I am allowing your notes to go as they are. Ask back
the article about Massingham. It is very fine indeed. It is
poetry, but it is not for Harijan. Moreover, though there is poetry
in it, it contains nothing of value to learn from our point of view.
Is there anything common between their villages and our villages?
Even at the time when those villages were formed, the people
there were armed pirates and freebooters. The villages were
signs of this fact. Our villages are so many dung-hills. The king
took interest in them only for the purpose of robbing them.
The Vaishyas only gathered money. The Shudras and Atishudras
slaved. Your article, therefore, can provide us no inspiration.
Would it not be sheer ignorance for any superficial observer to
see poetry in our villages? And if you take out extracts from
the Vedas and place them beside extracts from modern English, we
would have to hang our heads in shame. Elaborate this criti-
cism of mine further and understand my point. If there is any
error in my view, let me know. I read the article today at
three in the morning. But you may send it to Modern Review
or the Hindustan Times if you wish.
We have to march out immediately. I am writing this
while eating. I am eating fruit with a fork.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11674
