429. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
SIMLA,
August 27, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
I have to acknowledge with thanks your letter of even date
enclosing the new draft. Sir Cowasji has kindly also communi-
cated to me the amendments suggested by you. My colleagues and I
have very carefully considered the amended draft which we are
prepared to accept subject to the following remarks: In paragraph
4 it is not possible for me on behalf of the Congress to subscribe
to the position taken up by the Government. For we feel that,
where in the opinion of the Congress a grievance arising out of
the working of the Settlement is not redressed, an enquiry is a
necessity of the case, because of the fact that civil disobedience
remains under suspension during the pendency of the Delhi Pact.
But if the Government of India and local Governments are
not prepared to grant an enquiry, my colleagues and I have no
objection to the clause remaining. The result will be that, whilst
the Congress will not press for an enquiry in regard to 'the other
matter hitherto raised' on its behalf, if unfortunately any grie-
vance is so acutely felt that it becomes a paramount duty of the
Congress to seek some method of relief, in the absence of an en-
quiry, in the shape of defensive direct action, the Congress should
be held free to adopt such remedy notwithstanding the suspension
of civil disobedience.
1 The Viceroy's reply to this read: "Delighted to receive your letter last
night and to learn your decision. Am sure you are right. Send you my blessings
and all good wishes. You can entirely rely upon my assurance to you" (S.N.
17601).
I need hardly assure the Government, that it would be the
constant endeavour of the Congress to avoid direct action and to
gain relief by discussion, persuasion and the like. The statement
of Congress position given here has become necessary in order to
avoid any possible misunderstanding in the future or a charge of
breach of faith on the part of the Congress.
In the event of a successful issue to the present discussions, I
assume that the communique1, this letter and your reply would be
simultaneously published.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 3-9-1931
