165. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 7, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I wrote one letter to you yesterday. Afterwards Ramji and
Dr. Sharma came and saw me. Amtussalaam and Duncan are in
Bombay.
Ramji insists that, if he is not permitted to fast, he may be
permitted to tour villages and also wants that Rajbhoj should
accompany him.
I have asked him to obtain your permission. If you approve,
let them both go. But nobody should go in the name of the
Ashram. On behalf of the Ashram only what is arranged by
you should be done. However, I will respect your experience more
than my reason. You may, therefore, do what you think best.
Read the accompanying letters and pass them on to the persons
concerned. You will have to send a wire, of course.
147
I knew that N. had fallen in Bangalore.
She had written
about that, but I grasped the full meaning of her remarks only
the day previous to the day on which I sent her there. If she
is really pregnant, I will welcome that. That will test her and
us too. If her heart has become pure, it is our duty to shelter
her. Read my letter to her. Open all letters addressed to her
and read them before giving them to her. The letters written by
her may be passed and posted only if they are absolutely nece-
ssary. Reduce your other work and do some work regularly in a
Harijan locality.
The meeting with Dr. Sharma was not a happy one. I did
not like the way in which he talked. I found that there was
much truth in what Parashuram had said. I see that he had
come with a strong prejudice against the Ashram. I could not
have a sufficiently long talk with him. I will have a little more
discussion with him again tomorrow. He will not return there
now. Bhagwanji has praised his work in his letters to me. The
letters which Dr. Sharma wrote from there also seemed good.
Have you not been able to judge him? Did he come here with
your permission? It seems useless now to ask these questions. I
will not worry about the Ashram during the fast. You will have
to do that. Do what you think best. If you want help, you can
call Kaka or Vinoba. You may introduce any changes that you
like. If you don't get much time to think, find some. I should
like to hear about Kusum, Anandi and N. Give me other news,
too. Mahadev will reply as he thinks fit. Do what you wish.
You know what I desire.
Even if Parashuram comes there, ask him to leave if you
don't want him. Perhaps he may not come. All kinds of un-
expected things keep happening here. Nobody, therefore, can
foresee what will happen after two hours. That lady, Spiegel, has
gone away to Madras. May God give you equanimity and the
strength which you require. He who has equanimity will get the
strength. That is the Lord's assurance. You may expect one
more letter still in my handwriting. And then, if it is God's will,
I will write to you after the 29th.
BAPU
[PS.]
N. says in her letter that she is not able to go to the lava-
tory when she gets up at three. If the gates of the hostel are
kept closed at night, there must be some arrangement inside. A
removable commode can be kept in a corner of the yard or in a
room.
It would be desirable to supply to everybody who wants the
green vegetables which can be eaten uncooked.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8374. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
