156. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
August 21, 1901
TO
THE EDITOR
"THE NATAL MERCURY"
SIR,
I enclose copy, as supplied to me, of the resolutions and
covering letter addressed to me as Chairman of "the Protest Meet-
ing of English-speaking and other Indians", by the convener.
Chairman though I was of the meeting, I am not at all in
sympathy with the resolutions, as they contain many material
errors of statement, and are misleading. But realizing that venti-
lation in the Press of grievances, fancied or real, is the best safety-
valve, I forward them, to be used as you may think fit.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
[RESOLUTIONS]
At a protest meeting of the English-speaking and other Indians which
was held in the Congress Hall on the 2nd instant, Mr. J. L. Roberts, the con-
vener, proposed, and Mr. D. C. Andrews seconded, the following resolutions,
which were carried unanimously. Mr. M. K. Gandhi occupied the chair.
1. That this meeting strongly disapproves of the manner in which the
Indian representatives were chosen for the presentation of the address to their
Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, inasmuch as
only the Mohammedans were apprised of the meeting, thus depriving the
other Indians from participating in it.
2.
That this meeting strongly disapproves of the fact that the majority
of representatives elected to attend the presentation of addresses to their Royal
Highnesses are Mohammedans and that the other Indians in the Colony,
being greater in number than the Mohammedans, should have had at least
an equal number of representatives as the Mohammedans.
3.
That out of the eight further representatives who were chosen to
receive invitations (if the Reception Committee grant it), six are Mohamme-
dans; thus, again, the other Indians do not receive a fair share in the repre-
sentation.
4.
That this meeting strongly disapproves of the practice of the Moham-
medans, who, after choosing men to represent themselves, should invariably
choose one Mr. H. L. Paul to represent the English-speaking and other
Indians, thus acting in direct opposition to the wishes of the Indians in question.
5.
That copies of the foregoing resolutions should be sent to the secre-
tary of the Duke and Duchess of York, the Indian Reception Committee, the
Mayor of Durban, and the Press of Natal.
The Natal Mercury, 23-8-1901
