166. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
NADIAD, GUJARAT,
Ashad Vad 5, July 28, 1918
CHI. RAMDAS,
I received your letter. It is certainly regrettable that you
have to leave service again and again. It will be good if you
don't make a change now. Umiyashankar was telling me that
your accommodation can easily be arranged in his shop. There
will be no harm if you go there. You can certainly come to
me whenever you want. Go to England if they send you from
there. There is nothing wrong in that either. Besides Sorabji
is now gone. I cannot forget him. The moment I am idle in-
numerable recollections of Sorabji flood me.
If it is your wish that you should go to England for studies
and then work in South Africa you may do so. The course there
is indeed tough. If you had been here and if you had agreed,
I would have sent you to the War. I have come to realize
that this is our paramount duty. A young man must learn
self-defence. I have not forgotten the insults inflicted upon you
by that Pathan. I had defended you but that gave me no
satisfaction.
How can you understand ahimsa fully at this
tender age? It is possible that some extraordinary young man
may acquire the knowledge early and become an ocean of
compassion. But generally a young man must know how to
defend himself. Ahimsa is the extreme limit of human strength.
It is not a quality of weak or cowardly persons. What do they
know of ahimsa? Devdas is impatient to get himself recruited
for the War, but he is doing such good work in Madras that
he cannot be spared from there. I gave the same advice to
Harilal. But of course how can he undertake such labours? I
shall try for you. But it will be wholly your choice. You may
gladly come if you are tired there and if you want to become
a soldier. You alone must consider the matter. I would have
enticed Manilal too. Only his case is similar to that of Devdas.
So he should not be enticed away.
You can get an idea of the situation here from the enclosed
pamphlet. From the Ashram Nanubhai, Shankerlal, Surendra,
Ramanand and Ramjibhai will come.
You should not fret. You should consider yourself free and
do as you want. Only thus will you rise. If you do not know
something do not be scared. If you want to learn it you must
put in the requisite labour.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Motana Man, pp. 16-17
