297. LETTER TO KAKA KALELKAR
BETTIAH,
MOTIHARI,
Vaishakh Sud 11 [May 2, 1917]
BHAISHRI KAKA,
I have your letter. It is good you went over to the Ashram.
I may perhaps need you here but I will not ask for your help.
Your work at present is to lose yourself in the National School
experiment. I think it is a very important experiment. I should
like you to see Prof. Shah and start work immediately. Write to
Mr. Sadashiv to tell him that he may possibly be needed. I will call
him up then. Is he ready to come along with his family? He
must give at least six months. Perhaps more.
If Shastri's plot is not otherwise inconvenient and the water
there is good, it should be secured without any delay. Do you
think it will be possible to put up tents or thatched huts while cons-
truction work is under way? I don't care if the analyst's report on
the soil is not favourable. The water must be good. For the
school, we want 12 to 20 pupils for the present. It will be better
if they are drawn from good families. Rather, let them be what
they are. If it is decided to settle on Shastri's plot, boys from ad-
joining villages may be invited. However, so long as we can get
them from Ahmedabad city, it will be preferable not to bring in
villagers to join the experiment. But one need not be particular
in this matter; we should carry on with any boys who may join.
If the teacher has any real worth in him, the mechanical side
of education will take care of itself. If they tell stories from the
Ramayana, everyone will follow them as well as he can. In agricul-
ture, they will acquire equal proficiency. Spiritual awakening
will require [a mind disposed that way through] early influences.
How can we know whether we shall come upon such influences in
cities or villages? Show this to Prof. Shah and request him on my
behalf to take up this work in all earnestness. I shall write to him
if I find time.
Kripalani is in Muzaffarpur. He wanted to know from me
what he should do. I told him that, since he was here, he should
join in the work here. There has been no reply from him.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
Reassure [them] about Chintamani Shastri that, so long as
Sind needs him, we shall not ask him to join us.
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C.W. 5712. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi
