109. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 17, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
While waiting for the others to arrive for the morning prayer,
I wrote out a letter to Mirabehn and one to Ba. I made them brief
and started this. I read Narahari's letter and your two letters. I
have discussed these only briefly. Where is the time? I however
put down the thoughts which occur to me.
You should invite Narahari to see you and try to understand
his point of view. I know his temperament very well. He is one
of the few sincere workers who have come together in the Ashram.
They should all learn to become one as milk with sugar. If they
cannot do this, the Ashram is bound to perish. Naturally, it is
the responsibility of the secretary to see that different parts of an
organization work in harmony. It is my duty to explain this clearly
to you. The secretary is the centre of an organization. Those who
do not feel the pull of his attraction are outsiders in that organiza-
tion. The secretary should either free them or give them a proper
place in the organization and keep them in it. You cannot regard
Narahari as an outsider. We look upon certain persons as the limbs
of the body that is the Ashram. We can never imagine the Ashram
without them. If we can imagine it without them, we can imagine
it without ourselves too, which would mean the end of the Ashram.
I have only stated the principle. You may draw from it what
lesson you can.
Narahari should be regarded as an expert in the field of edu-
cation. In that field, therefore, we should subordinate our views
to his. If in consequence we find that mistakes are being made, we
should let them be made and draw the expert's attention to them
afterwards. There is no other way, and there can be none. If any-
body tries to point out my mistake in my own field, I would not
readily admit it. I must, therefore, taste the bitterness of failure.
This holds true of all other fields. In this, too, I have stated only
the general principle.
54-
All persons of the category of Maganbhai should have free
access to the books. If as a result some books are spoiled or lost,
we should write them off rather than create unpleasantness. The
rules for using the books should be pasted on the walls at
numerous places. In big libraries, even ordinary members are
permitted to take them out of the shelves. If they do not put them
back in their places after they have done with them, they leave
them on the table, and at the end of the day the librarian puts
them back in the shelves. The inmates of the Ashram should have
free access to the books. They can have the keys whenever they
wish. If you cannot decide who should be treated as inmates of
the Ashram, you may draw up a list of selected names of persons
who should be permitted to take out books and ask for the keys.
If the children go to bed at 8.15 p.m., they should be permitted
to sleep from 8.30 p.m. to 4.30 a.m. without fear. In addition,
they should also get one full hour during day-time for sleeping.
You will have to consider who may be described as children. You
may respect the parents' wishes in this matter.
A teacher should get time to prepare himself. I cannot accept
Chimanlal's excuse that he gets no time. If one undertakes a job,
one must do it well, otherwise one ought not to undertake it. To
undertake a job and not to do it well is a form of untruth. If a
person who is driving a car does not drive it carefully, he will be
committing a crime. Similarly, if a person who has undertaken
to teach something does not do it well, he will commit a greater
crime than that driver. Nobody should undertake anything which
is beyond his capacity.
We should faithfully obey Kuvalayanandji's instructions re-
garding exercise.
The conclusion to be drawn from all this is that all of you
should sit with Narahari, discuss the problem frankly and do what
you think best.
However, do only as much from this as you can easily do. I
am far away from there. After all it is you who have to decide
and act. It is you who have to run the Ashram and will have to
accept the responsibility. I may, therefore, make suggestions to
you but you should have complete freedom to accept or reject
them. You should assume that you have that freedom.
Prema also is involved in all this. She should learn to control
her tongue and restrain her obstinacy. She behaves in such a man-
ner as to wipe out all that she does. Try to persuade her as much
as you can. If you wish to free her from any responsibility, you may
do so. If her working the whole day does not let her have peace
of mind, she should reduce her work. If she has such peace, she
should be able to listen to criticism from anybody.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8336. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
