311. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
Friday, Chaitra Vad 8 [April 17, 1914]
CHI. MANILAL,
Received your letters. Ba is, now at any rate, on the way
to recovery again.
Even there, I cannot but think, it will prove a rewarding
practice to sit down on the floor to eat. You should clean the
place where you sit down, so that no one could object. We have
made it a practice to sleep on the floor and so we may have
our meal as well. It should be enough if you mop the floor
where the meal is to be served. One would feel it awkward if one
had to start doing this after going to India. There is humility
in sitting on the floor for a meal; it will mean, moreover, that we
are adopting a practice followed by crores of people. It is few
who have their meals at the table.
My diet consists of 18 dates, 9 bananas, three [sic] uncooked
groundnuts, four amatungulu and two lemons, with two spoonfuls of
oil added. I take a quantity of cocoanut kernel which I can chew.
Tomatoes being dear, they have been ordered only for such as can-
not do without them. Not everyone lives on one meal a day. Raoji-
bhai and I alone follow the practice. Ramdas carried on with it
for a month. On Mondays and Fridays, everyone goes without salt.
I do not know why people do not fast on the tenth instead of
the eleventh day [of each fortnight]; it seems obvious, however, that
going without the usual food at least one day in a fortnight purifies
body and mind. We want to have the palate under control but,
falling short of complete success, we atone for the failure once in a
fortnight. Moreover, we commit numerous sins mentally and hence
by balancing the account once a fortnight we realize our abject state.
To observe the ekadashi, it is not enough merely to keep a fast;
the day should be spent, rather, in reflecting over matters of faith.
I have already asked two books to be sent to you. The Gita
transcribed by you will be in addition to these.
"Such passeth from all 'plaining' to blest nirvana" is a
translation of sa shantimadhigachchhati. It means, he attains to
peace. He who has given up all desires, who is free from the
sense of "I" and "mine", who is unconscious of his identity as
a separate being, attains peace. In the word "plaining" occur-
ring in the English [translation] above, 'ex' has been left out, so
that the word is "explaining". Such a man escapes from all con-
cerns (objects of desire and pursuit) to the happy state of nirvana.
One who rises early should make no exception on Sundays.
If we do, we shall anxiously await the coming of a Sunday. If,
therefore, you seriously want to form the habit, you must get up
at the same time on Sundays as on other days.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Swami Mangalanandapuri has been here for the last two
days. He will leave tomorrow.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 96
Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
