51. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 23 2 /25, 1932
3 p.m., Saturday,
CHI. NARANDAS,
I will write as many letters as I can and hand them over
on Tuesdays for being posted. I cannot be as regular as I should
like to be. I need rest. My health is very good, though. You
will know more about it from my letter to Mirabehn. I was
weighed today. The weight was 106½ pounds. The Sardar weigh-
ed 144½ lb. Only, I need plenty of rest and take it.
Abbas Saheb is your neighbour now. I suppose you go and
inquire after him. If he requires any food, send it to him. Hamida-
behn, together with Kanjibhai's wife and daughter, is also there.
I suppose a woman from the Ashram visits them from time to time.
I cannot think from here what special work may be assigned
to Tilakam. He must, of course, pick up Hindi. It is also desir-
able that he should learn spinning and weaving. Does he work
to your satisfaction?
Afternoon, January 25 1932
I had a painful letter from Champa. Ratilal seems to be
harassing her a good deal. It would be desirable if Champa
could be separated from him on any pretext. She is not strong
enough to bear any more children. It is likely that Ratilal is
not able to control himself. We are faced with a very painful
moral duty. From what Champa writes, it seems that Ratilal spends
the whole day in the bungalow and beats the children whenever
he feels the itch. I don't understand what you can do in this
matter. If a woman or man agrees to stay with them for a pay-
ment, that may help. Consider this and do what you think best.
If someone visits Maganbhai, he should tell him that I got his
letter. How can I write to him now? He should also tell
Kakasaheb that I remember all that I have to write about. I
will write what I can during the time I get.
You will observe that I send to you many letters addressed
to persons outside Ahmedabad. I know that this means double
expense and increase in your work. If you wish, I can post
such letters directly from here to the persons concerned and save
both money and time. I have a faint recollection that I had put
this question to you on a previous occasion, too, and that you had
replied that they should be forwarded through you. Please let
me know what I should do.
You will find with this, on a separate sheet, a talk on Chapter
XIV.
Since I have started writing, I will, as far as possible,
continue the series from week to week.
Today's post includes some useful letters (and slips too). If
you get time, read them. I have one limitation, or say a gift.
I express certain thoughts only in certain circumstances. Without
those circumstances, those thoughts would remain unexpressed.
If these scattered reflections are not collected, they are likely
to be lost. Not that that would be much of a loss, but, since
Mahadev, Kaka and others have collected such reflections, I, too,
have somewhat fallen a victim to this temptation. As a matter of
fact, however, my ship sails as the wind blows. I have no map
of the course with me. How can I have one? Having such a
map is contrary to the spirit of bhakti. How can one who would
dance as God wills choose deliberately a course? It is enough if
such a one can give single-minded devotion to the task which
falls to his or her lot. But this is mere philosophizing. How does
it help? "Live as you like, but realize God somehow, anyhow."
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are sixty letters besides this.
Lakshman Giri writes from 96 Harrison Road, Calcutta, and
requests that the Giri family should be sent away. I write this
for your information. You yourself should reply to him from
there. I am not replying.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
