34. LETTER TO K. SRINIVASAN
September 20, 1934
DEAR SRINIVASAN 1 ,
Your letter to Mahadev of 8th instant has been on my file
ever since its receipt. Your argument, I am sorry to say, does
not appeal to me. Surely absolute reliability of the source of
information does not absolve an editor from criticism if the
information itself was confidential, especially if he is favoura-
ble to the cause to which the information is related. Ranga-
swamy used to know many most important things contemplated
by members of the Working Committee. I am not aware that
he ever abused the confidence by publishing anything and saying
that the information was absolutely reliable, as it undoubtedly
was. Even Salivati who, in Rangaswamy's time, had committed
a serious blunder, has very often got from me information and
therefore absolutely reliable. But he observed the law of the
game by not disclosing it when he knew that I did not want the
information to be published.
I should not have asked Mahadev to write to you the
letter he did if it was a mere matter of embarrassment to me.
There was none. But undoubtedly public cause was damaged
by your publication of information that was strictly confiden-
tial, more so as it was not even accurate. Had it not been for
the dangerous statement that the cause of the contemplated re-
tirement was the formation of the Malaviyaji party, I would
not have taken any public notice of your announcement.
I wish I could convince you that you had laid down a most
dangerous principle of conduct. You say "in this instance, there-
fore, our sole anxiety was about the authenticity of the news".
Suppose that the Sardar had contemplated some big move on
behalf of the Congress whose premature publication would
defeat the very end he had in view. Suppose that a very clever
correspondent of The Hindu was a thought reader, and he had
read the Sardar's thought. The news would be authentic. Would
you be justified, unless you avowed yourself as an enemy of
the Congress, in publishing the authentic information? Don't
retort by saying that no such calamity was possible in con-
nection with your publication of the news in question. I am
trying to show you the untenability of the position you have taken
up. That the publication in the case in point did not result
in much damage, you could not plead in self-protection. You
will, therefore, please dismiss from your mind the idea that you
have done any wrong to me. I have endeavoured to appreciate
your point of view. It is unfortunate that I have not been able
to appreciate your position. I think that it is wholly indefen-
sible, unless of course you take up the position that, as a news-
paper man, you have nothing to do with the nation, your sole
concern is to purvey news—no matter how obtained and no mat-
ter whose cause is damaged so long as the news you publish
is authentic wholly or in part.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI K. SRINIVASAN
MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
