126. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX, September 12, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your letter. It is strange you did not receive my letter on
Monday. I gave it to Sorabji to post. But the careless boy evidently
never posted it or posted it too late.
If I receive a reply tomorrow that Cachalia's letter has gone, I
shall send the resisters from here on Monday. They will reach Volksrust
on Tuesday. You should leave Monday night by the mail train so that
you are at the station when the Kaffir Mail reaches Volksrust on
Tuesday evening. You should simply watch as a spectator. They are
not to speak in English. One of them only will speak in that tongue,
interpret for the others. They will not give finger-prints. If the police
arrest them, they must ask for shelter at the police station. If the police
do not arrest them, you should, there and then, buy tickets for them
and proceed to Johannesburg. I then suggest their being housed at
Mountain View. If strangers don't come, it might be well to make
Mountain View the headquarters. But you are to be the judge, not
I, of this thing. If they are to go to Mountain View, you may buy
nothing but leave instructions for purchases so that you have full stock
at once. No more than Boer meal and a little dholl and rice will be
required and fruit and nuts of course. If they are arrested, you should
attend court, send full wire to me from Volksrust as also full letter.
If they are imprisoned you should immediately see the gaol doctor and
the jailor and tell them of religious and health foods they may take
and may not take. But you should also say that they will not complain
ifthey do not get what they want. Mrs. Gandhi will be purely fruitarian.
Jeki and others will not touch bread. Some of them will be able to
take only one meal. The names and further details later. It is well
that you will be free from your business even if passive resistance
is to start. Your whole time will be wanted for the struggle. You should
read my letter to be signed by Cachalia most carefully.
Yours.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Vide Vol. XII, pp. 183-.
