294. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
BENARES,
August 2, 1934
There are grave objections to organizing things in accordance
with your demand. The Congress would, in that case, be charged
with complete nullification of its resolution and this it cannot
afford. First, only the Parliamentary Board can properly delib-
erate over this because that alone is in possession of correct infor-
mation regarding the number and the names of candidates to be
put up and their respective constituencies. But the Parliamentary
Board itself will find it well-nigh impossible to accept the suggested
arrangement. It has already put up candidates at many places
and the work too has been started. To withdraw the Congress
candidates and put up your candidates instead would have, in view
of the Bombay Resolution1, an extremely adverse effect. It is also
very difficult to judge whether candidates whom you want to be put
up on your behalf can be found among tried Congressmen in
sufficiently large number. What we suggested was that you your-
self, Shri Aney and only a few other important persons whose
participation you consider most essential should come. They
should be confirmed Congressmen and willing to co-operate fully
with the members of the Parliamentary Board in all other respects
except the Communal Award. I feel this would be the proper
course and I do not expect good results from any other.
My
appeal to you even now is to accept this scheme and not to in-
volve yourself in the botheration of forming a new group.
It
would add to the prestige of both sides if you avoid any contest
with the Congress candidates. You have left the Parliamentary
Board regarding it as your dharma. If we all work placing this
dharma before us we shall all benefit and achieve our objectives.
Competition is bound to be very harmful. I am confident that
your opposition by itself would suffice as an expression of disappro-
val of Communal Award. I hope you will respond to my humble
appeal.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
