354. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 19, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I understand what you say regarding
Siddhimati. She shouldn't have left like that. I am of the opi-
nion that she should not be re-admitted all too easily.
Has Jamnadas gone out in search of a job? I tried to
persuade him to stay with me, but he did not. His anger does
not seem to have subsided yet. Didn't he and others read the
circular letters which I wrote to you?
I am glad that Lilavati is doing well. If Kusum is getting
fever, wouldn't it be advisable for her to go to Ranavav? She
always gets better there.
Chimanlal's case also is pitiable. His
health doesn't improve at all. Do not put too much trust in Amala's
letter. She is very cheerful here. She is even improving a little.
So long as I live here, it will not be advisable to shift her from
here. Even when I leave this place permanently, I will burden
you with the responsibility for her only if I think that she can
safely go there. I am sure that, if she is likely to improve under
anybody, she would do so under you.
If Keshu succeeds in his experiment regarding the spinning-
wheel, it will be a great achievement. He should continue the
experiments. The time-limit cannot be extended now, but, if
he succeeds in inventing a spinning-wheel which would have
deserved the prize, everybody will welcome it. He should not,
therefore, worry. We have not so far received any model which
would deserve a prize.
I have still not been able to decide anything about the dairy.
I wish to discuss the matter also with Jamnalalji who is in
hospital. I gathered your viewpoint to be that it should be run
as an independent activity and should not be handed over to
the Harijan Ashram. Is this impression of mine correct?
Has there been any change in Harilal's mode of life? Does
he exercise self-control there or does he continue to live in the
same manner?
It is excessively humid here. The rainfall has been quite
heavy. If possible, I don't wish to shift you from there for the
Kanya Ashram. You have been doing excellent work there. It
327
is desirable that you should put everything in perfect order.
In
case of absolute necessity here, you will of course be available.
Vinoba has agreed to take up complete responsibility. I see that
I shall have to call you here once before I decide anything. I
hope I shall be able to give you fairly long notice.
I am regaining strength fairly well. Even if the progress is
rather slow, I am satisfied.
Narahari, Kishorelal, Maganbhai, Soman and Kakasaheb are
here at present. I have been discussing with them plans for proper
organization of villages.
I hope you read the Harijan carefully. I suppose you know
that Krishnamachari and Sulochana are here. Amtussalaam and
Vasumati are with me, and of course Prabha. Ramdas may come
back in three or four days. There is an epidemic of cholera in
Khurja.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8409. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
