296. LETTER TO J. CRERAR
BOMBAY,
June 11, 1918
DEAR MR. CRERAR,
Pray convey my thanks to His Excellency for the frank and
full reply to my letter of this morning. I am just leaving for
Poona to attend the celebration of the Servants of India Society.
I return on Thursday and I would like to avail myself of His
Excellency's kind offer to see me. Could you please wire to me
at Poona City, care of the Society, the time (afternoon) when I
could wait on His Excellency if it is at all convenient for him
for that day. Meanwhile, I wish to assure His Excellency that
my letter was not intended to suggest even a possibility of any
change of views or alteration in my offer which I am preparing
every moment to reduce to practice.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
India Office Judicial and Public Records: 3412/18
opinion on public matters, he cannot conceive of two opinions on the propriety
of admitting a contentious political discussion on a resolution expressing loyalty
to His Majesty the King-Emperor. Still less can he understand that any loyal
citizen of the Empire should at this juncture desire to attach conditions to his
offers of service. Mr. Tilak and some of his friends attach conditions which
they know, and everybody knows, to be impossible of fulfilment by His Excel-
lency's Government. The offer of co-operation on such terms only differs from an
open refusal to co-operate by its lack of candour. His Excellency is convinced
that on reflection you will recognize that these are the only views he can
entertain and on which he is bound to act. His Excellency is the more con-
vinced of this in view of the fact that your own offer of your services to the
Viceroy, to which he attaches the highest value, was made unconditionally and
welcomed by him on that express understanding. He is confident that the diffe-
rent and, as he regards it, the lower view of the responsibilities of a citi-
zen of the Empire which others may entertain will not induce you to modify
your own observance of the pledge, which he was so glad to receive from you.
I am to add that if you desire to see His Excellency again on this matter, he will
be pleased to receive a visit from you."
