367. LETTER TO BABAN GOKHALE
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
October 3, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
You know that the Depressed Class friends have been intending
to build a hall and a hostel as also a school for Depressed Class
children. They came to me when I was convalescing at Juhu. I
told them that I would gladly interest myself in the matter if
they raised some money themselves and I told them too that I
would endeavour to beg some money myself. They made many
attempts more or less successful and they showed me many draft
copies of the trust-deed necessary for the purpose. The latest
I enclose herewith. They leave me to suggest the names of other
trustees beyond two from among themselves. The names of the
two are Sjt. Ramachandra Satvaji Nikaljey and Sjt. Jayaram Tabaji
Gaikwad. I would like you to interest yourself in this matter.
Go through the whole thing yourself, see the site, meet all the
principal members and then advise me. I would like you also to
become the Secretary of the trust and one of the trustees.
You
may suggest to me the other names. I would like you to see Sir
Purushottamdas and ask him whether he has promised to give
Rs. 5,000 and whether he will give that money and become one
of the trustees. Suggest some other names also to me. I would
myself suggest Sjt. Gokulbhai Bhatt of the Rashtriya School and
Kishorelal Mashruwala, Shrimati Avantikabai Gokhale, Seth
Jamnalal Bajaj, Sjts. Jerajani and Yeshwant Prasad Desai. That
would become a business-like trust. Sir Purushottamdas can become
the Chairman. If Mr. Jayakar joins, he will be a good addition.
But you may omit these names altogether and make your own
original suggestions. I have in mind Rameshwar Birla. He may
not consent to be one of the trustees though he has given me
ample funds for this class of work, and for this very work too I
expect from him a fairly good sum if I can convince him that
this would be a living trust and that you or some person like you
would act as the Secretary. More you will ascertain from Sjt.
Bhonsle who carries this letter.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. BABAN GOKHALE
GIRGAUM, BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 14736
