495. LETTER TO GULZARILAL NANDA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 15, 1927
MY DEAR GULZARILAL,
I have your letter and your draft to the Secretary. You may
send the letter. I do not want to suggest any alterations or
improvements in it; but I will just state what I think about the
whole thing and the extent to which we may rely upon mill-
owners' help and to which they are themselves at the present stage
likely to go.
So far as the Rs. 12,500 are concerned, I am afraid, we shall
not get them unless Kasturbhai, who is insistent even to the extent
of demanding his own quota back, as he might well do, invites
the other donors to do likewise. So far, therefore, as these funds
are concerned, the way to work lies in that direction. The
ultimate decision will be taken by the mill-owners on side issues
and on personal likes and dislikes. These aberrations we shall
always have with us and we must suffer them with becoming
calmness.
But the more important point for consideration is the principle
which should guide us in our relations with the mill-owners, or,
more generally speaking, capitalists. At the present moment,
we shall do well to be satisfied with doing the right without ex-
pecting reciprocity and therefore without expecting any pecuniary
help from the capitalists. Inch by inch labour will have to make
its position good and better its conditions independently of outside
support. The outside support may be divided into two parts:
from the capitalists directly concerned, in this instance, therefore
the mill-owners, and secondly, from the general sympathetic pub-
lic. The second support we shall get more quickly and without
in any way endangering our interests. The support from capitalists
directly concerned will come when labour has vindicated itself and
has almost attained the position of being able to dictate its own
terms. It will be then and not till then that we shall get willing
help from capital. If my diagnosis is correct, we must then so
order our affairs as to undertake just such work as we can do
irrespective of outside assistance. When its needs are to be sup-
plemented, we should go to the independent outsiders and never
go to the interested outsiders; but we do not need to refuse the
help from the last source when it comes voluntarily. And we must
always be able to so shape our course as to feel independent of all
outside help. Our concentration therefore must be in educating
labour from within and out of means chiefly supplied by labour
itself. This, in my opinion, is the shortest and the simplest way of
serving labour. It will undoubtedly cause in the initial stages
great difficulty, great embarrassment and labour itself will be
irresponsive. But that is the very reason why we should persist in
what we know to be the best course. Any other way, labour becomes
pauperized and demoralized as one sees happening all over India.
Applying the principle to the present case, my solution would be
to carry on such negotiations with the mill-owners as may be
consistent with the dignity and self-respect, but to be prepared
to do without the assistance that is being received now. You must
still find ways and means of continuing the schools. See what
resources there are within ourselves. Put the whole question be-
fore the members of the Union, and at the same time canvass for
subscriptions amongst private friends and then appeal to the
public also. I do not anticipate much difficulty in getting public
help. And, in any appeal that may be made to the public, the
circumstances necessitating the appeal now should be briefly stated.
This will involve some criticism of the mill-owners; but that is
inevitable. I wonder if I have made my position absolutely
clear. If I have not, please do not hesitate to write to me again.
Yours sincerely,
GULZARILAL
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat: S.N. 14155
