408. LETTER TO " THE RAND DAILY MAIL" 2
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before August 9, 1906]
[TO
THE EDITOR
The Rand Daily Mail]
SIR,
I trust you will permit me to offer a few remarks on your leading
article regarding the Asiatic legislation foreshadowed by Mr. Duncan
in what I would venture to term his extraordinary statement. In his
brief pronouncement he thrice told his hearers that it was the desire of
the Government to accord to the resident Asiatic population "just and
fair treatment" and that it was for that reason that the legislation des-
cribed by him was to be introduced, on the Legislative Council reassemb-
ling.
You have considered that the Ordinance to be passed will mean
generous treatment of the resident Asiatic population.
I very much fear that there is absolutely no generosity about the
proposed legislation, but that it will fall very far short of even "just and
fair treatment". Re-registration is certainly not part of such treatment,
and it is perfectly meaningless. Every Indian who has entered the Colony
is supposed to have been registered for the most part for the second time.
The second registration was, in reality, a concession to the Permit Depart-
ment, which was at the time very much appreciated. A third registration
is not a remedy for the evil of alleged fraudulent entrance of Asiatics into
the Colony. It is easy enough to examine the present registration cer-
tificates of the resident Asiatic population, and to prosecute those who are
without them. The British Indian Association has denied the charge of
any wholesale fraudulent entrance. There will always be a few people
prepared to break laws, no matter how stringently devised and how well
enforced. To brand as criminals a whole community — for that is what
re-registration implies — is hardly "just" or "fair".
But Mr. Duncan says, in consideration for a fresh registration, he
would give four things to the Asiatics, namely: (1) abolition of the £3
tax; (2) permission to the Asiatics to hold land for religious purposes;
(3) permission for those Asiatics who held land before Law 3 of 1885
came into force to transmit same to their heirs; (4) authority to issue
temporary permits to Asiatic visitors.
Now the first concession is, shall I say, a mere blind. It should be
remembered that it applies to those only who are resident in the Colony,
or perhaps to those who, being pre-war residents of the Transvaal, have
a right to re-enter. The resident population has already paid the £3 and
the majority of those who are still outside the Colony have also done like-
wise. There is no warrant in the existing legislation to charge the £3
fee twice. It is not an annual tax, but it is a fee that has to be paid once
for all under Law 3 of 1885 by Asiatics who wish to settle in the Colony.
Nor is there any merit about the proposed authority to be given for
holding land for religious purposes because it is possible to do so under
the existing law. The Superior Courts have decided that Coloured persons
can, as a corporate body, hold land for religious purposes.
The third grant would have been a concession, if it was applicable
to any large body of Asiatics. Mr. Duncan well knows that there is only
one such piece of land. It would be a performance of simple duty to allow
the heirs to hold their two-fifths of an erf in the Transvaal, and in any
case, in doing so, it is not the community that will receive justice but an
individual.
The fourth, of course, is again no concession. Mr. Nomura and Mr.
Manga suffered not because there was no authority to issue temporary
permits, but because there was a disinclination to exercise the authority.
The difficulty, therefore, lies not in the law but in its administration.
I hope I have thus clearly shown that there is no question of "just
and fair treatment" of the resident Asiatic population behind the fore-
cast given by the Colonial Secretary on Saturday last. On the contrary,
Damocles has again raised his sword [sic] over the heads of the poor Asiatics
who, because of their belief in the sanctity of the British subject idea, have
ventured to migrate to the Transvaal. There is no trace in Mr. Duncan's
statement of the fulfilment of the promises made before the war and, even
after it, by Lord Milner and other representatives of the Crown.
And if I may repeat what I have already said, what is it that British
Indians (to distinguish them from other Asiatics) want? They accept
the doctrine of the Transvaal having the right to regulate immigration,
and they — although such was not the case during the Dutch Govern-
ment — are quite willing that restrictions after the Cape or the Australian
Immigration Law applying to British subjects may be imposed on them;
but as against that, they claim that those British Indians, who have settled
in the country, ought to have full civil liberty, namely, the right to move
about freely, the right to own land subject to such general restrictions
as may be imposed to provide against speculative acquisition, and the
right to trade subject again to such municipal restriction as may be deemed
advisable in the interests of sanitation and of fair trade. It will be only
when this elementary right of the British Indian is recognised, and not
till then, that it will be possible for any representative of the Crown to
say that British Indians are receiving "just and fair treatment".
Remember, there is no attempt in the above statement to claim any
political rights. British Indians only ask for what can easily be given,
even by those who believe in the gospel of a white South Africa, if, that
is to say, South Africa, to paraphrase Lord Selborne's words, is to be
white not only in the exterior but also in the interior.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Rand Daily Mail, 9-8-1906
