370. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
April 13, 1932
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,
It was on the 6th of March that I wrote to Major Bhandari
about interviews with non-political associates. I sent a reminder
on the 30th March, but I am still without a reply. It is high
time that I got a reply about the illustrative list I have already
submitted. It causes me much inconvenience and some anxiety
not to be able to see some of the friends I should like to see and
who would like to see me.
The Government have been good enough to appreciate my
desire to write to my prison-associates about their welfare. In
virtue of the permission, I have been writing to some of them,
but from Belgaum I can get no answer. I have written to Shrimati
Manibehn Patel. She is Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel's daughter,
but she has been under the Ashram discipline for over ten years.
I knew from the letter that was received some time ago by her
father that she had been ailing. I therefore wrote to her asking
her to tell me all about her health, but I can get no answer.
Then there is Kaka Kalelkar whom you know well and who as
you are aware has suffered from tuberculosis and requires special
care. I have written to him also and can get no reply. The
third is Prabhudas Gandhi a nearly related cousin of mine,
brought up under me as an infant whilst I was in South Africa.
He is suffering from the same disease as Kaka Kalelkar and has
1 & 2 Vide pp. 182- & 253.
3 Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi, Gandhiji's nephew
been under special treatment. And there is Sjt. Narahari Parikh,
a member of the Ashram, an old associate. He is also in the
Belgaum prison. I inquired about these last two of Kakasaheb
Kalelkar, but can get no information. Will you please get the neces-
sary information about their health and diet and weight? Absence
of any news about them is a cause of considerable anxiety to me.
I shall be obliged if you will kindly ascertain for me whether
the telegram I handed to Major Bhandari addressed to Allahabad
making inquiries about the injuries sustained by Mrs. Motilal
Nehru and illness of her son-in-law Sjt. Ranjit Pandit was duly
sent. I may mention that my relations with the Nehrus are
more private and intimate than political, and naturally I am deep-
ly interested in the health and general welfare of the members
of the Nehru family.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, L.G.P. File No. 9
