268. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
The Leader of Johannesburg has published the following letter from
Mr. Gandhi:
Sir,
In your leading article, in today's issue, on the Asiatic Registration
Act, you have imputed to the British Indian Association a statement to
the effect that nearly the whole of the four hundred men said to have
been registered had no right to be in the Transvaal. I am not aware
of any such statement having been made by any official of the Associa-
tion. I know that some of our pickets did make some such statement,
but that was mere bravado. The chief picket, Mr. Naidoo, imme-
diately corrected it, but the correction did not appear in your report.
The official statement made by the Association is that four men at least
who, according to the interpretation of the law put upon it by the
Government, have no right to be in the country have applied for and
probably received registration certificates. The Association does not
even consider these men to be not entitled to their certificates.
If the Government keep the Office open for receiving applications,
I must respectfully decline to consider it as a graceful concession, as it
would be, in the opinion of the majority of Indians, a confession of
weakness on the part of the Government. The British Indian Associ-
ation, in all humility and in obedience to a higher call, has challenged
the Government to do its worst. We do not require the registration
pin-pricks. It has been stated that the pickets kept Indians away from
the plague-spot; (and that was the reason why the time-limit was
extended;) the pickets, however, will continue to exercise the same vigi-
lance in Pretoria also.
You ask what can be gained by the Indian opposition in the teeth
of General Smuts' threat and the refusal of intervention by the Imperial
Government. So far as I am aware, in the last resort, Indians have not
pinned their faith either to intervention from the Imperial Government
or to recognition of the principles of humanity by General Smuts.
Though the effort now being made by the Indian community is undoubt-
edly calculated, if successful, to give them a status in the Colony, they
are fully aware that they may lose their all in the struggle. But, if
that happens, which I do not believe, Indians will shine with a new light,
like gold tested in fire, which will be a gain in itself. As between that
1 For the original letter in English, vide "Letter to The Transvaal Leader",
pp. 322-3, with which the translation given here has been collated.
gain and all that General Smuts and his Act can give to the Indian
community, I have no hesitation in asking my countrymen to prefer
the former at all costs. You will then see that the sanctioning of the
Immigration Restriction Bill or any other harsher measure will not turn
the community from the straight and narrow path. If it does, and I
do not say that it will not, then every Indian knows that there is a
precipice on either side.
The following is the substance of the article in the Leader of
November 1:
Though October is over, only about 400 persons out of a total
of 8,000 have registered. According to the British Indian Asso-
ciation, nearly the whole of this 400 are men who have no right to
be in the Transvaal. There are 1,100 Chinese in the Transvaal,
out of whom only two have registered, and these two are also
half-caste. The Government is quite firm in spite of such a large
number of persons having refused to register. In view of the diffi-
culties in the way of registration, such as intimidation by pickets,
it was both wise and kind to have extended the time-limit. Since,
rightly or wrongly, the Act is on the Statute-book, we think it will
be better if the Indians submit to it. In view of the Prime Minis-
ter's reply in Parliament refusing to intervene, and the known
attitude of General Smuts on the question, what does the Indian
community expect to gain by continuing its resistance?
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 9-11-1907
