477. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
BANGALORE,
January 8, 1934
BA,
I have still not received your letter, but I believe it will reach
me after some wandering. I hope you are getting the newspaper
now. You must have received the Bhagavat and the Ramayana. Write
for anything else you may wish to have. I had a letter from
Manilal, as also one from Sushila. They are both well. Manilal
is unperturbed and asks you not to worry about him. Sita is
growing up fast. She is always playing about. Devdas has been
released earlier than expected.
He has gone to Ahmedabad.
I had a wire from him. Perhaps he will visit you. There were
letters from Ramdas and Nimu too. I keep on writing to Manu,
but again there has been no letter from her. Kishorelal's fever
has come down a little and so it can be hoped that he will have
fully recovered in a few days. There is nothing but good news
about Mani. Om, Kisan, Chandrashankar, etc., are all well.
I am in Bangalore today. Everyone has been inquiring after you.
Shankerlal and Gulzarilal have come here. There is to be a
meeting of the Panch regarding the workers' wages. Tomorrow is
Tuesday, and so it will meet tomorrow. Afterwards I have to
go to Malabar. I will be going to the area which you once
visited. Urmila Devi's son has a job in Madras now. I keep
good health. There is no cause at all for worry. At every place
people come in large crowds and give me purses, jewellery,
etc. Kanti is better now. I see that Bal will be seeing me in a few
days. His health also is quite good. I hope all of you there are
well. What progress have Shanta and Lalita made in their studies?
And now the discourse.
Today I will write something about what the Gita says con-
cerning yajna. The subject is introduced in Chapter III. In that
chapter the Lord says that he who eats without performing yajna
eats stolen food. This is a very serious statement indeed, for eating
stolen food is like swallowing raw mercury. Nobody can digest it
and, if anyone eats it, he will get eruptions all over the body. Hence
Akho Bhagat has said: "Eating stolen food is like swallowing raw
mercury." If, therefore, a person stops performing yajna even for a
while, he becomes a thief. All of us should know what this yajna
means. Fortunately for us, it is easy for all whose heart is in the
right place. It requires no wealth, no intellect nor education. Yajna
means any act of service. Only about a person whose whole life
is a ceaseless yajna can it be said that he does not eat stolen food.
Hence those who do just a little work as yajna may be said to be
not guilty of theft to that extent. Looking at the matter from this
point of view, we see that all of us are guilty of theft more or
less. Our yajna can be said to be perfect only when we have shed
all selfishness. To do this means to give up the sense of 'I' and
'mine', to cease feeling that this belongs to me and that to some-
body else, that this is my son and that somebody else's. There
should not be even a trace of such a feeling in one's heart. He
alone can do this who offers up his all to Shri Krishna. He who
has done that does everything with God as witness, as His servant
and in a spirit of service. Such a person is always happy and
peaceful in mind. Happiness and suffering are the same to him.
He uses his body, mind, intellect, possessions-all that is his-for
the service of others. All of us cannot do such perfect yajna. If,
however, we have the aspiration in our heart to serve the whole
world, what work is there which most people can do and which
would include service to the whole world? Asking this question,
we found that the answer was spinning, which is the work that
countless people can do in the spirit of service. One who spins
will have done that much labour for the service of the world.
But I mention this only as an example. What I wished to ex-
plain was the meaning and importance of yajna. I shall be satis-
fied if I have been able to explain it.
Blessings to all sisters from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 7-
