34. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
Personal
August 11, 1941
CHI. SUSHILA,
Your letter has arrived only today. You will have fully recovered
by now.
I did not have any particular hospital in mind. Let us first see
someone making a donation of Rs. 30 lakhs. Only then will you be
in a position to say what kind of a hospital could be run with that
amount, and what kind with a hundred rupees. I know this is very
difficult. But does not the M. D. degree mean the capacity to know
the most difficult things ? Only you can say whether all this is possible
20
through a study course of one year. Perhaps an M.D. is not required
to have knowledge of this kind. But even if that be so, I would expect
you to have that knowledge, because I have observed that medical
skill is a god-given gift to you, so that you are able to turn your reading
and observation into something good.
Had I known that you would be so upset by your failure I would
not have allowed you to appear for the examination at all. I should
have respected Pyarelal's knowledge of you and gone with his advice.
But I thought in my pride that I too knew you well. I also assumed
in my pride that you had developed detachment to a certain extent
after being in contact with me. But it is no use crying over spilt milk.
Now as far as possible try to forget your failure at the last examination
and work hard to pass the next examination. There should be no obstacle
to it.
I commend your resolve not to seek any financial help. But even
there, stubbornness would not be proper. If you need to have more
free time for the sake of your examination, then you must accept
such help.
I am treating Kanchan myself. Her fever is decreasing but not
completely gone. Even water tastes bitter to her. That is why I am
not giving her food. I shall give her everything when she recovers.
I shall not keep her just on milk and fruit.
I have understood about Anasuya. Increase in weight by 3 lb. is
quite good. It will be nice if the progress can be maintained.
Do not think it is your duty in any way to call Kanchan there.
Call her only if you can do so without trouble.
I am of course taking good care of myself. I do not tire myself
by walking.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar
