74. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Silence Day [June 24, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL (JOSHI),
I got your letters.
In front of me are Himalayan peaks wrapped in snow and
shining brilliantly in sunlight. Below are hills clad with greenery,
as though, feeling shy, they had covered their bodies with
it. The solitude of the place is beyond description. We are to stay
here for seven or eight days. I can permit myself such luxury
only if there is some pretext for it. This was provided by Kaka
and the arrangement was also suggested by him. He had
entrusted the task to Devdas and Prabhudas, and I accepted this
luxury after deciding to give practically all my time to the Gita.
I wish, therefore, to write the fewest possible letters this week
and also do the minimum work for Young India. Accordingly, I
have decided to suspend routine correspondence.
What remains of what you want I shall give you immediately
I arrive there. Keep yourself ready. Note down all the things
about which you wish to consult me. Think and decide who will
do in your absence the work that you are doing. It would be
good if Ramniklal agrees to do it. Also think and decide where
you wish to go for rest.
Many boys do what Katto and others do. Giriraj is of course
responsible for his faults. His letter throws a new light on the
matter.
If possible, we should dispose of the Thana land. The other
conditions of Dholka, we can accept but not the prohibition of
tanning. We may have connection with a dairy which does no
tanning, but owning a goshala [is a different matter]. 'Dhuni' for
'faddist' is quite correct.
Vaydo-"Stupidly obstinate"
Chakram-"Madcap"
Are there two d's in the English word?
I have read Kakasaheb's draft and am returning it. I only
expressed my view as a member. You may include the names
which all of you approve.
You should send to Subbiah his usual pay. We have given
him to Rajaji as interest-free loan.
There are many spelling and other mistakes in the copy of
the telegram to Swami. I hope the wire was not sent with
all mistakes.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I shall leave this place on the 2nd. On the 5th in Delhi, and
on 6th morning or evening, in the Ashram. Send the mail to me
only as long as I am at Almora.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5426
