177. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
June 22, 1908
Various statements have appeared in the Press regarding the
charge of breach by the Colonial Secretary of the compromise between
the Government and the Asiatic communities. Hitherto, owing to the
delicate nature of the negotiations that were going on between the
Government and the Asiatic communities, it has not been possible to
state the case before the public.
I am sorry to say that the negotiations came to an abrupt and
unsatisfactory end today. I use the term unsatisfactory as applicable
not merely to the Asiatics, but to the whole Empire. General Smuts
was willing to repeal the offending Asiatic Act, which has cost the
Asiatics treasures of money and much trouble, including incarceration
of over two hundred innocent Asiatics, mostly British. This shows that
General Smuts was, and still is, under promise to repeal the Act.
But if he was willing to carry out the letter of the compromise, he
wanted to break the spirit of it. For it will not be argued that the
material position of the Asiatics was, under and after the compromise,
to be lower than under the Asiatic Act. Yet such was General Smuts'
draft which I was today pained to study and, so far as I was concerned,
to reject.
The draft measure proposed to treat the following as prohibited
immigrants:
(a) Asiatics possessing educational qualifications prescribed by the
Immigrants' Restriction Act.
(b) Asiatics, whether in or out of the Colony, holding Dutch
registration certificates under Law 3 of 1885, for which they
paid £3.
(c)
Other Asiatics who were residents of the Transvaal before
the war, and who could prove before a court of law their
previous domicile.
(d) Those Asiatics whose claims have been rejected by
Mr. Chamney. (For these it is contended only that they
should have the right to have their claims investigated by a
1 This was published in Indian Opinion, 27-6-1908, under the title "Mr. Gandhi
Speaks". It was also published in The Star among other papers. The Star version is,
however, unavailable. Ritch forwarded a copy of the letter to the India Office. He
described it as a "circular letter" which set out the "issues between the Transvaal
Government and the British Indians".
judicial tribunal, not finally disposed of by an administra-
tive official.)
In rejecting these claims for consideration and adjudication, not
for admission ipso facto, General Smuts has misread the passive resistance
struggle. It was undertaken, not for selfish purposes, but for the benefit
of the Asiatics as a whole, and, shall I add, even the Empire. Moreover,
he has wrecked a whole compromise to avoid the possible acces-
sion to the Asiatic population of the Colony of two thousand Asiatics
as an outside figure. I call these people an "accession", but, in fact,
they are already domiciled residents of the Colony, though General
Smuts' draft ignored their rights.
The position of the Asiatics is simple. They must revert to the
condition that prevailed in January last in this matter, and they have
been advised to withdraw their voluntary application forms. General
Smuts has declined to return them. If he had the courage to face the
passive resisters, he would return them without much ado.
Asiatics were labouring under a cloud of suspicion up to January
last. Mr. Duncan had levelled the charge and it was repeated, even
in the highest places, that there was an organized illicit entry of
Asiatics. The fact that over 7,600 out of 9,000 have already proved
their bona fides disposes of the charge. It was in order to refute that foul
charge that voluntary registration was tendered, and for no other
reason. The Asiatics, therefore, approach the public with clean hands.
Moreover, they have shown by their sufferings that they have a right to
command sympathy from a humanitarian public.
Lastly, they have shown, by some of their leaders being severely
assaulted by their own countrymen, that they are just as eager to
serve the Government as they are to serve their countrymen.
General Smuts' Act will be that of the Government and the
Government's will be the white men's—mostly British. When I ex-
plained the compromise to my countrymen, the less thinking among
them said: "Do not trust the white man. Repeal of the Act should
precede voluntary registration and not succeed it." I told them that
that was not a dignified position to take up.
In tampering with the compromise, I venture to say that General
Smuts does not know what he is doing. Will the Englishmen in the
Colony tolerate the position, when their main intention is granted that
future immigration of Asiatics should be effectively controlled?
Yours etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08
