180. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 22, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your big packet of mail.
It was a great thing indeed that the [Chamar] children
gave up buffalo flesh. But there may possibly have been violence
behind this. If they parted with it through fear, what happened
was bad. If they so wished they should have been given some
compensation for giving it up since it was their food. Hence you or
some other responsible inmate of the Ashram should go and ask
them. It would be fine if they handed over the flesh of their own
accord and could give up eating buffalo flesh for ever. If they are
not ready to do that, we should have patience with them.
You should find out from them or from Chamars who have
connections with the Ashram the money value of a carcass. Try
and find out from them, if you can, what the hide, intestines, bones,
etc., would fetch if sold separately and how they use these things.
If anybody else feels sick as Duncan did, you should imme-
diately apply hot fomentation on the abdomen and give the per-
son a piece of ice or lemon to suck. He may also drink cold water
one tea-spoonful at a time. Very often the vomiting stops with these
measures. If one had not eaten any poisonous food, there is no
cause for alarm at all. An enema also will stop vomiting. You
should tell this to all who live in the Ashram.
Impure attraction had sprung up between . . .1 and. . .2.
They hid their love for quite a long time. I came to know of
it by chance. They used to meet secretly and also write to each
other secretly. I have still not been able to fathom what is in their
hearts. I do not know how far . . .'s passion has carried him.
Neither seems to have purified his or her heart of lust. We have
a rigid rule, to which no exception is condoned, that all young
men and women who live in the Ashram as inmates should regard
one another as brothers and sisters. The love of these two had
gone beyond that relationship. The men and women living in the
Ashram are forbidden to meet each other alone. These two have
violated that rule. And they also tried, successfully, to deceive the
whole Ashram, which means that they have violated our chief
vow, that of truth. Thus they have violated three important rules
of the Ashram.
I had boundless trust in . . . . I had thought him to be a
brahmachari of the highest purity. I had proudly believed that he
would never deceive me at any rate. I had believed . . . to be
an innocent and pure-minded girl who could never feel passion.
I looked upon her as my first-born daughter. I have been proved
wrong in my estimate. Falsehood cannot hide itself from one who
scrupulously follows truth, non-violence and brahmacharya. Such
a person immediately knows anybody who is lustful and all violence
subsides in his presence. I have ceaselessly striven for many years
to observe these three vows, but I admit that I have failed in
my effort. I do not say this in pride. It is my vow of truth which
compels me to make this admission. I should have discovered the
true character of . . . and . . . . My failure to do so is a sure
sign of the imperfection of my spiritual attainment. I see that it
is imperfect in regard to all the three requirements. I know my
spiritual poverty. Unknown to me, falsehood, violence and pas-
sion are lurking in me.
I, therefore, feel as much compassion for . . . and . . . as
anger against myself. Personally, I don't judge them, nor should
anybody else from among us do so. However, my attitude towards
them will appear to have changed from now onwards. In fact,
it is they who will have changed. Equality consists in treating a
sick person and a healthy person as each deserves. One's attitude
towards both should be inspired by love. In either case, one must
consider the good of the other person. My attitude towards these
two will be in conformity with this principle. I will treat them as
sick persons and nurse them as such. All of us should do that.
How we can do so, I shall be able to explain later.
Everybody should learn from this incident. The boys and
the girls should take a warning from it. Any of them who feels pas-
sion should confess the fact. They need not be ashamed of it.
If I discover a snake in my bed, I cannot be blamed for it. After
I have discovered it, I should remove it. Passion is like a snake in
the body. One need not feel ashamed of admitting its presence.
On the contrary, it is one's duty to do so. It is a sin to let
the snake remain and feed it. One's duty is to get rid of it. If
any girl or boy wishes to marry, she or he is free to do so, except
that the prohibition against a brother and a sister or other near
relations marrying ought to be observed. I have often cautioned
people that nobody should write or receive private letters. Every-
body should hand over to the Secretary his or her letter without
sealing it. The Ashram is one family. Truth can have nothing
private. Everybody who observes this one rule will save himself
or herself from many pitfalls. However, nobody should be forced
to observe it. The letters of all adult inmates will continue to
be treated as they are treated now.
This is meant for all. If you would like to suggest any
change in this or if you don't feel inclined to read it out to the
people there, you may hold the letter back for some time and let
me know what you desire. You had warned me against . . .'s
disregard of rules and his lethargy, and I had been warned by
many against his excessive intimacy with . . .2 But I did not wake
up. Let me see whether I who have been so stupid and obsti-
nate, change now.
Even when you send many letters, you put them in an ord-
inary envelope. By the time it arrives here, it is almost completely
torn. Some day some letter will get lost. You should either send
in a stronger cover, or tie the envelope with a string as we do a
packet sent by book post but stamp it as an ordinary letter. The
risk in adopting the latter course lies in what might happen in
the office here. One of the letters may slip out. If you wish to
economize, let somebody make strong envelopes in the Ashram
itself. Even if he makes only one every day, that will suffice.
You must be receiving strong brown paper. Probably some persons
will also have khadi which can no longer be used. With these
materials, you can easily make cloth-lined envelopes.
Are there any persons, besides Parashuram, who know Hindi
and English well? If there are, send me their names.
BAPU
[PS.]
Read my letter to Dhiru. Discuss the matter with him and
let me know. You will have received the letter which I wrote
yesterday. I wrote in it about Shanta Panwelkar. I have read
. . .'s letter. I don't see how we have a duty to let him live in
the Ashram. The Ashram cannot be turned into a home for in-
valids. He also asks for allowance for the maintenance of his
parents. We cannot pay it. Explain this to him. If he wishes
to get admitted to a hospital, he may certainly do so. His mother
should do some work. He may write to somebody in his town.
In any case, I don't think we can keep him.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8340. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
