140. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
PRETORIA [GAOL,]
April 26, 1909
FROM
MR. GANDHI (CONVICT No. 777)
MY DEAR HENRY,
Nothing has caused me so much worry as the financial question.
I hate the idea of Phoenix being in debt; that is what the office debts
mean. Besides the jewellery, then some of the law-books, i.e., the books
I got out from England and the law-reports should be sacrificed, also
the large safe in the office and the cyclopaedia in the revolving case.
The law books may be placed before Playford, Benson, or Godfrey,
if he is doing well. If none of them can take any or all up, you may
circulate a list. They should go at cost price less 10 per cent. The
safe should fetch at least £15. Godfrey owes £3 for the cyclopaedia
(Curtis's). You know Curtis got £3 from me. This amount does not
appear in the books. It might now be collected.
I had a long letter from Manilal, not badly constructed. I see
that Mrs. Pywell is proud of her grand-daughter and considers her to
be the. . .2 be careful. Waldo3, who may be claimed to be a Phoenixite
in posse, is the pattern to be beaten. It is a hard feat. I should like
1 The original having been damaged, missing words have been conjectured
and supplied in square brackets wherever possible.
2 Some words are missing here.
3 Son of the addressee
to know how Cordes' lecture went off, and where it was given. Has
Thakar brought any books and type from Bombay? I notice that the
Thakars are staying with Chhaganlal. Now Chhaganlal like Millie has
a habit of suffering mutely. But the suffering tells on both of them.
They, therefore, make the friends' position embarrassing. I am, there-
fore, anxious that Chhaganlal should not overdo things. He is a man
. . .as his mother puts it, of being baked even under the s[hade of a]
leafy tree. I have found this trait in him ever[since I have] known
him as a grown-up boy. And I have seen no [reason to change] my
opinion. Please, therefore, tell him that he must not tax himself. I
do not know Mrs. Gandhi's intentions. [The Thakars] should have
stayed with her. Purshotamdas and Cordes [have each] a boarder now.
It is grand of Cordes to [take a boarder.] It is so like him. But I am
sceptical about the advisability of P[urshottamdas] having taken up any
boarder at all. He has hardly enough floor space. Ani has more than
enough having to look after four kids. P[urshottamdas] wishes to do her
reparation for past laches. He has not begun well in that direction. I
should, therefore, very much like to know what he has done to lighten his
poor wife's burdens. The message he has sent me is sweet. More I will
not say at present. I should like all in Phoenix to read Tolstoy's Life and
My Confessions. Both are soul-stirring books. They can be easily read in
two days.
The Gujaratis should also read Kavi's two volumes-the
books I have got. Thakar may have brought them. They may give
10 minutes of the half-hour evening service and half hour of the hour's
service on Sundays, which the Gujaratis have [for] themselves. The
more I consider his life and his writings, the more I consider him to
have been the best Indian of his times. Indeed, I put him much higher
than Tolstoy in religious perception. The books I have read have
afforded me the highest solace. They should be read over and over
again. So far as English books are concerned, Tolstoy is incomparable
in my opinion in chastity of thought. His definition of the purpose
of life is unanswerable and easy to understand. Both Kavi and Tolstoy
have lived as they have preached. Kavi writes from richer experience.
Will you ask Chhaganlal to write Revashanker Jagjiwan & Co. to let
me know what I owe them and what they advance monthly to my sister ?
Manilal is naturally somewhat dissatisfied with his studies. But it is
inevitable. We are in the experimental stage and the first students
have to be the victims. However, let him learn well what is given to
him. I hope one of these days to examine him. He was sure of his
geometry lessons, but he was found wanting. Let him cultivate regular
and studious habits, and learn to rely on himself in his studies. One
of these days I may be able to undertake part of his tuition myself. [I]
understand too his worry about gardening. He should be patient[, give
the] best that is in him and then remain perfectly cheerful [without]
anxiety or fretting. I wish the boys would talk [to Mani]kum in Tamil.
I am glad Kitchin was at Phoenix for a day. Manilal does not mention
whether he was pleased with his stay there. I hope everything was
done to make him comfortable there. I suggest to Maganlal that now
that he has learnt so many English pieces by heart he should commit
to memory some Tamil sentences. Is Chanchi cheerful? Or does she
brood over her separation from Harilal? Does Mrs. G[andhi] now take
part in household work? Pray thank Dr. Nanji for his attention to the
Phoenix settlers.
He is ever adding to the debt I am under to him.
What is the progress of the school-building? I think Chhaganlal should
represent to Mr. Gora on my behalf that he should consent to the boarding
allowance to be raised so as to free the guardians from eternal worry
about half-pennies. I am glad Swamiji is prolonging his stay. I hope
to learn more from him about the sacred thread on meeting. I hope
he received my letter addressed to him at Pietermaritzburg, from the
train. I am anxious that he should do everything he can to promote
the goodwill existing between Hindus and Mahomedans. I expect
Anandlal to keep to his promise not to abandon his studies and to
make the garden smile. Please ask West to continue the Sunday services
in spite of difficulties, if any. During Mrs. West's illness, they may be
held elsewhere but so far as possible should not be omitted. Will you
please have the Phoenix part copied and sent to West?
Then all can
read it, and let Chhaganlal give me a detailed reply embodying messages
from all who have any to send. I would expect a letter from Chhaganlal
at the latest on the 7th May. That would give him ample time.
From a photostat of the typewritten copy: S.N. 4925
I An Indian medical practitioner of Durban and a leader of the Natal Indian
community; often treated the sick in the Phoenix settlement including Mrs. Gandhi.
2 This is not available.
3 The letter appears to be incomplete and represents, perhaps, the part which
was sent to West.
