164. LETTER TO PARSEE RUSTOMJEE
DURBAN,
October 18, 1901
DEAR MR. RUSTOMJEE,
I have been thinking what written reply to give to the hand-
some and costly address presented to me by my fellow-country-
men. After deep consideration, I have come to the conclusion
that, consistently with professions made by me from time to
time, I must not be satisfied with merely saying that what I value
is the affection that has prompted the gifts, not the gifts as such.
I have, therefore, decided to hand over the jewellery, as per ac-
companying schedule, to the African Banking Corporation with
instructions to deliver the articles to the Natal Indian Congress
against a receipt signed by the President and Honorary Secretary or
Secretaries for the time being.
I make them over to the Congress on the following conditions:
(1) The jewellery or its value should form an emergency
fund to be utilized only when the Congress has no other
funds to fall back upon without the two landed proper-
ties.
(2) I should have the right to withdraw any or such of the
jewellery that may then not have been utilized for
devoting same to any beneficial object, whether within or
outside the scope of the Congress.
246
When the necessity for utilizing the jewellery arises, and if it
is possible, I would feel it an honour to be consulted by the Con-
gress as to whether the object for which it is sought to utilize same
is, in my opinion, an emergency within the scope of this letter.
But the Congress is free at any time to withdraw the jewellery
without reference to me.
I have taken the above step deliberately and prayerfully. I feel
that neither I nor my family can make any personal use of the
costly presents. They are too sacred to be sold by me or my heirs,
and, seeing that there can be no guarantee against the last con-
tingency, in my opinion, the only way I can return the love of
our people is to dedicate them all to a sacred object. And since
they are in reality a tribute to the Congress principles, to the
Congress I return them.
Lastly, I repeat the hope that our people would translate
into acts their good intentions (for the institution) of which the
recent presentations were an earnest.
That the Congress may continue to serve the Empire and the
community and that my successors may receive the same support
that was extended to me is my fervent prayer.
I remain,
Yours truly,
[List of Articles]
Gold Medal presented in 1896.
Gold coin presented in 1896 by the Tamil Indians.
Gold chain presented by the Johannesburg Committee in 1899.
Gold chain, sovereign purse and seven gold coins presented by
Mr. Parsee Rustomjee.
Gold watch presented by Mr. Joosub of Messrs Dada Abdoola &
Co.
Diamond ring presented by the community.
Gold necklace presented by the Gujarati Hindoos.
Diamond pin presented by Mr. Abdul Cadir and a silver cup and
plate presented by the Kathiawar Hindoos, Stanger.
PARSEE RUSTOMJEE, ESQ.
HONORARY SECRETARY
ADDRESS COMMITTEE
DURBAN
From a photostat of the office copy: S.N. 3922-
