49. LETTER TO SURENDRA
June 4, 1947
I have your letter. I like what you say. It was my be-
lief till now that you had adopted Nathji as your guru. I am
like a father to you all, and I am happy about it. If what I
say appeals to your head and heart then alone should you ac-
cept it. You are free to pick and choose. But that cannot be
said in regard to one whom we regard as our guru. There is
no pick-and-choose there. Whatever the guru says should go
straight home without the aid of reason. . . .5 In the absence of
such a guru one should listen to everybody and then act as
one feels prompted. There is a proverb which says that our
own intuition (such as it is) is a better guide than all the learn-
ing and intellect of another. As you know, I have search-
ed in vain for a guru of the type which I fancied you
had found. I have mentioned this more than once either in
Harijan or Navajivan and I have envied those who have claim-
ed that they had found one. These friends in their turn re-
commended to me the names of Ramana Maharshi, Aurobindo
Ghosh, Sahebji Maharaj of Agra, Upasani Baba, Mehar Baba
and another name in Karnataka which I have forgotten. But
I could adopt none of them and in the end came to the con-
clusion that perhaps, as with ideals, the quest is more than
the attainment. An ideal ceases to be an ideal if it is realized.
One can contemplate it, come ever closer to it, but never reach
it. So much about the guru.
You should also ponder whether my conception of brahma-
charya, on which I have tried to base my life, may not after
all be the result of a delusion on my part, since I cannot make
others see what to me is clear as daylight. The ultimate crite-
rion of the soundness and purity of my theories and conduct
must be whether my life, taken as a whole, has moved in the
direction of greater self-control and renunciation or of self-indul-
gence. I shall regard it as your victory if they restore their
earlier relationship, because I do not consider them lesser vota-
ries of truth, in speech or action, than I. The question here
is not one of absolute Truth. None has perceived it. I am
talking about relative truth. Today I shall stop here. Lilavati
who is here, has seen your letter. Manu has seen it. Sushila
Nayyar has seen it and if more people desire it I shall let them
see it.
I shall remain in this furnace of a place for some more
time.
[From Gujarati]
Bihar Pachhi Dilhi, pp. 67-
