250. LETTER TO M. M. ANANTA RAU
January 29, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your last letter which is undated but which was receiv-
ed yesterday.
The first part of that letter is a complaint against unseemly
behaviour of certain people at the meeting organized by the "follo-
wers of sanatana dharma". I was grieved to hear of the incident
referred to by you. I shall discuss it with Shri Rajagopalachariar
who is expected here tomorrow. It hurts me whenever there is
any rowdyism or untruthfulness on either side. Honest differences
of opinion there will always be. The cause of Truth cannot be
served by hard swearing, stone-throwing or untruthfulness.
The second part of your letter relieved the pain caused by the
first part owing to the manner in which you approached my argu-
ment about untouchability. As it so happened, I read your let-
ter aloud amongst us, four prisoners, and I must confess to you
that, as I proceeded, I could not help bursting into laughter, in
which my companions heartily joined. But behind the laughter
was also a sadness that you, an agent of sanatana dharma, could
not see that religion could not be treated in terms of algebra. You
have, instead of going straight to the core of my argument, laun-
ched out into an irrelevant discourse, ending in a ludicrous algebrai-
cal formula.
You will pardon me for writing straight from the heart. Of
all the letters that I have been receiving only yours and one or two
others that I can mention have been courteous and have attempted
to argue cogently. I should only return your courtesy and your
honest attempt to convince me by giving you an honest reply. Let
me tell you that all the letters and literature that have come to me
have only confirmed me in the opinion that untouchability, as we
are practising today, is a big blot upon Hinduism and an atrocious
error in which we are still persisting, simply because of our lazi-
ness to understand and act up to the very fundamentals of Hindu-
Ism. This inglorious persistence in error cuts me to the quick, but
I am an optimist. I have implicit faith in the ultimate victory
of Truth. I know therefore that untouchability will go and Hindu-
ism will live a purified religion.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. M. M. ANANTA ROW
From a microfilm: S.N. 19263. Also C.W. 9573. Courtesy: Government
of Mysore
