519. LETTER TO MANILAL B. DESAI
January 26, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,
I am reaching your letter somewhat late. But it is difficult
to attend to outside work in the midst of a tour in the course of
which I keep on moving from one village to another every day.
Why did Dr. Bhagawat have to give up that diet? Has he
also accepted defeat? I do not, of course, suggest by this that,
if he has not accepted defeat, he should resume the whole food
experiment. One should eat only such food as helps one to keep
good health. If Datar refuses to put up the building, is anybody
else willing to do so? Discuss the matter with the people there
and let me know. Does Datar permit the use of his bungalow?
Or does he seem reluctant to do so? You should not trouble
Jehangiriji in regard to shortage of funds.
If needed, you
may call for an additional five thousand from the Ashram.
Ultimately, however, the expenditure on that place will have to
be found by the village. If it cannot be done, we will have to
consider whether we should stay on there permanently. We shall
not succeed in propagating nature cure in villages by obtaining
money from outside. I am certainly not unaware of the fact
that Dr. Dinshaw is not able to attend to village work. This
need not frighten you. There will be no harm if the Trust
is made into a sub-trust of the Poona Trust, nor if it is made
an independent one. However, even if it is a sub-trust, it must
include some residents of the village. We should also ascertain
what the residents themselves desire.
I am glad that Gangabehn pays occasional visits to the
place. Will the lady whom Appa Saheb has sent stay there per-
manently? Has she become friendly with the other women? I
was happy to learn that Gokhale had calmed down still further.
Can you say that Purushottam has been fully restored? I hope
Paramanand's eczema has been completely cured. I should advise
him to get married immediately, for it is most uncertain when
I shall be able to leave here. It is indeed a question whether
I shall return alive from the place. The best course, therefore,
would be to go through the marriage immediately. As far as
I understand, this marriage is not intended to be a means of
pleasure. This is not the time for such marriages. I believe that
it is intended as a help in self-control. If my assumption is
correct, it need not matter where I am.
The problem of the well seems to be a difficult one. If a
deep well can be successfully sunk, it will be a great achieve-
ment. But such efforts do not always succeed. You have written
that you are going to think over it further. It will be good,
however, if the Government people guide you in your delibera-
tions in the matter. Ask Morarjibhai.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 2734. Courtesy: Manilal B. Desai
