250. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 8, 1937
CHI. AMBUJAM,
I am glad you wrote to me in Hindi. The writing is good
—perfectly legible, and the language quite good. As I narrow-
ly look at the writing at the time of dictating this, I see that
though it is good, and legible, it admits of correction and im-
provement.
When you can at all get away for a few days, with parents'
full consent and blessings, do not hesitate to come for fear of
getting ill here. I have no such fear. You will eat exactly
as you like—you will bring your cooker and prepare the food
for yourself. I fear you cannot come here before the end of
November, for I am likely to be away during November in the
Frontier. I need prolonged mental rest much more than physi-
cal. I am taking as much as is possible, but I can afford to
take more.
I am taxing my mind as to Raghavan's substitute. I had
myself thought of you. You have always been diffident—have
always underestimated your ability—but, if you will take courage
in both your hands, you will make quite a good Director. Try
—if you feel unequal to it you will resign. After all, in difficul-
ties, you will fall back upon me—not merely as your guide but
as the official head of the organization. You have sufficient know-
ledge of Hindi, you like the work, you know most of the work,
you are scrupulously conscientious, you have powers of applica-
tion and are quite capable of exercising independent judgement
when you want to. There is, therefore, no cause for diffidence.
You must shed false modesty. Therefore, if there is room for you
to reconsider, you should do so, and straightaway go and see
Rajagopalachari and seek his advice. I do not want you to
accept the post, if, for any reason, he does not like my idea.
I had your special basket of fruit. But what I can manage
is not the especially expensive fruit that you sent me but
oranges and limes. There are never extra good oranges in
Wardha, and never the rich limes you get there. And just now
I am using here nearly 3 doz. oranges a day and at least 1 doz.
limes. So whenever these are cheap you may send them. I
dread the railage. For the satisfaction of my curiosity let me
know what it comes to when you send your next basket.
Mahadev has not told you but the Rs. 50 must have been
received.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Mu-
seum and Library
