244. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
BANGALORE,
January 8, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS,
I got both your letters. Do not worry about your having opened Manilal's
letter. You are free to open any letter. How can I possibly keep anything
secret from you all. You fear your own shadow, fancying a whole lot of
misfortunes. Both of you have resolved to stay on there and have the necessary
experience. You should therefore stick to the place now. Go on cheerfully
doing what you can and be happy. If you do that, you will certainly get over
your diffidence.
I may say I have now begun to understand why you suffer. Without
knowing it, you are trying to appear better than you are, wish to do so, but
you should check such a wish. One should not feel miserable at what one is.
One should try to improve oneself but should not worry if one fails. That is
1 Coarse silk for making blouse
2 A variety of khadi
3 This and the subscription is in Gandhiji's own hand.
186
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
the essence of the Bhagavad Gita's teaching and therein lies true humility.
Humility you have in ample measure but you feel sore in your mind fancying
that you lack something. To do so is the very opposite of humility. Humility
always makes one contented with what one is. Why should you, seeing
someone's palace, pull down your little hut? Why should you not think of your
hut as much better than a palace? It is not true that those who live in palaces
are happier than those who live in huts. Happiness consists in being contented.
Why need you feel sore over your inability to overcome your impure
thoughts? Everyone in this world is full of blemishes. Out of countless persons
who try to overcome their impure thoughts, only one succeeds in doing so.
The vast majority should be satisfied with doing the best they can and leave
the result to God.
You need not feel the least constraint in writing anything to me. You
should make it a rule to write to me at least once a week. You will feel light
in your heart if you do so. Never entertain such futile thoughts that you could
not write to me because you were unworthy. Should you on your own think
yourself unworthy, or feel so only if I thought you unworthy? Will you try to
curb my thoughts? If God thinks me worthy, why should I think myself to be
unworthy? God never regards anyone as unworthy. How, then, could parents
with feet of clay think their offspring unworthy? Are they themselves likely
to be so perfect that they can claim the right to judge their offspring and
think them unworthy? No one is competent to judge who in this world is
worthy and who is not. All of us being imperfect, we should bear with one
another and do the best we can and purify ourselves. Parents have no right
to sit in judgement over their offspring, nor has a husband the right to sit in
judgement over his wife. This is implicit in ahimsa. Therefore overcome your
sense of frustration and take heart.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
