496. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May 7, 1932
DEAR COLONEL DOYLE,
I wish to bring to your notice a matter that has reached the
point of exasperation. Over two months ago Sardar Vallabhbhai
wrote two letters, one to his son at Bombay and one to Mr. G. V.
Mavalankar at Ahmedabad, both of which were of a business
type. They were duly authorized, but never reached the address-
ees. On March 26th Sjt. Mahadev Desai wrote his monthly letter
to his wife at the Ashram at Sabarmati. The letter never reached
her. On the 28th ultimo I wrote, by permission, a letter addressed
to the Ashram and meant for an erring boy of mine. It was a
most important letter in answer to his. The letter was not deli-
vered at the Ashram, though subsequent letters were delivered.
Almost invariably the Ashram post reaches the Ashram two or
three days after the due day of delivery. I infer from this that
the letters are delayed, where they are not withheld entirely, by
some authority. I know that correspondence of civil resisters is
under strict censorship. I have nothing to say against it. But
the correspondence sent from a prison, duly franked by prison
authorities would, I should imagine, be free from further censor-
ship and consequent delay or danger of being withheld altogether.
I do not write letters uselessly and hope I am meticulous about
observing the terms under which I am permitted to write these
letters. If they require a double censorship, it may be well to
let us know. If they are withheld even after being passed by
prison authorities I think it is due to us that we should know at
least the fact of detention. The letter that I sent to my son was
designed to affect the future course of his conduct and it had
attached to it an original letter which my son had sent for my
inspection and which he desired should be returned to him. I
have no desire whatsoever to write a single line that I would not
like any Government official to see. But I do feel hurt when even
letters sent by prisoners that are held to be unobjectionable by
prison authorities are delayed or intercepted in course of trans-
mission.
I should, therefore, thank you if you would kindly enquire
of proper authorities as to the fate of the letters in question. I
should be glad if it were discovered that my suspicions were
groundless and that there had been no interference with this cor-
respondence, and that the delays had been accidental and that
the missing letters had been found and delivered to the addressees.
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (30), Pt. I, pp. 247-
