205. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
May 20, 1932
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I was keenly waiting for your letter. Ultimately it arrived. Dhiru had
come to see me and left behind the Magan spinning-wheel. I observed him
drawing yam on it for a minute. From the very next day, I started spinning
on it. I had to face a lot of difficulties but I cannot say that the written
suggestions sent to me by Padma were of any help. You had assessed the
qualities of a learner and a stupid learner, and according to that estimate, I
stand nowhere even near the stupid learner. I wasted quite a large number of
slivers while plying it, sometimes for four hours, sometimes for five hours
and sometimes for three hours. Now I can say that I have acquired sufficient
mastery over it. Today, I spun 183 rounds of yarn in about one and a half
hours. When the switch which gives direction to the wheel does not arrive
and stop at the right place, the wheel requires pushing by hand. The directions
for the difficulties I encountered are not mentioned in your list of suggestions.
From that, I have come to the conclusion that my difficulties are unusual. If
that is a fact, it is not surprising. An old man's organs do not co-operate
with each other promptly. So I took time in bringing about co-ordination
between my hand and fingers. I could not work on two spindles because of
pain in my left wrist. The doctors believe that the pain will not go unless I
give my left wrist complete rest. So the biggest utility of the Magan spinning-
wheel for me is that because of it I am able to continue spinning. I have
started hoping that gradually I will be able to achieve my normal speed on
the Magan spinning-wheel. At one time I feared that I would not be able to
spin on it at all. But I did not want to accept defeat and therefore worked
hard on it. I do not find spinning on it at all difficult. Initially I used to get
tired but now I do not. . . .2 Today is the fourteenth day of my spinning. I
like my device. It is good. The spinning-wheel is cheap and there is scope
for making it still cheaper. Some modifications occur to me but I will take
sometime to carry those out. I cannot say just now that I have so much mastery
over the spinning-wheel as to make modifications in it. It is plied with both
hands-that is no doubt a clear advantage. An efficient spinner would spin
either twice or one and a half times or one and two-third times more with
1 A few lines after this have been crossed out in the source. They may have been
censored by the jail authorities or cancelled by Gandhiji himself, who had dictated this
letter, having written only the last few lines himself.
2 A few words here are illegible in the source.
154
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
155
two hands than he would with one hand. I can think of other reasons too,
for producing more yam on it. I may be wrong. You will immediately gain
one or two seers of weight if you personally see the interest I am taking in
your spinning-wheel. You will be very happy. I had decided to experiment
with your spinning-wheel at a time when I had no problem with my wrist.
Now I have to do that under compulsion. Either I give up spinning or spin
on the same spinning-wheel. Just as a person who is in difficulty thinks of
new tricks to save himself, I will keep on thinking about new techniques of
improving my speed on the Magan spinning-wheel. And if you are released,
and I am allowed visitors at the time, come and see me and teach me some
new tricks.
And when you say that you would not allow anyone to depend on you,
then on whose strength are you going to buy the land? How then can you
insist on buying the land? One of the conditions of buying the land was that
you would stay on it as a guard. You violate that condition and suggest buying
the land —how are both things possible. It does not matter if you violate
the conditions because as long as the land is not bought, you have to some
extent a right to change your opinion. But the moment you absolve yourself
from that condition, you lose the right to suggest buying of land. Not only
that. The land will be bought under new conditions in case it is bought. And
as you say, the talk you had with the seller was final. Then you cannot absolve
yourself from the commitment. I do not analyse all these to bind you but to
show you what difficult predicament you are in. I understand you. I do not
want to criticise you in any way. One need not bind a devoted worker like
you. No person, however respected he is, can absolve others from their moral
obligations. Everyone has to define his or her own moral obligations himself.
As long as you do not have trust in yourself, you should not even accept for
yourself any moral obligation. If you compel yourself, you will possibly impede
your progress. It is all right if you rise gradually. No doubt you are going to
rise because your intentions are pure, you are hardworking, you want to help
others to be best of your ability and you do not want to deceive yourself.
However, you will come across many moral dilemmas. Do not worry about
them. They will help you to become a matured person. 3
'Matparah' means 'devotion to truth'. 'Charan Padma' means 'lotus feet
of Satyanarayan'. By using the word 'Lotus feet', a devotee has personified
truth. Truth is formless and so people imagine it in the form they like. In
spite of knowing that it is imagination, different persons conceive different
images. As long as the imagination lasts, the images are true; the devotees
1 The remaining paragraph is already reproduced in Vol. XLIX, on p. 461.
2 A few lines are again crossed out here, probably censored by jail authorities.
3 The following two paragraphs are already reproduced in Vol. XLIX, pp. 461-.
156
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
ascribe whatever they want, to those images. In fact, Vishnu, Maheshwar,
Brahma, Bhagwan, Ishwar, etc. are all meaningless names or are wanting in
meaning. But truth conveys full meaning. A person who says that he will die
for God would not be able to explain what he meant by that and the listener,
too, would hardly grasp the meaning of what is told to him. But a person
who says that he would die for truth, knows what he had said and the listener
would also most probably grasp the meaning of it. You ask me, "what does
Rama mean?" It is almost meaningless to worship Him after I explain to you
the meaning. But if you worship Rama with the realization that one whom
you wanted to worship was Him, only then will he be a Kamadhenu 1 to you.
If you recite the name of Rama with that faith, be it a parrot-like recitation,
you will transcend the material world. The difference is that you recite the
name of Rama with faith in Him which a parrot certainly does not have. A
parrot is devoid of faith and will therefore feel tired and give up, or, if he
worshipped God in pursuit of self-interest, he will keep quiet after collecting
enough grains for himself. From this point of view, you do not need a symbol.
Tulsidas has given more importance to the name of Rama than to Rama, the
man. That is to say, he has suggested that the name need not have any
meaning. A devotee will create the necessary meaning later on according to
the nature and quality of his faith in Him. That is the beauty of the practice
of such worship, otherwise it cannot be proved how even the dullest of men
can enjoy spiritual awakening. The only condition is that the name of God
should not be taken to impress others or to deceive others. As I have
suggested, if a man worships God with faith in Him and never tires of doing
so, for him He becomes a Kalpataru. I have no doubt about it. Men so inclined
can prove this for themselves. Initially, their mind, while worshiping God,
will wander for days together, in some cases for years; they will become
restless, feel sleepy, even more than that, they might have some tragic
experience, but even then if they keep on worshipping God, their devotion
will pay. I have no doubt about it. An inanimate thing like a spinning-wheel
comes under control only after giving us a lot of trouble. Other things which
are more difficult give us more trouble before we achieve them. What can
we do for a person who wants to achieve the best but does not take the
medicines prescribed for it patiently for a long time and gets disappointed.
I feel that the above covers answers to all your questions; after these
there remains nothing for you to ask. If you can develop faith, go on repeating
His name while doing your work-eating, drinking, sitting or sleeping. Even
if you have to devote your whole life, you are not going to accept defeat. If
you do this, no doubt, you will be more and more at peace with yourself
with each passing day.
1 The proverbial cow, believed to fulfill all wishes of the worshippers
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
157
Do only as much writing and reading as you can without straining yourself.
There is no need to tire out yourself by drawing up a big programme of
writing and reading or getting disappointed if you are not able to keep it up.
I will see what I can do for Devidutt and Chandradutt's sister Lakshmi. I
believe Chhaganlal will take care of inspection and checking of trivial things
about which you have written. Dhiru has lost a lot of weight and so he has
gone to Ranavav. Kusum has also gone as she too keeps indifferent health.
Padma has not recovered from her illness, so I need not expect much from
her.
The three of us are still together and are keeping good health.
I am writing on aparigraha for the Ashram-somewhat on the lines you
wanted me to write. I do not get much time as I am occupied these days
with Magan spinning-wheel and the increased correspondence. And for that
reason . . .2 is lying unfinished.
I will certainly not draft trivial rules. I neither have the inclination nor
it is good to draft such trivial rules. With the change of place and time, new
sub-rules will emerge from great principles. At the same time, some rules
will become obsolete while new ones will come in force. If you have a thorough
understanding of the basic principles, then you would know the source of the
sub-principles and be able to draft the rules easily. Just as a person who knows
the derivation of the principles of geometry is able to find the correct time.
Totaramji's wife, Gangadevi was conscious till the last moment. She died
while reciting the Ramanama. A few hours before her death, she knew that
she was going to die. She had warned others and was herself very cheerful.
Totaramji was also quite composed. Gangadevi brought credit to the Ashram
in her life and in her death. 3
Blessings from Sardar and Mahadev. Keep on asking me till you are
satisfied. Do you meet Kakasaheb and Narahari?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32935
1 Gandhiji wrote to Narandas Gandhi to accommodate her either at Wardha or at
Sabarmati Ashram and inform Prabhudas accordingly. Vide Vol. XLIX, p. 472.
2 A word here is illegible in the source.
3 The remaining letter is in Gandhiji's own hand.
