584. LETTER TO HAMIDUDDIN AHMED
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
January 17119, 1947
DEAR HAMIDUDDIN SAHEB,
I thank you for your letter of 10th instant received by me only
yesterday. I understand the cause of delay that took place in replying
to my letter. I do not propose to enter into any controversy with you.
But I propose to confine myself to removing misunderstanding that lurks
in your letter.
A statement of mine about the happenings in Noakhali would have
been premature, for the impressions formed have been damaging and
facts that come to me even now are disturbing, if they are true as
at least some of them seem to me to be. The volunteers who are
working are not under my guidance or discipline. Their removal is surely
the function of the Government. I can only remove those whom I have
brought with me. I have already told Saheed Saheb that if for any
reason whatsoever he finds the presence of anyone of them to be
harmful to the country, he has but to serve a notice on them and they
will go away without a murmur. I have excepted from the category
only myself and a grand-daughter of mine who is with me. Of course
I know nothing of the subversive activities of any of the volunteers.
But if the report received by you is true and I were in your place
I would certainly see to it that those responsible for such activities
were summarily removed. I have no recollection of your having ever
suggested to me to get rid of any volunteer. I would like you to tell
me what I have said in public about the Bihar Government or the report
of the Bihar Muslim League. I have been most reticent about these
things. I have certainly entered into correspondence with Saheed Saheb
and others. But I am not aware of having said much in public.
I am sorry that I cannot accept your advice about Bihar nor can
I endorse your estimate of the situation if I were in Bihar. My firm
opinion is that I could not do service to the Muslim cause by going
to Bihar. Immediately I feel that I could, I assure you that I would
not wait for any prompting from you or any other friend. I have been
1 Parliamentary Secretary, West Bengal Government
347
in correspondence with friends who know and they dissuade me from
going to Bihar, and that for very good reasons. But I must not go
into it at this stage.
You astound me when you tell me that you found Hindus were
not the least enthusiastic about peace committees. When we last parted,
you left me under the impression that you at least were going to stay
in the district and see through the working of the peace committees
and you then appeared to be very enthusiastic about all that was
happening at the formation of the peace committees.
Of course I should like you to visit this district again irrespective
of whether I still "require any explanation".
Yours sincerely,
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
