557. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
February 25, 1933
CHI. RAMDAS,
Khushaldas has passed away. I received both the accompa-
nying letters yesterday evening. I have written to Shantilal and
informed him. Khushaldas has indeed been released from the
suffering of this life. The truth is that everybody who goes on a
journey along that royal road is released from this life. For this
life is given to us for repaying our debts, and nobody can leave
before he has paid off his. If this idea is correct, death means
that the person has paid off his debt partially at least.
He who knows with perfect conviction that this life is given to
us for repaying our debts can repay his debts to all, and the an-
cients described that as attaining moksha. Moksha means complete
freedom from debt and, consequently, end of the cycle of births
for the person.
I was pained to see your condition yesterday, your broken
health and your mental suffering. I had no remedy for either,
and was pained because you attributed to your father more power
than he possessed. I felt as Harishchandra had done. He had
417
53-27
become ready to sell his only son for the sake of dharma. I have
been doing very much the same thing. Though I know the reme-
dy for your poor health, I cannot adopt it because of my concern
for dharma, nor can end your mental suffering for the same reason.
If you follow the rule that you cannot avail yourself of faci-
lities which other prisoners who keep bad health would not get,
you can do nothing to improve your health. I can understand
that you would not like to ask for special facilities for yourself,
but it does not seem right to me that you should not avail your-
self of facilities which may be offered to you when you explain
to the authorities the condition of your health. When you are
outside, you enjoy more facilities than the countless millions and
never think about the matter. I ask for and enjoy, both in jail
and outside, facilities which they can never hope to get, and am
fully aware that I do so. But I do not feel that I violate dharma
thereby. If an elephant tries to crawl like an ant, he will not
succeed in becoming an ant thereby and will cease to be an ele-
phant, which means that he will have lost his true nature. An
elephant like me, however, would humbly accept his big size and
consume food weighing more than thousands of ants and would
also draw, without the least effort, loads which those ants could
never draw. An elephant is entitled to consume food which the
size of his body requires. Only, he must not waste that food by
not giving proportionate service in return. That is, he should
carry loads proportionate to his strength. If he does that, he
will have consumed as much food and given as much service as
an ant. This is communism. If, therefore, you can secure the
food which your body requires by legitimate means and with-
out humiliating yourself for the purpose, you should do so and
improve your health, and then serve other people to the best of
your ability.
But even in trying to serve other people and securing faci-
lities for yourself by legitimate means, you should know and under-
stand your duty as a prisoner. A prisoner has no right except
that of preserving his self-respect, for he ceases to be the master of
his body as soon as he becomes a prisoner and the jail superin-
tendent becomes its master. Even if the latter does not give the
prisoner enough to eat or to drink or sufficient clothes to wear,
the prisoner should remain contented and cheerful. Anybody who
cannot do so is not a true prisoner. We must admit that in this
age the British policy towards prisoners is comparatively more
liberal than that of any other government. It is improving day
by day. There is certainly room for much more improvement
still, but that is another matter. A prisoner may fight to bring
about such improvement. If, however, he remembers the general
principle stated above, he will not be disappointed if he fails in
his attempt-for he has no absolute right to enjoy any facility.
If you understand this reasoning fully, I shall be relieved and
you will be able to overcome your mental unrest.
I will certainly try to do what I can in regard to every-
thing which you mentioned-but in my own way, and that is
bound to take time. The delay will not make me impatient, and
I wish that you also should not be. What can you or I do? Cer-
tainly we are not masters of the result.
We can only try the best that we can. You have been do-
ing what you can, and I also will do what I can. Even if we
don't succeed, you should dance with joy, and so will 1.
Be not moved by joy or sorrow; with the body were they created;
None can escape them for by the Lord of Raghu were they decreed.
Do you follow all this? Read the letter three or four times,
and if you do not follow any point ask me to explain it again.
Keep me informed about the condition of your health.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20366
