368. LETTER TO DARCY LINDSAY
AS AT SABARMATI,
June 3, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter of the 30th April last. I thought
that the proposition that the Indian is a mere clerk in the ad-
ministration of the country was not seriously disputed by anybody.
Wish that you could read the minds even of the Indian members
of the I.C.S. I know from personal experience of them that the
vast majority of them do not feel anything more than mere clerks,
somewhat glorified if you like. But when I wrote the passage I
had not the few of these highly-paid Indians in mind but I had
the army of actual clerks who, no matter what their ability may
be, can never rise beyond the status of clerks.
When I said that the Indian at best was a commission agent
I again thought that I was stating what was literally the truth.
Take the largest item of foreign trade. Is not the Indian merely
the agent of his foreign principals? If he makes five rupees for
himself, he makes Rs. 95 for his principal. So long as the condi-
tions of trade remain what they are it cannot be otherwise. If India
remains principally a country exporting raw produce and import-
ing manufactured articles, Indian merchants must be largely com-
mission agents whether of England, Japan, America or any other
foreign country.
How shall I prove to you the daily humiliating experience of
the Indian who, no matter how wealthy he is, gets no facility
whereas his English rival gets many things done for the asking.
Take the case of the British navigation companies, the concessions
enjoyed by Europeans all over India whether in mining, banking
or other commercial pursuits too numerous to mention.
When I say that the English trade is founded upon the ruin
of Indian trade, I have simply written what historians have stated.
If it was merely enterprise and grit that had brought about the
state of things I should not grumble. But I would like you to
study the rise of the East India Co. from the records of the India
Office collected, be it said to their honour, by English historians.
1 Vide Vol. XLV, p. 342.
294
In writing of the levelling process I certainly had not in mind
the Soviet rule of Bolshevism. It is perhaps somewhat shameful
that I have to confess to you that I do not yet know exactly
what Bolshevism is for the simple reason that I have not had time
to study the inner working of the Russian revolution. The levelling
process to me simply means that the system of favouritism on which,
as I believe, English commerce has been built should cease and for
that purpose a double process has to begin. Favouritism should go
and young Indian enterprises should receive State help and patro-
nage.
I know that I must not expect to convert you by argument.
What I would like Englishmen in India to do is to see them [selves]
as the average Indian sees them and ask themselves why it is that
the vast majority of Indians feel as I often write in the pages of
Young India. Can it be that what some English economists have
written and what most Indian economists, historians and admi-
nistrators have written is all untrue? The case that I have pre-
sented is based upon their testimony and supported by personal
experience.
Lastly, however much I may differ from your views, let me
assure you that I appreciate your persistence in trying to con-
vince me of my error. And if you will not give up the attempt
I dare say that if I am not converted it is possible that in the
process of friendly interchange of communications you might be
able to see the other side of the shield.
Yours sincerely,
SIR DARCY LINDSAY
THE SPORTS CLUB
ST. JAMES SQUARE
LONDON, S.W.
From a photostat: S.N. 17203
