193. LETTER TO S. L. SOKHEY
WARDHA,
June 5, 1935
DEAR COL. SOKHEY1,
As you may be aware, in company with Sardar Patel I visi-
ted several villages of Borsad Taluka and saw the houses in those
villages specially with a view to test the possibility of effectively
using calcid for the destruction of rats and fleas. I could see at
a glance that such destruction was well-nigh impossible unless you
hold that calcid pumped into brick houses with storeys which are
not air-proof will reach every nook and corner and the burrows
under floors. Nor is it possible to denude the houses of huge earth
en or mud jars under and round which mice and rats take shel-
ter. The only thing effective in these cases seems to me to make
the floors of all houses rat-proof. This was the method devised
successfully in South Africa when the plague made its first appear-
ance there. The device was to tear open all cutcha floors without
disturbing the super-structure and make them pucka and rat-proof.
This was easily and cheaply done by a liberal use of stone or
brick and cement.
Dr. Bhasker Patel has [after] consultation
with an experienced house contractor devised several cheap me-
thods of floor renewal so as to make floors rat-proof. Leaflets
have already been issued for the purpose. If you can approve of
the method, it will receive additional impetus and might be per-
fected under your kind guidance.
If you have anything further to say on behalf of the use of
calcid or to criticize the method adopted of making houses rat-
proof you will please not hesitate to send your criticism freely.
Both the Sardar and I would welcome any criticism or advice
you may have to offer.
I may add that the agent for calcid who went to Borsad whilst
I was there opined to Dr. Patel after visiting a few houses that
the calcid treatment is not applicable to them. I discovered too
that a judicious use of the special emulsion prepared by Dr.
Bhasker Patel followed by sulphur fumigation had proved most
effective for the destruction [of] fleas.
I must not omit to mention how grateful both Sardar and
I were to you for showing us round the Institute with so much
care.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
