266. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
SAVLI,
March 3, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,
I got your letter this morning. I read it immediately after
having my meal, had a few rounds and am now writing this reply
at 8.30.
I tore up your letter soon after reading it. What was so confi-
dential in it that you had to doubly reassure yourself? Indeed,
there was nothing private at all. And how could you have so pri-
vate a thing as that? I shall, however, carry out your wish so
long as you mark your letter confidential and ask me to tear it up.
Your going has of course lessened my anxiety because the
going meant following the law of truth, and not to go would
have been, I feared, its violation. But that had no relation to the
blood-pressure, which had already been going down and so went
down by itself. I was not so much worried about your staying
on, as I knew all the time that you would at last do the right
thing only, and you did so quite promptly. As for the blood-
pressure, however, things will go on as they have been going.
It had reached 188/110 at Wardha and once it went up to as
high as 212/120, but the same day again it fell to 188/108. I
don't know what it now is. It cannot, therefore, be said at all
that the blood-pressure went down because of your going. You
may come when you can, after staying there as long as you have
the duty to stay on. Happiness ever goes with dharma. And
there alone lies peace of mind. Never have any doubt that there
can be no happiness in the violation of dharma.
Why do you want to be exempted from taking milk? Your
good lies only in taking it. Of course, you have freedom to re-
duce its quantity when you cannot digest four lb. of it. There
will be no difficulty in digesting four lb. of milk as long as you
have regular exercise and sleep. As for fruit, take what is easily
to be had. It will be good if Jayaprakash follows the same
diet as yours.
Keep your diary day after day. I follow your point about
studies. You may do what you can. Study Hindi grammar. Send
for anything you need from here. I shall leave here on the 6th,
hoping to reach Delhi on the 8th. I shall be spending at least
a fortnight there.
You must have written, I think, to Swaruprani and others
about Kamala. Ba is in Bombay, Rajaji, who has gone to Bombay,
may perhaps come here.
We have a fairly good gathering here. The weather is fair
and they see that I get good peace and rest.
It seems one of your letters has been lost in transit. I have
noted that. I know it is unlikely that you would avoid writing out
of laziness. The fear is you might grow melancholy, but you ought
not to under any circumstances. Doesn't Mother Gita teach us to
endure cheerfully the situation that we happen to be in?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3458
