136. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
December 1, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Again this is Thursday morning before 4 o'clock. Mahadev
is taking his time so as not to hurry you. I should never have
taken you to be 40 unless someone had told me so. Let us hope
you are at least 40 times as wise as you were when you were a
baby one year old and if we increase in wisdom moment by moment
then the increase becomes incalculable if not infinite. May the
increase in yours be infinite!
For your health, I have shared with you the new know-
ledge I have gained. You will now find out what is good for
you. Add to your food some salad, lettuce, ripe tomatoes or tender
leaves of some bhaji. It is undoubtedly good for the bowels.
But you should know best what is good for you.
Verrier came back about a month ago. He sees nobody and
has given himself exclusively to good work. He is, I believe,
quite well. Shamrao is ailing and had to go to a hospital.
Tilakam is at the Ashram. He is not quite strong. I have
told him he can take up untouchability work whenever he likes.
His desire is to work among the Christian untouchables.
Your time-table reads crowded. You should have more re-
laxation than you have given yourself. I do not think you should
be rigid with yourself. There should be a feeling not of per-
petual fatigue but of freshness. Are you giving yourself ample
sleep? There should be no brooding.
For me, I have to report an extraordinary result. From 103
I have jumped to 106 lb. Dried milk continues. But there
is not a corresponding increase in energy or a decrease in the
pain in the elbows. Even the absence of spinning has yet made
no difference. Therefore addition of weight may not be an un-
mixed blessing. I am carefully watching this sudden development.
All my reading is suspended. Nothing but correspondence
and interviews. Ba has gone to the South taking Velabehn and
Bal with her. Urmila Devi has also been sent there. There
is no doubt that Hindus have never thought about their religion
so much as they are now doing.
I must stop now. It is past 5.30 a.m. I must go to the
'library' and then to the walk.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Hope you have received the book on Buddhism.
From the original: C.W. 6252. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9718
