351. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 30/31, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
I didn't get any letter from you from Wardha.
I received
the first one from Rajkot yesterday evening. I am writing this
letter before the morning prayer.
The calamity in Bihar is too awful for words.
I feel like ask-
ing you to come over, but I have been exercising control over
myself. This does not mean that I don't want you to come. If
you wish to come or have anything special to discuss, you may
certainly come. I have merely left the decision to you.
I was surprised to read about your nose trouble.
You should
draw in cold water through the nostrils. Take complete rest in
bed and get the head massaged with oil.
Put a mud pack on the
head at noon and drink as much milk and eat as much fruit as
you can.
For fruits, you may eat oranges, fresh grapes or raisins,
and also pomegranates, if good ones are available. There is a good
variety from Kathiawar.
I expect to receive at Madhubani a
reply to my wire.
The idea of bringing the children to Rajkot seems good. How-
ever, if Jamnadas does not keep good health and Purushottam's
condition is no better, nor Jamna very strong, it doesn't seem
proper to keep the boys and girls there.
If the plan is carried
out, it means that I will have to keep you in Rajkot.
If the
children cannot be kept in Ahmedabad, why cannot they be kept
at Wardha? Is language the reason?
A churning is going on in my heart at present. But I have
come to no conclusion so far. I shall know in a day or two what
the result is.
March 31, 1934
I was interrupted yesterday after I had written so far. I am
now writing this while preparations for leaving are under way.
It is God's kindness that Father and Mother are well. Is
Jamnadas resolved not to take rest?
Neither Chimanlal, nor any-
body else for that matter, should interfere with Titus's work. When
we have handed over a thing to somebody to manage, we may
give only as much help as he may ask for.
To take interest in
what we have given away is like sacrificing oneself for the sake of
the dead. You have still not given me your opinion about whom
we should appoint as the new trustees of the dairy. I have thought
of Ambalalbhai, Shankerlal, Ranchhodbhai and Parikshitlal.
Shankerlal knows the Ashram rules and observes them to the best
of his ability.
Chimanlal has suggested the addition of Pannalal's
name.
If, however, Pannalal's is included, he will have to give
sufficient time to the dairy. Will he do so?
Regarding Lilavati, it is as you say.
I can't write more now. My respectful greetings to Father and
Mother.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8395. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
