217. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
AHMEDABAD,
July 16 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
There is no letter from you for this week.
There is a pencil letter from you complaining of want of news from
me. Events have moved with me so swiftly that I did not know what
to say and what to omit. Names of men and places I omitted as I
could not give you the history of men and geography of places I visited.
Bolpur I left as it never was the intention to settle down there. The
boys' services were required in the nursing department at a fair in a
holy place and they left. They then went to Gurukul whilst I was touring
through Madras. After finishing Madras I took up quarters at
Ahmedabad and sent for the company. At Madras the two friends who
interested themselves in the scheme are lawyers of note. But so many
have interested themselves in it. Few are willing to adopt it themselves.
However I feel that it is the right thing. There is something noble
in a 7-year-old lad thinking he is working for his meal and he is studying
for his country. There is something great if a boy of seven does not
look forward to leaving the place when he is learning and altering his
life. After a number of years whether many will do this or not is not
the question. What is of importance is that some are making a serious
attempt to live such a life. There was a verse we read at the morning
prayer today. 'Pain and pleasure, happiness and misery are without doubt
results of some previous causes set in motion by ourselves.' This thought
gives us the faculty for bearing pains without fear or anxiety. If we
add to this the thought that what passes as a misery may not be misery
at all but divine discipline. If a man about to commit a heinous crime
is prevented by snake-bite from fulfilling his purpose, the bite was surely
a blessing for him. Our analysis of events is often faulty. The remedy
therefore lies in trying to remain unaffected by outward circumstances.
With love,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi- Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 This sentence is left incomplete in the original.
219
