330. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
[LONDON,
After October 29, 1909]
DEAR SIR,
You have cabled me for a message to the forthcoming Congress.
I do not know that I am at all competent to send any message. Simple
courtesy, however, demands that I should say something in reply to
your cable. At the present moment, I am unable to think of anything
but the task immediately before me, namely, the struggle that is going
on in the Transvaal. I hope our countrymen throughout India realise
that it is national in its aim in that it has been undertaken to save India's
honour. I may be wrong, but I have not hesitated publicly to remark
that it is the greatest struggle of modern times, because it is the purest
as well in its goal as in its methods. Our countrymen in the Transvaal
are fighting for the right of cultured Indians to enter the Transvaal in
common with Europeans. In this the fighters have no personal interest to
serve, nor is there any material gain to accrue to anybody after the above-
mentioned right (which has, for the first time in Colonial Legislation,
been taken away) is restored. The sons of Hindustan, who are in the
Transvaal, are showing that they are capable of fighting for an ideal
pure and simple. The methods adopted in order to secure relief are also
equally pure and equally simple. Violence in any shape or form is
entirely eschewed. They believe that self-suffering is the only true and
1 This was published in the December issue of Indian Review. Evidently, Gandhiji
had simultaneously sent a copy to Indian Opinion which published it under the heading:
"Message to Indian National Congress". Vide also "Letter to H. S. L. Polak", p. 504.
effective means to procure lasting reforms. They endeavour to meet
and conquer hatred by love. They oppose the brute or physical force by
soul-force. They hold that loyalty to an earthly Sovereign or an earthly
constitution is subordinate to loyalty to God and His constitution. In
interpreting God's constitution through their conscience, they admit
that they may possibly be wrong. Hence, in resisting or disregarding
those man-made laws which they consider to be inconsistent with the
eternal laws of God, they accept with resignation the penalties provided
by the former, and trust to the working of time and to the best in
human nature to make good their position. If they are wrong, they
alone suffer, and the established order of things continues. In the pro-
cess, over 2,500 Indians, or nearly one-half of the resident Indian popu-
lation, or one-fifth of the possible Indian population of the Transvaal,
have suffered imprisonment, carrying with it terrible hardships. Some
of them have gone to gaol again and again. Many families have been
impoverished. Several merchants have accepted privation rather than
surrender their manhood. Incidentally, the Hindu-Mahomedan problem
has been solved in South Africa. We realise there that the one cannot
do without the other. Mahomedans, Parsees and Hindus, or taking
them provincially, Bengalees, Madrasees, Punjabis, Afghanistanees,
and Bombayites, have fought shoulder to shoulder.
I venture to suggest that a struggle such as this is worthy of occupying
the best, if not, indeed, the exclusive attention of the Congress. If it be
not impertinent, I would like to distinguish between this and the other
items on the programme of the Congress. The opposition to the laws or
the policy with which the other items deal does not involve any material
suffering: the Congress activity consists in a mental attitude without
corresponding action. In the Transvaal case, the law and the policy
it enunciates being wrong, we disregard it, and therefore consciously and
deliberately suffer material and physical injury; action follows and
corresponds to our mental attitude. If the view here submitted be correct,
it will be allowed that, in asking for the best place in the Congress pro-
gramme for the Transvaal question, I have not been unreasonable. May
I also suggest that, in pondering over and concentrating our attention
upon passive resistance such as has been described above, we would
perchance find out that for the many ills we suffer from in India passive
resistance is an infallible panacea. It is worthy of careful study, and I
am sure it will be found that it is the only weapon that is suited to the
genius of our people and our land, which is the nursery of the most
ancient religions and has very little to learn from modern civilization—
a civilization based on violence of the blackest type, largely a negation
of the Divine in man, and which is rushing headlong to its own ruin.
Indian Opinion, 27-11-1909
