336. LETTER TO NANALAL K. JASANI
December 21, 1932
BHAISHRI NANALAL,
I had a long and frank discussion today with Chhaganlal and
Maganlal. Now you, Ratubhai and the two brothers should sit
together and discuss the matter. I have of course advised that
Manilal also should be present. But the brothers seemed to be
rather lukewarm about it, though they said that Manilal did not
wish it. When I explained to them the implication of that state-
ment, they said that they would include him if necessary. My
advice, which they seemed to accept, was as follows: Doctor's
will should be fully respected as far as practicable, that is, the
sisters' shares should be paid to them, though it would not matter
if that cannot be done just now. It will be enough if their shares
are credited to their names and they are paid interest at market
rate. As for Ratilal, Doctor's wish should be respected. If,
on dividing the property into three parts, Ratilal's share comes
to more than that1,, the excess should be credited to his account.
As for Manekbai, it is probable that the interest on the sum in-
tended for her by Doctor will not be enough to meet her needs,
and hence a monthly allowance should be fixed for her and
arrangements should be made so that she gets it regularly. If,
however, she insists on taking the amount intended by Doctor,
it should be decided to pay it to her and she would then get
nothing more. The sums which she has drawn after Doctor's
death should be deducted from that amount. The three brothers'
shares should be divided, Trustees should be appointed for Ratilal and
his running expense allowance should be fixed. As for the other
two brothers, they may, in mutual consultation, take whichever part
of the business each likes. If this is not acceptable to them, the
diamonds and the farms also should be divided into two shares
and the whole management should be in the hands of Trustees or
Manager, and, as in the case of the mother, a monthly allowance
should be fixed for them and the brothers should not exceed it.
For the present, they should not interfere with the work of the Trus-
tees or the Manager. When both have acquired sufficient reputation
in business circles, they may take over the management if they wish
but they should not interfere with it as long as the business has
not been started again and put in order. For the present,
Chhaganlal should stay at Rajkot or elsewhere in India, and for
their education the children should be admitted in the National
School at Rajkot or elsewhere. I have heard that Chhaganlal is
addicted to a vice. He confesses that it was so, but I believe that
he is still addicted to it. In their talk with me, both the brothers
adopted a reasonable attitude. If they adopt a similar attitude in
their discussion with you, you will be able to decide the matter
in a few hours. After this has been settled, you may send for
Prabhashankar, and also for Champa, if you wish. It is likely
that Ratilal will get upset if Champa is called. If possible, there-
fore, you should settle the matter without calling her. I consider
it essential that the whole matter should be settled before the
2nd. If it seems necessary to you to discuss the matter with me,
you may leave your work and come any time you wish. I assume
that all of you, or those of you for whom it is considered necessary,
will come to me with the decision that is finally arrived at.
As for the amount to be paid to the Ashram, my advice
is this. If any balance is left after paying the other contributions
from the funds in the Trust, the Ashram may be given its full
amount or whatever is left. It may be given nothing if there is
no balance. All the other contributions which are usually paid
should be fully paid. If the sum reserved does not bring enough
income for this purpose, there should be a proportionate reduction
from the amounts of those contributions. I understand that
Rs. 800-900 are being paid every month. Maganlal believes that
after deduction for taxes, etc., the net income does not exceed
Rs. 500.
If that is so, the Ashram will get between Rs. 100 and 200.
It seems that the receipts are enough to pay the other contributions.
I do not think I have left out anything. You may certainly ask
me about anything, if you wish.
Show this letter to Ratubhai, as it is intended for both of
you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9471
