403. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
The packet which I despatched yesterday contained a report
of discussion arising out of . . .'S affair along with two letters
relating to it, a letter from Mary with my reply to her and a
copy of the same for being preserved there.
I very much liked Marybehn's letter. I am sure you will
understand my reply to her. If all of you like her nature, res-
pect her wish. But before you do that let all the inmates of the
Ashram meet together and think about the suggestion indepen-
dently. None of you need think that my view has to be accept-
ed. You will see that I have made that clear in my letter to
Marybehn also.
You will find with this a letter from Jekibehn. Her sons
have grown up now. They can be easily looked after there. If
you can keep them in the Ashram, write to Manibhai and ask
him to send them over. Ask him also to send the estimated ex-
penses on their account. . . . 4
If we only would, all of us have much to learn from the
cases of . . .5. . . . 6 had to leave the Ashram because he repea-
tedly violated the Ashram rules. . . . 7 did not observe the Ashram
rules and has also realized that he will not be able to observe
them in future. He has not observed any of the rules till now
and will not be able to observe them in future, and so the
whole family is leaving the Ashram. . . . was the pillar of the
Ashram. Without him, the Ashram would not have come into
existence at all. It is a painful and serious thing that his family
should leave the Ashram. But I believe all the same that it is
necessary for the sake of dharma that they should leave. We will
not cease to love them for having left the Ashram. We will con-
tinue to take interest in them wherever they are. We should wish
that, even though they live away from the Ashram, they will
observe its rules to the best of their ability and will never do
anything to bring shame on the Ashram.
I do wish that nobody will feel superior and think that
they were not perfect because they left and that those who have
not left are so. Those who leave can be morally worthier than
those who remain. The imperfections of those who are leaving
became known to all, but who knows the imperfections of the
others which may have remained unknown? We should not sit
in judgment over anybody. God alone knows who is good and
who is bad.
We should learn a lesson from these instances and wake up.
No one should conceal his shortcomings. Everybody should be-
come more vigilant. Let nobody do anything out of false shame.
One should do only what one spontaneously can, and if anyone
cannot observe the Ashram rules or does not wish to do so, it would
be better for them to leave. All of us are imperfect, but if, know-
ing imperfections, we constantly strive to follow the Ashram
ideals and do not hide our shortcomings, we are fit to live in the
Ashram. We should, however, leave if we do not wish to follow
those ideals or have no faith in them.
If you circulate the foregoing among all friends there, it will
suffice. If you wish to suggest any changes in what I have
written, you may do so.
BAPU
[PS.]
Chhaganlal does not worry about Rama at all. He is sure
that you will do whatever is necessary.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8352. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
