397. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 18, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter.
I got the rakhdi, but late by two days. I had, however, taken
it that I had received it on Monday.
If bananas do not agree with you and yet you go on eating them,
they will not benefit you. Every stomach has its own peculiarity.
I have fully understood your analysis of the reasons why
you get angry. Try to overcome your weakness. I know that
you will succeed in overcoming it. I understood your meaning
in that part of your letter which you had decided not to leave
out. You did right in not leaving it out. There is great pride in
not explaining one's need to a person whom one loves, it does
him injustice and puts a heavy burden on him. Civility and
humility on our part save him from the trouble of ascertaining
our need. This is the first lesson in civility. Learn it now.
Write to Krishnan Nair and tell him that I often think about him.
You did very well in going to Rajkot. It seems your health
requires such rest.
Public opinion means the opinion of that section of society
for which we care. It is our duty to respect it so long as it is
not against morality.
It is difficult to come to a just conclusion on the basis of the
incident about the dhobi. Such conduct would certainly not
meet with our approval in this age. Anyone who abandons his
wife because of such criticism would be regarded as a cruel and
unjust man. But I am not in a position to say what the poet's
intention was in the Ramayana in narrating that incident. We
need not bother about that problem. I would not. I do not
read even works like the Ramayana from that point of view.
I believe that I must stop taking the freedom which I do with
the girls if that shocks the inmates of the Ashram. There is no
reason which makes it a moral duty for me to take such freedom,
nor does my taking it violate morality. If, however, my refrain-
ing from it was likely to have an undesirable effect on the girls,
I would reason with the inmates of the Ashram and continue to
behave as I have been doing. If the girls themselves do not leave
385
50-25
me, I would have to consider how to meet the situation. In any
case, no one should follow my example and take similar freedom
with them. The freedom one takes should be spontaneous. No
one should consciously and deliberately decide to take such free-
dom from one fine morning and behave unnaturally; it would be
quite improper if anyone did so. Narandas is free to act as he
thinks proper. I would not wish even to criticize him. The truth
is that anyone who takes even the most innocent freedom with
impure feelings falls into a pit and also drags others behind him.
As long as the relations of men and women have not become
natural in our society, one should certainly be careful in one's
behaviour. There is no royal road in such matters which all can
follow. There is a good deal of clumsiness in your own behaviour.
Your innocence saves you, but it is certainly not proper for you to
be proud of it and obstinately to persist in your behaviour. There
is thoughtlessness in doing so. You do not see today the harm which
such behaviour may do. But you may have to repent one day.
No one's pride has endured for ever. One should not deliberately
try to shock society, arguing that all conventional restrictions are
bad. Have you now some idea of what public opinion means?
Write to Dhurandhar and tell him that he should bear in
mind what the Major told him. He will himself have to become
a walking advertisement for asanas.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10299. Also C.W. 5745. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
