312. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
Sunday, September 8, 1929
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got the letters of you both. Sushila may certainly come
when she wants to. I shall arrange to keep everything ready for
her to return immediately if she so desires. I am dictating this
letter at Bhopal. Kanti is taking it down and I am spinning at
the wheel. Today is Sunday. It is already evening. My silence
period is about to begin. Among the others accompanying me
are Kusumbehn, Jamnabehn and Pyarelal. Pyarelal's sister will
be with us till we reach Agra, and Jamnalalji, too, will remain with
us at least till we leave this place. The scenery around here is very
pleasant. Sanchi, the place known for Buddhist art, is near here.
We shall visit it on Tuesday. The lake here also is famous all over
India. The surrounding scenery is beautiful and stretches some
six or seven miles.
Silence Day
You have put me a question regarding the continuation of
Indian Opinion. It is useless for me to write anything on the matter
from here. You may do there whatever seems possible. If you
finally decide to close it down, you should certainly consult
the Trustees there before doing so. Take the advice of Umar
Sheth also.
It is surprising that you should have raised the question
of marriage with a member of the Marwari community. I think
I once told you that, if the proposal for Sushila had not been
received, I had nearly decided to betroth you to a Bengali girl.
What I had said was that I was not prepared to go so far as to
approve of marriage with anyone outside one's community—
though of course there is no sin even in such a marriage. But it has
been my considered opinion that inter-provincial marriages are
a very good thing.
Others would have nothing to say against us for not being
vaccinated as long as we remain in a given place while the
epidemic rages there. However, why should I involve either of you
in that botheration? Do what your conscience tells you and what
is within your capacity. You need not now be guided by me
on this subject. The proper course for you is to read the litera-
ture on the subject and form your own views independently, and
then act on them. The majority of people get vaccinated. Only a
few like me do not.
Nimu will have her delivery shortly. She is at Lakhtar. I can-
not say why Ramdas does not write. I have written to him.
As for Nimu, she is lazy.
Devdas has gone to Almora as Mathuradas's wife has fallen
ill. Otherwise he would have seen me at Agra the day after to-
morrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4759
