198. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
July 9, 1932
DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
God willing, we shall meet on the 21st. You know well enough
things don't always happen as we intend or wish. See, Papa
seemed to be on her death-bed, but she recovered. Her hus-
band, Varadachari, was strong and healthy, but he passed away
after a brief illness, leaving for Raja a widowed daughter. Papa
is his dearest child. She is a strong-willed girl and will bear the
178
blow with courage. If knowledge sinks deep into the heart, one
does not feel the loss beyond one's strength to endure. For the
wise are equally unaffected by birth and death. As this recent
example of the uncertainty of life was fresh in my mind, I started
the letter with "God willing". We shall meet on the 21st if our
wish to meet on that date is in accord with His will. And even if
we don't, we shall be equally thankful.
Ashram letter is sent along with this.
Now this for Ramdas: Nimu's letter and the lines written
by you on the blank part of the sheet reached me. There is no-
thing impolite in your writing on the blank portion. In my opinion
it would be impolite not to use that part. Again, in prison we can
feel greedy about everything and we should keep up this greed
throughout life. This is also a prison in that the body is even a
jail. So that it would be well if we can observe all the good rules
of this small prison throughout the life. If we cannot observe
them, we should admit our weakness to that extent and should
try to observe them as far as we can.
I have written to Narandas that after talking with Nimu,
he should do what is proper. I have jokingly given a mild rebuke
to Nimu. Why does she trouble you? Why did she not write to
me direct? Why did she not make matters clear with Naran-
das? Is it for troubling you here also that she is married to you?
Again a girl brought up in the Ashram would not believe herself
to be weak or dependent. She would find her way out. She would
not sit (idly) looking at the face of her husband. What a (good)
example Gangadevi had set! Totaramji became a pauper; she
kept up his spirits and did not allow his beggarliness to be felt at
all. If she does not write to me hereafter she will have to be
brought round. I have written to her to this effect. I have ex-
pressed my opinion that she should not engage a boy servant to
do the Ashram work. A mother who takes proper care of her
children is also doing the Ashram work, because so long as Nimu
is in the Ashram the responsibility of taking care of the children
rests with the Ashram, i.e., Nimu by taking care of the children
discharges her duty to the Ashram and so it is equivalent to doing
Ashram work. You need not be anxious over it. You have
done right in throwing that anxiety on me. At present my
letters are being checked. There is no reason why they should do
so. But are we not prisoners? Hence perhaps my letter may reach
the Ashram late. Even in that case there is no cause for anxiety.
Your weight must increase. The doctor says that Ramdas can ask
for and eat whatever he likes. If milk is necessary, it should be
taken. You should not allow the body to become weak. I know
your nature. I am also of the same views. But I would not hesi-
tate to take those things which my other companions do not get
if I am convinced that my health requires them. It is a different
matter if we know that the other companions also need them.
As regards the health of Surendra, some thought has to be
given. Does he take wheat at present? His weight must increase.
If the energy is maintained there is no reason to add to the weight.
I have sent a Parsi book for Mr. Darbari. I have not paid for
it. He may return it when he has done with it. It is a very
good book. It contains a full substance of the Zoroastrian ethics.
Now Mr. Darbari must be completely recovered.
Devdas is completely recovered. There is nothing settled
about (his) transfer. It seems other (prisoners) are where they
were lodged.
Prof. Trivedi has sent (me) the writings of (Swami) Viveka-
nanda. I did not send for them. If anyone from your side has
sent for the same please let me know so that I may send the
same to him.
As regards our activity the latest news is that the Sardar
has begun the study of Sanskrit. He has sent for the 24 parts of
the Guide to Sanskrit by Satavlekar. The first part will be finish-
ed in about three days. Attempts are being made by him to
begin spinning. He is also doing the work of making envelopes.
You already know that the weight of us three has increased.
We have not received any new books worth reading. Chandu-
lal has sent me the Gondal Reading Series.
If Ramdas has occasion to write to Nimu, he may write a
brief purport of what I have written above. So that she may know
my views even if my letter reaches her late, or does not reach
her at all.
It is surprising there is no letter from you this time.
We three of us remember you all.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My post is passing through strict scrutiny. In consequence
there is every possibility of the Mimansa of Maganbhai being lost,
so Dahyabhai may bring it if the same is sent to him. He will
personally hand it over to the Superintendent and then there will
be no fear of its being lost.
Nevertheless, he must have a copy of it in his possession.
BAPU
[PPS.]
I send herewith Mr. Bhansali's letter for your perusal. You
will like it. It is not necessary to send it back.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (3), Pt. II, pp. 275-83 and Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 284
