76. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 12, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
Your argument is worthy of an M.A. "If someone can hang
himself upside down, why can I not play music?" Many other
questions like this can be framed. The only reply is that no rea-
son can be given why you may not. If one person can do one
thing, why may another person not do something else?
But it is certainly possible that someone who hangs himself
upside down may be able to give a valid reason even for such an
action, while a person like me who then starts playing music may
not be able to give a convincing reason for doing so. But let that
pass. You should now put your proposal before the other inmates
of the Ashram and, if a majority supports it, by all means go
ahead and make the necessary preparations. Being a prisoner, I
myself will not be able to join that marriage procession. And a
prisoner has no vote either, so you need not consult me. Q.E.D.
I will patiently wait for Dhurandhar's letter.
Whether you reply to my question or not, I will keep on in-
quiring about your health. Tell me, therefore, is it all right? Is
71
the throat all right and can you speak? How is the backache?
Is your weight increasing?
When the time comes for giving away the yarn which I am
spinning with the slivers sent by you, I will certainly give it to
you if you continue to deserve it even then. I hope you will be
satisfied with this answer. The count of the yarn will not ex-
ceed 75. There are fairly numerous rough particles in the sli-
vers. It is possible that even Keshu's machine is not good enough
for devkapas. I hope you know that this variety of cotton cannot
be carded with the ordinary bow.
I don't know anything about Mahadev having been offended.
Nor did I know that he had written to anybody about the matter.
I knew something from Narandas's letter. I knew about disrespect
only from your letter. Mahadev has told me nothing. Nor did
I know, when I asked him to spin [with your slivers], that he
found himself in a moral dilemma. In this matter your case
seems to be perfectly correct. I did not feel disrespect to anybody
in your remark or your request. I don't know why Mahadev felt
it. I am observing silence just now, otherwise I would have ask-
ed him. I did feel, however, that your request sprang from igno-
rant attachment. Why should you have such attachment for me?
One should eschew attachment for a person who cannot belong
to anyone individual but daily strives to belong to all. Such
attachment can avail nothing. But this is one thing. To de-
duce from it a dislike for others is a different thing.
Sardar, I believe, was only joking, as is his wont.
And now see how I valued your love. Surely you will agree
that I should make what I believe to be the best use of the sli-
vers sent by you. Wouldn't that be the best way of showing how
I valued your love? If a vaid, out of his great love for me, sends
me gold bhasma would it not be right to give it to my neigh-
bour to whom it might be more useful than to me? Or, if somebody
sends me a carriage to drive and if my neighbour can drive it
more safely than I can, would I not show better appreciation of
the donor's love by letting that neighbour drive it for me? The
same argument applies to slivers. Among us here, Mahadev can
make the best use of such fine slivers, and so I gave half the quan-
tity to him. This will test his skill and increase national wealth
and I also will feel happier. You should, therefore, change your
nature which makes you wish that your gift should be used only by
the person to whom it is given. If you make a gift, you should do so
unconditionally.
Sushila's description of you was correct.
If
Kisan was not likely to get in time the fruit which were brought
for her, you would have served both Sushila and Kisan by eating
it yourself. It was foolish of you to have let them rot. Q.E.D. again.
I am sorry I cannot reply to your last question.
I hope you have had long talks with Lakshmi.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10340. Also C.W. 6769.
Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak
