328. LETTER TO MANIBHAI DESAI
MUSSOORIE,
June 2, 1946
CHI. MANILAL,
I am glad that you got the land at last. If all the land
has been entered in my name, that is not right. There is no
objection, however, if I have been described as a Trustee. I
suppose you can easily see the difficulty that you will face if
the land has been entered in my name and I suddenly die. In
case, however, such a thing does happen, you may use this letter
and end any dispute that may arise, telling the people concerned that
the land was not my private property but was intended for schemes
for helping the people of Uruli Kanchan to preserve good health
and for purposes connected with such schemes. After me the Trus-
tees will be Dinshaw Mehta and Jehangir Patel or Balkrishna.
I am returning by registered post the plans received from
you. I accept the modifications suggested therein. I see no ob-
jection to all the lavatories being fitted with good septic tanks,
if that is possible. I suppose you know that if such tanks have not
been made carefully or if we do not use them properly, they can be
a source of grave danger. Let Dr. Bhagwat and Bhai Datar meet
and discuss this matter further. Balkrishna also knows about both
the dangers. I am not happy about the vagueness of my sugges-
tion, but I have not been able myself to come to a definite decision.
I discussed the matter with some friends who have experience
in this field, but they also could not help me to come to a deci-
sion, so [complicated] is the problem. For the present, therefore,
abide by the decision of the three persons I have mentioned.
I shall positively have returned there in July. If you have
not been able to make much progress by that time, I will take it
up when I come there. I shall be in Delhi up to June 15 at
any rate. I may [possibly] remain there even up to the 21st.
I shall. . . 3 be going to Panchgani thereafter. I must return
to Sevagram in August. I am, therefore, afraid that I [shall
get] at the most the month of July [in Uruli Kanchan].
My only consolation [is that you people] are doing excellent
1,2,3,4, 5& The source is damaged here.
262
work there, so much so that I sometimes fear whether my presence
there might not hamper the modest but beautifully progressing
work that you are doing. But I dismiss the fear from my mind
with the thought that I will do as God prompts me.
By a fortunate accident both Kanchan and Zohra happen to
be there. But they might leave that place any time. The best
thing would be that some local woman or women should get
trained and start working.
Carry out the modifications in the plan for the building
which you have suggested. Personally I like the change in the
doors from three feet to four feet, for narrow doors cannot
afterwards be widened. I myself have experienced the advantage
of wide doorways, namely, that patients' beds, etc., are easy
to move in and out through them. But the best course would be
to follow Dr. Bhagwat's advice. Everybody has a right to point
out to him the advantages and disadvantages of all things but
in case of a difference of opinion it is best, in my absence, that
his view should be carried out. I cannot from this distance come
to any more definite conclusions about the [suggested] modifica-
tions. I understand what you say about the cow.
I will reply to whatever questions you ask me about
brahmacharya. But you should attach importance only to what
your heart spontaneously suggests. Vinoba's articles are, of
course, fine. But for the person who has unquestioning faith
in the power of Ramanama there is no other support but that,
for when one has faith in its power Ramanama ceases to be a
matter of reason and becomes solely a matter of the heart. I
feel every moment that for such a person Rama is the only King
of his heart, and he who has Rama as his Lord cannot waste a
single moment of his time. And violation of brahmacharya even
in thought means for that moment at least the man's attention
had wandered, and that, therefore, that moment was wasted.
I am not writing separately to Dhiru today. This is to save
time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 2745. Courtesy: Manibhai Desai
