23. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 3/4, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter on Tuesday. I got the usual letter about
Kana1, too, posted separately. I convey the information to Ramdas
as and when I think fit. I had expected a postcard today, but there
was none. Pyare Ali had sent me a wire about Qureshi's operation.
I have also had a letter from him. I hope Champa got the post-
card I wrote to her. Please make whatever arrangements are
possible for the education of the new girls who join. I constantly
feel that you should get more free time to think about and plan
things such as this. We have done much for Liladhar. If he does
not understand his place or his self-interest, how can we help him?
Do only what seems proper to you. Indu yearns for parental love.
Try to understand his heart. Read my letter to Kusum. If she
takes careful measures, she will be completely all right. If, however,
she takes rest and employs other remedies just to please you, she will
lose her life altogether or else will become an invalid and then
weep. I intend to devote the weekly article this time to Narayanap-
pa's case. It will contain some thoughts which may seem novel.
Try to understand them and then explain them to the girls.
My chief reason for resuming milk from Wednesday was to see
whether bajri would be effective, in spite of the milk, in preventing
constipation. Today is Saturday. There has been no ill-effect till
now and in other respects my health has been quite good. So far
bajri and bananas have not disagreed with me.
What you say about Parasram is correct. Though he is ex-
tremely unmethodical, he has seemed to me a useful man. His
motives are good. Sometimes he exhibits great capacity for work.
Shankarbhai's hand should be completely cured by now. Is
the bone-setter a man trained in the indigenous method or has he
been qualified in Allopathy?
Vinoba's plan is indeed excellent. If we have the right type
of men, there is plenty of work which they can do. I received to-
day Chhakkaddas's and Keshu's slivers. I now want the thin-
nest spindle you can get. Only if I get it, can I carry on my expe-
riment here properly. I got the books too. How far they tally with
the ones I had asked you to send, I shall perhaps let you know
after I have checked them.
Do we get money for Kaka's milk and ghee? We should,
for he was supplied these items in Belgaum by the Government. If
they don't supply these to him there we must do so. But we
should not act like the woman who ignorantly gives away the butter
along with the whey, and is called a fool into the bargain. If neces-
sary, go and see the Superintendent and talk the matter over
with him.
I have suggested in a letter to Maganbhai a title for the dis-
courses But on second thoughts it seems to me that we need not
be in a hurry to print them. I have written them in great haste.
You and other people there may correct my mistakes as you read
the discourses, and even if you did not understand some point I
would not worry much. I would not mind even if you found that
a few sentences here and there were not sufficiently clear. It is not
always possible for me to revise the discourses after writing them.
Hence, if they are to be published I should certainly like to read
them from that point of view before they are published. I would,
therefore, suggest that, if you have not incurred any expense so far,
you should postpone their publication. If, however, Maganbhai,
Panditji, Chhaganlal-if he is there-and you feel no doubt about
the meaning of any sentence and if, whenever the language was
not clear, you have been able to make it clear, you may certainly
print them. You have suggested Mangal Prabhat-II as the title,
but it does not seem to me appropriate, for the discourses on this
occasion were written from a somewhat different point of view.
That is, I had in mind mostly the inmates of the Ashram when
writing them. That is why I have suggested the title Ashramvasi
Pratye1, so that readers may know the limitations of the discourses
and those of them who look upon themselves as among the inmates,
though they do not live in the Ashram, may understand that they
are addressed to them too. But I don't insist on this title being
accepted. You may choose any other that may appeal to all of
you.
Think about Manjula's dilemma. If her disease can be cured
with cod-liver oil, it would perhaps be the right thing to give it
to her. I don't think she can think for herself. She will probably
depend on Kashi's advice in which case she should follow it. And
if Kashi does not want to give her that, it should not be given.
But if Manjula, though only a child, understands things a little
and would like to take it I think we should respect her wish.
You may now do what you think best.
While writing the history of the Ashram, a thought occurred
to me. I have a faint recollection that I wrote to you about it
once. I don't know if we have a list of the persons who came and
stayed in the Ashram temporarily from the time of its establish-
ment to the present day. If we don't have such a list, we should
try to remember the names and write them down. They should
be noted in a register, which should contain the full name of every
such person, his place of residence, age, occupation, education,
marital status and similar information; also what he learnt
in the Ashram, when he left it and where he is at present.
Whenever anybody comes to the Ashram in future, his name should
be entered in the register, so that all this information will be avail-
able to us in one place. My only aim just now in asking for this
information is to know how many persons came to and stayed in
the Ashram temporarily, how each of them was trained and where
he is settled now. If we have kept no such record till now, as time
passes it will become increasingly more difficult to prepare one.
The pieces of leather for repairing the soles of sandals which
you sent a second time have also been used up. These pieces
are of such poor quality that, though I use the sandals very spa-
ringly, the repaired soles hardly give service for a month. Like a
miser, I also send small bits of leather for repair of soles. But we
must make do with whatever quality of leather of dead cattle we
can get. Please, therefore, send one or two pieces again.
[September] 4, 1932
Hemprabhadevi used to write to me regularly. Of late
I have had no letter from her except for a postcard once. Do you
hear from her? If you do, give me news of her health. And write
her a letter or postcard. And tell her that I complain about
absence of letters from her, and that I should get her letters
regularly. If she has been writing and if she has preserved the dates
of the letters, she should let me have them. Probably she has
been writing. Sometimes letters get lost in transit. Her letters
are not likely to have been lost here, but it is possible that they
did not reach this place at all.
I hope you have dispatched the postal acknowledgment for
the registration of the Anantpur report. I enclose a photograph
sent by Devdas. Show it to Ba too.
BAPU
[PS.]
After I had written the above, I sat down to write the article
for the women. I have just finished it. I think it is very important.
But probably they will find it difficult to understand the article.
If you do not understand it fully, do not show it to the new group.
Write to me about it. If you are convinced of its truth and can
see ahimsa in that slap, you may certainly read it to them solving
each difficulty that may be raised as you proceed. This is what
I would suggest. If, after reading the article, you feel that you
have understood it, give it to Panditji and other senior persons
to read. Prema also should read it. If these persons understand
1 The source has "4-7-1932".
2 Wife of Satis Chandra Das Gupta
3 Vide Vol. XLIX, p. 416.
it, show it to all others, and particularly to women, for it is pri-
marily meant for them. Of course this article should not be
published. It can be easily misunderstood. Those who have the
spirit of ahimsa in them would understand it without difficulty. In
any case, they would not misunderstand it. An article like this
may be published only when I am outside. For the present, it will
be enough if all of you understand it. If my reasoning is correct
and if I am right about my experience, I am sure that most people
who try to follow those ideas in practice are bound to realize their
truth.
BAPU
[PPS.]
In all there are 48 letters, 39 tied with a string along with 8
loose and a photograph.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I and Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 463-
