363. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
May 27, 1906
RESPECTED BROTHER,
I have your letter of the 17th April. I do not know what to say.
You are prejudiced against me. There is no remedy against prejudice.
I am helpless. I can only reply to your letter in full.
1. I have no idea of separating from you.
2. I claim nothing there.
3. I do not claim anything as mine.
1 The letter was translated from Gujarati by V. G. Desai who tells us that it was
revised by Gandhiji himself.
4. All that I have is being utilized for public purposes.
5. It is available to relations who devote themselves to public work.
6. I could have satisfied your desire for money if I had not dedicated
my all for public use.
I have never said that I have done much for brothers or other rela-
tions. I gave them all that I could save; and this I have mentioned not
out of pride, and only to friends.
Rest assured that I will cheerfully assume the burden of supporting
the family in case you pass on before me. You need have no fear on
that score.
I am not now in a position to send you money as you desire.
It is well if Harilal is married; it is also well if he is not. For the
present at any rate I have ceased to think of him as a son.
I am willing to go to India to attend Mani's wedding if at all pos-
sible. But I cannot give you any idea of my present condition. I am
so hard pressed for time that I scarcely know what to do. Please cable
the date of marriage, so that if possible I might hold myself in readiness
to go.
I might perhaps inform you that I am in debt to Revashankarbhai.
You may repudiate me, but still I will be to you what I have
always been.
I do not remember that I expressed a desire to separate from you
when I was there. But even if I did, my mind is now quite clear, my
aspirations are higher and I have no desire for worldly enjoyments of
any type whatever.
I am engaged in my present activities as I look upon them as essen-
tial to life. If I have to face death while thus engaged, I shall face
it with equanimity. I am now a stranger to fear.
I like those who are pure in heart. Young Kalyandas, Jagmohandas's
son, is like Prahlad in spirit. He is therefore dearer to me than one
who is a son because so born.
M. K. Gandhi: Selected Letters: (First Series), Navajivan, 1949
