572. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 19/23, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter on Wednesday morning. If you think that
I am doing any injustice to Harilal, please tell me. I say this
because you have not said in your letter what you decided after
reading my letter to Harilal. Provided you observe the three con-
ditions I have mentioned, you may do all you can. I can have
no objection then.
If you have found any improvement as a result of the period
of silence having been increased to five minutes, please let me
know.
Lady Vithaldas, Mathew and Manibehn came and saw me.
Mirabehn will not be permitted. The decision has been a great
blow to her. I feel that if the gates are not opened to her, I
should stop seeing any visitors. I have even written a letter
to the Government (very nearly) to this effect. It is probable, there-
fore, that the next week will be the last during which I shall be
seeing visitors. And even of that I am not certain, for, if I get
a negative reply before that, I will stop seeing visitors imme-
diately. I, therefore, also intend to drop a postcard to you to-
day. If you get it in time, it should be in your hands on Sunday.
If you do get it and if you do not receive a wire from me not to
come, it might be advisable for you to start soon. Provided, that
is, you think it necessary to come and see me. This applies to
Premabehn and Sushila too.
I think it will be difficult to make the labourers give up smok-
ing. It would of course be good if you succeed. But it would be
most undesirable if they agree to give it up for fear of losing their
jobs or any other similar reason and then continue to smoke on
the sly. One labourer may be a smoker and still be good in
other ways, while another who does not smoke may be a very
bad man. Of the two, the one who smokes is a far better per-
son. Hence, while paying attention to the habits of those whom
you engage as labourers, pay as much attention as you can to
their inner character as well.
I was glad to learn that Dhiru and Kusum have gone to
Ranavav. Don't let them return to the Ashram all too soon.
We may be sure that those who have understood the meaning
of the Ashram rules of life and have fallen in love with that life
will carry the Ashram wherever they go. Moreover, if Dhiru and
Kusum, who have spent many years in the Ashram, cannot ob-
serve the Ashram rules even while living away from it, it will
only show that they have learnt nothing from their stay in the
Ashram.
Anybody who has understood the meaning of the
Ashram life can serve wherever he lives. The field of service is
as wide as the world, and opportunities for it exist everywhere.
Dhiru and Kusum, therefore, ought not to get impatient. If the
water of Ranavav agrees with them and their health improves,
let them stay there till they get completely all right.
Pyare Ali, Noorbanu and Tilakam have not come [to see me
till now]. If you sent any messages with Mathew, they remain-
ed with him, for he could not speak much.
I have received no letter from Ba so far. Maybe her letters
have not been dispatched from there. They don't seem to keep
back any letter here. If any of you can, please inquire from the
Superintendent whether they have been dispatched. In any case
Ba can certainly inquire.
May 20, 1932
Are there any Chharas still staying near the Ashram? If
there are, have you cultivated contacts with them?
Do they
harass you in any way? Why do the Ashram inmates keep a watch
[at night]? For how many hours is the watch kept? Who are the
persons taking turns? Who stays in Doctor's bungalow? Who
stays in Jyotirbhavan? I send with this a letter from Chhagan-
lal, along with one from Prabhudas to me. Read both of them.
There is a reference to Lakshmi in them. If Balkrishna agrees to
accommodate her in Wardha, let her go and stay there. If Bal-
krishna does not agree or if the girl wants to stay in Sabarmati
and if you see no difficulty in that, accommodate her there. If
you cannot do so and if Balkrishna is not prepared to accept the
responsibility, write to Devidatta and inform him accordingly.
And also to Prabhudas.
I can now say that I have acquired control over the Magan
spinning-wheel. Today I spun 183 rounds in about 2½ hours. The
yarn must be of about 16 counts. The slivers sent by Ramjibhai
were full of hard particles, otherwise I think I could spin yarn
of even higher count. The wheel still offers difficulties. I have
often to use my hand and put the wheel in the right position. I
believe this must be a defect. The pedal produces a low grating
sound. Show this to Keshu. Ask him if he has any sugges-
tion to make.
May 22, 1932
If you have not read out to the inmates of the Ashram the
reminiscences of Gangadevi which Totaramji has sent, or given
them a summary, you should do so. They are quite interesting.
May 23, 1932
Today I spun 89 rounds in 50 minutes. The count of the
yarn, too, is 20.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
