66. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG,
May 19, 1911
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
I do not know indeed whether, after your cablegram inquiring
about the now defunct Immigration Bill, you expected me to write
to you regularly. I have always refrained from inflicting letters
on you, being personally aware of the many other calls upon your
time. Mr. Polak brought my knowledge up to date by telling
me that, when he last saw you, you were, if possible, much busier
than you used to be when I had the privilege of staying with you
in Calcutta. But I feel that it is necessary for me to give you a
review of the situation here, at periodic intervals. Whilst I
naturally consider that without passive resistance during the four
years nothing whatsoever could have been done, I am quite certain
that the efforts made by the public in India under your guidance
and Mr. Polak's wonderful work there and Mr. Ritch's in England
have very materially hastened the end of our troubles; but we have
to fight such a stubborn enemy, that ceaseless watchfulness is
absolutely necessary. I am not unaware of the fact that the gaining
of theoretical equality in the immigration legislation will not have
visibly altered for the better our material condition here; but the
struggle has knit us together in a wonderful manner, and it has
undoubtedly secured for us an honourable hearing. The com-
munity has gained confidence in itself. We are, therefore, only
now free to devote our attention to the existing local legal dis-
abilities affecting not so much our honour as a nation but the
material position of the settlers themselves. For instance, the pro-
hibition to own landed property in the Transvaal must be removed;
the disability as to using tram-cars is too galling to be tolerated for
any length of time; the diabolical attempt being made through
the operation of the obscure section in the recently passed Gold
Law of the Transvaal must be frustrated at any cost if the Indian
traders are to be left undisturbed in possession of their premises
and their business. So much for the Transvaal. In Natal, the
inhuman annual tax exacted from freed indentured Indians, their
wives, and their little children, male and female, is a burden that
cannot but oppress the conscience of every Indian who has any
knowledge of the tax. The Dealers' Licenses Act of Natal, in spite
of the slight amendment made in it recently, is like a cloud threat-
ening to burst upon the community at any moment. And, at the
Cape, similar statute threatens the existence of Indian traders;
and a clause in its immigration law makes the right of domicile
possessed by Indian settlers a mockery by compelling them, in the
event of their absence from the Cape, to carry a permit which
is really a document giving leave of absence whose breach would
cancel the right of domicile. It will be too much to expect you to
read the memorials submitted or being submitted to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies in these matters, but perhaps you will ask
one of your workers to study them, and then take what steps you
may consider necessary. These will be found in Indian Opinion.
About the beginning of November, Mr. and Mrs. Polak
will be in India, when, of course, Mr. Polak will be able to give
you all the assistance you will need. Whilst there is little doubt
that the Provisional Settlement will go through, we are yet awaiting
a final reply from General Smuts. All the passive resisters are
being warned to keep themselves in readiness, in the event of General
Smuts' promise not being fulfilled next year. Tolstoy Farm is,
therefore, still being continued, but every effort is being made
to use the passive resistance funds most sparingly. I am preparing
an account to the end of April of disbursements, which I shall
embody in a public letter to Mr. Ratan Tata reviewing the
position. The expenses of Mr. Polak's tour are being raised locally.
Hoping that you are keeping well,
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten original: G.N. 3802
