672. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
October 18, 1945
BHAI MANGALDAS PAKVASA,
Many Provincial governments permit the sale of cloth under
licences. They have now amended the terms. A copy of the
amendment introduced by the C. P. Government is enclosed. In
my view a product like khadi cannot be, ought not to be,
licensed.
A leading counsel in South Africa with a flourishing
practice had told me that one must proceed on the assumption
that every tangible wrong had a remedy in law and search for it,
assured that it would be found. This had appealed to me very
much, and I had always relied on it in my work in South
Africa and succeeded in finding the remedies. I believe the prin-
ciple is true in India, too. I have not read all the laws, but I
feel that a law which applies to a mill-owner worth millions
cannot apply to khadi.
If you see the definition of a 'dealer', you will observe that
it must include 'business'. There is no trace of 'business' in
khadi, for all processes relating to it merely ensure a livelihood
to those who make a living through khadi.
I have alluded to this argument merely as a suggestion to you.
You will also see that the Government is empowered to grant ex-
emption to anybody. This is not a matter of law, as yet. I draw
your attention to it. You may write to Jajuji for any further in-
formation which you cannot get locally. What I want you to do
is this. Consult anybody whom you wish to and then write to the
Government yourself, or request the counsel whom you consult to
do so. If, however, you feel that whatever representation is to be
made should be addressed by Jajuji as Secretary, we shall do that.
Send copies to Jajuji and me of any correspondence that you have.
And if you decide to write to the Government directly from there,
send the letter after showing the draft to me. I still cherish the
belief that I may be able to suggest some improvements.
We should write immediately to the Provincial Government
or to the Central Government, whichever you decide. I have
already addressed a communication to the Central Government as
President of the Charkha Sangh. A copy is enclosed. I have even
received an acknowledgement of the letter. The copy is only for
your information for the present. We do not wish to give publi-
city to this matter in newspapers just now or let everybody know
about it. Probably you know that by adopting such a procedure
I had been able to save the Charkha Sangh during Linlithgow's
tenure. Let us see what happens this time.
I am entrusting this important task to you relying on the
assurance you have given to me, that you intend to use your
ability and prestige as a lawyer, not for money but entirely for
public service. And that is what you have been doing for some
time. Isn't that the best way for everybody to use their talents? If
you want any further information, please write to me. The matter
is urgent, since they have already started issuing licences.
I forgot about one thing. Khadi is facing a special danger,
namely, the U. P. Government's objection to our practice of
demanding yarn worth some pice from the buyers for khadi worth
every rupee. The objection seems to me ridiculous and harmful
from every point of view. However, please consider along with
the other issue whether such an objection can be sustained in law.
In my view this is a secondary matter and can be easily dealt
with. The chief thing is that khadi must not be considered as
falling within the scope of the licensing law. We have even stores
which sell less than 1,000 rupees worth of khadi every month.
To require a licence for sale of khadi is to put a restraint over
the production of khadi, i. e., over the poor.
Blessings from
BAPU
Enclosures :
1. Letter to P. S.
2. Jajuji's letters
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 4783. Courtesy: Mangaldas
Pakvasa
