256. LETTER TO W. HOSKEN
[JOHANNESBURG,]
August 5, 1908
DEAR MR. HOSKEN,
Thirteen Indian merchants were today arrested at Standerton for
trading without licences. They were all sentenced to paying a fine
of [£] or to go to gaol for fourteen days with hard labour. They all
selected to go to gaol. They are all bona-fide residents of the Transvaal,
and held, I believe, licences up to the 30th June last. On their appli-
cation for renewals, they were called upon to give thumb-impressions
under the Asiatic Act, which they declined to do. Hence their trading
without licences and hence also the prosecutions. Whatever the Prog-
ressive Party may wish to do, do you not think that, as an indepen-
dent member, you should ask General Smuts a question in the House
of Assembly?
One thing more. As you know, the British Indian Association has
approached the Director of Prisons for giving Indian prisoners more
humane diet. Europeans get food suitable for them, Cape Boys get
European food, and Natives get their own national diet. Indians, who
are classed with Natives, are therefore entirely neglected, except that,
for one meal, they get a small quantity of rice and fat. For breakfast,
therefore, most Indian prisoners have to starve, as they cannot accom-
modate themselves to mealie pap. I am afraid that perhaps the
Authorities out of sheer vindictiveness will not alter the scale for Indian
prisoners, if only to harass them. Even so, I think that my country-
men will not flinch but will accept the additional brutality. But can
you not put questions in the House and otherwise move actively in the
matter, and bring about a reform that is just[?] General Smuts, when
he was anxious to have everything from Indians at the time of the
compromise, smilingly told me that he would listen to me with refe-
rence to the special hardships of Indians in the Transvaal gaols.
Those days are now gone, but I hope the days are not gone, when
a man like you would simply insist on some decency being observed,
1 Vide "Johannesburg Letter", p. 426 and "Brave Indians of Standerton", p. 431.
2 Vide "Letter to Director of Prisons", p. 397,
3 "gone. When" in the original
or at least dissociate himself from the inhumanity practised in the name
of the people of the Transvaal.
I am,
Yours truly,
Wm. HOSKEN, ESQ., M.L.A.
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
PRETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy : S. N. 4854
