169. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
SEVAGRAM,
August 15, 1946
CHI. DINSHAW,
I have been planning to write to you but could neither
write nor dictate a letter till the pressure of the Working Committee
[meeting] was over.
Today all the [members] of the Working
Committee have left as also the Congress President, hence I am
dictating this letter early in the morning. I have been think-
ing all these days about what you mentioned to me last time.
I don't feel like making for you such arrangements as you
desire in connection with the work I expected from you. Since
you want to serve the villages you should appreciate the posi-
tion and learn to live among and become one with all the
others in the institution. And if you cannot learn this in my
company it is going to be very difficult for you to learn it in
any other place. If I were to create for you the facilities that
you desire it would only mean that after all you can practise
nature cure only under certain conditions, which means only
in the towns or where urban conditions can be created. I don't
suggest it is a failing on your part. I have many friends whose
habits are similar to yours. I content myself with whatever I
can get out of them but you have yourself said that you want
to give me much more and accordingly I hope to take from
you a great deal. I shall persuade myself to be content even
if I don't get as much as I hope. In that case both of us, or
rather all three of us, will have to understand this. And I for my
part do believe that under the present circumstances it does not
seem as though you would be able to work here comfortably.
But then only after I stay with you for some time and you get
more used to me will you be in full flood.
In case the Gujarati language of this letter is incompre-
hensible and if you often come in contact with Valjibhai you
may consult him or the boys at his house and they will be
able to correctly interpret the letter to you. I would recommend
that you should be in frequent contact with him. He is very
cultured and is also a man of erudition. It is worth paying
158
a visit to his house. It will not be surprising if I happen to
go to Delhi from here. But I don't know.
Read out this letter to Gulbai. It will be good if Jehangirji
is also made familiar with the ideas expressed herein.
Blessings from
BAPU
DR. DINSHAW MEHTA
POONA
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
