56. LETTER TO JIVRAM K. KOTHARI
[Before July 7, 1929]
BHAISHRI JIVRAM,
Even when I wrote to you yesterday I had a feeling that
there was another letter of yours I had not answered. I searched
for it today and have found it. Your first letter carries a report
of your work; this one has a ring of despair. The letter to which
I replied yesterday bears the date 20th and the one to which I
am replying now is dated 10th June. I found the letter of 10th
June after I had commented on the letter of the 20th for Nava-
jivan. I am, however, allowing the article on the letter of the 20th
to go as it is.
Your despair is natural. But how can one who has dedica-
ted everything to God yield to despair? Let God despair if He
will. Why should we, His obedient servants, yield to despair? Let
us do the job He has entrusted to us. Whether the result is
good or bad is His concern. We shall be doomed if we are found
wanting in our efforts. If we are not found so wanting, we shall
have won the battle of life. If you remember this you will not
yield to despair again.
Do not worry that you are not able to attract other work-
ers. If you remain steady in your place other workers will be
attracted on their own. Pay more and more attention to the
spinning-wheel. I am arranging to send Jethalal to you for some
time. Women will not come to your meetings but Purbai can
meet them in their houses. For the present she may only talk
with them and invite them to meet her.
You must all acquire a working knowledge of the Oriya
language. This can be done more quickly not through books
but by talking to children and picking up words from them.
The language is not difficult.
If you can find a few orphans, you may bring them up and
train them. Some of them at least will grow into good workers.
The experiment at Bijolia and Ringus has succeeded because
the spinning-wheel had been in use there and had only to be
revived. The people there are not as poor as in Utkal. The
poverty of Utkal has reduced the people to utter passivity. If
you can find one worker there against a hundred in Ringus, I
would say that a reasonable proportion had been achieved.
To dismiss the weavers who have been found stealing is in
itself satyagraha. We may not do anything more. You are bound
to have such experiences there.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32577/65
