191. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
KULPAHAR,
November 22, 1929
BHAISHRI SHAH,
I have your topical letter. I appreciate the questions you have
discussed in your letter and in the newspaper. I will discuss
them in the newspapers if I get the time. But I also fear that I
may not be able to do SO. Let me therefore give my brief reply
here.
Dominion Status means partnership with the British Govern-
ment on a basis of equality with complete freedom to end the
connection. Whether we shall be able to win this type of Domi-
nion Status from the discussions at the Conference or something
else will depend not only on the attitude of the British Cabinet
or the Parties but also on our situation here in India at that time.
In the sudden importance given to the Princely states I smell
not the fragrance of wise statesmanship but the stink of crafty
politics. But we should not be surprised if it turns out in this case
according to the saying, 'he reaped the fruit of his own folly'.
The outcome of this also would depend on us.
Even if the Conference arrives at agreed conclusions, in law
the [British] Parliament can certainly alter its decisions. But
there is little possibility of that happening. Nobody can give a
guarantee that that will not happen and we cannot even ask
for such a guarantee.
There is a trap in the stress that is being put on the Act of
1919. The letter from the leaders at Delhi seeks clarification on
this point.
There is no need to seek clarification now on the point of
economic independence. But if the Conference is held, that
clarification will have to be sought. Why do you assume that
the Congress resolution about the debts passed in 19221 stands
cancelled? If we are going to have a genuine Dominion
Status, there can be no question of our having to bear the entire
burden of the debts. We cannot ask for a guarantee for such things
right now. But persons like you should keep the people alive to
such problems, so that the delegates at the Conference do not
go to sleep over the issue and forget it. On what ground do you
believe that the Haji Bill will be withdrawn or that all the
illegitimate rights usurped by the foreign banks will remain un-
touched? All these points cannot be included in a letter to Irwin.
But they must be included in the draft of the Swaraj Act. What
the leaders, however, purposely or under pressure or out of igno-
rance may omit, God alone can say. It is for you to remove
the ignorance. It is my duty to contribute something to create
the atmosphere which would prevent the leaders from giving up
anything under pressure.
Do not be remiss in doing your duty. If you think that you
should write a series of articles on the subject, signed or unsigned,
and if you have the time and the zeal for it, you may do
that too.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32579/13
