254. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
July 24, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
Since writing to you about my correspondence, Major Bhan-
dari has showed me the Government's letter to you on the subject.
I must confess that the letter has come upon me as a shock.
It betrays, if I understand it rightly, want of confidence in Indian
officials as a class and, naturally therefore, a disregard of the great
languages of the country spoken by the millions of its inhabitants.
The consequences of the policy are disastrous for those who have to
suffer from it. Those who do not know English and cannot afford
to pay for English assistance or who are too proud to avail them-
selves of it are at once put under a disadvantage. My own case is
an instance in point. A friend who has visited my ailing son in
the Gorakhpur Central Jail tells me that he is anxiously awaiting
my letter. I did write to him. But he had not got the letter at the
time the friend wrote. My son knows English, but we have never
written to each other in English. My wife complains of the absence
of my letters. She does not know English. I do not know what
happens to her letters to me and mine to her. In my humble opi-
nion the principal languages of India are entitled to as much
status at least as English, if not a greater.
It hurts me to think that no Indian officials knowing the
respective languages are considered fit or trustworthy enough to
decide whether letters I write in Gujarati or Hindi or Urdu do or
do not come within the passable limits. I have already in my
letter of 22nd instant inquired if I have unwittingly given cause for
the extraordinary scrutiny of my letters.
The revised orders of the Government therefore by implica-
tion seem to take away the liberty they have given me for letter-
writing.
Alike therefore for grounds of reason and sentiment, I would
invite Government to reconsider their decision and so arrange as to
ensure for my correspondence in the vernaculars the same quick
despatch they promise for the English, if they whole-heartedly
desire that I should continue to write letters as I have done
hitherto.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I, p. 249
