283. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD ELGIN
UNION-CASTLE LINE,
R. M. s. BRITON,
SOUTHAMPTON DOCKS,
December 1, 1906
[TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES
LONDON]
DEAR SIR,
I have been so much over-worked night and day that I have not
been able before now to submit my promised statement on Natal to
His Lordship. I allowed it to be crowded out as Mr. Tatham's Bill
was rejected by the Natal Parliament.
I have now forwarded to Mr. Ritch, the Secretary of the South
Africa British Indian Committee, my statement and asked him to have
1 The Indian Opinion version reads: ". . .offensively restrictive legislation, we are
obliged. . ."
2 Vide enclosure.
it typed and then present the original with a typed copy to you for
submission to Lord Elgin.
I duly received your letter with enclosures for which I thank you.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: C.O. 179, Vol. 239/Ind.
[ENCLOSURE]
STATEMENT REGARDING BRITISH INDIAN POSITION IN NATAL
1. I shall venture to deal with only the most important and pressing
portion of the question.
THE IMMIGRATION ACT
2. Under this Act an undoubted injustice is done to British Indian
merchants in that they are not allowed to import confidential clerks
or domestic servants.
3. The result is that a monopoly is created among the few clerks
and servants.
4. Nor is it possible to command a large supply of confidential
clerks from those who are already domiciled in the Colony.
5. Confidential clerks as a rule and domestic servants invariably
lack ability to satisfy the educational test under the Immigration Act.
6. It is not contended that such men should be allowed to possess
rights of domicile but it is respectfully submitted that they ought to be
allowed to enter the Colony to reside therein temporarily subject to
guarantee being given that, at the end of their service with their masters,
they should quit the Colony.
DEALERS' LICENSES ACT
7. This Act has caused and continues to cause the gravest mischief.
British Indian merchants are totally at the mercy of the licensing officers
whose decisions are not capable of being reviewed by the Supreme Court.
8. Under this Act most respectable Indian merchants of long
standing have been deprived of their licences to trade, i.e., of their vested
rights. This happened in the case of Messrs Dada Osman and Hoondamal.
9. At one time an arbitrary use of their power by the licensing
officers created a scandal. Mr. Chamberlain sent a strong despatch
and the then ministry in Natal addressed a circular letter to the muni-
cipalities of Natal that, unless they exercised reasonably, moderately
and with due regard for vested rights, the power given to them, the
Act would have to be amended so as to restore the inherent jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court.
10. It is submitted that the right of the Supreme Court to review
the decisions of licensing officers should be restored at the earliest opportu-
nity unless the Indian traders are to lose all they have in the Colony.
11. The late Mr. Escombe in his latter days deplored the depri-
vation of the right of approaching the Supreme Court in appeal against
decisions of licensing officers.
MUNICIPALITIES BILL
12. The attempt to deprive the Indian ratepayers of the right to
exercise the municipal franchise is held to be totally unjustifiable and
wantonly insulting.
13. It is debatable whether India possesses representative insti-
tutions founded on the Parliamentary franchise. But it is not open
to question as to the municipal franchise.
14. Both the late Sir John Robinson and the late Mr. Escombe
said emphatically that the Indian community ought not to be deprived
of the municipal franchise.
15. The moral effect of sanctioning such legislation will be very
serious and the Indians will be further degraded in the estimation of
the Colonists.
CONCLUSION
16. It now only remains for me to add that regarding Natal the
remedy is absolutely in the hands of the Imperial Government. [The] pros-
perity of Natal is dependent on a continuance of indentured labour
from India. Natal cannot be allowed to draw upon India for a supply
of indentured labour when she refuses to treat the resident Indian popu-
lation with justice and decency.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: C.O. 179, Vol. 239/Misc. Off.
1 Vide Vol. III, pp. 106-.
2 Vide Vol. IV, p. 193.
