623. LETTER TO BOYD TUCKER
March 4, 1933
MY DEAR BOYD1,
I have your long and good letter but none too long to mar
my pleasure. You were quite right in writing the letter. The
best appreciation I could show was to publish the relevant parts
of it and to offer my own criticism. I had prepared the article
for this week's issue of the Harijan, but it had to stand aside for
matters more urgent.
I hope however it will go in next week.
I shall then send you a proof copy and as I have said there all
I had to in connection with your letter I will not repeat the
argument just now. The reference to Gurudev I have not given
in the Harijan. I know he has been specially tender towards
me of late. Perhaps Truth suffers through his reticence if he has
absolutely strong and confirmed views on the question as your
letter would suggest he has. I should hold it to be a great
tragedy if through the tenderness of friends, untruth had crept
into my life or had passed current among the people.
If what
I hold is truth, it must stand the light of fiercest criticism even
of friends who have hitherto worked with me. I have no end to
serve but that of Truth. If my defeat means victory of Truth,
I would count that defeat itself as victory. I do not regard my
judgments as infallible and even though I may be right in 99
cases out of 100, I do not want to trade upon it and assume or
expect other people to assume that the 100th judgment is also
right. I have for that reason called Gurudev the great sentinel,
and I have always appreciated his warnings even when I have
not been able to depart from my course by reason of his warn-
ings. They have put me on my mettle and made the people
think and choose. It is not good for individuals or nations to be
under the hypnotic influence of any single person. It is a golden
cover that hides the face of Truth. You may, if you like, read
this to Gurudev, and if he is clear in his mind, after reading the
article that you will see in a few days, that he has no doubt in
his mind that I am in error, let him issue his warning by way
either of a public statement or a letter addressed to me for publi-
cation. But if he has any doubt I want the benefit of that doubt,
because I do not want the people to be confused. As it is, on
this temple-entry question I do not hold the field undisputed.
They have all kinds of arguments put before them for examina-
tion. I do not want Gurudev's to be one of this crowd of argu-
ments against the simple issue. His must be an overpowering
deliverance standing by itself in its strength and originality.
I am personally not quite sure that Gurudev agrees with
you in your attitude, for Santiniketan has its own temple or
church or mandir, whatever you like to call it. Where two or
three people gather together in a particular place in the name of
God to offer worship, it becomes a temple. In Santiniketan we
have a humble but beautiful building where prayers are offered,
incenses burnt and sermons given. In Sabarmati we have no
building, no walls, but the cardinal points are the walls, the sky
is the roof and mother earth is the floor; nevertheless, the spot
that has been selected for the morning and the evening prayers
has all the essentials of a temple. But in accordance with your
letter even that bare ground is a prostitution of religion. Sure-
ly, Gurudev will not agree with you in this attitude if I have
understood it correctly.
With love from us,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20454
