181. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
SEVAGRAM,
November 27, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
Champabehn is going to stay here in the same way as the
others do. About Sarala's education I have made it clear to
her that while she stays here, she can neither have tuition from
outside nor expect any other special facilities. She can receive
only the education available here and she has to do as much
work for the Ashram as her body will permit. She will have to
be content with the food provided here and she will have to bear
all expenses. She already knows spinning and other activities.
Efforts should be made gently to make Kanjibhai abide by
the rules or else he must be suffered with love. Only love can
understand the language of love. It would be a crime to make
a mechanical approach.
2. I have already had a talk with Kailasbehn. She will
stay in the Ashram. This is a similar problem. Here too the
key lies in love. The same applies to Om Prakash.
3. I would love to keep Govind in the Talimi Sangh but
only if Sankaran is convinced.
4. I do not know anything about Mavjibhai. I have just
met him and his wife. With regard to them do what Kishore-
lalbhai and Naraharibhai say.
5. There is nothing to be said about Govind Reddy.
6. I should be happy to make the acquaintance of Mohan
Singhji but I have no time. I would like to utilize his services
as a blacksmith and carpenter.
7. While looking after the management, it will be good if
you can take classes in the spare time. But I too have looked
after the management, haven't I? For me management itself had
become a [training] class. I was a teacher as well as a pupil.
The manager keeps an eye on everyone and sees how he sits, how
he eats and what he reads. If within this framework, you can
have a class, it will be all right. For instance, at Kocharab, all
education was given in the Ashram. I had made a list of all
those who were qualified to teach. Probably only one or two
hours were reserved for teaching. I had assigned some work to
myself too and I used to do my share.
8. Workers have got to learn all the processes concerning
cotton. Let this instruction be imparted at Khadi Vidyalaya.
The three R's must be taught. I shall not be able to go into
the details of how it is to be done.
9. Even if Vinoba takes selections from Al Fateha and Mazda
it will have to be in Arabic and Pehlavi. They can be accompanied
by Vinoba's translation to bring out the meaning. In my view
there is some value in reciting them in the original. I do not
take the position that everything should be in the mother tongue
or the national language.
10. You are right.
11. What you say is correct. I am used to one room only
and I have not had two separate rooms. It is the same thought
with a slight difference at the Christ Seva Sangh.
12. I have written at length about clothing. Go through it.
13. Now I myself take spices. But I hope I do that only
by way of medicine. I take them at the instance of Dr. Mehta
but I am not even aware of their existence in my food. The
significant change is that we have now realized they have as
much place in medicine as they have in taste. Wheat is cooked
in so many different ways for taste and we also make roti out
of it to fill the stomach.
14. The quantity of milk is all right. Maybe, even one
lb. is enough.
15. Gajraj has started going to the Talimi Sangh. I think
we should keep him there full time.
16. Think things over and write to me further if you wish.
There are two sides to it.
17 . Write to Purushottam Gandhi in this regard.
18. Consider in this matter the person concerned and the
convenience of the Ashram. I may agree to allow a deserving
person [to stay in the Ashram] even for eight days.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 4537
