399. LETTER TO COL. R. J. BAKER
[LONDON,]
October 14, 1914
DEAR COLONEL BAKER,
I have to say with the greatest regret that your letter in reply
to mine of yesterday's date was a severe disappointment to me.
I had come to look upon you as a good-natured and soulful Com-
mander who, being free from red tape and stiffness, would carry
everything before him and that in the sweetest manner possible.
But your letter disillusions me. I made a most reasonable sugges-
tion well knowing the feeling of the Corps. My special vocation in
life has been to smooth over difficulties between officials and my
countrymen, and I may tell you, although I occupied no official
rank in the late South African Indian Ambulance Corps consisting
of 1200 men, there never was a hitch between Colonel Gallwey
and the Corps. And though officially there were even several
Europeans who occupied ranks, Colonel Gallwey and Major Bap-
tey, who was under him, were good enough not to take any steps
without reference to me with a view to ascertaining the wishes of
the Corps. And you may know that we were attached to a column
of 30,000, were under strictest military discipline, and the Corps
was called upon to work at the most critical period of the Boer
War and when, in the initial stages, British arms had suffered
reverses. I assure that nothing can be further from my thought
than to undermine your proper authority or to do anything subver-
sive of military discipline, but if you desire to train us for that
discipline, in my opinion, there is no other way than the one I
have ventured to suggest. It will enable you to know your Corps
better, and may I say that, by accepting my humble advice, you
will add to your popularity and prestige.
We had an enthusiastic meeting of the Corps last night. There
were 53 members present. I attended though I was in agony and in
defiance of medical instructions. The subjoined resolution was
carried by 49 votes against 2 dissentients. I have asked the members
present to attend at the drilling time this afternoon. If you could
possibly see your way, in the interest of the Corps, to alter your
decision, the drilling will go on. If you could not do so, those
of us who voted for the resolution and the others who may fall in
with it will be informed of your unfavourable decision and will
therefore respectfully withdraw.
I hope that you will reconsider your decision and avoid what
would undoubtedly be a catastrophe. I assure you that I am
most anxious to please you as our Commanding Officer, but I am
equally anxious to serve my countrymen many of whom have
joined this movement upon my advice.
Mr. Gandevia who has kindly offered to take this letter to you
will await your reply.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten office copy signed by Gandhiji: S. N. 6069B
