386. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
JOHANNESBURG,
March 4, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
I hope you will receive with this my letter of Thursday last, under
separate cover. After that letter was closed, I saw in The Star that the
Bill had already been read a first time. On Friday, I, therefore, sent the
following wire to General Smuts:
May I know whether section one Immigrants' Restriction Bill just intro-
duced contemplates Asiatics who may pass education test will be able enter
Transvaal without being liable to take out registration under Act 36, 1908.
Wrote letter yesterday more fully but in view Bill having been read first time
request telegraphic information. 3
To this his reply as per copy enclosed was received today. The reply
seems to be satisfactory in more ways than one. It shows clearly how
your work in London and Polak's in India have told on the Imperial
and Indian Governments, and the latter's pressure on the Union Gov-
ernment. We ought not, however, to be satisfied with the assurance.
We want no loophole left. It will, therefore, be necessary still to watch
the progress of the Bill, so far as the points affecting passive resisters
1 Vide "Letter to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior", pp. 450-.
2 Vide "Letter to L. W. Ritch", pp. 415-.
3 Vide "Telegram to Private Secretary to General Smuts", p. 420.
4 Vide footnote 1 on p. 425.
are concerned. Polak strongly urges that you should confer with
Schreiner regarding the points raised by me in my letter to Gregorow-
ski. I agree with him entirely, and it will be ever so much better if we
collect opinions from all sides. I am suggesting to Polak that he should
confer with Laughton also. You will have noticed that the Bill has been
set down for the second reading on Monday week. All our principal
representations, therefore, should be placed either before the Govern-
ment or before Parliament before that time. As it seems that the
Transvaal question will not cause any difficulty, I propose, subject to your
approval, to remain here. Polak, of course, attends to Durban, and you
remain there until the Bill is through. Professor Gokhale cabled yester-
day as follows:
Wire views new proposals. Arranging here frustrate Natal move. Private.
to which the following reply was sent:
Thanks assurance Natal. Regarding new Bill cable later.
I think we would wait yet awhile before cabling views on the new Bill.
There would naturally be expenses on your side. I hope that the Cape
Indians will provide a fund for conducting the campaign. They must
not expect passive resistance funds to be used for ameliorating the condi-
tion in the Cape Peninsula, nor can we afford to rely upon promises
they may make. If they do not want you to take Schreiner's opinion,
then, I am afraid, we should drop it. But, if they do, they have to pay
for it.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5231
