95. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
October 20, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I am exceedingly obliged to you for your telegram.
I had hoped that the instructions issued were merely local.
Since sending you my telegram I have had further news that
News Agencies had been informed that they were not to distrib-
ute my messages directly as they have done hitherto, but that
all such messages were to be sent to headquarters at Delhi for
censorship before they were distributed.
I also send you herewith a copy of notices received by
registered publications.
I should like to keep the public in-
formed of the development of individual civil disobedience which
is being carried on under my strict supervision. In view of
the notice, I dread to send anything for printing to the local
printing Press, for if I did send anything and the order were
accepted, the local printing Press, which is purely a commercial
concern, may come in for penalty. For the same reason I have
hesitated to send any public statement. My chief motive in sending
such statements would be to regularize the movement so as to
ensure unadulterated non-violence. Up to now the response has
been fully up to expectation. I was not certain about the Trade
Union Congress. But its President who came to see me has
assured me that no strike of a political nature will be resorted to
without my consent.
Shri Vinoba Bhave's addresses are from the highest plane. I
have been sending Mahadev Desai to follow him and give me a full
report of what he says. He is a strict disciplinarian and therefore
will carry out most difficult instructions. His first extempore
speech was not as I would have delivered it. Living in seclusion
he had not followed closely the correspondence between us. He
had, therefore, put the worst construction on it. I immediately sent
him instructions that our code was to put the most favourable
construction on the opponent's language. He accepted the correc-
tion and made the earliest amends by making a public admission.
And his address of yesterday was unexceptionable. His main
work, whilst he is free, will be to emphasize the necessity of the
constructive programme and not to bother about civil disobedience
(which will, for the moment, be confined to himself) being offered
by others. All this development I would like Congressmen and
the public at large to know. It is an education in courteous and
non-violent conduct. And although we are 'at war' with each other
we might observe the law which I claim specially belongs to the
human species. But I know that the decision rests with you.
I can only plead.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7582. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
