493. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
December 4, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,
I got both your letters. I was glad to learn that your mother
and others had arrived. If you take your meals with your mother
with Narandas's consent, I should not object. However, there is
certainly a moral flaw in what you are doing. You ought to make
it clear to Mother that the life which you two live is different from
normal family life. Of course the financial aspect of the matter
creates some difficulty. But I have stated here only the ideal.
Do not take my words to mean that you ought to take your meals
in the common kitchen, as we cannot always live up to an ideal
and sometimes in actual practice we have to compromise it in
order that we may not be forced to give it up altogether. As for
your relations with Father, strictness is necessary. You should tell
him in the plainest language that he should give up hopes of your
taking up a job or a profession and earning money. By telling
him this, you will serve him, for, as long as there is the slightest
hope, he will continue complaining to you, but will cease doing
so or rather the complaining will cease of itself, when he has given
up the hope. This is human nature. When hope is entirely gone,
despair itself turns into a sort of consolation. There are here
several prisoners serving life sentences, who have no hope of be-
ing released and, therefore, live cheerfully. Those whose position
is uncertain, like mine, suffer. They keep on hoping from day to
day that they would soon be released. In other words, the cause
of the pain in your relationship with Father is in your own mind.
If you have understood your dharma clearly you should not so
much as give a thought to Father's complaining. To borrow
money from friends to help Father to pay his debts and relieve
his burden to that extent is not a good policy. It would be
better not to receive such private benefits from one's friends.
Here again, I have merely stated the ideal. It may be advisable,
in case of necessity, to borrow money from Mahavir Prasad and
357
others if your relations with them are intimate. Solve all these
problems with the master key of non-attachment.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5263
