239. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
WARDHA,
December 10, 1928
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I think all of you would like me to give in my weekly letter
the details of my experiments in diet. I started feeling consider-
ably weak from the last Wednesday or Thursday. As I had told
you, I did not wish to persist in my experiments if I lost weight
because of them. Vinoba, too, felt a little unhappy, for he saw my
weakness; the weight also had gone down. On Friday, I started
taking oranges and other fruits and included in the diet almond-
milk. My weight was taken yesterday and it had increased by one
pound. The weakness had begun to disappear from the very day
that I included almond-milk and fruits in the diet; there is no
trace of it now. I still see, therefore, no need to include milk.
I have continued oil. I see no harm done to anyone here through
it. The loss of weight and the weakness may be ascribed to no
other cause but the sudden reduction of protein in my diet.
The only things which are excluded now are milk and ghee. My
objection is especially to goat's milk. If I can give it up, I shall
have peace of mind. I have no aversion to fruits, fresh or dry.
In giving them up I was prompted only by the consideration of
expense. I will not, however, insist on excluding either at the
cost of my health. All of you will see that the results so far are
beneficial. Nevertheless, I wish to make no predictions about the
outcome of the experiment. We can judge nothing in fifteen days.
We can come to some conclusion only if the same condition is
maintained for three months. Let no one, therefore, give up milk
in a fit of enthusiasm. But anyone who wishes to try the effect
of milk and linseed oil may do so. It is the experience of many here,
including of course Pyarelal and Chhotelal, that fresh oil is
harmless. It has done Pyarelal and Chhotelal no harm whatever.
Subbiah has joined them now, and so has Vasumatibehn. These
two have not been in the experiment for many days. It seems,
however, that linseed oil, if anyone wishes to experiment with its
use, must be fresh. It should not be warmed. You may get the
seeds pressed in ghani there. The oil can be sent from here, but the
railway freight is excessive. If sent by goods train, it will take a
long time to reach there. You can instal a ghani for about Rs. 100,
or Rs. 150. But the best course just now is to arrange with the owner
of a ghani in the city. Of course I do not insist that this matter
be taken up. We experience many difficulties, and they will re-
main; that is why I merely set down here the effects of excluding
ghee and make a suggestion about how to get the oil. Two other
effects of the oil have been observed, and they are these: it acts
as a laxative and stimulates appetite. It is Pyarelal's experience
that, instead of weakening, it stimulates appetite. It is the expe-
rience of the people here that it acts as a laxative. Personally I
can say nothing positive about its having such an effect.
And now another subject.
The noise in the kitchen there must stop. I expect to see this
outward reform when I return there. It should not be difficult
for anyone never to speak, unless quite necessary, while eating. It
should also not be difficult to keep the children quiet.
My second suggestion is that some restriction should be placed
on the quantity of vegetables served. Whatever the vegetable that
is cooked, the quantity per head should not exceed 10 tolas. Ac-
cording to medical science, more than this quantity of green
vegetable is not required. I hear that attendance at prayers is
again becoming thinner. It should not be necessary for me to ex-
plain at this hour of the day that no one should expect someone
else to stimulate his or her interest in prayers. The interest should
be felt within. As the body needs food and feels hungry, so the
soul needs and feels hungry for prayer. Prayer is a form of com-
munication with God. So long as our need for attendance at pra-
yers is not the same as that for attendance at meals, for which we
require no one to goad us, so long our faith in God is weak; or,
though we subscribe to the rules of the Ashram we do not observe
them and to that extent we are unfaithful to it and violate the vow
of truth. Anyone who realizes this will not remain absent at pra-
yers-whether morning or evening-without some strong reason.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 24-
