339. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
April 7, 1932
The fear of tuberculosis is worse than the disease itself. The
person who is suspected to have got it is always brooding over the
disease and sees its symptoms in every discomfort that he suffers. If
he can be helped to get rid of this obsession, he recovers very soon.
Why do you worry over the problem of money? You ought
to learn this lesson from me, for I am an expert in the subject.
Long before the country made me a Mahatma, I had learnt that,
just as it is bad economics to do business with borrowed money,
so it is a false conception of dharma to run a public institu-
tion with borrowed money. And if the ablest workers of an
institution have to go out begging for money to run it, I would
say that that is like doing business with borrowed money. Instead
of fixing a specific number, why don't you follow this other method,
namely, to admit only as many pupils as you can manage with
the money which you get. It is the easiest thing in the world to
do that. You have only to make up your mind; that is all. At the
beginning of every year, you should estimate the sum which you
will need. If you get it without having to go begging for it, you
should carry on, otherwise you should close the institution. Yours
is an established institution now, with a glorious record. You
have efficient teachers. Why, then, have you no faith?
Offer
up your venture wholly as sacrifice to the Lord and resolve to
run it in His name. He will then keep it running if He so wills. "We
have heard of none who loved the Lord and whose honour He did
not uphold." We sang this bhajan at the time of the evening
prayer today. I was reminded of it by a letter which I wrote to
a girl. You say that the problem would not have worried you if
Vallabhbhai or I had been out of jail. But where is the pro-
blem? And if there is any, who are we to solve it? Can one blind
man lead another blind man? If you think that there is a pro-
blem, leave it to Him. Do not dismiss all this as mere philosophiz-
ing, but try to act upon it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 78
