271. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
December 15/[16], 1932
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have sent you one telegram today about the name of the
League and another about the Bengal Provincial Organization
will go tomorrow.
First, about the name. I enclose herewith Rajaji's letter. I
think that his argument is conclusive, and if it is at all possible
to adopt his suggestion, you will alter the name accordingly. I
was so possessed with the idea of service that I missed the im-
plication to which Rajaji draws pointed attention.
Now, as to the Bengal Organization, I fear that I have com-
mitted a grievous blunder. I overrated my influence with Dr.
Bidhan. I am sorry because I have given him pain; and I am
sorry because I have placed you in an awkward position. He
will survive the pain; you will surmount all awkward difficulty; I
shall not easily forget my folly.
I have sent Dr. Roy the following telegram:
Your unsigned letter received today. Correspondence not
meant for publication. Have told you distinctly if you feel
confident you should continue work already begun. Accept
my apology for what I now recognize was undue interference
and what I had meant to be friendly suggestion. Please there-
fore treat my letter as absolutely withdrawn.-Gandhi
and I enclose herewith a copy of the letter I am sending him.
I do not need to add anything more. I hope that the incident
will close without causing much worry to you. I enclose also a
copy of Dr. Bidhan's reply.
I have received your letter of the 12th December. The de-
finition that Sjt. Thakkar has sent you has been further altered
by me. I enclose copy of the altered definition. Pandit Kunzru
had sent me the definition that Sjt. Thakkar had sent you. I
made alterations and sent him the altered copy. I see that Sjt.
Thakkar had not received the altered copy when he wrote to you.
I had about seven friends and followers of Dr. Ambedkar today.
They complained or stated (because they said they did not want
to complain but merely to make a statement) that Dr. Ambed-
kar's letter to Sjt. Thakkar written on board the steamer making
certain suggestions was not mentioned during the meeting of the
Board in Poona. I told them I did not know that it was not
mentioned, but I told them also that the letter could not have
been passed by and it must have been considered by the Board.
You will now please write to them or me as to what was exactly
done in connection with that letter.
These friends also stated that our organizations were keep-
ing up the split amongst the Harijans and wherever possible favouring
Rao Bahadur Rajah's party. I assured them that such never
could be your intention and that the endeavour of the Board
would be to steer clear of party divisions, and that the endeavour
of the Board and its Branches everywhere would be to cement the
relations between the two parties for which now that the politi-
cal part of the question was settled there was absolutely no need.
Although I have got additional assistance in the shape of
Sjt. Chhaganlal Joshi having been sent to me, as also efficient
shorthand assistance, I can have no leisure. This much-needed
assistance enables me to keep abreast with the growing work.
Interviews take up a great deal of time, but they are all neces-
sary. I do not therefore grudge them.
I hope you are keeping fit. You must do something that
would induce sound sleep, not by way of drugs, but through
natural means or dietetic changes. Have you tried the prunes in
the manner I suggested? Some of the easy asanas and deep
breathing, which is what pranayam for health means, might assist
digestion and induce sleep.
Yours sincerely,
[December 16, 1932]
PS.
Since dictating the above letter, I have received the follow-
ing telegram from Dr. Bidhan:
Thanks for telegram. Respectfully submit don't understand what you
mean feeling confident. As explained in letter in view of present
enthusiasm in Bengal any President and Board can perform anti-untoucha-
bility work. If however you mean confidence in obtaining co-operation
from those who refuse it when offered no one can ensure it. Measure
of success will depend on funds and proper utilization thereof. Please
wire whether I and Board can rely on your full support if we
continue.-Bidhanray
to which I have sent the following reply:
Thanks your wire. By confidence I mean self-confidence.
Of course you can rely upon such assistance as is within my
power. -Gandhi
From a copy: C.W. 7909. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 18715
