576. LETTER TO A. RANGASWAMY AIYENGAR
NANDI HILLS,
May 10, 1927
DEAR RANGASWAMI AIYENGAR,
In accordance with the instructions of the Working Com-
mittee, I am sending herewith draft rules in connection with
Article VII (iv) b1.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Encl. 1.
SRIJUT A. RANGASWAMI AIYENGAR
GENERAL SECRETARY, A.I.C.C.
DESHABANDHU BUILDINGS
MOUNT ROAD, MADRAS
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT RULES
1. Every person choosing under Article VII of the Consti-
tution to send the subscription in yarn shall send 2,000 yards
of evenly spun yarn of his or her own spinning to the All India
Spinners' Association office, Sabarmati, to reach on or before the
28th February every year in advance for the full year.
2. Members joining in the middle of the year shall send
the full quota for the year at the time of application for admis-
sion. No one who has failed to send his yarn subscription on or
before the 28th February, or in case of members joining in the
middle of the year, no one who has not paid in the full quota
1 Of the Congress constitution; vide Vol. XXXII, p. 465, fn. I and
XXXIII, pp. 457-.
Presumably this was sent for the A.I.C.C. meeting scheduled to be held in
Bombay on May 15 and 16, 1927; vide Vol. XXXIII, p. 343.
of 2,000 yards shall be entitled to exercise any of the privileges
of membership referred to in Sec. (iv) of Art. VII.
3. The yarn shall be hanked in 4 ft. circumference and
sent up at the member's cost to the A.I.S.A. office, Sabarmati
with such particulars filled in as may be prescribed in the forms
issued from that office.
4. On any member being found to the satisfaction of the
President of a Provincial Congress Committee to be infringing
the rule of habitual wear of khaddar, he may at his discretion
report him to the President of the Congress; and he shall there-
upon forfeit for the rest of the year the right to vote or be elec-
ted at the election of representatives or delegates or any com-
mittee or sub-committee of any Congress organization whatso-
ever or to take part in any meeting of the Congress or Cong-
ress organization or any committee or sub-committee thereof.
5. Subject to the above rule, if at any meeting a question
is raised that any member is not entitled to vote or to be elec-
ted or to take part in any proceedings thereof, on the ground
that he does not habitually wear khaddar, the statement of the
member himself shall, except where it is manifestly untrue to the
knowledge of the Chairman, be accepted without further proof
in regard to the question so far as that meeting is concerned.
From a copy: A.I.C.C. File No. 194, 1927. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
