130. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 15, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
I have yours of the 14th instant, received at 9.40 a.m.
I woke up at 3 a.m. today to finish my promised letter on
the Lahore Resolution.
There is no mistake about the date, for I wrote in answer
to your reminder of the 13th instant.
Independence does mean as envisaged in the A.I.C.C. Reso-
lution of 1942. But it cannot be on the basis of a united
India. If we come to a settlement, it would be on the basis
of the settlement, assuming, of course, that it accrues general
acceptance in the country. The process will be somewhat like
this. We reach by joint effort independence for India as it
stands. India becoming free will proceed to demarcation,
plebiscite and partition if the people concerned vote for partition.
All this is implied in the Rajaji Formula.
As to the provisional interim government, I am afraid I can-
not carry my answer any further than I have done. Though
I have no scheme for the provisional government, if you have one
in connection with the Lahore Resolution, which also, I presume,
requires an interim government, we can discuss it.
The Formula was framed by Rajaji in good faith. I accepted
it in equal good faith. The hope was that you would look at
it with favour. We still think it to be the best in the circum-
stances. You and I have to put flesh on it, if we can. I have ex-
plained the process we have to go through. You have no objec-
tion to it. Perhaps, you want to know how I would form the
provisional government if I was invited thereto. If I was in
that unenviable position, I would see all the claimants and en-
deavour to satisfy them. My co-operation will be available in
that task.
I can give you full satisfaction about your inquiry, "What I
would like to know would be, what will be the powers of such a
provisional interim government, how it will be formed, to whom
it will be responsible." The provisional interim government will
be responsible to the elected members of the present Assembly or
a newly elected one. It will have all the powers less that of the
Commander-in-Chief during the war and full powers thereafter.
It will be the authority to give effect to the agreement that may
be arrived at between the League and the Congress and ratified
by the other parties.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
