201. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NIPANI,
Silence Day [March 28, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
You must not be alarmed at my illness. You should remove
the inconveniences to Bhai Bomanji and do nothing more. He
needs the commode and other things upstairs.
Mrityunjaya promised to observe discipline, relying on which
I suggested that Vidyavati and Prabhavati may be accommodated
within the Ashram precincts. Do we not ourselves live there?
I trust Mrityunjaya's word as much as I trust other persons'. He
is a very polite and truthful boy. He has all of Rajendra Babu's
qualities. But you may, of course, accommodate him somewhere
else if you want to.
Why is the Vijapur case hanging fire? We will not give any
interest. How can we? Does Deshpande Saheb decline to work?
Now you must write out the thing for Sir Gangaram.
I am writing to Chhotelal. Write what you can about cow-
protection. Let us add no more buffaloes to our stock. Read my
article in Young India.
Purushottamdas has expressed an altogether different opinion
about the Ramachandra lift. Please consider his arguments with
patience. I hope you have arranged for the spindle and have
written to Apte. You must have sent over the essay on spinning.
It is good that you gave up your vow of taking salt-free food.
Sharadabehn says she would do four hours' spinning and carding,
and whatever sewing there may be as also help in the kitchen as
much as she can. Now let me know how much she has been
able to carry out.
If I can hold on till June I want to come over for the Parishad
I can do so even earlier.
Kaka must have himself read to you my letter to him. I
have letters in this connection from Kaka and the other teachers.
Kaka has withdrawn his attack on hearing of my indisposition. I
wish you would all take decisions on merits. You should attach
no importance to my illness. You will not find it in my writing.
Today it is just an illness, tomorrow there may be death. Why
think about it? Or let us make our decisions after reckoning on
the inevitability of death. So that it is no special factor to be
considered.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My programme has not yet been settled.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9126. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri
