8. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
PANCHGANI,
July 17, 1946
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have gone through what Munshi showed me, though I did
not have the time to examine it closely. He came today after
4 o'clock and will be going back tomorrow morning. I had a
long talk with him about grouping. He will explain things to
you. I have advised him to consult other lawyers as well. What
he has prepared after seven days' labours may not be placed before
the Committee just yet. Once it goes before the Committee, it
will become public. I do not see the need of making it public
so soon.
Your statement as published in the papers does not sound
good. If it is correctly reported, some explanation is needed.
1 The reference is to the Rules of Procedure in the Constituent
Assembly.
2 The reference is presumably to Jawaharlal Nehru's Press Statement
of July 10, 1946, in which he had said that the Congress would enter the
Constituent Assembly "completely unfettered by agreements and free to meet
all situations as they arise".
It must be admitted that we have to work within the limits of
the State Paper. It is clear in Maulana's letters. We have
given it our own interpretation. But if the Federal Court gives
a different interpretation, we shall have to be firm. I think it
necessary to say this clearly. If we do not admit even this much,
we will be doing nothing and Jinnah Saheb's accusation will
prove true.
Fischer and Jayaprakash have come here today. They too
will return tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
In regard to Kashmir, Sardar has sent me the Maharaja's
speech. It deserves careful study. I think a meeting of the
Working Committee should be called to consider it. Let us not
be hasty. Let us not endanger the whole thing just for this
reason. I am of the view that Maulana Saheb and, if necessary,
Sardar too, should go to Kashmir. After all, has not the Work-
ing Committee assumed the entire responsibility?
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : C. W. 7697
