79. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
December 10, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
For the first time since your departure from London a week has
passed without a letter from you. You have so used me to the regularity
of your correspondence that last Thursday left a sad blank when 1
saw among the letters nothing from you. But I know that you were
travelling. You told me you were leaving for Berlin on a Tuesday or
Wednesday. I therefore assume that you were travelling and without
reach of a station where you could post your letter to be in time.
Gordon was here today (Sunday) as he was last Sunday. He likes
to be here. He is keeping well.
Call is still in Johannesburg. He may leave for London next week.
It all depends upon the Medical Superintendent of the asylum. Call is
by no means right yet. But probably a voyage will be the best thing
for him. He may be a total wreck for ever, i.e., remain an imbecile.
He is no lunatic, but he has no control over himself.
The fencing is now almost complete. Just a little finishing is required
- probably there is a day's work. We are drying apricots in the manner
suggested by you in your letter from Potchefstroom.
I had a talk with Kennedy. His answer as to further prolongation
of the agreement was not quite satisfactory. I have asked him to think
[it] over and let me know. He seemed to resent the fact that you
had not written to him in the matter. On the whole I think it is better
for you not to take more than the time you intended to when you left.
After all 8 months is a fair time. You could still pass a few weeks
at Mrs. Mayo's. I certainly think that you have stayed enough with
your people. They know now what you are. Their assimilation of your
(our) ideals now depends upon your living the life according to the
ideals for a length of time. But you and I are not living the life for
them or anybody else. We are living the life because we want to,
irrespective of what the rest of mankind do.
Your brother was duly married on Sunday. Herewith a cutting, if
you have not received it through other channels.
I have now 18 boys in the school, much to the disgust of Mrs.
Gandhi. And yet I must continue as I have begun. There is no looking
100
back. One hesitating step and I perish. We have now 4 Mohammedan
boys.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
