498. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
BASTI,
October 9, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I dictated yesterday a long letter to you. I forgot to men-
tion one thing, and that was your reference to confidence. I
smiled as I thought what an imperfect means of communication
language is. It was after your explanation that I could under-
stand the meaning of your words "deserving the confidence". But
in the context in which you wrote the sentence, I understood it
to mean that you were eager to make an effort to win my con-
fidence. I could not see that you were referring to your effort
to deserve the confidence which you already enjoyed. But now
I understand. That effort, of course, you should always make.
But worry should have no place in it at all.
The effort not to lose the confidence of a person after we
have won it indicates attachment on our part. Man is so imper-
fect a creature that he may place confidence today and withdraw
it the next day over a trifle. What difference does it make wheth-
er or not we enjoy the confidence of such a person? We should,
however, aspire to be worthy of the confidence of the entire world,
for if we are able to take a single breath, the reason is the
whole world's confidence in us. If that were not so, people
would have killed one another long ago. Hence, being worthy
of other people's confidence is no more than devotion to duty and
this we should practise without attachment.
What I ask from you, therefore, is a mind at peace with
itself in the midst of any amount of work and an attitude of
extreme generosity towards the environment. When you acquire
these, you will find your work quite easy, for your words will then
penetrate directly to the heart like an arrow and neither Madhav-
lal on one side nor Narandas on the other will ever misunder-
stand your meaning.
I have made this letter short. If, therefore, you find it diffi-
cult to follow my meaning, return it along with your questions
and I will try to explain more clearly.
I expect to get details of the passing away of Kaki.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5453
