336. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
November 5, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I can send you only a brief letter today, although I have a lot to say.
You will find a copy of the letter from Lord Crewe, and copy of my
reply. It has not yet been delivered to Lord Crewe because it has been
sent to Lord Ampthill for approval.
The statement is now being distributed. I send you one copy along
with the Times Literary Supplement by parcel post, and I hope to send
you also copy of the letter which will accompany the statement, bringing
the matters to date. The letter from Lord Crewe has been received in
time for the Congress to do its duty. Let us hope that it will.
We leave on 13th November. On Saturday last I addressed a
meeting of the Indian Union Society. All these things are now necessary
in order to let every Indian know the position. There might be a report
of the meeting in the columns of India. On Tuesday, as per card herewith,
1 Vide Appendix XXXI.
2 This was the same as the letter sent on November 6; vide "Letter to Under
Secretary for Colonies", p. 519.
3 For Lord Ampthill's reply, vide Appendix XXXI.
4 Vide the preceding item.
5 This was the printed statement of July 16, which had been withheld from
circulation till then. It was released with a covering letter; vide the following item.
6 Vide "Speech at New Reform Club", p. 510.
7 The original has "not", an obvious typing error.
there was a meeting of young Indians to consider what they could
do. Mr. Anglia, Mr. Hajee Habib, and I spoke to them. The proposi-
tion I made before them was that students and other resident Indians
should give what time they could regularly to propaganda work, should
get a memorandum signed by thousands of people here, with whatever
subscription they may choose to give towards the maintenance of the
struggle. I send you draft memorandum. A meeting is to be held
tomorrow to consider the programme of work and the draft memorandum.
The idea is also to publish a weekly bulletin, if possible, that would give
a resume of the position in India and South Africa, but there are obvious
difficulties about the paper. The paper, in my opinion, cannot be
financed from India. It must be self-supporting and any deficiency
found by the English people, because I hold that it is their duty from
many points of view to take up the work. But you require a man
who is able enough, and who can give his exclusive attention to this.
Ritch cannot do it at present. It therefore remains to be seen whether
this can come out. If Chhaganlal is here in time, there is a likelihood
of it. The work of the Committee will continue. I take it that you will
correspond with Ritch regularly.
I send you herewith copy of my letter to Lord Ampthil1, which is
quite confidential, but of course you should know the whole position.
After reading the letter I would like you to destroy it. I am sending a
copy to Dr. Mehta with a similar request, and I am sending also a copy
of this letter to him in order to avoid my having to write about the same
thing. If the volunteers do their duty here, and if India makes a sufficient
effort, there is no reason why the thing cannot go through, provided, of
course, that we in the Transvaal are firm. It is a curious coincidence
that along with the letter from Lord Crewe comes the news from the
Transvaal that Harilal too is safely lodged in gaol. I am itching to join
him.
I have your cablegram asking me to repeat the last word of my last
cable, which I shall do tomorrow in the hope of being able to add some-
thing more to the cable. The last word was "NEARCTIC" meaning
thirteenth November. It occurs in the 5th edition of the A.B.C. code.
I am addressing a meeting of the Indian Majlis at Cambridge on
Sunday.
You will notice from the list of volunteers that both Sally and Maud
are offering their help. The Pater and Mater also are coming tomorrow.
1 Vide "Speech at Meeting of Indians", p. 511.
2 Vide "Letter to Transvaal British Indians", pp. 519-20.
3 Vide "Letter to Lord Ampthill", pp. 508-10.
4 No report of this speech is available.
5 Vide "Deputation's Last Letter", pp. 524.
9-33
I do not know what they will do. Of course if they will they also can do
the missionary work, but I can hardly conceive it as possible. Miss
Winterbottom has thrown herself into it.
Mr. Doke's book has been reviewed in the Edinburgh Evening News
in about 20 lines. The Times has just acknowledged it, giving a 4-line
notice. I do not think it has been reviewed anywhere else yet. Mr. Meyer
calls a meeting to bid us farewell and to hear me on the position on
Friday the 12th inst. and about sixty people are being invited to tea.
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5162
