151. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 19, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
Many thanks for yours of the 17th instant.
I am sorry to have to say that your answers omitting 1, 2
and 6 do not give satisfaction.
It may be that all my questions do not arise from the view of
mere clarification of the Lahore Resolution. But I contend that
they are very relevant from the standpoint of a seeker that I am.
You cannot expect anyone to agree to or shoulder the burden
of the claim contained in the Lahore Resolution without, for
instance, answering my questions 15 (a) and 15 (b) which you
brush aside as not arising by way of clarification.
Dr. Ambedkar's thesis, while it is ably written, has carried
no conviction to me. The other book mentioned by you, I am
sorry to say, I have not seen.
Why can you not accept my statement that I aspire to repre-
sent all the sections that compose the people of India? Do you
not aspire? Should not every Indian? That the aspiration may
never be realized is beside the point.
I am beholden to you, in spite of your opinion about me,
for having patience with me. I hope you will never lose it, but
will persevere in your effort to convert me. I ask you to take me
with my strong views and even prejudices, if I am guilty of any.
As to your verdict on my policy and programme, we must
agree to differ. For, I am wholly unrepentant. My purpose is
as a lover of communal unity to place my services at your disposal.
I hope you do not expect me to accept the Lahore Resolu-
tion without understanding its implications. If your letter is the
final word, there is little hope. Can we not agree to differ on the
question of "two nations" and yet solve the problem on the
basis of self-determination? It is this basis that has brought
me to you. If the regions holding Muslim majorities have to be
separated according to the Lahore Resolution, the grave step
of separation should be specifically placed before and approved
by the people in that area.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
