199. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
RAJKOT,
May 10, 1902
THE EDITOR
"THE TIMES OF INDIA"
BOMBAY
SIR,
With reference to my letter about the position of the Brit-
ish Indians in Natal published in your issue of the 1st instant,
I have now received from Natal the papers containing the text
of the Bill, which I beg to give below:
Bill to amend the Indian Immigration Amendment Act, providing
that every Indian child, on attaining the age of majority (males 16,
females 13), shall be obliged (a) to go to India, or (b) to remain in
Natal under indentures similar to and renewable in the same manner as
the re-indenture referred to in Act No. 17, 1895, as amended by sub-
sequent Acts, or (c) to take out year by year, in terms of Section 6 of
Act No. 17, 1895, a pass or licence to remain in the Colony.
Provided, however, that if such child attains majority before the
completion of his father's first or any subsequent indenture, the operation
of this section shall be suspended until the completion of such indenture.
In the case of a child whose father is dead or not in Natal, or whose
mother was unmarried at the time of the child's birth, the above refer-
ence to the father's indenture shall be deemed to apply to the mother's
indenture. A child to whom this Act applies shall be entitled to a free
passage to India in order to enable him to proceed thither at the
end of the first or any renewed term of indenture of his father (or of
his mother, as the case may be). The right to a free passage shall
however be lost (a) if the father, or, as in the above case, the mother,
shall have completed a term of indenture during the child's minority
and shall not have returned to India or entered into a fresh indenture
in terms of Act No. 17, 1895, (b) if the child does not go to India by the
first opportunity available to him after attaining his majority or after the
end of a term of indenture entered into under this Act. The Act does
not apply to persons who have attained the age of majority previous
to the date of taking effect of the Act, but it makes no difference whether
the child is born before or after arrival of parents in Natal.
The Bill, then, if it is any satisfaction to know the fact, is
not to apply to infants in arms. The more, however, one consi-
ders it, the more unjust it is found to be.
It is worthy of note that the children who have received an
elementary education in the Colony are expected by the Bill to
serve at a rate of wages far below the market-rate, like well-
built men as field labourers from "sunrise to sunset", and that
the children born of the so-called unlawful connections, too, are
brought under the Bill. Thus, the children of an indentured
woman married according to the religious rites of her sect to a
free Indian, but whose marriage is not registered and not recog-
nized in the Colony, will be under the same restrictions as in-
dentured Indians. But it is hardly worth while to examine
the details of a measure whose principle is repugnant to the or-
dinary rules of justice as it is known to those brought up under
the British Constitution.
The same mail that has brought the papers containing the
text of the Bill also brings the news that Indian children,
attending the schools in the Colony, are to be debarred from re-
ceiving the Coronation commemoration medals which are to be
presented by the Government in June next to all the European
children attending the schools. The exclusion is certainly not
based on grounds of economy, for the Indian children are, I
think, about 3,000 against 20,000 European children. Evidently,
the Coronation celebration day is to be marked out for the
Indian children to realize as vividly as possible that the pos-
session of a brown skin is a sure mark of humiliation and degra-
dation in the estimation of the Government of the Colony.
The Times of India, 14-5-1902
