13. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SYLHET,
ASSAM,
[August 30, 1921]
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I have your letter. I have sent you a telegram today; a copy
of it is enclosed. If we have the necessary strength, I for my part
would suggest that there should be a hartal in Ahmedabad, but
only so long as the Prince is there, care being taken to see that
poor people get all the provisions they need. In the event of such a
hartal being observed, martial law is likely to be proclaimed. We
should face it and meet death if it comes to that. But I do not
think we are ready for this; we haven't yet the necessary strength.
We should, therefore, rest content with what we can do. We should
tell the people how they could dissociate themselves from the
visit. The Municipality should have as little to do with it as pos-
sible. No one may salute the Prince and, if he visits Govern-
ment schools, the boys may not rise from their seats. If we are
strong enough for such action, we should organize picketing outside
his office and prevent people from seeing him. We can think of
many more ways of showing our displeasure without being rude.
All these we may adopt and make our attitude known to the
public. My advice is that we announce the full boycott programme
right now and start training the people to act peacefully but firm-
ly. We must have the strength to make it impossible for the
Prince to parade his position in Ahmedabad.
More than this I cannot say from this distance.
Only, I
would ask you not to undertake anything beyond your capacity.
It is essential to avoid failure. Apart from this, if there is any
possibility of a breach of the peace following determined opposi-
tion by us, please do not make any attempt to carry out my
suggestions.
It is in the fitness of things that you have accepted the Chair-
manship of the [Congress] Reception Committee. Such honours
will not turn our heads when service of the people is our only aim
in life.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine
