16. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
BOMBAY,
Thursday [July 8, 1920]
BHAISHRI NARAHARI 2 ,
Experience has convinced me that one cannot pay too much
attention to students' handwriting. If I were to think merely of
livelihood, [good] handwriting is valuable enough. For a student,
it is an accomplishment.
Why does one fall ill? Everyone should find this out for him-
self. I keep thinking about it all the time. Merely from con-
siderations of physical health, I find myself drawn at present to
some techniques of Hathayoga. I think some of them to be very
important from this point of view. It was a vaidya from Baroda
who gave these ideas to me. Think this over with Vinoba . With
unhealthy bodies, we cannot give of our best in the service of India.
I often feel that pranayama and techniques like neti dhauti etc., must
be of great help in maintaining the internal cleanliness of the body.
My only point in saying all this is that you should make your
body [as strong] as steel.
In order to be able to get up early, go to bed, if necessary, at
eight sharp. I say this because I put the highest value on early rising.
Deepak has very little fat on him. His ribs are visible. I am
not happy with this. I simply cannot bear the thought that even
one boy should have his ribs visible.
If possible, find out more about Bhaskar's money. There is
no doubt, of course, that we should credit the amount to his
account. Could he himself have taken that money?
The reply Kaka gave about students could have been given
by him alone, by one who was filled with the true spirit of the
school. I am perfectly satisfied with it as far as it goes. But,
to go further than that, I am sure a student from my school will
be able, if he but wants, to earn more in the end. He will have a
trained and sharp intellect. His brain will not have been crushed
under the burden of a foreign language and of examinations. Even as
things are today, the idea that those who have passed examinations
earn more is just a myth. The rich in India are still men who have
had no English education. They have English-educated men working
under them. I leave out of account here barristers and doctors,
especially the former, for they are the men who require a stamp.
As for medicine, even our children can practise if they have the
requisite knowledge. They may take up any service, except under
Government, in which B.A.s are employed (if service is to be all
their aim). If, having attained that level in their studies, any
of them wants to go to England, he may take the matriculation
there and may also become a barrister. That is, we leave an open-
ing for him in case he repents. If the education we are giving is
really up to our expectations, we can defend it against the entire
world.
Forgetting for the moment all about moksha1, we can certainly
persuade every child to aspire to be good. While explaining who
is a good man, quite a few things can be taught.
But all this when we meet. I shall go there on Monday and
return the same day. It will be good if you can set apart one
hour at one for us. There will be no one then and, if
anyone turns up, we shall excuse ourselves.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 6415
