263. LETTER TO TARABEHN R. MODI
March 8, 1934
CHI. TARA,
It is 3.30 a.m. just now. This is a small village. We reached
the place at 9 last night after travelling the whole day. I was
given your letter immediately on arrival and am writing this
reply now.
Five systems of treatment are current in India at present:
(1) allopathy, (2) ayurveda, (3) unani, (4) homoeopathy and
(5) nature cure. I leave out the use of mantras and magic. Of
these, allopathy is the most widely in use.
I am inclined towards
nature cure and, if further help is needed, I would have recourse
to allopathy, but within limits. In certain cases surgery is indis-
pensable and some of the drugs, like quinine, are very effective.
I would put you under nature-cure treatment and, for the trouble
you are having with your teeth, etc., I would advise you to take
help from allopathy.
But I am not with you just now and don't
wish to offer guidance from this distance. I, therefore, feel in-
clined to let things go on as at present. Allopathic practitioners
are comparatively more honest. In the West, they are continually
experimenting. Their treatments, therefore, are often found to
succeed. But I would say this even from here. After commencing a
treatment, one should think no more about it and watch the effect
patiently.
One should not feel impatient for the result. Let it
be what it will, good or bad.
After all, how do we know what
result is good and what bad? "What we regard as misery is not
misery, nor what we regard as happiness happiness. The only misery
is forgetfulness of Narayana's name and the only happiness is
constant memory of Him." Let the attachment to the body fall
away slowly. Keep on writing to me. I will then write if I
have any suggestion to make.
Don't think about anything till the body is completely
restored to health and you can work.
There will be plenty of
time to serve after you have recovered.
Kishorelal is at Deolali. Fever does not leave him complete-
ly.
Going to Deolali does not seem to have made much dif-
ference. I had a letter from Vasumati. Pyarelal is in Bombay.
You have done well in renting a separate room there. But
who is with you to help you? Who does your cleaning, sweeping,
cooking and other chores?
I am sure you must be realizing the
usefulness of the Ashram in your present circumstances.
The test
for us consists in creating the atmosphere of the Ashram even when
there is no Ashram now.
The noise has started now. The hands of the clock are moving
to 4.20. Wherever I go, a thousand or two thousand persons
attend the morning and evening prayers.
Since it is a new place
every day, people don't feel it a hardship to forgo one night's
sleep. They come to the morning prayer even from great distances.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4180. Also C.W. 1679. Courtesy:
Ramniklal Modi
