469. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
March 24, 1911
MY DEAR POLAK,
I have your letter. I am glad that your tooth is out. I certainly
congratulate you upon getting such a splendid dentist. All I can say
is that he is an exception. Karamat's case is shocking. He is undoubted-
ly a great liar. He will not obey instructions. It is, therefore, difficult
to treat him. Otherwise, I consider that his is not a hopeless case.
Until he can be sent to India, and supported somewhere, all I can sug-
1 Vide "Report of European Committee Meeting", p. 485.
2 The draft of this cable is found under the text of the cable sent to Gokhale
without the addressee's name. It is presumed to have been addressed to Natesan from
a reference to it in the following item.
3 Vide "Letter to Maganlal Gandhi", p. 407.
gest is that, if the people at Phoenix are reconciled to the idea,
Mr. Rustomjee should build him a hut, and he should live in that hut
by himself and cook for himself, the settlers to have strict instructions
not to supply him with any other food at all. The cost will be trifling.
He could pass his time in a fairly easy manner, and he will have some
sympathetic company also. He can take a small plot, which he may do
anything he likes with, so long as he keeps his hut and the plot in a
sweet condition. He can only be allowed to come to Phoenix, subject,
as I say, to the consent of the settlers, if Mr. Rustomjee will undertake
to see him personally at least once per month. To send him to a laza-
retto is, in my opinion, to ask him to commit suicide. I would far rather
place in his hands a revolver than be party to sending him to any place of
compulsory segregation. I dare say you know something of the scan-
dals about Robben Island
Unless some telegram is received from Smuts, I shall be leaving
for Cape Town tomorrow, and we shall exchange telegrams very fre-
quently. Nothing need, therefore, be discussed by me in this letter.
Miss Schlesin will write to you daily with reference to the situation here,
and send you what there may be for Indian Opinion. I enclose cables sent
today to London and Calcutta . I have sent a short cablegram to
Natesan asking him to see the cables to Gokhale and act.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5356
