367. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
At Night, October 9, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I duly got your mail. We must help Bhau to overcome his
constipation. I feel that, if you send him to Rajkot, the water
there may perhaps agree with him. If it is impossible to send
him to Rajkot, you may send him to Vijapur. But I am eager
that he should go to Rajkot, as we know that the water of that
place agreed with Purushottam. Moreover, he will benefit from the
company of Purushottam and Jamnadas. Do what you think best.
I feel worried about Kusum. The thought that her health
does not improve is a painful one. Does she take proper rest
now? Prema told me in her letter that you abstained from
many things during my fast. I hope that has not affected your
health. I am regaining my strength with wonderful speed. You
see how many letters I write. I must have written about 30 letters
today, important and unimportant. As for spinning, I spin at
least 200 rounds a day, of more than 45 counts. The elbow is
in excellent condition, so far. I have gone up to two pounds
of milk. Fruit continues. The weight also has gone up to 99.
217
I can walk for a sufficiently long time. You need not, therefore,
worry about me at all.
In which jail is the elder Kusum to be kept? Where is she
at present? After the death at Trivedi's place, I felt that we
should either banish the primus stove from the Ashram or the
women should resolve never to light it. I enforced this rule
today in the case of Ba. We have got a primus here at present.
Ba went to light it. I stopped her and Mahadev went instead.
The dress of our women is such that there is every danger of
its catching fire. If the women must use a primus stove, they
should ask a man every time to light it. Really speaking, it is
not at all necessary.
I hope that Qureshi's piles have completely disappeared now.
How is Amina? Ask her to write to me. Anyone who wishes
may write. Nobody need refrain out of pity for me now. Ba is
still permitted to stay with me for the whole day. But the per-
mission may now be withdrawn any time. Devdas is free to
come and see me every day. Read my letter to Panditji.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8259. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
