282. LETTER TO THE PRESS
HOTEL CECIL,
STRAND, W.C.,
November 30, 1906
TO
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES
[LONDON]
SIR,
On the eve of the departure of the Indian Deputation from the
Transvaal, may we trespass upon your courtesy to allow us to offer
our thanks to the many supporters of the British Indian cause who have
rendered us their valuable assistance in putting our case before the
Imperial Government and the British public. The unfailing courtesy
we have experienced from gentlemen representing different shades of
opinion, from all parties, and from the Press has been a source of keenest
satisfaction to us and has inspired us with a new hope. Our brief stay
in London has prevented us from personally waiting on all whom we
should have liked to meet. We have, however, received support and
sympathy even from them.
The lesson we have drawn from the above is that we may rely upon
the British sense of fair play and justice and that the cause we have
the honour to espouse is absolutely just. May we restate it in a few
words? We ask for no political power in the Transvaal. We do not
strive for unrestricted immigration of British Indians, but we do respect-
fully and emphatically claim the ordinary rights of citizenship for those
who are already in the country—namely, freedom of ownership of land,
freedom of locomotion, freedom of trade, subject to such requirements
as may be necessary in the interests of the community as a whole. In
short, the British Indians in the Transvaal claim the right to live in the
Transvaal with self-respect and dignity. The Indian community pro-
tests against any class distinction being made, and it has exerted itself
against the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance, because it violates in
the most brutal manner the principles above laid down. In our humble
opinion we feel that if we cannot secure for our countrymen, whom
we have the honour to represent, the above measure of recognition,
the term "British Indian" becomes an empty platitude and "Empire"
ceases to have any meaning for the British Indian. In coming to England
and laying our case before the Home Government, we have no desire
to offer violent opposition to the European Colonists in the Transvaal.
Ours is wholly a defensive attitude. When the local Government, in
the name of the people of the Transvaal, sends to the Imperial Govern-
ment for assent a piece of offensive legislation to protect and accentuate
colour prejudice, we are obliged, in self-defence, to lay before the same
Government the Indian side of the question. We are anxious and willing
to work out our own salvation by our conduct, and by showing to the
Colonists that their interests are also our interests and that our goal is
the common advancement of them and us. We cannot do this if we
do not get breathing time, by reason of the anti-Indian prejudice of the
few being crystallized into and receiving the hallmark of legislation
under the King's Sign Manual.
We are,
M. K. GANDHI
H. O. ALLY
The Times, 3-12-1906
