454. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
September 5, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,
What a letter! But the reply will have to be in English.
You are a perfect fraud-a strange mystic who cannot rise
above the loving prejudices of parents. Your issue seems to me to
be quite correct. But why are you not satisfied with your being
in the right! Must your neighbours, be they parents, also admit
your claim to be in the right? Why must not your knowledge
that you are in the right be its own satisfaction? Why should disap-
pointments defeat you? Or you must withdraw your claim to
be spiritually-minded and mystic.
Mystics are made of sterner
stuff-they are not ruffled by misery or pain or insult nor elated
by happiness, pleasure or praise.
If you say, they interfere with your action, it won't hold
water. They do not prevent you bodily from being absorbed in
prayer or contemplation for two hours or longer. I think
you will find that all your difficulties will dissolve, if without
irritation, anger or assertiveness you tell them with the greatest
firmness and equal gentleness and with a smile on your lips, that
whatever you are doing is a fundamental necessity of your being.
Whilst I say this you should know that my whole heart is
with you. You must have freedom of thought, speech and action.
You must be treated as a friend, not as a child. I am afraid that
in your resentment you have underrated the atmosphere of large-
heartedness and tolerance that is the speciality of Tyabjis. If you
gave full credit to them for this rare quality you would gladly
overlook what appears to be patronizing in their behaviour
towards you.
Remember that you will not be you but for the
training they gave you and the affection with which they have
surrounded you all.
Do not belittle the much they have done
for you. Do you know this great doha of Tulsidas, the mystic?
~ ~;:r ~1lT ~rql{'1:f f<r.iOf f'fi~Q 'fi~T<:
~('f ~~ l!1lT 'TQfQ q~ qf~<: onf<: fOf'fiT<:
God has endowed His animate and inanimate creation
with good and bad qualities. The good man will sift and
treasure the good from the bad even as the fabled swan
separates and eats the cream from the water and the milk he
sees before him.
I advise you and ask you to follow the advice of your fellow-
mystic.
Tell me in reply that you have thrown overboard all your misery
and are singing away in praise of Allah the Good and the Benevolent.
My love to you and Saroj. Do you need thanks for Rs. 15
for the Harijans?
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 9653. Also manuscript of Mahadev Desai's
Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
