289. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
SABARMATI,
August 9, 1924
Very Confidential
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I promised to write to you an important letter, but I have
not been able up to now. I was ready four days ago when I
received Mrs. Naidu's letter informing me she was coming here.
I, therefore, stopped the letter pending her arrival. I wanted
to say that I was prepared to facilitate your securing the Con-
gress machinery, actually assisting you to do so. In no case will
I be party to vote-catching in the sense it is being under-
stood at the present moment. I would be prepared to work
outside the Congress but not in opposition to it. I have no
interest in anything but promoting a peaceful atmosphere, khad-
dar, and Hindu-Muslim unity and removal of untouchability.
In all this I know I should get your assistance. I would natu-
rally have an organization for that work, but not with any
desire whatsoever to capture the Congress ultimately. I would
not like to waste the nation's time in wrangling over getting a
majority in an atmosphere such as is prevalent today.
If you are not prepared to take over the whole of the Con-
gress machinery, I am quite prepared to facilitate your taking
over those Provinces where you think you have no difficulty in
running it.
Short of my coming into your programme, I would like to
place myself at your disposal.
Then there is the question of the Congress President. Raja-
gopalachary, Gangadharrao and Rajendra Babu insist on
my accepting the office. Vallabhbhai and Shankarlal approve
of my idea of not accepting. Jamnalal is neutral and so is
perhaps Mrs. Naidu. I forget to say that Shaukat Ali too is
insistent that I should accept the office. The only condition
that will make me reconsider my position would be your
desire that I should accept. Will you please consult Messrs
Das, Kelkar and others and let me know what you would advise
me to do in both the matters referred to by me?
I have read this letter to Mrs. Naidu.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 5177. Courtesy: Krishnadas
