188. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
S. S. "ARABIA",
December [23, 1914]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
This is the fifth letter I am writing to you during the voyage. The
first was written before reaching Sheerness. My last letter was written
in a gloomy mood. But somehow or other the gloom went with the
disappearance of the gateway to Europe. It is strange yet true. But
why strange ! Perhaps it should be considered quite natural.
Our joint life is becoming stricter. Our menu now is for Mrs. Gandhi
a portion of the special bread, three biscuits soaked in water, 3 plums,
a fig, two tomatoes and 3 oranges, also a spoonful of oil and 6 almonds.
This twice a day. Mine was ground-nut, butter spoonful, two biscuits,
6 plums, 2 oranges, one tomato and teaspoonful pine kernel. This for
breakfast; for the evening meal ground-nut preparation with the other
things and no biscuits but 6 walnuts. Before retiring, I shall drink a
lemon. These simple meals satisfy us both and now for me there is
no hankering. The only thing to complete our happiness would be your
presence. We always talk about you at meal times, what you would
be doing there at the time, how you would make the stewards work
here and how you would have insisted on some cooked things and how
you would have wanted more tomatoes and more oil and how I would
have protested against both. This return to the old style has improved
my health wonderfully though the pain in the side has not yet left me.
However, that may leave me in India. Today I have worn somewhat
to Mrs. Gandhi's disgust, the Indian dress I used to in South Africa.
The passengers looked surprised as I appeared on the deck but I think
the surprise has passed away.
I have been more and more devoted to my Bengali studies and
I fancy I have made marked progress. Before retiring I invariably read
the Bhagavad Gita, Ramayana and sing one hymn.
We have mixed but little with the passengers. One very noted
suffragist is on board. She has become interested in us. So we talk
to her now and then.
So much of our life. But yours - we left you unhappy, a lonely
calf! That cow must be wretched that leaves her calf! And yet the
1 The source has December 3 in Gandhiji's hand, evidently a slip as he set sail
for India on December 19, 1914. From the opening sentence in the letter, the date
is presumed to be the 23rd, the fifth day of voyage.
195
leaving was the only thing possible and I think it was the best. I shall
feel very sad if you keep me without a cable even when we reach
Bombay. I dare not expect any news of you at [Aden] which we
reach tomorrow.
And now a personal touch before I reach India. I have been harsh
to you, apparently cruel even, rude too as you thought. But the words
came out of the purest love. If I did wrong, it was not because I
loved you less but because I loved too well. I became impatient to
see you do what I thought was the right thing. Pardon me then if
I hurt you as I know I did. You made no secret of it. I did not heed
it. I hope I did right in not heeding it. Let that love keep you and
me on the path we have chosen. It is a strange path, it is difficult
but not inaccessible. With sufficient attempt we shall reach it. The glory,
if we want it, lies in the attempt not in the reaching. Tolstoy even
said that the goal ever receded as [one] went nearer.
Mrs. Gandhi, who is sitting by me, wants me especially to send
her love to you.
And now, may this letter be redirected to you in India. May you
have left before this reaches London. If it does reach you in London,
please give the purport of this unless you would read it to Sorabji,
Gandevia and Mehta.
With love,
Ever Yours,
OLD FRIEND
LATE UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
