323. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 14, 1927
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
Your letters still arrive after many wanderings.
I should get faithful account of Sastri's visit, but have not
received one so far.
Sushila has asked a question about social service. Any work
which we do for people's welfare and with sincere motives is social
service. If in your family life you merely aim at enjoyment and
do not think of society, that will be serving self-interest; if, on the
other hand, you adopt simplicity for the sake of society, take care
not to set a bad example to others and, when buying anything,
consider whether it is morally right or wrong to do so, then
that is social service. Going further, if your aim in helping in the
press work is merely to save money, that is service of self. If,
however, your aim is to learn that work and spend the money
saved by your work for some public purpose, if it is that you
should bring out the paper even at the cost of hardship to your-
self, that is social service. Go a step further still; if, finding that
your neighbour is ill, you sacrifice your comforts in order to nurse
him and learn nursing work, that is social service. From these
examples you can think of any number of others and extend the
field of social service within the limits of your capacity. If, tired
of India, Manilal lives in South Africa to enjoy the pleasures
which that country offers, that is selfishness. If, believing that
the paper conducted by his father was good and that his country
stood to gain by his continuing to run it, he lives and forces you
to live in exile without the aim of amassing wealth, he is ren-
dering a great social service and you, too, are making a contri-
bution to it.
Today we have come to a far-off place in Mysore State.
About sixty miles from here is a waterfall like the Inanda Falls,
but much bigger than that, which we are all going to see to-
morrow. Devdas has stayed back in Bangalore. He will arrive
here this evening with others. We shall remain here and collect
contributions for about four days and then return to Bangalore.
At the end of this month, we shall cross the boundary of Mysore
State and enter Tamilnad.
My health continues to improve. I do not think we shall
get back to the Ashram by the end of December. We positively
wish to return in January, since Vasantapanchami falls at the end
of that month and Ramdas's wedding has been fixed for that
day. Whether Nimu turns out to be as wise as Sushila and gives
Ramdas a life-companion exactly like yours and makes him a
prisoner is still to be seen. Nimu of course is wise, but are there
not degrees even of wisdom? How much distance is there between
you two and who is better of the two, only the future will tell.
For myself, I wish that both of you should reach the summit
and that all the four of you should strengthen one another's moral
character and stand foremost in the yajna of service. Ramdas has
gone out to help in flood relief work.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4725
