142. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
CHARLESTOWN,
November 3, 1913
The enclosed letter was written on the way. It is unfinished. I
have seen the quotations for tents, and it seems to me that, after all,
bell-tents would be the cheapest and the easiest to fix up. One bell-
tent takes in twelve men. At that rate in order to accommodate 1,200
men, we should want 100. The figures then amount to £75. That would
be, in my opinion, prohibitive. The alternative is to buy tarpaulin and
make our own tents and poles. It seems to me that this could be easily
fixed. If we could sew them on to the tarpaulin, the thing would be
quite substantial, but it may be too long. In that event we shall have
to use handles. I am now writing without any experience whatsoever,
but I am giving you all these suggestions for what they are worth.
At the time of the Zulu Rebellion we had tents which when erected
simply looked like the wings of a roof without any wall. There were
pegs which were to be driven in. They could easily be rigged up and
two slender poles kept them erect. They were V-shape inverted, and
if these tents could be bought probably they would be the cheapest.
1 Vide pp. 152-.
2 Of 1906
Six could at a pinch be put into these tents. I would like to carry these
tents myself on the march, failing that tarpaulin. Having known all these
things, you may do what you like, but what I want is sufficient cover
for my journey. The same cover I shall use in Charlestown until I
have commenced the march. As soon as you can supply me with
sufficient tents, you may send me all the men there, so that we could
concentrate all the women and children at Charlestown. All the men
must march, the women may get trains. Whilst you are in Johannesburg,
you must see Mr. Cachalia and others, and get them to send vegetables,
oil, rice, mealimeal and even coal— whatever they can beg. Not a
single consignment has yet arrived from Johannesburg, and it is certainly
discreditable that the merchants have not yet sent anything.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
