203. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
RANGOON,
March 21 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
This is my second letter from Rangoon. Yours of the 12th February
has followed me here.
You want to know my personal life. I shall therefore restrict this
to its description. I rise never later than 5 a.m. and often at 4 a.m.
Here in Rangoon I go out for a long walk with Dr. Mehta. At 10 a.m.
we take the first meal. Mine and Mrs. Gandhi's consists of uncooked
fruits and nuts. Groundnuts are roasted. My menu today was 4 bananas,
2 tiny tomatoes, 1 tiny unripe mango chopped, 2 spoonfuls of grated
fresh coconut, 4 walnuts, perhaps 2 ounces of date, ground - nut meal
mixed, 1 naarangi, 2 slices of wretched melon, 2 lemons and a drink
of coconut water. Much the same will be taken at 5 p.m. Or. Mehta
joins me in the fruitarian meal. He adds milk and almonds to the above.
Both of us walk about the Town barefoot. Mrs. Gandhi cooks unripe
bananas when she can get them. I have now no desire for cooked
bananas. Hitherto, there has been no difficulty about procuring fruits
and nuts. Several young men in different parts of the country are trying
the fruitarian diet. I have asked them to let me have results. The tutor
to Dr. Mehta's sons is trying the experiment with me. We retire here
at about 10 p.m. Elsewhere I have not been able to do so. The pains
in the ribs are still there somewhat. I notice nothing in the groins
or the right calf I have a good appetite now and my bowels move
twice. I anticipate no difficulty about continuing the experiment. This
country seems to be peculiarly fitted for fruitarian diet. The temptations
which I feared there have not overtaken me at all. On the contrary,
living our ideals here seems to be comparatively easier.
Or. Mehta's house is nice and airy. It is very simply conducted.
His life is transparent. There is no cant or hypocrisy about it. You
would have liked the life here immensely. He has a farm also which
is groaning under the weight of fruit trees that were there when he
bought it. He has introduced handlooms there.
I leave here on the 29th instant and reach Santiniketan about the
5th April.
Now good-bye.
With love from us all,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
