351. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
December 30, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
The Government are to be congratulated on boldly and honestly
taking proceedings mainly against those only who have led the passive
resistance movement against the Asiatic Act. That, indeed, is the only
method of testing the reality and universality of Asiatic feeling. But
among those arrested are some who have never taken an active part
in the agitation, and there are also remarkable omissions. Both these
facts tell their own tale. Some have even suggested that one or two
1 At the conclusion of the trial, Gandhiji addressed a large gathering of Indians,
Chinese and Europeans in Government Square. Speaking first in Hindustani, he
narrated what had happened at the trial. This is a report of what he said in English
to the Europeans.
2 This appeared in Indian Opinion, 4-1-1908, as a "Letter to the Press".
arrests are due to private grudge. However, it is not my purpose, in
trespassing on your courtesy, to deal with this phase of the question.
The arrests have synchronised with the announcement of the Royal
Assent to the Immigration Act. This shows that the Government intend
to use their newly-acquired power. They have now three strings to
their bow, viz., imprisonment, the stopping of trade licences, and deporta-
tion. All these powers have been taken or given in order to enable
the Government, not to stop an influx of Asiatics, because no one wants
it, and the Registration Act cannot stop it; not to avoid trade competition,
because every Indian submitting to the Act can have as many licences
as and where he wants; but to enable them to bend Indians to their
will, to force them to do violence to their conscience; in short, by
delivering a crushing blow, to unman them, so that they may become
as wax in their hands.
Do the colonists know that deportation under the Immigration
Act is worse than ordinary deportation? If I committed murder and
were sentenced to transportation for life, I should be sent to a place
where I should be housed and fed even as the few native rebels sent
from Natal to St. Helena are. But if I do not submit to the Asiatic
Act I am deported, that is, put across the border or sent to India without
a penny on me, if I do not possess private property, to shift for myself
as best I can, the cost of deportation to be paid by me. And if I have
a family in the Transvaal, so far as the Government are concerned,
they will be allowed to die of starvation. And this, mind, is to happen
to men to whom the Transvaal is their adopted home and India a
foreign country for purposes of earning a livelihood. Some of the Indians
arrested are traders of nearly fifteen years' standing, with wives born
in South Africa and living in the Transvaal. One Chinaman came
to South Africa a mere lad, knows China only in name. He was born
and bred in Western institutions. All the Asiatics arrested are lawful
residents in possession of documents entitling them to remain in the
country. These men, because they do not violate their conscience,
but violate the Asiatic Act, may not only be imprisoned, but deported,
in the above fashion under a warrant signed by the Colonial Secretary!
I do not say that those who do not comply with the law, even when
non-compliance is due to the dictates of the conscience, should not
be punished at all, but I do say that when the punishment is dispropor-
tionate to the offence, it savours strongly of barbarism. And if the
powers under the Immigration Act are exercised in respect of the Asiatic
Law, an act of barbarism will have been committed in the name of
the electors of the Transvaal. Will the people of this country chuckle
with delight over such ruination of a whole people? What will the
Guild of Loyal Women say regarding wives being kept without their
natural protectors? I consider myself a lover of the British Empire,
a citizen (though voteless) of the Transvaal, prepared to take my full
share in promoting the general well-being of the country. And I claim
it to be perfectly honourable, and consistent with the above profession,
to advise my countrymen not to submit to the Asiatic Act as being
derogatory to their manhood and offensive to their religion. And I
claim, too, that the method of passive resistance adopted to combat
the mischief is the cleanest and the safest, because, if the cause is not
true, it is the resisters, and they alone, who suffer. I am perfectly aware
of the danger to good government, in a country inhabited by many
races unequally developed, in an honest citizen advising resistance to
a law of the land. But I refuse to believe in the infallibility of legislators.
I do believe that they are not always guided by generous or even just
sentiments in their dealings with unrepresented classes. I venture to
say that, if passive resistance is generally accepted, it will once and
for ever avoid the contingency of a terrible death struggle and bloodshed
in the event (not impossible) of the natives becoming exasperated by
a stupid mistake of our legislators.
It has been said that those who do not like the law may leave the
country. This is all very well, spoken from a cushioned chair, but it
is neither possible nor becoming for men to leave their homes because
they do not subscribe to certain laws enacted against them. The
Uitlanders of the Boer regime complained of harsh laws; they, too, were
told that if they did not like them, they could retire from the country,
but they thought better and did not go. Are Indians, who are fighting
for their self-respect, to slink away from the country for fear of suffering
imprisonment or worse?
No, Sir, if I could help it, nothing would remove Indians from the
country save brute force. It is no part of a citizen's duty to pay blind
obedience to the laws imposed on him. And if my countrymen believe
in God and the existence of the soul, then, while they may admit that
their bodies belong to the State to be imprisoned and deported, their
minds, their wills and their souls must ever remain free like the birds
of the air, and are beyond the reach of the swiftest arrow. General
Smuts, who puts trust in the tyrannical laws sanctioned by an obliging
Secretary of State, forgets that those Asiatics who are fighting for
conscience sake will not be bent by any machinery he may put in force.
If, when the leaders are withdrawn, my countrymen succumb, we shall
have deserved the law. Then, too, the cleanness of passive resistance,
that is Jesus' teaching "resist not evil", will have been justified.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 30-12-1907
