27. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
June 10, 1932
Most of the manual work in the Ashram is done by the in-
mates themselves. There are a few hired labourers, but only those
men who follow the Ashram rules fairly well have remained to
work in that capacity and the inmates of the Ashram work with
them. Gradually they are acquiring mastery over all types of
work. Children also contribute their share.
Newcomers are first required to learn prayers, bhajans, etc.
It is only after they have learnt these that those among them who
wish to learn English may do so.
All the inmates spin for yajna in company for one hour.
Yarn of less than twenty counts cannot be included as part of
one's contribution through the spinning yajna. The yarn spun
on a day has to be handed over to the depot on the same day.
I have now suggested that, if all the people agree, no one should
be permitted to buy the yarn spun by himself or herself for his
or her own use. I have always believed that our yajna remains
incomplete because of this freedom to buy one's own yarn.
Beginning last week, it has been decided to maintain an ac-
count of everybody's labour at the rate of one anna per hour
of work, irrespective of the nature of work, though it has not
been decided to make actual payments at this rate. Just now
my suggestion to Narandas was merely that, if he agreed, he
should immediately start keeping the records. These records will
be in addition to the general records which are being kept now,
and for the present we will merely note the results. They will
give us much useful information and may also help us to realize
the ideal of equality of work. In other words, all types of social
service, whether spinning or weaving or cleaning lavatories, should
be valued at the rate of one anna per hour of work. You pro-
bably remember that we have discussed this subject in the past
at great length. Recently I have been writing to Narandas on
a variety of subjects and among them I brought up this one
again for discussion. It seems to me that Narandas's capacity for
responding to such ideas has increased considerably these days.
He, therefore, welcomed my suggestion. These records do not
require much time to maintain and, if the present experiment
reaches the stage of implementation, the keeping of accounts
would be so easy that even a person of ordinary education in
Gujarati would be able to do the work. Success in maintaining
accounts of this nature depends on the honesty of the people.
If a person has not really worked for the number of hours which
he enters against his name or supplies to the account-keeper, or
if he has done the work carelessly, it is plain that the account
will not be correct. That is, it will be like good and bad coins
getting mixed up. I have been writing from here a great deal
about children's education too. I cannot tell how much of it the
inmates of the Ashram will be able to adopt. It would require
much time to discuss all that here, and I cannot spare it. Have
patience in this matter.
All of us should make the right use, according to our lights,
of this priceless opportunity which we have got. The best use we
can make of it is to cultivate the power of reflection. Our minds
are often vacant and at such times the only thing we like to do
is either to read or to talk. Some of us do think, but they only
build castles in the air. Really speaking, just as reading is an
art so is thinking. All our thoughts should occur to us at the
right time. Just as we do not read useless books, so also we
should not let our minds run after idle thoughts. The power which
is produced and conserved by such control over one's thoughts
cannot be measured. I have felt during each term of imprisonment
that it was the best time for learning to think in this manner.
I, therefore, advise all of you to master the art of deep re-
flection. If you do so, you will not find it necessary to consult
me frequently. But let no one misunderstand my meaning. I
do not wish to forbid anyone to consult me. I only wish to cure
people of excessive dependence on me.
In case of necessity,
however, my advice will always be available. It is your right and
also your duty to take whatever advantage you can of my expe-
rience and the results of my reflection concerning matters of
which I have had more experience and over which I have re-
flected more deeply than others.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 211-
