98. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
NEW DELHI,
June 10/11, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
The Rajkumari has given me the purport of your con-
versation with her.
Though you have been good enough to tell me that I
could see you at any time I wanted to, I must not avail my-
self of the kindness. I would like, however, to reduce to writing
some of the things I hold to be necessary for the proper
and swift working of the scheme.
1. As to the referendum in the Frontier Province I must
confess that my idea does not commend itself to Pandit Nehru
and his colleagues. As I told you, if my proposal did not com-
mend itself to them, I would not have the heart to go any
further with it.
2. This, however, does not in any way affect my proposal
that before proceeding with the referendum, you should invite
Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah to proceed to the Frontier Province and to
woo the Ministers including Badshah Khan and his Khudai
Khidmatgars who have made the province what it is-better or
worse. Before he goes, no doubt, he should be assured of a
courteous hearing from them.
3. Whether he favours the idea or not, Qaid-e-Azam should
be asked to give a fair picture of the Pakistan scheme before the
simple Pathan mind is asked to make its choice of Hindustan
or Pakistan. I fancy that the Pathan knows his position in
Hindustan. If he does not, the Congress or the Constituent
Assembly now at work should be called upon to complete the
picture. It will be unfair, I apprehend, to choose between
Hindustan or Pakistan without knowing what each is. He should
at least know where his entity will be fully protected.
4. There is as yet no peace in the Frontier Province. Can
there be a true referendum when strife has not completely
abated? Minds are too heated to think coherently. Neither the
Congress nor the League can disown liability for disturbances
by their followers. If peace does not reign in the land, the
whole superstructure will come to pieces and you will, in spite of
division, leave behind a legacy of which you will not be proud.
5. The sooner you have a homogeneous ministry the better.
In no case can the League nominees work independently of the
whole Cabinet. It is a vicious thing that there is no joint
responsibility for every act of individual members.
6. The only way to keep the wonderful time-table made
by you is to anticipate the future and ask your special staff to
work out all the items presented by you, without reference to
the Cabinet and then when the time comes, the report should be
presented to the respective parties for acceptance, amendment
or rejection.
7. The more I see things the more firmly I believe that the
States' problem presents a variety of difficulties which demand
very serious and fearless treatment on your part.
8. The problem of the civil and military services, though
in a way not equally difficult, demands the same firm handling
as the States. Gurgaon strife is an instance in point. So far as
I know one single officer is responsible for the continuance of
the mischief.
9. Lastly may I suggest that the attempt to please all
parties is a fruitless and thankless task. In the course of our
conversation I suggested that equal praise bestowed on both the
parties was not meant. No praise would have been the right
thing. 'Duty will be merit when debt becomes a donation.' It
is not too late to mend. Your undoubted skill as a warrior was
never more in demand than today. Fancy a sailor without his
fleet, save his mother wit!
10. I have tried to be as succinct as possible. I could not
be briefer. If any of the points raised herein demand a personal
talk, you have but to appoint the suitable time. Please do not
think of calling me for the sake of courtesy.
11. I received your kind note of 10th instant whilst I had
almost finished this note. It does not call for a separate reply.
This was finished at 9.25 p. m. It will be typed tomorrow.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
NEW DELHI
From the original: India Office Library and Records, London; also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 256-
