414. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
March 17, 1935
CHI. MARY,
I wonder if I replied to your previous letter. Now I have
your second letter. You cannot always make people pay for
medicines. Always tell them that they ought to pay, whatever they
can, not by way of fees but in order that people who cannot afford
anything might be helped. Where you find that people are taking
advantage of you, you should resolutely refuse to let them have
any medicines without payment. Do not encourage people to come
to you for medicines but lead them to a natural life and point out
to them household nature-cure remedies.
Of course cripples are to be fed and clothed without being
expected to do any work. They are a first charge on a well-ordered
society.
I understand what you say about the coolie question. You
were certainly entitled to ask your neighbour to help you without
feeling dependent upon him. There was no principle at stake.
Mary C.'s method of doing everything herself even at the risk of
losing time is not to be lightly disposed of. Local circumstances
should determine the choice of a particular way where more than
one are open to us.
If you have the slightest trace of dysentery, it is absolutely
necessary for you not to strain yourself in any way. You have to
do only light work.
I am not doing physical work. What I am doing is the super-
intendence of the kitchen so as to bring it in line with village
surroundings. All servants have been dispensed with. One only
has been retained, because he has undergone training enough
himself to become one with us. He is a member of the family.
He works side by side with everybody else. And whereas he was
getting only 7 or 8 rupees per month he is getting here 8 rupees
plus food which means at least 14 rupees per month.
Mary C. is quite wrong in holding that foreign industrialists
are to be preferred to Indian industrialists. I admit that there is
not much room for choice, but such as there is in favour of
the indigenous gentry, for the simple reason that they cannot drain
the wealth of the country and it is easier to deal with them than
with the foreign industrialists who do not hesitate to make good
their position by force of arms which they are able to wield effec-
tively. Their Indian counterpart is unarmed, and knows that he
cannot play fast and loose with his dependents.
If you saw that your neighbours were in need of assistance
during the harvesting season, it would certainly be your duty to
offer your help without any expectation of return in the shape of
helping you to build the verandah.
I have now your letter of 9th March in front of me. I have
a vivid recollection of our discussion over Duncan's two chapters.
They had reference to the village worker. You told me in the
course of our discussion whilst you endorsed his views generally
there were portions about which you thought he was over enthu-
siastic and highly emotional. It was not a perfunctory discussion
either. You laid special stress upon his suggestion of wandering
teachers who would go from village to village. I think that this
was the only point which would have been overlooked had I
not come across your letter of the 9th.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6035. Also C.W. 3365. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
1 The source has "looked over".
