586. LETTER TO E. F. MCINERNY
February 8, 1947
This is the letter I promised you when you were good
enough to see me yesterday.
I am quite clear that you should not abruptly stop rations until
due notice (at least one month) of their stoppage is given to the
refugees that they will be stopped unless one of the specified items of
work is done by them against the rations which should be adequate
and medically fit for consumption. The items should include:
1. Road construction or road repair for at least two hours
per day, Sundays excluded.
2. Removal of water hyacinth for the same period as in
(1), under supervision.
3. House building on their own vacated lands for the same
period as in (1), with material and tools supplied by the Gov-
ernment.
4. Village reconstruction for the same period as in (1).
5. Cleaning of tanks for the same period as in (1).
6. Hand-spinning for four hours per day, cotton and wheel
or takli being supplied by the Government; spinning to include
ginning, carding or tunai or punai.
7. Weaving for the same period as in (6), tools and ac-
cessories and yarn, double-twisted in the case of hand-spun, be-
ing supplied by the Government.
8. Dhenki-husking, same period as in (1), dhenkis being sup-
plied by the Government.
9. Oil-pressing out of coconut or seeds supplied by the
Government.
10. Any other village craft chosen by the Government
or refugees, approved by the Government for the period as in
(1) or (6) as the case may be.
Efficient working of the foregoing is wholly dependent upon
a well-thought-out scheme capably managed by the Government.
This is no famine measure. It is conceived wholly in the spirit
of the maxim, no labour no food.
No breakdown in transport or other Government machin-
ery should stop the supply of rations to the helpless unfortu-
nate sufferers.
I would suggest that refugees who are not willing or are
otherwise incapable may be supplied rations against payment at
fixed rates.
The time for ploughing for the next crop is soon ebbing
away. Therefore agricultural implements, bullocks and seeds have
to be supplied at once or disaster may have to be faced.
This was written at 2 a. m. and has not been seen by
Shri Satis Chandra Das Gupta of Khadi Pratishthan. I would
suggest your seeing and consulting him since I am wholly
ignorant of local conditions.
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 141-
