505. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
ON THE TRAIN FROM POONA TO BOMBAY,
September 15, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter in the train and I am writing this reply im-
mediately. I am going to Bombay. On Wednesday I will go
to Ahmedabad. I have to perform two ceremonies there on
Thursday. You must have read about that. I expect to reach
Wardha on the 23rd. The programme after that will be decided
there.
Don't worry at all about my health. I do take, and will
continue to take, the utmost care. I can drink two pounds of
milk and eat fruit and vegetables. My weight is 100 pounds. The
body is massaged daily. Dr. Dinshaw takes great care of my
health. He will come to Bombay also. Premlilabehn literally
bathed me in her love. 'Parnakuti' has practically become a second
home to me. I am very glad that you have continued honey.
Should I ask her to send you some? She will be coming to Bom-
bay tomorrow. She frequently visits the place. Aunt was with me
all the time. She is an amazing mixture. There is no doubt
about her love, but she always creates difficulties. Jawaharlal's
health is excellent. He has still preserved the qualities of charac-
ter which his name connotes. He will now go to Lucknow. He
stayed in 'Parnakuti' with me. He was accompanied by Upa-
dhyaya . Manzar Ali and Professors also were there. Professor had
fever, but there is no cause for anxiety. Andrews has remained
behind in Poona for two days to have some rest. Devdhar has
become very weak. Write a letter inquiring after his health. Shastri
is all right now and has returned to Poona. Most probably
Chandrashankar will accompany me on my visits. The only diffi-
culty is about his health. Mathuradas also is accompanying. But
it is not certain whether he will come to Wardha. Most probably
he will accompany up to there. Mirabehn, of course, will be in
the party. Prabhavati also is with me up to now. I had a long
letter from Mahadev. He is fairly well. He reads and spins. Panna-
lal was in Poona and will now go to Bombay. Kaka also will
come to Bombay in two or three days. Ba is quite well. Do the
needful about your tooth. Have you kept up the study of Sans-
krit? Don't worry about anything. I have written10 to Mani and
told her that, when she is released, she should go and see you
and then see me wherever I am. Kamala Nehru has a cardiac ail-
ment. She is in Lucknow.
Why should we care whether or not we get any company?11
Why should one who feels the presence of God need other com-
pany? However, you have done right in writing about that, as
also about visits.
I have to draw up a tour programme for Harijan work in
consultation with Ghanshyamdas (Birla) and Thakkar Bapa.
Anandi is well on the whole. Narahari's children have been
ill for some time. They are being properly looked after and treated.
Bablo has gone to live with his aunt. He went on crying till he
had his way. Nirmala is all right, and so also Sharda. I get
letters from Anandi. In Bombay I shall be staying in Mani Bhavan,
and in Ahmedabad at Ranchhodbhai's place.
Send for anything you want. Mahadev has taken over charge
of making envelopes.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 22-
