93. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 25, 1937
CHI. PREMA,
You must have heard about my ill-health. I have been
ordered minimum mental exertion and maximum rest. Since both
the brain and the right hand demand complete rest, I will con-
tent myself with writing what you want immediately.
I did tie your raksha which I received in time.
I have completely re-written the reply to your question.
The old replies are not incorrect, but being incomplete they
may lend themselves to misinterpretation. I am returning them.
Cancel them.
See that they are not published at all. If the
new reply is useful, you may publish it. I have preserved your
letters and will reply to them when I am all right. You may
even receive my reply sooner if I am permitted to dictate.
There is no cause for worry about me. However, I have
to be extremely careful.
Blessings from
BAPU
QUESTION:
A professor who is married wants to observe brahmacharya.
The wife doesn't agree. What is the professor friend's dharma in these cir-
cumstances ?
ANSWER: This question could have arisen only if the idea
of observing brahmacharya came to the husband after marriage.
What I mean by marriage as a part of dharma is that intercourse
between husband and wife is resorted to only when they desire
children, and never for sex-gratification. Those who do not look
upon marriage as a holy bond will of course respect each other's
wishes. Intercourse without the consent of the other party is
nothing but rape.
Let us now deal with the above mentioned question. In
a case in which it is only the husband who wishes to observe
brahmacharya but the wife does not, if the husband has become
completely free from passion, that is, has, in the language of
the Gita, Ch. II, v. 59, realized the Supreme, intercourse will be
physically impossible. The wife will realize the husband's
condition and her passion will subside. But the question refers to
a man's striving for brahmacharya. A husband or wife can strive for
any aim which was not present in the minds of both at the time
of marriage, only with the consent of the other partner. In other
words, a husband cannot take the vow of brahmacharya without the
consent of his wife. Of course everybody should try to practise
ordinary self-control. When either party is aroused, generally the
other party also is agreeable or becomes so after a little persuasion.
When this does not happen, bitterness results. I have, therefore,
come to the conclusion, from the experiences of many people and
after careful reflection over them, that practice of self-control
depends on mutual consent.
I should therefore say that the
question is defective. Where brahmacharya has become a natural
condition, the question does not arise. And it has no room
when passion is present and the person only wants to strive for
brahmacharya.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10393. Also C.W. 6832. Court-
esy: Premabehn Kantak
94.
LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 25, 1937
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
What can I write? My mind can work in one direction only.
I do not know how I can be of help. What opinion can I form on a
matter I know nothing about? Hence I would only suggest that
you do what is in the interest of India irrespective of the opinion
of Congressmen. Rest assured that the Congress will have to ac-
cept what is for the country's good. And its prestige will suffer in
rejecting it. The Congress has no other capital except its prestige
which in turn depends upon the following of the poor millions.
Thus the welfare of India means simply the economic, intellectual
and moral welfare of its millions. I have said nothing new but at
times such pronouncements of principle are most effective when
made by a friend. One can say my health is quite good. A
little weakness is there but it will disappear. There is no need
for a change. But it will automatically be brought about if the
trip to the Frontier Province materializes. For one thing the
climate there is good and fruit, etc., are available in plenty.
You must be building up your health. The operation must
have been of considerable help.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 7983. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
