12. LETTER TO FULCHAND SHAH
ON THE WAY TO DELHI,
Posh Vad 13 [January 22, 1925]
BHAI FULCHAND4,
I have your letter. This time I shall certainly stay for a few
hours in Wadhwan City.
If what you write about Pattani Saheb is true, it is a sad
thing. I heard such an allegation for the first time at Bhavnagar,
but I paid no attention to it. But I cannot brush aside your writing.
But I want to know from you if your knowledge is based on direct
evidence. If you did not yourself see it, how did you know about
it? What kind of adultery is it? I want to know this because I
have had very high notions and favourable impressions about
Pattaniji.
Your views that one should not stay at the house of such an
adulterous officer or at a prince's place are not proper. How can
we sit in judgment over others? You know that there are all
sorts of allegations against many people at whose houses I put
up. Some of these are true, I know. For this reason people go into
the solitary forest and stay there. But so long as we want to
remain in society, we cannot behave as you would wish.
I am not telling you all this from the practical point of view,
but from the spiritual. It is our duty to stay wherever our host
puts us up; but we may not stay with those who by putting us
up with them seek our countenance for their immoral conduct.
But this is an exception. Suppose you or I have committed
adultery in thought, don't we put up at one another's place?
In this world full of sin who is there so sinless that sitting on
a high pedestal he can despise others? I do not give anyone
testimonials such as you imagine. If a well-known courtesan
plies the spinning-wheel, I would certainly praise her for doing
so; but that would not mean that I gave her a certificate for chas-
tity.
"God has made this world, both Jada and chetana full of short-
comings. Like the proverbial swan which separates milk from
water and takes only the former, a good man accepts the good
and rejects the evil."
Our duty is to recognize merit and sing its praises. The world
is hardly likely to be deceived by testimonials. I certainly have
not given any testimonial of purity to Pattaniji. But my mind
was led to give it. It was at Trapaj3, that I was pleasantly sur-
prised to see his simplicity, his deep knowledge, his firmness, etc.
In spite of all this, however, he may be impure. In that case, I
must give up the feeling of respect that I came to have for his
purity of character. Your letter will be useful to me for my future
conduct. What has happened has been, I believe, quite proper.
Even if I come to believe that he is an adulterer, when I go to
Bhavnagar for public work, I shall put up at the State Guest
House if he puts me up there. I shall stay even in his own
house, if he lodges me there. I do believe to a certain extent
about the immorality of the Prince of . . . . But if he puts me
up at his place, I would certainly stay there and I would not
think that I was committing any sin. My non-co-operation is with
sin, not the sinner; with Dyerism, not with Dyer.
I am afraid I have not been able to explain everything I
wanted to. But try to understand this much. For the rest, you
may come here and ask me personally. You may write and ask,
if you like. The path of ahimsa is very difficult; it is sharper
than the edge of a sword. There must be compassion in ahimsa.
Tulsidas considered himself to be the most sinful person. "Who is
there so crooked, so wicked and so sensual as I?" sings Bhakta
Surdas .
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 2826. Courtesy: Shardabehn Shah
