336. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
POONA,
March 19, 1946
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I did receive your message to the Navy. I also got the same
information from the Associated Press. I paid no attention to it. I did
not think it worth attending to either. I feel that we should chart our
course in faith, and wait and see whatever is to happen. Why should
one who is already armed worry especially when the weapon in
his hands is Ramabana . These lines of Pritam constantly reverberate
in my ears: Those who are in the fire feel the highest happiness
while the onlookers who remain outside are scorched by it.
I hope you will arrange for me to stay in the Bhangi colony.
Please do so, if you have not already done it.
For the nature cure clinic I must select some village. I am
looking around for it here. My plan is that the period from
February to the end of July should be spent in a comparatively
cool place, including April and May in the hills. This arrange-
ment cannot be made in Gujarat. Abu is the only hill station,
and it does not have a climate comparable to that of Panchgani
or Mahabaleshwar. Nor have I found cool climate like that of
Poona anywhere in Gujarat. I am telling you all this in order
that you should have nothing to complain about later. However,
do you think one could find a place in Gujarat where nature
cure work could be done and also where the above conditions be
satisfied? And would you really prefer it? Nature cure is no
longer a hobby with me. I must try it out in detail.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
68 MARINE DRIVE, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 302-
1 According to The Indian Annual Register, 1946, Vol. I, p. 39, Val-
labhbhai Patel had advised the striking R. I. N. ratings to "surrender uncon-
ditionally" and told them that the "Congress would do its best" to get "their
legitimate demands accepted without victimization".
2 Literally, Rama's arrow, i. e., something unfailing like faith in God
288
