59. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
SEVAGRAM,
August 24, 1944
BHAI JIVANJI,
Mridulabehn has a good many complaints against Nava-
jivan Karyalaya and the [Gujarat] Vidyapith. She says that when
one seeks your help for my work, one always gets a negative
reply. The result is, you do not profit from the ideas that occur
to workers like her. You attach no value to the help offered by
these workers. You behave with absolute confidence in yourself as
if whatever you do is beyond criticism or improvement. Since
you are involved in these complaints, and since you are one of
the founders of these institutions, people generally believe that
what the
Gandhians do can hardly warrant any criticism.
And the Gandhians, on their part, boastfully say to workers like
her: 'Look at our work and our skill in keeping our balance. We
are supplying cheap and ennobling literature to the people; and
we never sit idle. We have acquired the secret of unremitting
work. Now, we do not understand what you critics want to say.
You cannot find fault with the work we are doing. We do
not work the way you do. It does not suit us. The field for
service is very wide. You can do as you please and let us do
what we like. So our plea is that we should bear with each other
and carry on our work. Moreover, we are always ready to carry out
Gandhiji's wishes.' Mridulabehn depicts this picture of Navajivan
Karyalaya and the Vidyapith and allied institutions. The language
is not hers but mine. I have used garish words. Without them
I cannot make you see Mridulabehn's meaning as I understand it.
She is sarcastic but not virulent. I have regarded her criticism
as friendly. You also should take it in the same spirit and give
her whatever help she needs and you can give. She has cited two
instances. The reply which I gave to the Government's allega-
tions has been translated into many languages by the Aundh
Press. According to Mridulabehn, a Gujarati translation in sim-
ple language and in my style can be rendered truthfully only by
those who are called Gandhians. Mridulabehn is particular about
this style of language. She tried to secure this translation but no
one paid any heed. It is getting late and I shall therefore cut
my letter short. But this is enough to explain to you what Mri-
dulabehn wants. Please send your reply to me.
I gave this letter to Mridulabehn to read. She wants to add
two points to it. First, it was my idea to send the material to
the Aundh Press. This is right. I thought that due to the scar-
city of paper, etc., it would be difficult to sort out things any-
where else. Secondly, she expects mutual understanding between
you and her, so that she should not be required to rush to me.
This is right so far as it goes. But sometimes it may become
unavoidable to come to me. There is no means in the world to
bar this road in anticipation.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
