131. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Aso Sud 2 [September 24, 1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
I have not yet replied to your three letters. Since you were
to go to India, why should I have written [to you] in England?
As regards the mail to India, well, the old position continues. So
it is not possible to write regularly. Even today I write without
knowing when the post will be cleared.
I am not writing anything to Manilal now. I enclose his last
letter. I have [already] written to him saying that he may come
when he wants to. I have also written to Phoenix about him.
I don't think I shall be able to go there myself. I shall therefore
ask him to come over. I feel he will gain some experience here.
As to his going to Fiji, I have written to him plainly that he
should not. Even if he goes, I think he will regret it. There was
no one waiting at Fiji just to hand him money.
He has made a great mistake in converting his paper into a
daily. As it is, there is no worth in it. The types are bad, the
paper is bad and so is the substance. He doesn't have capable
helpers in Mauritius.
How then can a proper newspaper be
brought out? Besides, where are the readers? I shall discuss all
this with him when he comes here.
In writing about Ritch and others, you say that I should not
take it ill whatever you write. You should not even entertain
such a doubt. When a view is expressed candidly, why should
it offend? Do continue, therefore, to write whatever you think right
on any subject on which you feel the need to say something.
It is likely that whites entertain more hatred towards us than
we do towards them. If, however, we make a great show of love
in return for the little that they show us, there is another reason.
It is that we fear them. Otherwise, so far as my experience goes,
many Indians do not even distinguish between good and bad and
take all whites to be bad. On the one hand, this needless fear
must go; on the other, one must learn to distinguish between good
and bad. I believe both will come about in the course of time.
I do not look upon Ritch, Polak or anyone else as my dis-
ciples. They will all work with us as long as they think it fit.
There is no reason to believe that, after my death, people would
imagine that their actions would necessarily have my approval.
Those who have come in contact with me know that differences
of opinion do exist among us on subjects other than satyagraha.
However, I shall not dismiss your suggestions from my mind.
I have written a great deal about my going there. I, too,
feel that I can render useful service if I am there during the famine.
I shall be there when the time comes. What more shall I say?
All my preparations are meant to equip myself for work there.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Please read Tolstoy's Ivan the Fool if you have not done so
already.
Please look up the two or three pages of comments in Indian
Oovland [sic] on your article about me.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5629. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
1 To India
2 Presumably, M. K. Gandhi and the South African Problem
XI—11
