230. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
NEW DELHI,
July 2, 1947
CHI. SUSHILA,
I got your letter today. Why do you worry? It is very
likely that Krishna Kumar goes to the movies. Manu reminds me
that she had told me about it. I don't remember such things,
but I believe Manu. She didn't see anything objectionable in
that. Who doesn't go to the movies these days? Manu did. She
herself has not come under the bad influence of movies. I am sure
Sita also must have done so. And I know that Manilal at any
rate goes. Probably you also must have gone occasionally. So far
as I know, I am the only person who has never seen a movie.
But no, I did go once, not knowing what the thing was about,
and saw a film about the exile of Janaki and Ramachandra.
It was a depressing experience and I felt like running away
from the place, but could not do so. It was sheer waste of time.
This incident occurred in Shantikumar's house. But now that
you write to me I will make further inquiries if an opportunity
offers itself. I cannot say that Brij Krishna has done justice to
Kr. Kumar. The latter didn't impress me as a shallow youth. I
would be pained if Sita selected a shallow person. However,
there is no question of engagement just yet. You may, therefore,
leave for South Africa without the least worry.
I have discovered, however, that I have much less strength to
bear pain or hardship than I thought I had. What is happening
today in the country and the Congress in connection with inde-
pendence and Pakistan fills me with agony. And moreover the
weather is bad. I have therefore given up counting on my being
alive very much longer. And if, after you have left, I pass away,
you will feel unhappy. You wouldn't be able to bear the thought
of Sita's present condition while Manilal and you were far away
from her. Because I put all my trust in God nothing will happen
to me. But I mentioned this because I thought it my duty to
do so.
I have replied to the letter which you have received re-
garding Sita's college. See it yourself and show it to Sita. My
letter was dispatched today. I shall let you know immediately I
receive a reply to it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5006
