549. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
NEW DELHI,
October 7, 1946
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I got your letter written to Kanchan. Can the fact of
pregnancy be ever concealed? And why need it be concealed?
Surely you have committed no sin. And even if you have
committed a sin, you should not commit another by hiding it.
Sin is a kind of boil. If we let the poison circulate in the system
we shall die, but if we throw it out with the help of natural
remedies we shall live. You have committed no sin, but you did
cherish great pride. Everybody thought that you were a strong-
willed brahmachari. If that pride has melted, you have won.
I have written to Kanchan at length and explained what she
and you should now do. I shall not repeat it here. Generally I
keep no copies of the letters I write to you. But copies of my
letter to Kanchan and of this one shall be kept. They may also
help me in refreshing my memory in future.
You should now, like a householder, earn an adequate living.
You can be accommodated in one of our departments. Think
over your needs and let me know. Also state what kind of work
you would like. It would be better if you reply to this letter
after reading my letter to Kanchan. It would be all right even
if both of you stay in Vyara. You may go on serving the people
while looking after your own affairs. I am of course of the view
that during the period of Kanchan's pregnancy and for two years
after the birth of the baby you should not cohabit with her.
Doctors advise the same thing. It is for this reason that people
adopt artificial methods of birth-control. I don't think, however,
that your craving for indulgence is so strong as to make that
necessary. But even if it is, you should humbly admit the fact.
There are numerous men and women who adopt artificial methods.
Society does not boycott them; on the contrary, it even com-
mends them. Sin is what we believe to be sin and virtue what
we believe to be virtue. There are but few things which are sinful
or virtuous in themselves. And in the last analysis even these
are so because we think them so. I have written enough now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 8398. Also C. W. 7217. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
