373. LETTER TO ATULANAND CHAKRABARTY
SEGAON (WARDHA),
June 23, 1937
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. It is unfortunate but it is true that
I have not been able to appreciate the utility of your method as
a contribution to the communal tangle. That does not mean that
there is no value in cultural contact. I think it has great value.
But I am more than doubtful as to the possibility of organizing
such contact. I do not know if I have expressed myself clearly.
Rabindranath has, of all the men of the world, perhaps, made the
largest contribution in that direction. But it has not been
through any organization. His writings have compelled attention.
I should be delighted if your writings serve the same purpose.
But then you do not need my certificate or anybody else's,
even as the Poet does not. I wonder if I have made my position
clear. I, somehow or other, feel that yours is a different
position. Maybe that I have not understood it and, therefore,
I have been indifferent to it. I would be satisfied if I can make
you believe that my indifference is not due to cussedness or
even to want of study of your thought expressed by you. The
moment I begin to appreciate your method you will find me adver-
tising it in my own humble way. But you seem to be paralysed
without my advertisement and this hurts me. Why should you
need my advertisement? Surely the names you have gathered
round yourself are far better judges of your work than I ever can be.
It is easy enough now to answer your questions.
The solid work for villages that I have in mind is the work
such as the Spinners' Association is doing among thousands of
artisans irrespective of their caste or creed. I hope to publish
statistics showing the number of artisans with whom the Spinners'
Association has established contact—not political but purely eco-
nomic. Of course, anyone who has faith in such kind of contact
can work for it if he has the desire to learn the technique.
This work is necessarily confined to the villages because
the bulk of these artisans are to be found in the villages and
these are the people who are in need of the assistance of the
kind we are offering.
The third and the fourth questions are answered in the fore-
going paragraphs.
The fifth question is answered in the preliminary paragraph.
You do not seem to have kept a copy of your letter. I am,
therefore, returning your letter in order to enable you to see if
I have covered all your questions. If I have not, you should
tell me and I shall make another endeavour to answer your
questions.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 1476. Courtesy: A. K. Sen
