260. LETTER TO INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
November 4, 1907
[SHRI RASH BEHARI GHOSH
PRESIDENT- ELECT
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
SIR,]
I beg to draw your attention and that of the Congress to the present
critical position of British Indians in the Transvaal in connection with
the Asiatic Registration Act. British Indians have been informed that
the last day for receiving applications for registration under that obnoxi-
ous measure is the 30th instant, whereafter the Government will not
entertain applications for registration, except in special cases. You
will, probably, already have learnt that, with the exception of a very
small section of the community, practically the entire Indian population
has refused to register under the new law. My Association claims that,
to date, there have not been more than 350 applications for registration
out of a total of 13,000 permit-holders. From this you will be able to
gauge the intensity of the feeling in this matter.
You will have learnt that our method of endeavouring to redress
the wrong that has been done us is that of passive resistance. We have
1 Of the 23rd session of the Indian National Congress held at Surat in 1907
resolved to suffer all the consequences of a breach of the law. Many
of us have already lost heavily, many more stand to lose everything
they possess. Several European wholesale houses have even gone so far
as to stop credit unless Indian merchants can produce registration certi-
ficates issued under the new law. Many Indians employed as servants
or labourers have accepted dismissal at the hands of their employers
rather than register themselves.
As you will be well aware, the British Indian community in the
Transvaal is composed of Mahomedans, Hindus, Christians and Parsis;
Madrassis, Gujaratis, Sikhs, Pathans, Hindi men, and men from Cal-
cutta, all of whom have combined in the great work of resisting
an iniquitous law which threatens to rob every Indian of his material
wealth and to destroy that self-respect which he has snatched from the
ruin with which he has been threatened by previous oppressive legislation.
My Association approaches the Congress at this moment in the hope
that the Transvaal Registration Act will be put in the forefront of the
subjects to be dealt with by the Congress and made the main plank of
its platform as distinguished from the general South African question.
Today, there is no other South African question than the awful position
of the British Indians in the Transvaal. What happens to us today
will happen to our brethren everywhere in South Africa tomorrow.
Nay, we consider that ours is a question of first-class importance to the
Empire and of national importance to India; for what the South African
Colonies succeed in enforcing against us here, other dominions of the
Empire will practise against our brethren elsewhere. It may be said
that we are adopting heroic measures in order to meet a special difficulty
in the Transvaal; but we regard ourselves as the representatives, in this
country, of our Motherland, and it is impossible for us, as patriotic
Indians, to keep silence under an insult that is levied against our race
and our national honour. No other legislation in South Africa has
attacked us so fiercely on these points, but the Transvaal Asiatic Regis-
tration Act is intolerable. All other South African legislations deprive
us, as a rule, of the avenues to wealth. The Transvaal Registration Act
deprives us of our manhood and reduces us to the status of slavery.
By the end of December, probably many Indians may have even suffered
imprisonment for a principle, whilst the 1st of January will witness a
general refusal to issue trade licences to Indians who have refused to
register under the new law, so that a very acute stage will have been
reached by the time the Congress meets. We hold that our movement of
passive resistance merits the approval of all religious men, of all true
patriots, of all men of commonsense and integrity. It is a movement
so potent as to compel the respect of our adversaries by virtue of our
very non-resistance, of our willingness to suffer; and we are the more
firm in our determination to offer this opposition, because we consider
that our example, on a small scale in this Colony, whether successful or
unsuccessful, may well be adopted by every oppressed people, by every
oppressed individual, as being a more reliable and more honourable
instrument for securing the redress of wrongs than any which has
heretofore been adopted.
[I have etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION]
Indian Opinion, 9-11-1907
