88. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION CAMP,
May 3, 1944
SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,
Shri Jamnadas Gandhi came in yesterday. When I was
asked whether I would see him, I had consented so as to cause
as little disappointment as possible. For the future, my position is
that whilst I would be glad to see any relatives who might secure
Government permission, I must not break the rule I have made
for myself that I would deny myself the pleasure, so long as the
Government restrict the permission only to relatives and exclude
the members of the Ashram or those who stand in the same cate-
gory. I regard them as equal with my relatives. The Govern-
ment were good enough to grant such permission during my
fast last year without any untoward result so far as I know. Can
they do likewise during my convalescence which bids fair to be
protracted?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 3937
1 From February 10 to March 3, 1943
2 According to The Transfer of Power, Vol. IV, pp. 948-9, in a cable
dated May 4, 1944, to the Secretary of State for India, the Viceroy reported:
"Latest reports show progressive deterioration in Gandhi's anaemia, blood-
pressure and kidney functions, all of which in opinion of Dr. B. C. Roy
shared by Surgeon-General Candy, have tendency to produce coronary or
cerebral thrombosis. . . . This is a case in which I consider we must be
guided by medical opinion. Deterioration in Gandhi's health appears such
that his further participation in active politics is improbable and I have no
doubt that death in custody would intensify feeling against Government. . . .
I am accordingly instructing Bombay Government to release Gandhi uncondi-
tionally at 8 a.m. on Saturday, 6th May, with announcement that release
is entirely on medical grounds and am informing all Governors accordingly."
For the British Premier Winston Churchill's displeasure at Viceroy's decision,
vide footnote 1, Appendix XXII.
262
