308. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[October 13, 1930]
CHI. MIRA,
I hope you have got the straying letters. I am sure they have
not been intercepted, but have been delayed in transit from
place to place.
It is evident, my 'scolding' as you call it, was well deserved,
for you have returned in a dilapidated condition. On the top
of that, you had a bad accident. Now you would be as good as
your word and take full rest. I was much relieved to under-
stand that you had been visiting the Sardar. That showed that
you were well enough to travel.
I am still at the Gandiv wheel, and my rapture continues,
if anything it has increased. I am spinning scientifically now, i.e.,
with a yard measure underneath the track of the yarn as it is
drawn. I can draw 8 threads in one minute and I pull at least
two feet to each draw. This means 240 rounds or 300 yards per
hour. But of course, I do nothing of the sort in an hour but
that is not because of any defect in the Gandiv. The less out-
put is due to breakages and consequent waste of time. But since
adopting the method of concentration, breakages have very consider-
ably reduced. I therefore often reach 200 yards per hour which
for me is very good. You will publish nothing just yet of my
views about the Gandiv. I want the report of those who
may try at the Ashram. Most of all I want your report, if you
have the leisure and the inclination to give it a trial. I know
that you all have not the time that I have for these experiments.
You will therefore do whatever is possible and if you think it neces-
sary. I, having nothing else to do, may easily exaggerate the
merits of a thing which I may have disregarded before as I did
and which now gives comparative satisfaction.
For the past two days I have gone back to raisins and dates
just to see if the cold I have had anything to do with the vege-
tables. Whether it is a coincidence or what, it is as good as
gone today. In any event health is quite good. Weight 104.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Today I have finished the 100th hymn. Only two remain to
be translated of the Hindustani hymns. This means I am nearly
half through with this work.
From the original: C.W. 5415. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9649
