508. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SODEPUR,
January 8, 1946
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Yesterday I sent you a telegram as follows :
"God willing reach Bardoli 3rd March." I very much wanted
to come on the 1st but I see that that is not possible, for
February has only 28 days and I must look in at Poona, for a
few days at least, before going to Bardoli. I have, therefore
counted two days more so that I may arrange the programme as
if the month had 30 days. Having started the thing I must see
it through. I cannot in any circumstances tolerate misuse of
money. And if I take no interest Dinshaw cannot manage the new
venture. I will, therefore, quickly finish the work at Wardha, pay
a brief visit to Poona, and then come to Bardoli and after that
go back to Poona again. This is what I have in mind at the
moment.
I have already written something about the Parliamentary
Delegation. We should not spurn it; on the other hand we should
welcome it whole-heartedly. It is not necessary to get excited
over it as people used to when such people arrived in the past.
We should not insult our guests in any manner whatsoever.
There is no need for Congressmen to decline the invitation if they
are invited to parties that may be held to honour the members
of the delegation. I myself will certainly meet them somewhere.
As it is, I was to see the Governor on returning from Midnapore.
I saw him only last evening and he himself asked me when I
could meet them. I gave him my dates. They will most pro-
bably meet me in Madras, no other dates seemed suitable.
Dr. Mahmud has come over to see me. He met me the day
before yesterday, and since I am soon leaving for Assam he
intends to go to Patna after seeing me off. So he will go today.
In the meanwhile, the Governor heard about his arrival and
suggested a meeting. They were together for about an hour.
Nothing important seems to have been discussed, but they were
glad to have met. I have not as yet been able to sit and talk
with Dr. Mahmud for even a quarter of an hour. Just as he
came my silence began. It lasted throughout yesterday. Dr.
Mahmud came in the evening, but I went to see the Governor.
When I returned it was already a quarter to ten; and so natu-
rally we could not sit and talk.
I am all right. Kanchan has been taken very ill but I hope
she will recover. She has severe anaemia. She has had it for
some time but she did not pay attention to it. I leave for Assam
today. I do not like to leave her but you know how often I
have had to go like this. Most probably Sushila will stay on for
her sake. I am dictating this early in the morning after the
prayers. How she fares today we shall know only in the course
of the day. Just now she is sleeping. So is Sushila, She was
with Kanchan for most of the night.
If I fill this letter with an account of my experiences here,
it would become much longer. I have not the time for it.
Besides, why should you want to read all that?
Rajkumari is of course here. She had to go to Hyderabad
(Sindh) for some time. She will accompany me to Assam. After
that she will have to go to Mysore.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
68 MARINE DRIVE, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 291-
