104. LETTER TO G. K. DEVDHAR
March 16, 1933
MY DEAR DEVDHAR 1 ,
I have your letter about Prof. Purandare. The thing is this.
He had delivered some addresses in Poona. He was brought to
me by Haribhau. Haribhau told me that his addresses were well
received, and so in order to begin the propaganda and in order
to help Purandare I suggested that his speeches should be publi-
shed in book form. He was quite agreeable. He told me that
his wants were very few and that he would gladly dedicate him-
self to the cause, I asked him to tell me what he would require
for his labour in collecting the speeches, perhaps even rewriting
them, examining proofs, etc. He would not name the sum
although I pressed him hard. But he told me that he would
be entirely satisfied with whatever I named and got from the
Central Board. When the book was finished and the time came
for payment I hesitated to name the sum. I therefore referred
the matter to Haribhau. He suggested Rs. 125. I immediately
accepted the amount and had the cheque prepared, when, 10 and
behold, Prof. Purandare declined to accept the money and
wanted "Rs. 1000, if not Rs. 3,000".
Since then the story is one of my receiving angry letters of
abuse and nothing else. That, however, is not a matter of much
moment. I told him that he could have the book against payment
of the printing charges. He disputed the reasonableness of the
printing bill saying that it was exorbitant. I said I would accept
any sum that might be fixed by an independent arbitrator. He
would not accept that. There is much more that I could write,
but I think this is enough.
Now, I am acting as a Trustee for the Central Board. How
can I possibly ask the Central Board, without the slightest justifica-
tion, to pay more? The translation rights, etc., he can have.
There is not much demand even for the books that we have. I
would gladly say that if there is any surplus left after discharging
the printers' bill, he should have it. What more is it possible to
offer?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20591
