391. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 13, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
It is the morning of the silence day. I got up at three and
have taken up your letter to reply to it. I liked it very much
indeed. You have given me in it all that I wanted. It fully
answers to my imagination of what women can give me. What it
gives seems small and unspectacular, but is very useful to a seeker
after truth. I learn something from an objective letter like this
one, and it helps me to guide you and others.
The Ashram is indeed a dharmashala. But the word has two
meanings. It means a place where people can stay free, but it
also means a place where one can learn dharma and try to follow
it. The Ashram is a dharmashala in this second sense of the word.
But dharma means truth. The Ashram, therefore, is a place where
one may know the truth and try to follow it, that is, show agraha
for it, and hence it is Satyagraha Ashram.
In our quest for truth, we wish to cultivate unity with all
living creatures.
The Ashram, therefore, is an ever-growing
family. But it is something more even than that, for it is the
means and dharma is the end, and not vice versa. It is also a
big school, and yet it is not so; for, since it is a family, we can-
not mechanically apply there rules of outward behaviour such as
are followed for other types of training. The letter of the rule
has to be sacrificed in order to save the spirit of the rule.
I will now apply these observations to some specific cases. In
bringing up and educating Lakshmi, we, including you, are
being tested. What would we do to children in our own family?
What would you do to your own sister? If Lakshmi does not
observe the rules, the fault is chiefly mine, and then yours. I
leave out the others. I leave out Narandas, too, for if we hold
him responsible for the behaviour of every person in the Ashram,
he will not be able to attend to his own duties. Looking after
Lakshmi is a woman's job, and particularly of the woman to
whom it is entrusted. The fault is chiefly mine because I am
her adopted father and also mother. I did my duty as a father
but not as a mother, because I remained away from the Ashram
most of the time. I feel now that I should not have accepted
Lakshmi at all. But who was I to decide? I am but a servant
of God. I did not seek Lakshmi. God sent her. Let Him,
then, look after her. She was under the charge of Ba first, then
of Santok, then of Gangabehn, and now she is under your charge.
None of you asked to have charge of her. It was time and circum-
stances which put her under the charge of these persons one after
another. You should now do the best that you can. Whenever
necessary, you may consult me. Do not get tired of your charge
or despair. Have faith and bathe her with your love. God will
ultimately solve the problem. She has come to us as a represen-
tative of Harijans to claim payment of the debt which we owe
to them. If she is full of shortcomings and is indolent, the
responsibility for that lies on you, me and on the caste Hindus.
We reap as we sow. I am trying to get her married off. I
have written to Lakshmidas and inquired about Maruti. I have
also written to Dudabhai.
You need not get upset because more boys and girls are
coming to the Ashram. They will benefit to the extent that they
observe the rules. We may let them stay as long as we tolerate
their laxity, and ask them to leave when we can do so no longer.
People do not stay in a dharmashala permanently. Even near
relations do not stay permanently.
Those of them who can
accommodate themselves to the discipline of the Ashram will stay,
and the others will leave. Why should we care either way?
Moreover, we cannot adopt any other policy in the present
circumstances. As long as we can do so, we should admit people
who come unasked and who seem deserving. Most of them will
leave on their own. Our rules themselves will drive them away.
Everybody who comes must do physical work. They should clean
lavatories and eat simple food in the same manner as we swallow
medicine. They will not get jaggery, nor wheat as often as they
might wish. If we can daily demonstrate more and more clearly
by our manner of life that the Ashram is a representative of the
starving poor, we shall always be safe and happy. This means
that there should be increasing simplicity in our life in the Ashram
and the rules should be observed more and more strictly. If fire
preserves its nature, creatures which cannot endure it simply
cannot live near it. That is the virtue of fire and not its defect.
It is because, unlike fire, we are not true to ourselves that
all the problems arise. My suggestion about simplicity and
strictness in observing the rules concerns ourselves. We should
53-19
cultivate them in ever greater degree. We seek protection for
ourselves in our inner selves and not outside of us-"we" here
means all of us who voluntarily stay in the Ashram, you, I and
everybody else. And one should not observe only as many rules
as the other inmates do. One must observe every rule as strictly
as one can. In this lies the secret of the progress of the Ashram.
The rule should be, a liberal attitude towards others and strictness
towards oneself. Even so, we shall preserve some minimum
decency in our attitude to ourselves, for very often our liberal
attitude towards others will not be sincere and our strictness
towards ourselves will be so only in appearance.
The ideal for girls is a life of inviolate brahmacharya. Training
for it includes training for ideal married life. Boys and girls do
not require to be instructed as to what married life means. That
relation is a part of the animal nature of men and women. The
institution of marriage was devised as a means of exercising some
control on that nature. Its perfect control means brahmacharya.
Anybody who can observe this perfect control will also be able to
observe the limited control of marriage. But those who regard
marriage itself as their ideal will not understand the real purpose
even of marriage. What training does one require for lust? It
will grow of itself. However, the girl who has accepted complete
brahmacharya as her ideal must learn how to manage a home. She
must learn something about child-care. She will not be a nun
living in a cave. An unmarried woman marries the whole world,
makes herself a mother and a daughter to all people and thereby
becomes fit to manage the affairs of the whole society. May be
there has been no such unmarried woman. Nevertheless that is
the ideal. For all girls, therefore, the training should be the same.
I think I have explained the idea clearly. If I have not done so,
ask me to explain it again.
This will explain your duty towards that Muslim woman.
The real cause of fainting fits and similar ailments in girls lies
in our own shortcomings. If we have made fairly satisfactory
progress, even the presence of young people among us will not
be dangerous to the Ashram. But whenever we see such danger,
we should ask the young man or woman to leave. If you wish
to stop admitting other young men or women, you may do so.
All my hopes rest on Narandas. If Narandas who is the
secretary of the Ashram is the Narandas as I imagine him to be,
everything will be well. My faith in him is daily increasing.
If he is defeated, some other old inmate of the Ashram will grow
and advance, and I am sure, therefore, that everything will be
well. There are many residents in the Ashram but only a few
inmates. That is why we do not get sufficient workers. In these
very imperfect conditions, all of you should do the best that you
can.
The Ashram is the measuring rod by which people can judge
me. I take it with me wherever I go. Wherever my body may
be, my soul is always in the Ashram. All the shortcomings found
in the Ashram must be present, visibly or invisibly, in me too.
If I have made a mistake in understanding you all, the blame
must be mine and nobody else's. If, however, I do not know
myself, how can I sit in judgment over all of you? When I
think of particular persons, I see that I did not invite anybody
except Chhaganlal and Maganlal. All the others were sent to me
by God to test me or to help me.
And now another matter. You made a mistake in not going
to Dr. Patel yourself. You cannot ask a doctor's advice through
a note. Observe complete silence. Show your throat to the
doctor and follow his advice. You should not be obstinate in this
matter.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10326
