284. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
August 27, 1945
CRI. KISHORELAL,
I have your letter. The weather is still moist. The house
is near the mill and it is possible to find something there. But I
do not have the courage to call you here till the weather com-
pletely clears. We do not want to fall out of the frying pan into
the fire. Still I will call you when it completely stops raining
here and that too in the hope that the change of air will do
good to both of you. I do not want to take work from you here.
Valji comes daily. His competent son is also prepared to render
some service but I have not entrusted him with any work.
There is no work which can be given to him.
I understand about Parnerkar.
You have done what you could. It seems that your recom-
mendations cannot be implemented now. Everyone has land
and a house, how can they be removed? Moreover, can those
who are true workers stay at a distance? Why should they be
servants? It is a matter of shame and sorrow that they are
172
retained as servants. The number of those who are retained as
servants will not be reduced by their staying in different places.
Only the attitude of everyone should be changed. If that happens
the question of staying separately or in different places should
not arise. Yes, one thing is certain. It will be a long time before
people's nature changes. In the mean time there will be a scram-
ble for servants and that will do good to no one. However,
if I have understood your recommendations they may be applied
in future but not to the organizations which are functioning today.
There was and is a purpose in merging all the organizations,
although whatever has happened was only a drifting of the cur-
rent. Do let me know if there is a flaw in the argument. If
the present situation cannot be changed I want to understand the
whole position.
I hope both of you are keeping good health.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Sushila has arrived. Manu has run away. She is with her
sister in Bombay. Let us see what happens. There is no change
In Sardar's condition.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
