507. LETTER TO A
GONDA,
October 10, 1929
DEAR FRIEND . . .1,
I got your letter. There is nothing in it which need be kept
secret. You have admitted your error, and so nothing more need
be said about it.
A man has no right at all to beat any woman. Are men less
guilty towards their wives? If, however, wives started beating their
husbands for every misdeed, we would see very few husbands alive.
If a woman has no such right, how can a man claim it? I do
not write all this to point out your fault, but only to open your
eyes so that you may feel the seriousness of your error still more
and refrain from repeating it.
Moreover, you observe brahmacharya even in relation to your
wife, so that it is all the more your duty to remain unaffected by
her. You should forget the very thought that she is your wife.
You should regard her as your friend and serve her as best as
you can. If she stole cotton, you should have paid its price. If
she steals again, you can fix a maintenance allowance for her and
ask her to live separately from you.
Moreover, you had really no right to use her cushion. So
long as your relations are unhappy, you should never accept a
service or obligation from her, and in using her cushion you ac-
cepted, if not a service, an obligation from her.
I also place before you a rather subtle consideration. No per-
son who wishes to observe brahmacharya should use any article be-
longing to a woman towards whom impure feelings are likely to
be aroused in his heart. Especially, he should not use an article
like a cushion which she must have touched every day and which
the man may have used together with her when in an impure state
of mind. The vows which you have described are good. If they
do not forbid milk, you may benefit by taking milk or curds. Do
not take any vow which is beyond your strength. There is no
harm if you cannot take a vow, but it will do you much harm
if you take a vow and then are forced to give it up.
Have no fear at all if people talk ill of your relation with
. . .1 If you can say, with your soul as witness, that their evil talk
has no basis in fact, you are safe. Have a frank talk with your wife.
If she goes on harassing you though you commit no fault, you
can be firm and tell her to go and live elsewhere. For the present,
you must let her live with you as atonement for your fault in your
relation to her and as a test of your capacity for tolerance. If you
have anything more to ask, let me know.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 160-
