38. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 6, 1928
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I have had a full chat with Dr. Zakir Husain. The position
is certainly very precarious. The liabilities are accumulating and
the money collected for the Jamia Millia Fund cannot be released
till a proper trust-deed is made, which is the condition in the
original announcement. The constitution framed is acceptable
neither to Jamnalalji nor to me, nor is it in accordance with the
terms we discussed when you were here. What is to be done in
the circumstances? I feel that the new Committee should surrender
all the powers to the professors who have pledged themselves to
become life-workers, or the Committee should become an active
working body and take charge of the institution so far as the
financial liabilities are concerned. But from what Dr. Zakir Hu-
sain tells me and from what I can see for myself, the Committee
will not act swiftly and effectively. And if it neither acts nor sur-
renders full control to the working professors, I can see nothing
but a lingering death for the Jamia and that would be a terrible
tragedy. One would not mind it if it was inevitable. What
should happen to the Ajmal Jamia Fund collected up to now is
difficult to say. If a trust-deed acceptable to us four collectors
cannot be made, the only way possible in order to release the
fund is to publish the constitution that has been framed and call
upon the donors to signify their wish whether they want their do-
nations to be given to the Committee under the constitution.
Of course, this is a most unsatisfactory thing and hardly a step that
can be taken, if we will cherish the memory of Hakim Saheb and
value the good of the Jamia. Is it then not possible to give the
full control to the working professors and then they can frame
a proper trust-deed and release the fund already collected and
make an effort to collect more?
Yours sincerely,
DR. M. A. ANSARI
1 DARYAGUNJ, DELHI
PS.
Dr. Zakir reminds me that I have said nothing in this letter
about the time-limit. Time in this case is of the essence. I
therefore hope that you will come to some definite conclusion long
before so that there may be either a decent burial to the Jamia
or that the Jamia may resume its work with some degree of
safety.
From a microfilm: S.N. 14930
