108. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
BETTIAH,
Jeth Sud 1, May 22, 1917
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
This letter is only for you two brothers. We must not turn
away from the temper of the times. Whatever your parents may
say, deep down they do wish that their devoted son and their
daughter-in-law should be with them. One of you two brothers
should certainly stay with them. If they are unwilling to come
to Ahmedabad you should go to Rajkot. If the times were not
awry why would families break up? Hence, I am convinced
that if Khushalbhai does not come to Ahmedabad, one of you
brothers must stay at Rajkot.
We assume that there is nothing wrong in our women going
to their in-laws or their parents for delivery. This too I think
is not right. Why should Narandas send Jamna to Rajkot? Why
can't you see that if the delivery cannot take place in Bombay,
it is not a fit place to live in? Who will see Jamna through
her delivery ? Had Dev Bhabhi not been an invalid it would
have been simple. Now she cannot be expected to attend to such
jobs. It is our duty to make our parents feel in their old age
that it is not only we who are their children but that they are
the progenitors of the world at large. This can happen only
when we do not make them slave for us. It is the duty of a
husband to be with his wife during child-birth. (This last is a
separate idea but I am mentioning it here.)
Why is Santok at Morvi? I am troubled by the information.
Her duty solely was to serve the sick at Rajkot. She should not
have left the house at Rajkot even for a single moment. That
is my view. I realize that if Santok does not feel so she cannot
be forced to do it. I am writing this for consideration of the
matter to the extent that Maganlal has sympathy with it. Maganlal
too is one of us. All that he can say is: 'this is worth doing
and this is not.' He cannot go beyond that. It occurs to me that
I should put before you two the question whether our education
has in some way harmed the purity of filial devotion.
1 The addressee and his younger brother Maganlal
2 Addressee's mother
113
SV:I.
If you think it proper let Narandas read this letter. My
mind is otherwise occupied and right now I have some other
work to attend to. Hence, I have not found the peace of mind
that is requisite for writing this letter. Usually I have peace at
this time. It is just six o'clock in the morning. I am hesitating
for fear that Narandas may not realize the import of my writing.
You two know me quite well and so I do not hesitate to put
my jumbled ideas before you. Jamnadas may read this letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: S.N. 32328. Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers.
Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
