384. LETTER TO NEWSPAPER EDITORS
SEVAGRAM,
January 28, 1941
DEAR EDITOR,
We have become so used to the Press gag that we hardly know
that there is a partial paralysis of the Press. In the name of "war
effort" all honest expression of opinion, if it is opposed to war
effort as conceived by the official world, is effectively suppressed,
unless an enterprising editor or publisher risks the loss of his Press.
Thus my own effort, if my honesty be not questioned, is the true
effort to end all war and therefore in no way anti-British or pro-
German. If public opinion desired suppression, the Press would
on its own initiative exclude news and opinions disliked by the
public. But in India the majority of Indian Editors would gladly
publish all the news about satyagraha if there was no gag.
I wish to use my case by way of illustration. For the conduct
of the campaign and for the sake even of keeping it within restraint,
I have to issue statements from time to time. During four days
two out of three such statements were suppressed. The reason
assigned was as follows:
1. January 16, 1941. I am writing this to inform you that
Mahatma Gandhi's statement of January 121 regarding continuance of
the Civil Disobedience Movement was submitted for Press advice by two
of the Press agencies but was not passed for publication. I am accordingly
bringing the above fact to your notice.
2. January 28, 1941. I am writing this to inform you that
Mahatma Gandhi's statement of January 10 2 regarding payment of fines
by satyagrahis, which was submitted for Press advice by two of the Press
agencies, was not passed for publication, as being a prejudicial report
containing incitement to carry on anti-war civil disobedience.
I am
accordingly bringing the above fact to your notice
I used to send my statements through the usual news agencies.
But when I found that they were censored, I had to send my
statements to selected newspapers and so they found place in some
of them. You can judge for yourself whether they were objection-
able news. This method of sending statements on chance publica-
tion is precarious. As I had no intention of extending civil dis-
obedience to the special Press laws and ordinances, I stopped the
three Harijan weeklies whose chief aim was to propagate non-
violence and what is known as the constructive programme. I do
not want so far as possible to extend the scope of civil disobedience
beyond the present limit. But I do not know that I can exercise
that restraint if the Press abdicates its function of publishing relevant
news. I therefore appeal to the Press not to succumb to the gag
but to assert its independence by publishing all the satyagraha news
in its fullness. Of course it is open to the Editors to criticize and
condemn the movement or the statements that may be issued.
Editors can signify their disapproval of the gag by either publish-
ing the offending statements and risking prosecution or even confis-
cation of the Press or by stopping publication of their papers alto-
gether by way of protest. These are only two out of many ways
for signifying your disapproval.
I observe that the Standing Committee of Editors is meeting
on the 1st proximo. The Committee is expected fearlessly to
vindicate the liberty of the Press. It must cease to be the power
it should be, if it submits to suppression of free public opinion.
I need hardly draw attention to the fact that in a subject
country like India, the liberty of the Press is doubly precious.
And your responsibility, if you represent British-owned Press, is very
great at the present critical moment in the history of this country.
I need hardly also draw attention to the fact that I represent
unadulterated non-violence whose spread can do nobody any harm.
It is false and cruel to suggest that I could have anything in com-
mon with Nazism or Fascism because I happen to oppose imperial-
ism.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 1362, 1941. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
