148. LETTER TO D. B. SHUKLA
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Aso Vad 9 [October 25, 1921]
BHAISHRI,
You are pressing me to visit Kathiawar. I am also eager to
go and see for myself the enthusiasm which has spread and the self-
purification which has come about among the people of Kathia-
war, and see the blessed sight of thousands of women dressed in
sacred khadi.
But you know I am helpless at present. I can only say that
I will take the first opportunity to go there. All India now knows
that there is no limit to my greed, and it will [of course] not be
satisfied as long as there is a single home without a spinning-wheel
or a single street without a handloom or a carding-bow. You have
done much but I know for a certainty that you have not done
this. It is, therefore, my special appeal to one and all that they
devote their attention to carrying out the swadeshi [programme]
even if that means putting aside other activities. I can say from
the experience of my own deficiencies that, until the volunteers
become expert in carding and weaving, they cannot work pro-
perly.
I hear that in Kathiawar the Antyajas are looked down upon
and ill-treated. They still encounter hardships on trains. We have
not come to regard them as our own brothers and sisters and, so
long as we lack this spirit of love, I would consider the so-called
self-purification as no more than make-believe. I pray that Kathia-
war will not tolerate this outrage which is being committed in the
name of religion.
I am convinced that Kathiawar need not rule out the other
activities which are part of the struggle being specially carried on
in British India. I know that in some places the relations between
the princes and their subjects are strained. I am confident that, if
people devote themselves to the two activities I have mentioned
above and go on working silently the other difficulties will auto-
matically be solved. I would advise the people to put up with
the hardships they may have to suffer meanwhile.
I believe that the position of the princes is worse than that of
their subjects. Moreover, the chaotic conditions in the Indian
States about which I hear are, in my view, but an echo of the far
greater chaos prevailing in British India. And why should we
get involved in this matter at the present juncture? If we have
come to know God, why not trust to Him in regard to all our
inevitable sufferings?
Those who fear God become free from
other fears. I should, therefore, like you to give up all fear.
Respects from
Your younger brother,
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Gujarati, 6-11-1921
