196. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
ON THE TRAIN,
June 30, 1947
CHI. MRIDU,
Regarding H[indus]. M[uslims]
1.
Keep seeing the Leaguers. If they want to show you anything,
go and see it, note down what you see and take their signatures
on your notings.
2.A. They are free to do picketing on their own if they wish. They
must not ask or expect the Government to lend them support.
B. If anyone vacates his land or house, the property will be taken
145
146
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
over by the Government. If he wishes to retain the possession
of the land or the house, he cannot expect to get anything from
the Government. He can ask for the damages to the house if
any.
C. Recruitment of Muslims in the Police cannot be demanded.
Demand can always be made for good, impartial Police.
D. The culprits should be brought to book. Mathura Singh must be
arrested. If he is not arrested, it will show the bankruptcy of
the Government.
E.
Wherever riots have taken place, the Hindus must pay a fine
voluntarily or compulsorily.
F.
Repairs in the villages should mean that ideal sanitary condi-
tions will prevail in the villages and streets will be clean without
dirt and dust; villagers and school children should do this work
on voluntary basis. There should be adequate provision for
water.
G.
The Government as well as the people should give up their
dependence on the Police. Local Hindus should take up the
responsibility. And the Government should pass a legislation
that wherever there is destruction of Muslim life and property,
the Hindus must pay the damages.
H. There should be provision for clean water everywhere.
I .
Gen. Shah Nawaz should be appointed advisor and his recom-
mendations should be accepted as far as possible.
MISCELLANEOUS
Ansari was to meet me. I regret he has not done so.
Mahant Bhagwan Das should resign.
It is right to demand surety from confirmed criminals.
It is desirable that relief centres should be controlled by
Government. But others cannot be forbidden. Those who are being
given help by way of food, etc., should contribute their utmost to
work.
Both the Muslim ministers should give their full co-operation in
this and they should be included in all negotiations.
Help should be sought from all political parties. There should
be no party politics in such matters.
LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
147
The places where destruction has taken place should be shown
in the presence of the Panch, and should be photographed wherever
possible and the rubble must be cleared at once.
You may give this to the Ministers after having it translated
into Hindi.
You should talk in Hindi with Hindi-knowing persons. This
work must be carried out only in Hindi. Both the scripts should be
used. Even if you are entertaining different ideas in the matter, you
must follow my ideas and method of working. Then only will you
bring credit to it and to yourself and help me in the task.
You are keeping very late hours at night. That is not service
but attachment.
REGARDING THE POLICE
Only that much should be done about which Jayaprakash is
convinced. I do not want two contradictory voices -- mine and his
The actual work has to be done by him. I am in no doubt whatever
about the absolute correctness of my policy.
You should meet the prisoners if that is allowed. The Premier
should let you meet them freely . You should not even think that you
would work or benefit on behalf of the Socialist or any other party.
If the politicians take advantage of the situation, it is the venomous
legacy of the British practice, a volunteer has no party.
Let the police release the prisoners as far as possible. The
cases of those who have indulged in murders will have to be
considered. It is the duty of the Police to remain faithful to the
present Government. The present Government should be regarded
as popular Government. The question of capital and labour must not
be allowed to be raised. That problem must be solved. It is possible
to solve it. The Police should keep itself aloof from it. Jayaprakash
must fully play his role in this and other matters. He has the spirit of
self-sacrifice. He has intelligence. He is brave and courageous. I
have a very high opinion of him. I do not want him to do anything for
the sake of his position but for the sake of people. Many things about
the Socialist Party can find wide acceptance. I believe that the
policy by which he has become like a God to the people cannot work
today. If he agrees to what I am saying, let him talk in the language
148
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
of peace and make a public announcement of it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11261. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
