221. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
NAGPUR,
Before the morning prayer, November 9, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter. You must not stop writing to me while
I am touring. I will also write to you. What happened regarding
Vithalbhai has not passed unnoticed by me. I also have been
attacked strongly. I have paid no attention at all to these
attacks. Even if I did, what could I do! If you stir dirty water,
more dirt will come to the surface. I paid attention only to
Subhas's services. As for the stories we hear regarding Vithal-
bhai's last wishes1, we can say nothing. I, too, have my doubts
as you have.
My work commenced from Tuesday. Wherever I go, large
crowds assemble. They don't seem to resent my talking about
untouchability. A fine temple near Wardha was thrown open to
Harijans. There was a large crowd such as had never been seen
before in this city. My voice met the demand on it fairly well.
Nor did I get tired. I have started with my weight 108 or 109.
The collection also, I think, was good. After completing the C.P.,
I have to go to Delhi and from there straight to the South. Raja
says that it is necessary to tour the South first. The opposition
of the sanatanists comes mainly from there.
I have to return to
Wardha on Saturday. The Wardha taluka remains to be toured.
Meanwhile Jawaharlal and others will come to see me. Ansari
has already arrived. Hence he also may join me. With me are
Mira, Chandrashankar, Nayar, Ramnath (of the Sasta Sahitya
of Delhi), Om and the wife of Rameshwar Birla's son. The last
will be with me for a few days only. Om has become a strong-
willed girl. Thakkar Bapa also is in the party. Ba will leave
Wardha on the 13th. She will reach Ahmedabad about the
15th or the 16th. This time she is very much agitated. She is
restless no doubt. But she will go [to jail]. She is convinced
that that is the only right course.
Please continue to write to me at the Wardha address.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 45-
1 It was reported that Vithalbhai Patel had bequeathed a large sum to
Subhas Chandra Bose to be used at his discretion for propaganda abroad.
Later, the Bombay High Court decided that the amount should go to Vithal-
bhai's legatees. Gandhiji persuaded the family to give it to the Congress for
national service.
2 Vide "Speech at Selu", p. 193.
3 Dr. M. A. Ansari
4 G. D. Birla's elder brother
