284. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[CAPE TOWN,]
Phagan Sud 5 [March 2, 1914]
CHI. HARILAL,
I have your letter. You apologize in every letter of yours
and put up a defence as well. It all seems to me sheer hypo-
crisy now. For years, you have been slack in writing letters, and then
coming forward with apologies. Will this go on till death, I
forgiving every time? And what is the point of my forgiving? For-
giving has a meaning only to the extent that the person who has
apologized does not err again. My forgiving you all the time means
that I should go on doing my duty as father though you may not
do yours as son. My duty, of course, I shall continue to do accord-
ing to my judgment. I don't believe that you are impatient to see
us both; equally, this idea that you were to come here sounds in-
sincere to me. Does one who really means to come trumpet it
aloud? Now, of course, your coming is pointless, as you say. I see
that your ideas and mine differ very much. Your conception of
your duty as son differs from mine, but I have no right to enquire
what your duty is. If you go on doing your duty as you in all
sincerity conceive it to be, I shall be perfectly satisfied. Whether
your idea of duty is sincere or not, I and others will be able to
judge from your actions. It seems you have also applied your
mind to what my duty is, and in this respect, too, our ideas differ.
It should be for me to consider what my duty is. You may, never-
theless, continue to tell me what you think.
I did not reply to your letter. I got it after my release from
gaol. Your suggestions, however, were carried out; that is, I
wrote to Revashankerbhai that he should have a talk with you and
give you more [money] as may seem necessary.
You want my advice regarding Chanchi, and also about your
studies. You violate all the conditions I had made and you
promised to fulfil. You were asked never to go in for studies at
the cost of your health. You have failed to take care of it. No
wonder that Ramdas and Manilal have outdone you. And Ramdas
has put in a fine effort, indeed, and grown in size as well. Mani-
lal, too, has plenty of strength and would have been stronger yet if
he had not taken to the evil ways of pleasure. Even their studies
I take to be sounder than yours. Your mind is now running after
Bombay. You say you have Revashankerbhai's consent for that.
What weight can that consent carry with me? I would submit in
all humility to Revashankerbhai's judgment of a diamond. How
could I listen to him in the matter of studies? You are, so it seems
to me, in a state of stupefaction. What, then, am I to say? You
can only think of Davar's classes. That simply stuns me. Do you
think it will be much of an achievement to pass the matricu-
lation examination? I do not even understand what it is that
you want to do. I would only advise you to do nothing. Wait till
my return. Meanwhile, read as you like. Do not, however, start
a new venture. Later, you may talk things over with me, but only
if you want to.
If, indeed, you wish to go ahead with your plan for studies,
you should have Chanchi stay with me and should yourself stay
away from me. I shall supply your needs. Think of Chanchi
when you turn your mind to earning. If you wish to live as
I want you to, stay with me and be my right hand. Use your
own judgment in all these matters, taking no thought of my per-
sonal inclinations. Weighing my advice against that of others,
do what you think best. I am a father who is prejudiced against
you. I do not approve of your ways at all. I doubt whether you
have any love for us. This statement sounds very harsh, but I
see extreme insincerity in your letters. If I am mistaken in this,
consider that I am in Kurukshetra and so forgive me, showing me
the generosity that Shravana did to his parents. Even worldly
children show some marks of love for their parents. You have
shown none. Nevertheless, I am so proud a father that I attri-
bute perfection to my children. This is an error. It is spiritual
darkness. But, apart from this . . . have not fulfilled. . . .4 Des-
pite your promise, you did not send me the papers at the last
year's examination. You have not taken the trouble to remember
to send this year's either. I become angry when writing to you
and also feel like crying. This is my ignorant state, my lack of
enlightenment. I ought not to be so much attached to you. I
will free myself from this. Be patient with me till I succeed.
Now I have given you too long a lesson. I will write no
more. I shall be satisfied if you treat me as a friend and show me
the regard due to a friend. I want you to improve your charac-
ter and train your inner self.
I will probably go there in April. Just now I am in Cape
Town. Ba is with me. She lies hanging between life and death. Till
yesterday, she was very bad indeed. There is again a little im-
provement. She is a mere skeleton. She gives me no trouble, but,
not having succeeded yet in disciplining the palate, she suffers
and pines. I am by her side the whole day. Between yesterday
and today, she must have consumed the juice of two tomatoes
and a teaspoonful of oil.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9543
