168. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG,
May 2, 1910
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
I am sending you a public letter addressed to you. After due deli-
beration, I thought that it was the best thing for me to do. The letter
has been handed to the Press here, and I take it that you will pub-
lish it on your side also. The letter, too, enables me to inform all the
contributors. I have now heard from Mr. Petit that Mr. Tata approves
of the expenses incurred by me in connection with Indian Opinion.
Your letter, to which I have alluded in the accompanying, had already
relieved me of anxiety on this score, but it is as well that I have receiv-
ed specific approval from Mr. Tata also.
I do hope that my action in publishing Hind Swaraj in Gujarati and
now the translation in English does not in any way affect the struggle
that is going on in the Transvaal. The opinions expressed by me in the
booklet are personal to me. Though they have been matured in the
course of the struggle, they have nothing to do with it at all, and I trust
that you will be able, should any prejudice arise against myself per-
sonally or the pamphlet, to keep the merits of the struggle entirely separate
from me. The views expressed by me in Hind SSwaraj have not been
formed without much thought and consideration. Mr. Polak has pass-
ed on the typed copy to you. I am not sending you the printed copy
because, as the Gujarati is confiscated, I suppose the same thing applies
to the translation.
If you have had the time to go through the typed copy, I shall es-
teem your opinion. The booklet has been widely circulated here. Much
criticism has been received. There appears today in The Transvaal Leader
a signed criticism, which I am asking Mr. Polak to forward to you.
I am not answering the personal part of your letter of December.
I simply felt that it was my duty to lay my views before you, which I
have done. It is not for me now to argue. Should I ever have the privi-
lege of meeting you personally, I shall certainly again press upon your
attention some of the views I hold so strongly, and which it appears to
me are perfectly sound. Meanwhile, with the hope that you have
entirely recovered from your malady, and that you will be long spared
for the service of the Motherland, I can only remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
THE HONOURABLE PROFESSOR GOKHALE
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the typewritten original signed by Gandhiji: G. N. 3800
