127. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG,
September 12, 1913]
SIR,
On behalf of the British Indian Association, I have the
honour to submit, for the information of the Hon'ble the Minister,
that, after having read your telegram of September 9, addressed
to Mr. Gandhi, it has been most reluctantly and with the utmost
regret decided to revive passive resistance, owing to the inabi-
lity or unwillingness of the Government to concede the points
submitted by Mr. Gandhi in his letters to you, which my Asso-
ciation has seen.
I venture shortly to explain the position that unfortunately
faces the community represented by my Association.
Ever since the British occupation, the position of the Indians
residing in this Province has admittedly grown worse than it was
during the Republican regime. In 1906 it culminated in the Bill
of that year, which not only summed up the black past but fore-
shadowed a blacker future, and which, though then vetoed, was
repassed almost as the first Act of the Responsible Government,
and became known as Act 2 of 19071. As the measure was consider-
ed by the community to be humiliating, and as the circumstances
surrounding it showed a policy deliberately hostile to an honour-
able existence of the community in the Transvaal, my country-
men solemnly decided in the month of September, 1906 to adopt
passive resistance. As is well known, over 3,500 imprisonments
were suffered by my countrymen during the struggle, over 100
deportations to India took place, and even two deaths occurred,
owing to the suffering gone through during the crisis. Several fami-
lies were rendered homeless, and they had to be supported from
public funds. Then came the provisional settlement of 1911,
which the Indians thought not only promised them what they had
been suffering for but also meant an attitude of friendliness towards
them such that, almost complete prohibition of Indian immigra-
tion being obtained, the resident Indian population would be free
from the state of uncertainty it had lived in and might look for-
ward to a steady improvement in its status, as a permanent ele-
ment of the new nation that was forming in South Africa. More-
over, the inauguration of the Union gave it some hope, though it
filled it equally with misgivings and threw on the passive resisters
a responsibility for the whole of the Union instead of for the
Transvaal only.
But the community was soon disillusioned. The administra-
tion of existing laws specially affecting it grew steadily harsher.
The Cape Licensing Act, the Natal Licensing Act, the Gold and
the Township Laws of the Transvaal and the existing Immigra-
tion Laws of the Provinces began to be administered as they never
had been before. What has been termed the "northern" spirit be-
gan to pervade the administration in Natal and the Cape. Thus
the spirit of the settlement certainly began to be broken as soon
as it was effected.
The abortive Bill of 1912 showed that even the letter would
be broken. The original draft contained serious flaws and was in
conflict with the two principles of the settlement— the removal
of the racial bar and the maintenance of existing rights through-
out the Union. I must admit in fairness that, so soon as the
defects were pointed out, there was a willingness on the part of the
Minister to remodel his objectionable clauses. But that Bill fell
through, and fresh assurances were issued to the community that
the settlement would be carried out.
Then came the memorable visit of the Hon'ble Mr. Gokhale.
High hopes were again raised. The position was made perfectly
clear. And declarations were made by responsible statesmen indu-
cing the expectation that a satisfactory Bill would be passed during
the ensuing session, and that the iniquitous and admittedly un-
just tax of £3 on certain ex-indentured men and women would
be withdrawn. The Hon'ble Mr. Gokhale declared at public
meetings that he had every confidence that the tax would be abo-
lished both for men and women.
But the last session dashed all hope to the ground. The Draft
Immigration Bill broke almost every condition of the settlement
of 1911, and it showed that the community was to expect nothing
from the Government, who would have carried the Bill as it was,
could they have done so. That the Act itself is a great improvement
on the original Bill is due entirely to the unexpected opposition that
the Government met from all quarters of both Houses of Parlia-
ment. The attempt of the Government to remit the £3 tax only
on women showed also that they, at any rate, were not prepared to
remove it from men.
Notwithstanding such gloomy indications of the hostile spirit
of the Government, Mr. Gandhi was authorized to enter into
negotiations for a settlement by submitting proposals which, if ac-
cepted, would have just, but only just, sufficed to fulfil the
letter of the provisional settlement of 1911 above referred to.
The community had hoped that, if even such a settlement were
effected, the terrible passive resistance could be avoided, and
that other grievances could be pressed on the attention of the
Government by means involving less personal sacrifice and suffer-
ing by the community.
But the Government evidently thought otherwise. They have
not only rejected most of Mr. Gandhi's proposals, but they are
showing by their administration of the new Act in Natal and by
their having passed regulations under the Act, some of which are
harsh and unjust, that it is their desire not only to keep out new
immigrants, but also to keep out domiciled residents who, before the
new Act, found no difficulty in re-entering, and to put obstacles in
the way of wives of domiciled Indians entering the respective
Provinces.
In the circumstances, there is now no course left open to the
community but to take up passive resistance again, which now natu-
rally will not be confined to this Province alone, and which, on
this occasion, will be taken up by women as well as men. The lea-
ders of the community fully realize their responsibility in the
matter. They know also what they and their countrymen will have
to suffer. But they feel that, as an unrepresented and voiceless
community which has been so much misunderstood in the past
and which is labouring under a curious but strong race prejudice,
it can only defend its honour and status by a process of sacrifice
and self-suffering.
Passive resistance has been recognized by the Government as a
legitimate means of securing redress. It is, therefore, hardly neces-
sary to assure the Government that the community has no
desire to defy the laws of the land, to which it will submit by
bearing the penalties provided for a breach of the obligations there-
under which the community cannot discharge consistently with its
honour and self-respect.
In conclusion, I beg to state that the struggle will be conti-
nued so long as:
(1) a racial bar disfigures the Immigration Act;
(2) the rights existing prior to the passing of the Act are
not restored and maintained;
(3) the £3 tax upon ex-indentured men, women, and children
is not removed;
(4) the status of women married in South Africa is not
secured;
(5) generally, so long as a spirit of generosity and justice does
not pervade the administration of the existing laws referred to
herein.
And it is respectfully submitted that a smooth and just work-
ing of the laws is not possible until the Government consult the
leaders of the community in the different Provinces.
[I have, etc.,]
A. M. CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Rand Daily Mail, 15-9-1913
