117. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
POONA,
November 14, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,
My cogitations go on. The institution should close down on
December 31. From January 1, it should become an institution
for the poor and cease to be one for the rich. You have so far
insisted that the poor should be taken only after the rich have
been accommodated but those who are really poor can hardly
reach you and if anyone reaches you, they will have to pay the
rates the rich pay, which will completely ruin them. From the
1st January let the rich come after the poor are accommodated
but only if they can live as the poor. The institution should
have more cleanliness than it has today. Money is not necessary
for maintaining cleanliness, but it requires care, love, truth and
knowledge. So it is better that cleaning work is started from
today, but I am afraid it is not possible because no one listens
to the others and everyone is his own master. If anyone takes
interest in work, it is only to please you. Therefore there can be
improvement only if someone from among the people I mentioned
above starts working from today. If this thing does not appeal
to you, both of us will have to repent ultimately because I
believe that cleanliness is a part of God. I would amend the
saying "cleanliness is next to godliness" and say "cleanliness is
godliness". But only if cleanliness is both internal and external
can we call it an attribute of God.
A sign-board should be hung here from January 1. It should
be written in Marathi, Devanagari, Urdu and English. I have
not in my mind formed a precise idea but it would be somewhat
as follows. "The poor are given nature-cure treatment here".
The name Healthotorium should be removed. There is no need
for any name. It does not befit a poor institution. In fact it
does not befit any. The English would consider it "vulgar".
We should not use foreign things whether they are patent
or not. The poor cannot afford a bottle of Isapgol packed in
England, Robinson Barley, Quaker Oats, Sanatogen, Horlicks, mal-
ted milk or Merck's Glucose. We, from here, cannot teach the
75
people to take these things-it is immaterial who is here-whe-
ther Sardar, some Raja or I. We must make Sanatogen here.
Things similar to Horlicks and malted milk should be made here
and also something like glucose should be available.
The kitchen can no longer function on the lines it has been
doing so far. Today you have the means to feed even a king.
But those means must be given up tomorrow. The liberality with
which fruit and other things are used here hurts me much. It
ought to be changed. Can't we manage with jaggery and lemon?
You must develop the habit of writing. Let your Gujarati
be faulty, it can be expressed in good language. Little booklets
should be brought out from here. You will have to pay a lot
of attention to all these things. I do not know how you will be
able to do that while earning 4- thousand rupees a month.
But bear in mind that if you cannot do it the University will
remain merely a dream. I have a capacity for boundless work
and also for planning. But I do not have a magic wand by
waving which I can create a university. Further, I do not
have the knowledge required for that. Therefore I am helpless.
If I was not helpless I would have started a nature cure clinic
of my own, and would have carried on all my activities from
there. But God did not grant me that. Although I was, and
still am, very enthusiastic, which is why I am clinging on to
you, you are a big man and you have allowed your knowledge
to stagnate. That is a big stumbling-block in your way. Your
dream will be realized only if you can get over it. If your heart
bids you that it is not possible, then leave me even now. I shall
not feel bad. Sardar is worried how I am going to cope with
the work. His worry is meaningless because no one compels me.
God impels me to do the work. If He wants to stop the work He
will do so. But you seem to have faith in me, so I must warn
you about my helplessness. And I must let you know the limita-
tions and faults I find in you. More when something strikes me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
