116. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
October 24, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
Your letter makes dismal reading but I do not mind. We may
not attempt more than the atmosphere warrants or more than
the purse allows. The chief thing is to reduce your stock. I shall
see what I can do with your box when it arrives.
The new charkha has now been received. Though it shows
extraordinary care in packing it has been received in a broken
condition. The middle side has broken in two and the stopper
is also damaged. But I had no difficulty in examining the wheel.
Though it is better than the original, it is not equal to what
Keshu has made and I am now using. It is much stronger than
the one you have sent. The axle does not jut out of the box. The
handle and the winder are made of metal. The spokes are much
stronger. The hub too is made of metal. Although it has seen
much rough usage it has not yet gone out of order. Before you
make further improvements or standardize the pattern you should
see Keshu's wheel. Have you much demand for the box charkha?
How are you keeping in health? Does the heart still give
trouble?
I had heard about Shyam Babu before you gave me the news.
I wish he would or could stick to this his latest. Did Sarat Babu
get the consent of his wife? What more will he do, now that he
has taken the robe? I prefer your sannyasa.
It is very likely that I shall have to go to Delhi and postpone
the Ceylon visit for a few days. I should know for certain today or
tomorrow.
Is Tarini better now? And the boy?
I had a full account about Abhoy Ashram. From it, it appears
that there was no aggression on their part and that the story about
masked spears is a pure fabrication. These fabrications are just
now the order of the day, the same as was the case during the
War on the part of both the sides.
With love,
BAPU
Here is a letter from Capt. Petavel and the enclosure. This is
not the first of its kind but one out of many. I remember you
once reported adversely on his institution. Now he has come
out with Dr. Ray's testimonial. I have this time asked him to see
you and discuss the thing with you.
Give him some time and
show him the error of his ways unless you find him to be on
the right path.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1578
