142. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
November 6, 1905
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter to hand. I am returning the letter addressed to Reva-
shankar. I shall ask Abhechand to take the papers back. He has gone
to Pretoria.
You have done well in writing about Kitchin. Your argument is
not wrong. The facilities we have provided him are, generally speaking,
too many. The money is being paid to him not for his proficiency but
because of my folly; and because there was no other way of correcting my
mistake. I did allow him to leave; but he pleaded with me that he
was not in a position to do any other work, since he could not start
work afresh in Johannesburg. Indubitably, he did wind up the big
business he had. Under these circumstances, I could not bring myself to
discharge him. So the best way I could find was to give him as much in
salary as would meet his normal expenses. However, either of us is free
to terminate the arrangement by giving a month's notice. It means that,
if the condition of the press gets worse and it does not show any income,
I can dispense with his services at a month's notice. Even if the condi-
tion improves, there is no stipulation about paying him more than £10, nor
is it necessary. There is, therefore, no reason to believe that he will always
draw the same salary. We need not suppose that he and Polak will not be
able to pull on together when the latter comes. If they cannot, Kitchin
will have to leave. Polak will take at least two and a half years to go to
Phoenix; it is, therefore, unnecessary for the present to think of that
far-off eventuality. I envisage the possibility of a great change in our
condition during that period. There was no other alternative when we
gave Kitchin a house and land. His heart is in Phoenix. He no doubt
likes the life there. Please do not hesitate when you have to do some-
thing for him. We have to take into consideration the virtues of a man;
we cannot bother ourselves about his drawbacks. We have to be satis-
fied if, by putting ourselves out, others can be made happy or can bene-
fit. There is no difficulty in giving two acres of land to any of you who
wants it, that is, yourself, West, Bean or Anandlal. I think I have al-
ready explained this to you. Polak also has asked for two acres. This
much I believe: if Kitchin stays, his nature will change and he will
do his work well. If, on the other hand, his nature does not improve,
he will give in of his own accord. Do ask for further clarification, if you
need it. Always write to me unhesitatingly.
Gokuldas is good by nature; but he has become very selfish and
narrow-minded because of his upbringing in the country. He seems to be
prejudiced against you. In spite of my repeated attempts to persuade him
I find that the idea that "maternal uncle is crazy" is deep-rooted in his
mind due to the arrogant impetuosity of youth. His mind is set more on
making money. We have to be very careful and see that his leanings
become pure. You may watch him and guide him. I believe he will put
in hard work. He will not take anything from the press at present; at the
same time, he will not work the whole day. I have told him that he is
still a student and has to behave accordingly. He will, therefore, work for
some time in the press, some time on the land and the rest he will devote
to studies. It is necessary for him to have a good knowledge of Gujarati,
English and Tamil. I have asked him to start with composing Tamil
matter in the press. I shall write a letter about this to Pillay also. You
may come, if possible, during Christmas, after Gokuldas arrives there
and has become conversant with the work.
How is West doing the job-work? Does he feel uncomfortable or
is he cheerful? Who are doing the composing work for the newspaper?
How does Virji behave? Write to me about everybody there. How is
Bean doing? What is the position of the books now? How about Anand-
lal? I have written to him also about Gokuldas. I still feel that it will
be better if you three brothers live together. But if there is even the least
possibility of bitterness resulting from doing so, you have not to act on
my suggestions. Gokuldas, of course, will stay with you.
Is Orchard still there in the house or has he left?
I have sent the Tamil material, but I find that there will be some diffi-
culty for me in the matter. I saw that the man who did the translation
has very little knowledge of the language. He felt very diffident and said
that it would be better if I did not entrust the work to him. It will be
quite enough if Gokuldas and Pillay understand it even after a strenuous
effort. Gokuldas has learnt a little. The English matter that I send
from here will merely have to be translated there. Consult Pillay about
this. Who has written for this week's issue?
Does Hemchand give you satisfaction or not? Does he go out for
the collection of dues? Train him well.
What has happened to Ramnath? I had written a letter to Ajodha.
Has Jayashanker been able to procure any assistant or does he have
the same difficulty still? Give Bean whatever miscellaneous things he
wants. Send Moon's report when you get it. Who is to sow the land
that has been ploughed? Does the leakage in the roof continue or has it
stopped?
Let me know if the shifting of the office to Mercury Lane has affected
the flow of work. Do the whites come in greater numbers?
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Govindji says that he is not getting the paper regularly.
I sent more Gujarati matter yesterday.
Do see what is written on the back of the first four sheets also.
From a photostat of the original Gujarati: S. N. 4262
