202. LETTER TO KASTURBHAI LALBHAI
TILAKNAGAR, FAIZPUR,
December 25, 1936
BHAI KASTURBHAI,
I have received your telegrams and letter. I take it that you
have obtained legal opinion on the basic issues I have raised and
that it has gone against me. If it is so, one can easily under-
stand that there is nothing you can do in this connection.
The paper No. 2 was of course included on my suggestion
but at that time you did not raise any objection.
I was not
bound in any way and therefore it was my duty to hear the
Labour Association. My decision no doubt goes against them
but their protest is a part of the representation they have made
against us and therefore it must go to the Umpire. I did ask
for paper No. 6 and you had no objection to it. I have no
objection to dropping Nos. 10 and 11.
Both of us had asked for No. 12. We had certainly agreed
that the mistakes should be rectified.
Therefore in my record I have kept all the papers except
Nos. 10 and 11. I can say that I have even used them for
arriving at my decision. Paper No. 12 is of no use to me, but
as your opinion is based on the merits and demerits of the case
I believe it is necessary for you.
If there is difference of opinion between us even over this,
let it also be decided by the Umpire. As a lot of time has al-
ready been taken up we should not delay matters further by
prolonging our correspondence.
About the Rajnagar mill, my opinion is that Chimanbhai
has made a serious mistake. I feel that my decision is correct
and therefore it is wrong to change it. Had Chimanbhai al-
lowed us to take the decision regarding the remaining mills, I
would have imposed a fine on the workers so that the account
would have been squared. We should go deeper into the question
of reinstating the workers.
I shall try to send my Award with additions and alterations
by tomorrow. Kindly arrange to send it along with yours to the
Umpire there or wherever he may be.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I forgot one point. We should give copies of our Awards
to both the parties. Even if we do not do so the Press will
continue to write about it. I went through the cutting you
have sent. How can we say from which side the names were
leaked out? Are newspapermen averse to indulging in guess
work? Sometimes something is bound to come true. Don't
you think so?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4199
