233. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
January 4, 1937
CHI. MAHADEV,
My memory is daily getting more confused. I did have a
vague recollection that I had written to Duncan, but I dictated
a letter to him since his letter was lying in the file. It was
good that you remembered. My memory has gone but my
laxity has not. I could have saved time and paper and myself
from shame if I had noted down on the letter itself while reply-
ing to Duncan. "Crooked are all the limbs of a camel; how
can they be kept hidden, do what one will?"
Akte, with a straight face denied four or five times his boorish
conduct. But afterwards he felt remorse, confessed everything and
repented of his conduct very much. However, he stuck to what
he had said regarding Buva. The witness that he had produced
also boldly stuck to his statement before Buva. My suspicion
against Buva is deepening. He seems to be a very strange man.
The letter to Pingle and the papers to be forwarded to him
which I sent with Rajkumari will throw more light. But it is
enough that you know. Don't spend time in reading the papers.
You can tell all this to J.
Agatha didn't speak at all yesterday. Polak asked one or two
questions in public. The rest of the time was spent on titbits.
Fortunately Polak and others came very late: at 4.30. You haven't,
therefore, missed anything. Polak's talk was private and as such it
cannot be reported. I am going to make you laugh when we meet.
Dinkar's talk means a speech. I will tell you about that also some
time. Agatha has come today. But she can't even look at me. Tomor-
row she will come for a talk. You also may come and spend the
day here. Durga and Bablo also may come if they want to.
BAPU
[PS.]
Send today's mail with Rajkumari.
Write to Burbage and tell him that I have referred to his
letter in Harijan. Send him a copy also.
I will break my silence late at 9.45. If, therefore, the
students wish to have a talk with me, they can do so only tomorrow.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11516
209
64-14
