154. LETTER TO DUKE OF CONNAUGHT
[Before February 2, 1921]
SIR,
Your Royal Highness must have heard a great deal about non-
co-operation, non-co-operationists and their methods and inci-
dentally of me, its humble author. I fear that the information given
to Your Royal Highness must have been in its nature one-sided.
I owe it to you, to my friends and myself that I should place
before you what I conceive to be the scope of non-co-operation as
followed not only by me but my closest associates such as Messrs
Shaukat Ali and Mahomed Ali.
For me it is no joy and pleasure to be actively associated in the
boycott of Your Royal Highness's visit. I have tendered loyal,
voluntary assistance to the Government for an unbroken period
of nearly 30 years in the full belief that through that lay the path
of freedom for my country. It was, therefore, no slight thing for
me to suggest to my countrymen that we should take no part in
welcoming Your Royal Highness. Not one amongst us has anything
against you as an English gentleman. We hold your person as sac-
red as that of a dearest friend. I do not know any of my friends
who would not guard it with his life if he found it in danger.
We are not at war with individual Englishmen. We seek not
to destroy English life. We do desire to destroy the system that has
emasculated our country in body, mind and soul. We are deter-
mined to battle with all our might against that in English nature
which has made O'Dwyerism and Dyerism possible in the Pun-
jab and has resulted in a wanton affront upon Islam, a faith
professed by seven crores of our countrymen. We consider it in-
consistent with our self-respect any longer to brook the spirit of
superiority and dominance which has systematically ignored and
disregarded the sentiments of thirty crores of innocent people of
India on many a vital matter. It is humiliating to us. It cannot be
a matter of pride to you that thirty crores of Indians should live
day in and day out in fear of their lives from one hundred thou-
sand Englishmen and, therefore, be under subjection to them.
Your Royal Highness has come, not to end the system I des-
cribed, but to sustain it by upholding its prestige. Your first
pronouncement was a laudation of Lord Willingdon. I have the
privilege of knowing him. I believe him to be an honest, amiable
gentleman, who will not willingly hurt even a fly, but he certainly
failed as a ruler. He allowed himself to be guided by those whose
interest it was to support their power. He is not reading the mind
of the Dravidian province. Here, in Bengal, you are issuing a
certificate of merit to a Governor who is again, from all I have
heard, an estimable gentleman, but who knows nothing of the
heart of Bengal and its yearnings. Bengal is not Calcutta; Fort
William and the palaces of Calcutta represent an insolent exploi-
tation of the unmurmuring and highly cultured peasantry of this
fair province.
The non-co-operationists have come to the conclusion that
they must not be deceived by the reforms that tinker with the
problem of India's distress and humiliation, nor must they be im-
patient and angry. We must not in our impatient anger resort to
stupid violence. We freely admit that we must take our due share
of blame for the existing state. It is not so much British guns that
are responsible for our subjection as our voluntary co-operation.
Our non-participation in a hearty welcome to Your Royal
Highness is thus in no sense a demonstration against your high
personage, but it is against the system you come to uphold. I
know individual Englishmen cannot, even if they will, alter the
English nature all of a sudden. If we would be the equals of Eng-
lishmen we must cast off fear. We must learn to be self-reliant
and independent of schools, courts, protection and patronage of a
Government we seek to end if it will not mend.
Hence this non-violent non-co-operation. I know we have
not all yet become non-violent in speech and deed, but the results
so far achieved have, I assure Your Royal Highness, been amazing.
The people have understood the secret and value of non-violence
as they have never done before. He who will may see that this is
a religious, purifying movement. We are leaving off drink. We
are trying to rid India of the curse of untouchability. We are try-
ing to throw off foreign tinsel splendour and, by reverting to the
spinning-wheel, reviving the ancient and poetic simplicity of life.
We hope thereby to sterilize the existing harmful institutions.
I ask Your Royal Highness as an Englishman to study this
movement and its possibilities for the Empire and the world. We
are at war with nothing that is good in the world. In protecting
Islam in the manner we are, we are protecting all religions; in
protecting the honour of India, we are protecting the honour of
humanity. For our means are hurtful to none. We desire to live
on terms of friendship with Englishmen, but that friendship must
be friendship of equals both in theory and in practice, and we must
continue to non-co-operate, i.e., to purify ourselves till the goal is
achieved. I ask Your Royal Highness, and through you every
Englishman, to appreciate the viewpoint of non-co-operation.
I beg to remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 9-2-1921
