598. LETTER TO ASHRAFUDDIN AHMED CHOWDHURY
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
January 28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
I am sorry. I reached your letter only today. In the constant
movement I feel called upon to do from day to day the letter was
mislaid and it was discovered yesterday by chance in my unassorted
and undocketed papers whilst I was searching for another document.
From the trend of my answer you will see that nothing has been lost
by the delay for which I must hold myself responsible.
You have done well to give me your views briefly. Having had
such views before me often enough I have no difficulty in giving you
my reply.
1. I do not think that leaflets and pamphlets can do any good at the
present moment. Unfortunately for the country those who have any
influence over the masses have already made up their minds and closed
them against any criticism. In such a state of society I feel that the
kind of activity you suggest must fall flat. You should know also that
such an attempt has been made before and is even now being made,
in my opinion without producing any appreciable effect.
2. A volunteer corps such as you have in view could not be formed.
If by any chance it is formed its effort will be discounted. Before that
happy time comes it is necessary for each party or community to
form its own corps of sincere Muslims and Hindus who will work for
peace without any mental reservations. Out of such a band of selfless
workers of Hindus and Muslims a combined corps is bound to come
into being. Unfortunately we have not such men in any appreciable
measure.
3. I doubt if there are many Muslim missionaries. But if there are
even a few, there is nothing to prevent them from doing this valuable
mission work. You say it is necessary to secure such service. My
experience covering a period of sixty years tells me otherwise. Such
services are not secured. They are freely given.
4. Of course it is possible to organize a volunteer corps of Muslims
only. The pity of it is that it has not been done up to now in a proper
friendly manner.
1 The source has "done".
357
5. I have already said that a combination will be premature. Of course
I have no knowledge of what the Congress organization is doing here
and indeed elsewhere except such knowledge as is of no use being
vague. I hope you realize your suggestions do not require money but
men and women of the right type. Are they available ?
Yours sincerely,
ASHRAFUDDIN AHMED CHOWDHURY SAHEB
97 -A SOUTHERN AVENUE
CALCUTTA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
