122. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
PATNA,
March 19/[20]1, 1947
CHI. SATIS BABU,
I must dictate this to save time. The dictation can only be in
English because Rangaswamy is not an efficient Hindustani writer.
The first thing is to give you the sad news that Nirmal Babu
abruptly left yesterday. He had prepared me for the news two
days ago. He was wanted by his University. He had some private
work too. And so he was to leave. But he suddenly took it
into his head to leave yesterday. I had not the heart to detain
him against his will and to come between him and what he
thought was his dharma at the time.
Kakasaheb wrote to me three days ago that he would like
me to have Bisen by my side. I was thinking what to do and
though I know that he could not in any way be a substitute
for Nirmal Babu the latter's absence has made me come to a
hurried decision that if Bisen is not wanted by you he should
join me. He is a handy man who knows Gujarati as well as
his mother tongue. He is a willing worker. So if you can spare
him and he wants to come you can send him. Let him go to
Patna and report himself at Dr. Mahmud's place. I sent you a
telegram today about sending Bisen here.
I am here touring in Patna district and looking at the
awful scenes of destruction wrought by human beings gone
mad. I had hoped that I would be able at the outside, in a
fortnight, to go back to Noakhali and its velvety earth and soft
grass. I very much fear that I must now do Noakhali work
from here as I had flattered myself while in Noakhali that I
was also doing Bihar work. Having come here I see how vitally
necessary it was for me to come.
I do not know that I
won't have to undertake a pilgrimage on foot here also. Pro-
bably I shall not be able to do so on foot. But everything is
in the lap of God.
It is quite clear to me that whatever be my fate you should
all, including the Sevagram party, stick to your posts.
How is Sardar Jivan Singhji shaping himself?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I had your wire. I have sent a wire to Suhrawardy. Sent
. . .3 also a wire.
SHRI SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KAZIRKHIL
RAMGANJ P. S.
NOAKHALI
From a photostat: G. N. 8966
