21. LETTER TO "THE ENGLISHMAN"
BOMBAY,
November 30, 1896
THE EDITOR, The Englishman
CALCUTTA
SIR,
With reference to my letter in connection with the grievances
of the Indians in South Africa, dated the 13th instant, I
happened to read the original telegram received from South Africa.
It reads "raad" and not "road" as in the message received by
me in Calcutta. The meaning is now quite clear. It is that
the Transvaal Government are enforcing Indians to locations.
This makes the matter still more serious, if possible.
The High Commissioner for South Africa, in accepting the
award of the arbitrator in connection with the Indian question
in that Republic, writes as follows in a telegram, dated the 24th
of June, 1895, A.D. :
The Secretary of State has received a telegram from the Indians
stating that they have received notice to remove and praying that action
may be stayed. I therefore urge Your Honour's Government to stay
action until the resolution and circular of 1893 have been cancelled and
the law brought in harmony with the award when a test case can be
tried in the courts of the South African Republic.
The resolution and the circular referred to have been can-
celled, but so far as I know, and I have been receiving here the
South African papers regularly, a test case has not been tried.
Evidently, therefore, the action of the Transvaal Government is
premature, and, I venture to think, constitutes a breach of
international courtesy, if nothing more. I venture to remind
you that the assets of the Indians in the Transvaal amount to
over £100,000, and that removal to locations would practically
mean ruin to the Indian traders. The question, therefore, in
its immediate aspect involves the very existence of hundreds of
Her Majesty's subjects whose only fault is that they are "sober,
thrifty and industrious".
I submit that the matter demands the most urgent and
immediate attention of the whole public in India.
M. K. GANDHI
The Englishman, 8-12-1896
