376. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
May 19, 1929
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I get your letters regularly though I find them rather dry.
But the grievance that both of you have is justified, since I do
not write regularly, whether interestingly or otherwise. But dur-
ing this touring I cannot keep count of the dates. I think I have
not been able to attend to your correspondence during my tours
of Burma and Andhra. I shall be more careful now that the
pace of my tours will slow down.
I had learnt from Nanabhai that you did not like the name
Sita. And you have mentioned the reason in your latest letter.
I appreciate your reason. It may be all right for Sushila to have
Sita as her ideal but the child should have someone revolutionary.
I cannot at the moment recollect any girl mentioned in the
classics who would fulfil all these requirements. You should have
acquainted me with your sentiments earlier. I shall now think
of some other name. In our society as also among the English
a person may have two or three names. Let Sita have two or
three. In this way I wish to justify the name Sita. Sita is the
last word in wifehood as much as it is in maidenhood. Moreover
it is my ideal to make a person lead a life of independence and
purity in spite of being married. Sita, Parvati and others have
fully attained both these ideals. According to the accounts in
the Ramayana and other works they were free from passion. Sita
experienced no difficulty when she was separated from Rama-
chandra. She was so free from passion that the lascivious Ravana
could not touch her. A woman should pray for freedom from passion
although her name may be Sita. That is why Sita is one of the
seven satis. Sati does not merely mean one faithful to her husband.
Sati signifies freedom from passion. Sita had two children. This
need not be regarded as wrong on her part, because it is mention-
ed in this context that Rama and Sita came together out of a
desire for progeny. It is not so today. Now children are born as a
result of passion; a person like me therefore regards begetting child-
ren as forbidden. I am, of course, talking about the belief in
regard to Sita and others; Sita should not be regarded as a historical
person but as our ideal woman. We do not worship the historical
Rama and Sita. The Rama of history is no more now. But the
Rama to whom we attribute perfect divinity, who is God directly
perceived, lives to this day. Reciting the name of this Rama would
save us; the Rama of history, who is qualified by attributes, good
or bad, would not have the strength to save. If you do not follow
all this you should, by all means, discuss it with me. In all my
reading I have come across no ideal loftier than Sita. This name
therefore is extremely dear to me. Again, it is sweet to utter, short,
and the two syllables too are easy. It has no compound syllable.
And the name is by itself musical, ending as it does with a long
a. But I do not insist that you call the child by this name.
There is nothing wrong if you give a name of your own choice.
You may give her a name indicative of the qualities that you
wish her to have. Find it in some religious books or novels. On
my part I shall certainly search for another.
Well, you have come to know the regrettable episode involv-
ing Chhaganlal. It has created a great commotion in the Udyoga
Mandir. Now I shall know more about it when I reach there in
a few days. Devdas is still there. Nimu has returned to Bardoli.
Rami's address at Morvi: Kunvarji Khetshi's House, Tribhuvan
Parekh's Sheri, Morvi.
My health is all right. Ba too is fine. Imam Saheb is not
wholly all right, but there is nothing special about him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4746
