341. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 8, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. It seems to me that the trouble with
the right hand will persist. On coming here I began writing
freely with the right hand and I soon discovered that it was no
use. It may be one sign of creeping old age. If it is, it is cause
neither for grief nor wonder. Had I learnt to use the body
merely as an instrument of service and His temple, old age would
have been like a beautiful ripe fruit with all the qualities of its
species at their highest. It would be a stroke of good fortune
if I escape merely with such disability. But even this is idle
speculation. I have no business to speculate about these things.
It is enough to note such things and take reasonable precautions
within the prescribed limits. You will not therefore worry about
the hand.
My weight stands at 106 lb. except for the fasting day when
it naturally dropped to 103½. I take during 24 hours five to six
slices of well-toasted white bread, 30 dates, bowlful of boiled
vegetable once, two spoonful of honey at 4.15 a.m. with a pinch
of soda and hot water and soda and lemon twice. I take two
ounces (nearly) of almond paste. This seems to satisfy me; if it
fails, I shall go back to milk. The bowels move perfectly twice
or thrice daily without my medicament or appliances. I sleep
between 9 and 3.40 and twice during the daytime 20 minutes
each time. I spin 375 rounds in two days. I have not begun
carding yet. Your supply seems to be inexhaustible. The balance
of the time is given to reading and writing. Just now I am
reading Ruskin's Fors Clavigera, a deeply human document. He is
dreadfully in earnest. These letters are his last effort at self-
expression in word and deed. Much time is taken up in writing
and now also dictating letters. As I am allowed to write to fellow-
prisoners, naturally there is more writing to be done than last
time. I am glad of it. I send something on moral problems to
the Ashram every week. And now I have commenced the his-
tory of the Ashram for the past five days.
This answers all your questions about self.
Vallabhbhai and Mahadev are doing excellently. . . .2 In these
matters we are subject to no restrictions that we would not impose
upon ourselves.
Abstention from salt for a time can do no harm and does
produce the results you have noticed for yourself. The weakening
effect you notice is temporary and can be greatly counteracted by
taking fresh limes in some shape or other. I suppose you know
that I have gone without salt continuously for six or eight years
without noticing any ill effect. Many had joined me in the ex-
periment, you may therefore prolong your saltless experiment to the
extent that it benefits you. Milk contains much free salt. There
is a saltish taste in raw milk.
I understand and appreciate all you say about yourself. Let
me put you at ease. When I come out you shall certainly be
with me and resume your original work of personal service.
I
quite clearly see that it is the only way for your self-expansion.
I shall no longer be guilty as I have been before of thwarting you
in any way whatsoever. My only consolation in thinking over
the past is that in all I did I was guided by nothing else than the
deepest love for you and regard for your well-being. I see once
more that good government is no substitute for self-government.
A Gujarati proverb says what one sees for oneself may not be visible
to the nearest friend even though he may have ever so powerful
a searchlight. Both these proverbs may not be universally appli-
cable. They certainly are in your case. You need therefore fear
no interference from me henceforth. And who can give me more
loving service than you?
Mahadev has the hymns you sent him. He is going to work
at them.
I forgot to tell you that I have now developed the habit of
studying the heavens. As you see my pen is exhausted. This is
Mahadev's. And it is now past bed time, 9.15. But I think I
have left nothing unanswered. I have a full letter from Nurgis
about Jal. What a deliverance!
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
I enclose an interesting cutting which I consider to be non-
political enough to pass muster.
From a photostat: C.W. 9506. Courtesy: Mirabehn
