2. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
January 11, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I am permitted to see Jamnalalji as often as may be neces-
sary and to discuss untouchability matters with him. He was
reading the constitution of the Society and these are the pertinent
things to which he drew my attention:
The resolution is wrong. It is not in accordance with the
resolution as it was passed by the Conference. There is nothing
in the resolution as it is given in the pamphlet about temple-
entry. You will see the correction made in my statement of the
30th December. How the incomplete resolution came to be taken
I do not know. The correct text appears in The Times of India
of the 26th September. This point was first noticed by me, but I
forgot all about it till the resolution was required for my state-
ment. Then too I forgot to write to you about it. But I noted down
the points that Jamnalalji brought forward, and this was the very
first.
The second is that whereas the resolution about electorate is
described as having been passed by the Conference, the resolution
about the social and religious rights of Harijans is described as
having been passed by a meeting of Hindus, five days later.
Jamnalalji therefore says that as the text reads, it will appear as if
it was a resolution passed by a meeting of Bombay Hindus only and
not by representatives of all-India Hindus. If so, the Anti-untouch-
ability League could not be established for all India by a Bombay
Hindus' meeting.
The third point he made was that there is nothing in the
creative resolution authorizing the All-India Anti-untouchability
League, as it was originally called, to alter its name.
The fourth was that the resolution describing the powers of
the League or the Society was not exhaustive enough.
The fifth was that there was no Treasurer appointed, and that
it was not clear as to who would have the control of the funds
raised by provincial organizations.
All these points deserve consideration. I could not throw
much light upon them, except that I told him that you retained
in your own person the Treasurership purposely in the initial stages.
I take it that you are collecting statistics somehow or other
as to the opening of temples, wells, etc., throughout India.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 19226
