2. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
August 6, 1918
MY DEAR CHARLIE 2 ,
I shall be good this time and not accuse you of crimes against
the laws of God and man regarding health. But there is no doubt
that you need a curator euphemistically called a nurse. And how
I should like to occupy that post! If you cannot have a nurse like
1 "Lokamanya" Bal Gangadhar Tilak (1856-1920); patriot, politician and
scholar; vide Vol. II, p. 380.
2 1871-1940; British missionary; co-worker of Tagore and Gandhiji; honour-
ed as "Deenabandhu" (brother of the poor)
me, who would make love to you but at the same time enforce strict
obedience to doctor's orders, you need a wife who would see that
you had your food properly served, you never went out without an
abdominal bandage and who would not allow you to overworry
yourself about bad news of the sickness of relatives. But marriage
is probably too late. And not being able to nurse you myself I
can only fret. I can do better if I pray and that is precisely what
I am going to do. He must keep you well and free from harm so
that you may glorify Him in your strength, if such be His will.
I am quietly settling down to my task as if it was the most
natural for me. The side issues do puzzle me but I shall soon
cease to think about them. They are not before me for immediate
solution. My life has never been fashioned thus. I have always
declined to work out to my satisfaction all the possible deductions.
I have taken up things as they have come to me and always in
trembling and fear. I did not work out the possibilities in Cham-
paran, Kheda or Ahmedabad nor yet when I made an uncondi-
tional offer of service in 1914. I fancy that I followed His will
and no other and He will lead me "amid the encircling gloom". It
delights my heart to know that the Poet is himself teaching the boys.
For me it is worth far more than his visit to America and I
equally enjoy the idea of your sharing that burden of his. May
God bless you both and keep you well.
Do please convey my respects to Baradada .
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
