442. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
CUDDAPAH (ANDHRA),
January 2, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Today I am writing this letter at 3.20 [a.m.]. After cleaning
my teeth, I thought of you first. I find this the most quiet time for
writing. I will of course have a nap during the day. Today also
there will be no touring. Please don't worry about me at all. I
really keep good health.
Since you don't write about yourself, I wonder whether you
are keeping back anything from me. Please don't,
I have been writing to Ba every week and will continue to do
so. As desired by her, I send her some discourses on the Gita
just as I used to do from Yeravda Mandir.
Mahadev is now permitted to write and receive only one
letter. He tries to include several in one. He will get others'
letters through Jivanji. He is being tested severely indeed. I am
sure he will get an M.A. degree even in this. He is buried in
the translation of the Gita.
You know Kishorelal's condition. He refuses to part with
his fever. He himself has now appointed a committee consisting
of Nath1, Swami and Gomati. He will abide by their advice.
I got a letter from Ba yesterday. Om made copies of it, one
of which I am sending to you. Om is a very active girl. Besides,
she is eager to learn everything as quickly as she can. Being frank
and truthful, she is progressing very well. Kisan's health is not
as good as it used to be. Otherwise she also is a hard worker.
Both the girls are extremely simple in their habits. They have
become intimate friends.
Radhakant Malaviya came yesterday to see me. He has
brought with him a scheme for preserving milk in dry ice and
wants my help in carrying it out. But to ask for my help in
such an enterprise is as futile as to churn sand for butter. Probably
you know that he has been to England for practical training.
Malkani has been working very hard. He is filling Thakkar
Bapa's place well enough. The entire staff works sincerely and
leaves nothing to be desired. So far the work has been progress-
ing very well.
. . .1 is now showing his teeth. He has . . .2 under his com-
plete control. He doesn't intend now to give the sisters their share.
He got the power of attorney given by . . . to all three revoked
and got a new power of attorney executed exclusively in his name.
When I wrote to him protesting against all this, he gave me an
evasive reply. I have now written to Nanalal. But I don't think
it will have any effect.
Anandi, Bablo, Babu, Mohan, Vanamala, Bachu and Amina's
children are making good progress. Ramnarayan Pathak gives
three hours every week. Jamnadas [Gandhi] remains what he has
been, thin and weak.
He seems to be uneasy too.
I think I
wrote to you about the death of Santok's mother. Prabhudas will
settle down to khadi work in some village near his father-in-law's
place. If he continues to be in Almora, the expenses would go up
very much.
Having thus remembered the family budget today, I end
this letter here. I am writing to Mani, but I hope her plight is not
similar to Mahadev's. Let me know if you have any informa-
tion about it.
To you both or rather to all,
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 57-
