150. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
August 24/26, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I got the letters earlier than usual, that is, on Wed-
nesday instead of on Thursday. Among the letters is one for Satis
Babu. He is Krishnadas's guru, Satis Mukherjee. His address is
Harra Road, Calcutta. I have forgotten the number of the flat.
You will find it somewhere in my papers. Surendra is likely to
know it. Or you will get it in the Ashram office itself. How is
Devdas's health? Tell him that I often think of him. Has Ramdas's
health recovered? I have before now asked for the names of those
who have been released. It would be better if against each name
the quantity of carding and spinning done by the person is also
mentioned. If, when you do not get a cloth-lined envelope, the
ordinary envelope is tightly secured by a string, like a packet sent
as book post, there will be no risk afterwards. Keshu seems to
have lost health again. Take immediate and effective measures to
help him to recover. Giriraj's illness has lasted quite long. His
blood must be impure. I have not received the guide to Singer's.
If you find it difficult to secure a copy, give up the attempt. I
understand what you write about Hasmukhrai. Give him the
102
letters if and when you think you may. Read the letter to Zaulinger
before giving it to her. Hence I don't write about her in this letter.
You must have sent an acknowledgment to Dhangopal. How is
Jamnadas? Do the authorities let you visit him occasionally?
Tuesday morning, August 26, 1930
Non-possession is allied to non-stealing. A thing not ori-
ginally stolen must nevertheless be classified as stolen property
if we possess it without needing it. Possession implies provision
for the future. A seeker after truth, a follower of the law of love,
cannot hold anything against tomorrow. God never stores for the
morrow; He never creates more than what is strictly needed for the
moment. If, therefore, we repose faith in His providence, we
should be assured that He will give us every day our daily bread,
meaning everything we require. Saints and men of faith have
always found justification for it from their experience. Our igno-
rance or negligence of the Divine Law, which gives to man from
day to day his daily bread and no more, has given rise to inequali-
ties with all the miseries attendant upon them. The rich have a
superfluous store of things which they do not need, and which are
therefore neglected and wasted; while millions starve to death for
want of sustenance. If each retained possession only of what he
needed, no one would be in want and all would live in contentment.
As it is, the rich are discontented no less than the poor. The
poor man would fain become a millionaire, and the millionaire
a multi-millionaire. The poor are not content if they get their
daily needs. They have a right, however, to get enough for their
daily needs and it is the duty of society to help them to satisfy
them. The rich should take the initiative in dispossession with a
view to universal diffusion of the spirit of contentment. If only
they keep their own property within moderate limits, the starving
will be easily fed and will learn the lesson of contentment along
with the rich. Perfect fulfilment of the ideal of non-possession
requires that man should, like the birds, have no roof over his head,
no clothing and no stock of food for the morrow. He will indeed
need his daily bread, but it will be God's business, and not his,
to provide it. Only very very few, if any at all, can reach this
ideal. We ordinary seekers may not be repelled by the seeming
impossibility. But we must keep the ideal constantly before us, and
in the light thereof critically examine our possessions and try to
reduce them. Civilization, in the real sense of the term, consists not
in the multiplication, but in the deliberate and voluntary reduction
of wants. This alone promotes real happiness and contentment,
and increases the capacity for service. Judging by this criterion, we
find that in the Ashram we possess many things the necessity for
which cannot be proved, and we thus tempt our neighbours to steal.
If people try, they can reduce their wants and, as the latter dimi-
nish, they become happier, more peaceful and healthier. From the
standpoint of pure truth, the body, too, is a possession. It has
been truly said that desire for enjoyment creates bodies for the
soul and sustains them. When this desire vanishes, there remains
no further need for the body and man is free from the vicious cycle
of births and deaths. The soul is omnipresent; why should she care
to be confined within the cage-like body, or do evil and even kill
for the sake of that cage? We thus arrive at the ideal of total re-
nunciation and learn the use of the body for the purposes of
service so long as it exists, so much so that service, and not bread,
becomes for us the staff of life. We eat and drink, sleep and wake,
for service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us real happi-
ness and the beatific vision in the fulness of time. Let us all exa-
mine ourselves from this standpoint.
We should remember that non-possession is a principle appli-
cable to thoughts as well as to things. A man who fills his brain
with useless knowledge violates that inestimable principle.
Thoughts which turn us away from God or do not turn us towards
Him are unnecessary possessions and constitute impediments in
our way. In this connection we may consider the definition of
knowledge contained in Chapter XIII of the Gita. We are there
told that humility, amanitvam, etc., constitute knowledge and that
all the rest is ignorance. If this is true—and there is no doubt that
it is true—much that we hug today as knowledge is ignorance pure
and simple, and therefore only does us harm instead of conferring
any benefit. It makes the mind wander and even reduces it to a
vacuity, and discontent flourishes in endless ramifications of evil.
Needless to say, this is not a plea for inertia. Every moment of our
life should be filled with mental or physical activity, but that acti-
vity should be sattvik, tending towards truth. One who has con-
secrated his life to service cannot be idle for a single moment.
But we have to learn to distinguish between good activity and
evil activity. This discernment goes naturally with a single-minded
devotion to service.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Kakasaheb's weight has again increased by one pound,
and his cheerfulness has also increased. I have regained one
pound from what I had lost. For the past three days, I have been
taking boiled vegetables in addition to curds. You will see that to-
day's letters are put into one of the envelopes received from you, fresh
slips of paper being pasted on it. You can use the envelope again.
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 53 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
