229. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
This is in continuation of the message from Jamnalal which
I have given in my letter to Prema. One reason why we have
been able to take no service from the older women in the Ash-
ram (after the struggle) is the Ashram's lack of ability, that is,
my lack of ability. When Jamnalal talked to me about some
other ladies, I felt a stab in my heart. He also felt unhappy that
he had to make the suggestion which he did. But what could he
do? He had often asked me in the past for workers, but I could
not do anything then. I think we have got an opportunity now.
I first thought of Lakshmibehn 3 and then of Durga. There is a
Mahila Ashram in Maharashtra, and that too in Wardha. Th-
ere will be Vinoba's company and guidance, too. There is also
Janakibehn. Will Lakshmibehn agree to go and stay there with-
out Panditji? Will Panditji like that? If not, why not? Ma-
thuri also will go and stay with Lakshmibehn. She will get the
same kind of training there that she does in the Ashram. If Lak-
shmibehn does not agree to go or cannot go, why shouldn't Durga
go?
She is in any case bound to remain separated [from
Mahadev] at present, probably for some years. She will not have
to do hard physical work there. She will have only to supervise.
The burden will not be too heavy for her health. She may cer-
tainly take Nirmala with her if she wishes. Narayanswami also
may go if he wishes. I thought about Kashi too. But she is a
complete invalid and so I dropped the idea. I cannot think
about Santok just now, and I do not know Jamna's capacity.
I think Lakshmibehn and Durga would be the best. Manibehn
too, I think, can go. She has done such work in Champaran.
I have not discussed this idea with Mahadev here. I cannot think
of any other senior women.
I think I have given you ample
information. If any lady volunteers are willing to go, let me
know. And if the Maharashtrian ladies who have recently
joined wish to go, they also may go. Their services will certainly
be required. But there should be a mature and experienced wo-
man at their head who would look after all the women as her
daughters and be in charge of the Ashram. The work requires
maturity, purity of character and common sense. Other quali-
ties will follow from this.
I hope Mohan has fully recovered.
I have already written about Raojibhai of Dharasana and,
therefore, say nothing about him in this letter. It is not our duty
to shelter him. I think it is beyond our means to do so.
I have also written to you about buffalo flesh. Sitla Sahai
continues to write to me. But I tell him every time in my reply
that he should convince you. Does Mahavir write to you? I
have had no letter from him at all. Gangabehn has helped him
to get a job of Rs. 25 per month, and she says in her letter that
she will try to get some work for Krishnamaiyadevi also. How
are Maitri and Durga? I had no letter from . . .9. This creates a
doubt in my mind whether she has fallen again.
BAPU
[PS.]
Prabhavati has not received a copy of the discourses. Send
one to her. I have received today's post, that is, the letters posted
on the 25th. I have replied to Amina in a separate letter en-
closed with this. What is the doctor's diagnosis of Mohan's ill-
ness? I got Jamna's letter. Tell her only this: She should
put complete trust in Purushottam and continue the experiment
faithfully. She is bound to get cured.
[PPS.]
The list of books and chart of stars are attached separately.
Nineteen letters are bound together and Amina's is kept loose.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8343. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
