352. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
AGRA,
September 15, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Has anything been done about Kathor? Hasmukhrai should
write to me and keep me informed about Bhansali. Has his weight
increased? Can he walk now without help? What does he eat? I
ought to know all this. How does Marathe keep? Nathji was to go
there to meet him and plead with him. It was proposed to frame
rules about personal cleanliness; have they been framed? Have the
roads been named at last? If they have, I have not seen the list.
I wish to remind you of a suggestion which I had made some
months ago. It was that we should get the Khadi Vidyalaya
recognized by the Vidyapith and that those who pass its exami-
nation should be awarded degrees or diplomas by the latter.
We have given no further thought to this matter. I think we
should do so now. Discuss the matter with Shankerlal and
Kaka and give effect to the suggestion. Perhaps you remember
that I had gone to the extent of suggesting that even those who
had passed the examination in previous years should, if they
desired, be given certificates after going through a special proce-
dure, and that the names of all such persons should be entered
on our register and that of the Vidyapith. There are two or
three similar matters which sometimes occur to me, but I do not
recollect them at the moment.
Doctor Hariprasad must have now started the nursing class.
Tell Shivabhai that in consultation with Jethalal and Appasaheb
he should fully reconcile the discrepancies in the accounts to which
they have drawn attention. I think that Narandas, too, does not
accept Shivabhai's figures. Shivabhai should resolve the differences
with all the three either through correspondence or by personal
discussion. Mirabehn told me that a new method of estimating the
quality of yarn had been recently introduced in the Ashram. If
this is true, it should be explained both in Navajivan and Young India.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5435; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 128-
