86. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
Thursday [January 23, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
My heart yearns often to write long letters to you, but I am obliged
to deny myself the pleasure. Such is the life here. From 4.45 a.m.
to 10 p.m., I do not think I waste a single moment in talk. I see no
visitors except on Sundays. But even Sunday is no free day with me.
On no other terms could the new scheme be worked here effectively.
My meal never now takes more than 15 minutes. Between 11 and
12, bathing and dinner are finished. Boys do no washing of pots now.
Miss West alone does it and she is at the school at the stroke of
12.30 p.m. I do little personal correspondence now. Even my London
letters are only a few lines. Thus do I cope with the day's programme
but only barely so. The tension does not irritate me. It gives me greater
pleasure.
How I wish you could stand this life. But I fear it is too much
for you, at any rate at this stage. How long I shall stand it remains
to be seen. But you will come and see things for yourself. Meantime
you are comparing notes and collecting your thoughts and yourself. I
know that you will not allow your head to guide you but your heart.
I suggest your putting the wagon and the mules at an auction sale
as also everything else not required there. Your books I am keeping
as they are in their cases. Only those tools which I require myself
I have taken out and not the others.
I am just now on my trial. The Government have rejected two
of the names given by us of educated entrants. This is a matter of
principle and I have told them that passive resistance will be revived
if they reject our nominees. So I might any moment have to abandon
work here which is moulding me and those who are with me. Secondly,
I have as a matter of principle boycotted the Congress as I boycotted
the Swami. This I have done because of Anglia. My step may bring
on a great deal of trouble. I must prepare myself for it. God will help
me. I know that I should be a coward if I took any other step.
I am glad Geevers has at last left you. I have often blamed myself
severely for inflicting him on you. I cannot to my own satisfaction
sufficiently apologize for the serious blunder I committed. Anyhow that
1 Vide Vol. XI, p. 438.
108
incident opened my eyes to my weakness — that of vaulting ambition
wrongly to serve.
With much love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
