296. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 28/31, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got today your letter of 25th/26th. We ought to thank
God that you still get my letters. But we should thank Him even
when you do not receive them. This will mean that we shall have
learnt to be equal towards cold and heat, good and bad, happi-
ness and suffering. If we have truly handed over to Him the
direction of our lives, we should dance as He wills. We may be
happy if He sends us a letter, and should be happy, too, when
He sends none. Narasinh Mehta danced and sang with relief: "It
is a blessing that the net is cut." That certainly did not mean that
his wife was not dear to him or that her presence did not make
him happy. She was of course dear to him. However, when she
died he felt that there was divine providence in that, even that it
was God's kindness. Hence, as long as you continue to get my
letters let them give you what pleasure they can. But rest content
when they stop. You will discover that there is joy even in that
contentment.
I got the postcard which you wrote on getting the previous
packet of letters. The condition of the elbow has remained the
same. The weight had risen to 105½ pounds, but it has again gone
down to 104. Such minor changes are bound to be there from
time to time, but otherwise my health is quite good.
As a principle it is correct that Padma ought not to have in-
curred a debt.
But circumstances may change and a principle
may no longer remain applicable. To do her justice, therefore, we
should take into account the total figure and, if you feel that the
expense was justified, you should pay the debt. We can imagine
circumstances in which one has no choice but to incur a debt. It
may even be one's duty to do that. All such principles have to be
relaxed when circumstances change. Only then can we do justice
in every case. If we do not act in this manner, we would be merely
clinging to the letter of a rule. About Titus, do what you think
best.
It is a great achievement on Keshu's part to have spun yarn
of up to 200 counts. How many rounds of such quality did he spin?
If you send samples of every quality of such yarn-strings of five
313
or seven threads each tied to your letter-we shall get them safe and
be able to see the yarn. Also send, with somebody who may be
coming to this side, a few slivers from among those with which he
could spin such fine yarn. If he can spin more such yarn, you
should also be ready to get cloth woven from it. On which type
of spinning-wheel did he spin yarn of 200 counts, and what was
the spindle like?
I have already written to you that at present I spin on the
Gandiva wheel. After making some improvements in its spindle-
bearer, I can easily spin on it yarn of 30 counts. Today I probably
spun yarn of still higher count. The waste, moreover, is negligible.
The improvements are these: There is just enough space in the
spindle-bearer to fit the spindle; the spindle-bearer is made very
narrow; the spindle fits so closely that there is no room for the
pulley to move loosely, since there is just enough space for the
spindle to rotate freely. These improvements have reduced to a
minimum the accidents which resulted in the snapping of the
threads, and enable us to draw very fine threads without fear. I
have to see whether, by making the spindle still thinner, I can
spin fine yarn with greater ease.
I get news about Mirabehn quite regularly here. The latest
news I had, at the time of writing this letter, was of 23rd. She
was bed-ridden then, though the postcard was written in her
own hand. She has become very weak.
I understand what you say about the changes in the prayers.
The important thing is that nobody should look upon the prayers
as an infliction. As a healthy man feels the pangs of hunger in his
stomach if he has not eaten anything on some day, so also a person
with a healthy soul cannot but feel uneasy if he has not prayed
during a day.
Do what you think proper regarding Prabhudas.
I suppose Shankarbhai's arm is no longer in plaster.
I don't like to tell Premabehn to make her letters shorter. I
ought to let her pour out her heart. I know that she must be
giving a good deal of her time to these letters, but probably she
feels satisfied after writing them.
I will write to Mathew. Read that letter. The inmates of
the Ashram will be able to put into practice my suggestion re-
garding education only to the extent that you have been able
to understand the idea and can carry it out. It is something which
1 Vide p. 264.
2 Vide pp. 182-.
I cannot easily make clear by explaining in words. It is only
by putting it into practice that one can show how easy study and
learning can be if we master that key, and how the thing can be
done without much ostentation.
July 31, 1932
About Narmada, I wrote to you in my letter dated
311-7-1932. I don't suppose you could have got it in due time.
I need not write anything more in this. I had one more letter
from Shambhushankar. I am sure that, if anything was possible,
you must have done it. I bless her and pray that her honour
may remain inviolate.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8241. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
