405. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 12, 1930]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Show this letter to all, so that I need not write about the
same things to everyone.
Most probably I shall be able to write to you and you will
be able to send a reply once a week.
I keep excellent health. I get up in the morning and go
through the routine according to the Ashram rules. There is a
light in the room so that, according to my rule, I can read chap-
ters from the Gita. I have been resting after many days of fatigue
and, therefore, must be sleeping for probably two or three hours
during the day. Generally I sleep at eight in the morning and
twelve at noon. I have resumed eating oranges, which I had
given up during the march. On the first day I took cold milk,
and I have continued it for the time being. I take about three
seers. Probably I shall have to reduce the quantity a little. Or I
may have some of it made into curds. In the morning, too, I drink
cold water instead of hot water. This I do only as an experiment.
The authorities have of course supplied the facilities for heating
water, etc. If, however, I can preserve my health with cold water,
why should I go to the trouble of heating it? I have given up
honey. Even for bathing I have been using cold water, but I intend
to change over to hot water from tomorrow. The goat is brought
before me and milked in my presence, so that the milk is as clean
as I would like it to be. If cold milk does not suit me, I will
certainly heat it. They have given me one person to clean the
utensils and do other work. The diet includes dates and raisins too.
No one need worry in the least about my food. Write to Jamnabehn
1 From Bapuna Palro - 9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Part I
and tell her that no one need take the trouble to send me any fruit.
I shall get from here everything I may require. Tell Anasuyabehn
that she need not pay any money here, as she used to do on the
previous occasion. It is not at all necessary to do so. We have no
time, ought to have none, to take unnecessary care of anyone.
We have no money, ought to have none, to throwaway.
The air here is considered to be good. I sleep in the open as
I used to do there.
If you have still not received the money from Gordhanbhai
Patel, remind him to send it.
I do spinning regularly. I make a skein of what I spin each
day and get someone to blow and spray water over it. Send me
Vanatshastra and Takli-shikshak along with other books. I never as-
certained my speed with the takli when I was outside. I tried to
ascertain it here and found that I hardly spin 30 rounds in one
hour. I ought to be ashamed of this speed. It means that I went
on spinning but did not learn the secret of doing it well. I can
now master it only by experimenting. I, therefore, give plenty of
time to the work. I practise on a bamboo takli. It is neces-
sary for everyone of us to acquire complete control over the takli.
It is easy to do so if there is someone to teach us. I saw chil-
dren in Karadi who could draw out thread with playful ease. All
that is necessary is that they should feel interest in the work. In
Wardha there are persons who have reached the speed of 80
rounds in half an hour. Kanti Parekh told me that he spun that
many. The people there who have learnt to spin on the takli
should ascertain their speed; let me know what it is in each case.
How is Purushottam? How is Kanu?
Give me news about Khushalbhai. I had written to him.
Is Mathew at peace?
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8110. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
