15. LETTER TO P. S. TO LT.-GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
BOX 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 27, 1903
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
To HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 22nd
of April received on the 24th instant.
My Committee tenders its respectful thanks to His Excellency
for the reply which shows that he is anxious to do justice to the
Indian community, in that it puts a liberal construction on the
Government Notice No. 356 of 1903.
But the reply has deeply grieved the community, in that it
is, in my Committee's humble opinion, a departure from the
declarations before War, of Her Late Majesty's Government, as
well as the assurances since given by His Majesty's Government,
that the existing Law would be reconsidered. My Committee
will therefore be obliged later to revert to the general question.
In the meanwhile, I am to request information on the following
further points that arise out of the Notice and your letter
under reply.
Indians who did not hold licences before War and yet were
granted them last year were not informed that they were tem-
porary. The first intimation given to such effect was last year
and it was repudiated by the Right Honourable Mr. Chamber-
lain as soon as it was brought to his notice. Such store-keepers
have in some instances gone to the expense of building substan-
tial structures. Others hold long leases and all have built up a
fair custom which is likely to increase as time goes on. It will
be, therefore, in my Committee's humble opinion, unjust to
require them to remove to Bazaars. The removal, as a rule,
cannot be effected without a heavy loss, no matter how well
situated the proposed Bazaars may be.
The Notice in question refers to renewals of licences out-
side Bazaars to those who were trading on the outbreak of War.
The letter under reply mentioned "trading before War". Is my
Committee right in understanding that all Indians who were
trading before War, whether on the outbreak or not, will have
their licences renewed? If not, an Indian who opened a store
in 1899 outside Locations would be entitled to a renewal where-
as one who traded for fifteen years and went to India for a trip,
closing his business in August 1899, would be disentitled, thus
causing [sic] manifest injustice.
The enforcement of the whole Law would seem to imply a
continuance of the prohibition to British Indians to hold landed
property except in Locations or Bazaars. There are some Indians
who hold landed property in the names of white persons. Most
of these cases are already before His Excellency for consideration,
more especially the three mosques in Johannesburg, Pretoria
and Heidelberg. Law 3 of 1885 and its amendment con-
templated a registration fee of £ 3 on every Indian-a clause
that was formerly as a rule enforced only in the case of store-
keepers and hawkers and because the Receivers of Revenue
would not grant licences without the production of the Regis-
tration Certificate. A large number, however, never paid the fee
nor were they ever called upon either to register themselves or
to pay the fee. My Committee has seen the Notice appointing
Captain Fowle as the Registration Officer for Asiatics, but my
Committee respectfully hopes that it is not the intention of the
Government to enforce the provision which was not enforced
during the old regime and which can have nothing to do with
the Anti-Asiatic agitation on the part of the public at large.
My Committee, therefore, requests information
(a) Whether His Excellency will be pleased to respect the vested
interests of all existing licensees, whether they were trading before
the War or not.
(b) Whether licences will be granted to those who were trading
before War outside Locations whether on the outbreak thereof or
earlier.
(c) Whether Law 3 of 1885 as amended in 1886 is to be
enforced as to the prohibition to hold landed property, and if
so whether permission will be granted for the transfers of those
properties which are held by Indians in the name of white
persons.
(d) Whether it is the intention of the Government to enforce
payment of the registration fee of £ 3 in terms of the Law.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: LG. 92/2132 Asiatics. 1902-1906
