351. LETTER TO UNDER SECRETARY FOR COLONIES
[LONDON,]
November 11, 1909
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
9th instant, enclosing a copy of a despatch from the Governor of the
Transvaal, together with a minute from the Transvaal Ministers regard-
ing the treatment of British Indian prisoners.
I note in the minute from the Prime Minister's Office, Pretoria, to
the Deputy Governor, that there is a categorical denial of every com-
plaint made. I venture, however, to submit for His Lordship's considera-
tion the fact that, from my own personal observations made at the different
prisons of the Transvaal, the complaints received by me and passed on
to the Colonial Office appear to me, in the main, to be substantial.
As to the death of the late Nagappen, the magistrate's finding has
been challenged by the Indian community, as also by the European
Committee presided over by Mr. Hosken, and that a reopening of the
enquiry was asked for and refused. Moreover, I invite His Lordship's
attention to the fact that the allegation that the deceased was not
supplied with rice was sustained. That the magistrate left it an open
question as to whether he had two blankets or not, that the deceased
was taken from Johannesburg to a camp in a rigorous winter, and
was called upon to do rough work, are undisputed facts.
As to the diet scale, His Lordship is already in possession of the
exhaustive report of the independent medical men of Johannesburg
bearing out the Indian allegation that this scale is deficient.
With regard to the prisoner Mahomed Khan, I have already stated
in my letter of the 16th August that there might be some exaggeration,
but I venture to trust that I shall be pardoned for saying that the denials
of the officials concerned of the truth of the complaints are hardly suffi-
cient answer. It was open, as it is now, to the Government, if they wish,
to invite Mr. Mahomed Khan to corroborate or withdraw his complaints.
The later developments, in the shape of a refusal to allow Indian
prisoners to receive religious consolation, and to permit Mahomedans
during the sacred month of Ramzan to receive facilities for observing
their fast, hardly bear out the statement that Indian prisoners are treated
humanely, and that there is no desire on the part of the prison officials
to treat them harshly because they are passive resisters.
It is likely that Indian prisoners are now invariably housed in
cells by themselves, but it is within my own knowledge that, up to the
month of May, Indian prisoners have been housed in the self-same
cells as the Natives.
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten office
copy: S. N. 5177
