471. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
September 8, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I have been regularly getting your letters and also reports
about your health. You seem to enjoy God's kindness in full
measure, for the wound is healing more quickly than the doctors
had expected. Do not be in the slightest hurry to leave. Leave
only after the wound has healed completely. I like your idea of
going to Sinhgad.
There you will also get Mehta's help when-
ever needed. The climate is certainly very good.
The water is
very light. The place, therefore, will do you much good. Nor is
it very far.
Do not talk much. Even when necessary, talk in a low voice
and not with a full voice. The effort to speak has always some
effect on the ear.
Avoid rice and dal. I am sure that will do you much good.
Rely more on milk. Curds should not be even slightly sour. Go
on gradually increasing exercise as much as the doctors permit
from time to time. Do not worry about anything. If you follow
this regimen, it will not only be good for the ear but will also
refresh the brain.
Malaviyaji came today. He is accompanied by Radhakant.
Ali and Khaliq [uz- Zaman] also have come. The others will come
tomorrow.
Khanbhai is very happy. He is with me every morning when
I go for a walk and also from 4- in the evening. We discuss
the problems at leisure one by one.
You must have heard Pagali's story regarding myself.
I
do not want to bother you with it now.
You may offer your
criticism later when you are completely all right.
I think you
will approve of everything.
Om stays with me all the time and helps as and when
required. Four or rather five girls are doing the work which
could be done by one or two girls.
Each, therefore, gets very
little to do. As you know, Prabhavati will not let the other
girls do much. Moreover Madalasa also comes to claim her share.
Radhakisan keeps worrying so much because of your instruc-
tions that, though he keeps careful watch over me, he is always
afraid lest he may be blamed. I do get up very early. I do not
need more sleep and I feel light during the day if I have finished
my work in the morning. Now the weight will increase slowly.
The quantity of food cannot be increased, so what I eat now will
increase the weight slowly. I think that is better. Strength is
growing steadily.
I take a short nap during daytime and am
in bed at 8.45 p.m., or at the latest by 9 p.m. Thus nobody
can blame me for not taking enough care of my health. I shall
be here till you come and even after that. I shall not go any-
where unless there is some reason.
Andrews is returning on Sunday. Kumarappa has taken 20
days' leave. I will send him back as soon as the period is over.
He will arrive here on Tuesday.
The girls seem to be progressing quite well. Vinoba himself
supervises everything. I therefore, don't have to interfere with
anything.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I forgot about Assam. If you know the Congressmen there,
send the Assam money to them. If you don't know, then send the
money to Jwalaprasad. The Marwari Relief Committee is working
there. This amount should be added to its funds. Do what you
think best.
[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 134-
