371. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
October 4, 1928
MY DEAR MALKANI,
I cannot trace your previous letter. With reference to yours
of the 27th ultimo I see that you will be free from the relief work
at the latest at the end of this month. I know that you have
work for you in Sind, and I know too that you will make your
presence felt, no matter where you are working. The only question
is what should be your final choice. Of course I had set my mind
upon you as the Secretary for the All-India Suppressed Class
Association to be formed. But I cannot guide you in this matter.
Your own instinct must be the best guide. After all you must
make the choice, and therefore you must choose that work which
is most to your liking and for which you may consider yourself
to be the most fitted.
If Sind needs you and you feel that you
should bury yourself in Sind, I do not mind it; only you must
make your final choice in so far as it is humanly possible.
I note what you say about your daughter. I do not like the
thing overmuch. But I am sure that you have done the best
that was possible in the circumstances. If it was not tragic, I
should have a hearty laugh over your considering the expense
of Rs. 2,000 a little thing. We poor people of the new age consider
Rs. 10 a trifle too much. Ramdas's marriage cost me probably
one rupee, that is, one or two cocoanuts and two taklis for the bride
and the bridegroom, two copies of the Gita and two copies of the
Bhajanavali. Rs. 2,000 in Gujarat will be considered a fairly large
sum even outside the Ashram limits. I do not think that even
Jamnalalji spent Rs. 2,000 over Kamala's wedding two years
ago. But I know that if I measured Sind by the Gujarat footrule
or the footrule of the new age, it would be a hopelessly false
measurement. I suppose, for you, it is progress from perhaps
Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 2,000, and if you were to go from Rs. 2,000 to
Rs. 20, you would perhaps have to renounce your mother-in-law
and to have a divorce from your wife. Considered from that point
of view, Rs. 2,000 is perhaps not a bad bargain.
I hope you all keep good health.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
SJT. NARAINDAS MALKANI
HYDERABAD (SIND)
From a photostat: G.N. 888
