355. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
October 8, 1932
CHI. MANI,
I did get your long letter though it was not long enough for me.
The fast is now a thing of the past. It was inspired by God and so
it was crowned with success. I am rapidly getting back my normal
health. I have almost regained my strength. Everyday I take two
pounds of milk and lots of juice of oranges, pomegranates or grapes,
and gourd or tomato soup. . . .1 I can take a fairly good walk,
and spin at least 200 rounds of fine yarn, of 45 counts. I also write
a great many letters. So you see there is no cause now for anxiety.
Ba is permitted to stay with me during the day. Devdas also
is allowed to come and see me. He is all right now.
Your dreaming about food could be a sign of indigestion, if
nothing more. Such dreams are common when one is very hungry
or suffers from indigestion. You should find out the real cause and
take the necessary measures, and then stop worrying about the
matter. If one's life is regulated by rules of self-discipline, such
dreams are bound to stop in the course of time. We must not
expect the veils of ignorance of many lives to vanish all at once;
they will take their own time. But we need not, for that reason,
lose heart or give way to despair or slacken our efforts, and we
must entertain no doubt nor worry about the ultimate victory.
This is the meaning of non-attachment taught by the Gita.
Fasting produces different effects on different persons, and
this is not surprising. They depend on one's physical constitution
1 Some words here are censored by the jail authorities.
and psychological attitude towards the fast. One who is not accus-
tomed to fasting will be upset by the thought of fasting even for one
day. But fasting is child's play for one who is in the habit of fasting
from time to time. Similarly, a person who has not much fat in
his system cannot hold out for many days. But a fat person, if
he is patient, can prolong the fast for a long time and physically
benefit by it.
Father and Mahadev are all right. We never enjoyed such
solitude before, and it has done us much good.
I hope you are in good health and so also are Lilavati and
Kamaladevi. My blessings to the other women there. Tell Lilavati
that I had a fine letter from Munshi. Ask her to write to me if she
can and feels inclined. I enclose Nandubehn's letter which was
received here.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 87-
