128. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
August 5, 1945
CHI. RAMDAS,
You have used reasoning in your letter which, however, does
not appeal to me. You have a right to go to Dinshaw's because
he has made you his own. Dinshaw is imbued with the spirit
of altruism, even towards the poorest. His is not an organization
for the poor. Similarly it is not for the rich. However, both
can go there as also those belonging to the middle class; that is
possible because of Dinshaw's good nature. Moreover, you had
no right to use reasoning the way you have, for you had given
me to understand that you were about to take long leave, or had
taken it, and would be devoting a year to improving your health.
Of course you will have yourself treated there and think of going
to Dinshaw only after you have completely ruined your health.
As you will yourself admit you could not perceive Dinshaw's love
for you. I therefore even now advise you to take one year's
leave and go to Dinshaw's. As I have already told you, I shall
manage to find your one year's expenses from somewhere. I
shall not pay from the Ashram funds but seek money for you
from somewhere. I have forgotten what arrangement was made
about the expenditure. However, explain that to me again and I
will act accordingly. You have something that attracts older per-
sons to you. I myself do not know what it is but I have first-
hand knowledge of it. Dinshaw knows many of my people but
he is not drawn to them. But he is attracted to you. Most pro-
bably you yourself do not know why that is so. This is one of
the instances. I have many others in my mind. It would there-
fore be better if you did not argue over the matter and went to
Dinshaw's. If you both want to go you may. It will be enough
for you to wind up the establishment from there for one year.
There are numerous teaching institutions in Poona. Kanam and
Usha won't have any difficulty in learning Marathi if they
have to.
Manilal and Sushila will be arriving tomorrow. Sita will
stay on in Akola. She is engrossed in her studies.
I am still of the opinion that Nimu did well in not going
either to Delhi or to Simla. There is no point in making Sumi
dependent on you. I can understand parents' attachment. How-
ever, this time I have seen that neither Nimu nor you could have
done anything more for Sumi than what Devdas and Lakshmi did
for her. I noticed that they looked after Sumi in the same way
as they look after their own children. Sumi gave me the impres-
sion that she also held the same view. She is quite at home with
the children there. Ultimately, isn't God the Protector of all?
Gopaldas's and Nalini's son was gone in a moment while they
helplessly looked on. Nalini could not save him. There are so
many such instances.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI RAMDAS GANDHI
KHALASI LINES
KINGSWAY, NAGPUR
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
