405. LETTER TO MANJULABEHN M. MEHTA
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
February 6, 1941
CHI. MANJULA,
I got your letter. You did well in writing about Prabha-
shankar. I shall write to him.
You say that all of you will come over in May. Why so late?
It is very hot in May. If you are not afraid of the heat, it is all
right. It will take time for your quarters to get ready. But I shall
be able to accommodate you in the quarters that are getting ready
and make arrangements for a separate kitchen for you. A suitable
building for that will be ready soon. I will let you know as soon
as it is ready. Anyway you can come whenever you wish to. As
you can put up with inconveniences, I do not worry about you.
Do observe the vow of brahmacharya which you have taken. I
would be happy if you could observe it. After the birth of a certain
number of children, everyone should observe brahmacharya. As this
is not done, people resort to artificial means of birth-control. But
the practice cannot but do harm in the end. It destroys morality.
According to me life without self-control has no meaning. Without
self-control no real service is possible. Those who wish to observe
brahmacharya should lead a simple and disciplined life. They should
keep themselves physically and mentally well occupied all the
time. One's reading, too, should be such as will fill one's mind
with good thoughts. Both husband and wife should devote themselves
to public service, so that they might not even feel the desire for
pleasure. If you want to ask me anything more, do so. You should,
of course, do nothing beyond your capacity. Only rare persons suc-
ceed in observing self-control. If, therefore, you two cannot observe
it for a long time, what need I say? Hence both of you should
think over the matter yourselves and do what you think best.
Devdas told me that Magan was thinking of going to Poona.
If you decide not to stay here, Poona would of course be better
than Delhi.
Urmila is all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 1613. Courtesy: Manjulabehn M.
Mehta
