214. LETTER TO SIR STANLEY REED
THE ASHRAM,
April 15, 1919
DEAR SIR STANLEY REED,
According to my usual custom, the time has come for me to
place before you things, which, in the interests of public peace, I
do not wish to ventilate in the Press. The atmosphere is so surcharg-
ed with distrust, disaffection and ill will, that I do not want to add
to the forces of evil by saying anything which may even remotely
produce that result, and which it is not obligatory on me to say
in public.
Though it is a small matter, may I correct the statement of
your informant that I was not arrested in reality? This is what
exactly happened: An officer boarded the train at Palwal, and,
laying his hands on me, said, "Mr. Gandhi, I arrest you". I was
then immediately handed to an Indian sepoy—I suppose he was
that—and I was taken by the arm and marched out of the train.
I was guarded by four sepoys on four sides of the cot, on which
I lay in Palwal on the station platform. I was brought to the plat-
form out of the waiting-room at my request, and I was sharply
pulled up as I passed one of the guards probably two feet from him
to clear my throat. I was taken to Muttra during the night, and a
guard was put in my compartment, which was a second-class com-
partment. We had to wait at Muttra for another train. Early in
the morning, I was again put in the second-class compartment,
in which accompanied by the guard, I travelled to Sawai Madho-
pur. There we waited for the mail train, and on its arrival
Mr. Bowring of Lahore took charge of me, put me in a first-class
compartment with him, but in that carriage too a guard was kept
during whole of the night whilst both he and I were sleeping.
I do not wish to complain of what happened to me. I am simply
stating the naked facts to demonstrate that I was under arrest. I
would have declined to begin the return journey had I not been
arrested, as I did actually mention to the officer, who served the
first order upon me. There are some other incidents which I
wish to omit. But nothing that I have said is intended to qualify
or detract from the public acknowledgment of the extreme per-
sonal courtesy that was extended to me by the three officers, who
were concerned with the service of the orders, the arrest and the
deportation.
I hastened to Ahmedabad in company with Anasuya Behn
in order that the people may be calmed and in all humility I may
say that the effect of our arrival on the populace was electrical. I
placed myself unreservedly at the service of the authorities. You
will have observed that I spoke at the Monday meeting with the
utmost caution. I would like you to go through my speech sent to
you for publication. I deliberately refrained from narrating the
acts done by the military under martial law. I doubt not that
there was much avoidable loss of life. I have seen the wounded
at the Civil Hospital. I spoke to everyone of them. All of them
gave me frank statements. Many admitted that they were part of
large crowds, not crowds that had any evil designs, but crowds of
men, who had hardly realized what the law was. They could not
immediately upon its being proclaimed have informed themselves
of the conditions. I know that although eager crowds gathered
round me to listen to my speech, and although I had printed
25 thousand copies, it has not reached all. How then could the
martial law notices indifferently distributed amongst a sullen
population inform vast bodies of men? These crowds, therefore, did
gather. I understand that they were fired at after due notice being
given to them, but you will agree with me when I say that they
could not all understand the notice to disperse. In the hospital,
I saw a few little children 10 or 11 years old. I asked them what
they were doing, and they said they had gone out to play. A
husband and wife were shot in their own house. The wife died
of the wounds. The husband who described the affair does not
say that they were deliberately aimed at, but that the bullets
whizzed through the house and struck them. Some of them told
me that they were alone. The rule was that if ten people collect-
ed together, they could be fired at. In one case, I was told, a
man, who wanted to be extra-cautious, first asked the permission
to pass the pickets, he got it and he passed the pickets with his
friends, and as soon as they had proceeded a few paces, they received
bullet wounds. The one who asked for permission dropped down
dead, and the other is in danger of losing his life. The wound is
so serious. The view I have taken of this is that the people of
Ahmedabad have no right to complain of these sad occurrences,
after the ruthlessness with which the mob destroyed the property,
hacked to pieces Sergeant Fraser, and committed many other
excesses. It is highly likely that the English lads—I call them lads,
because they looked like lads—who were posted as pickets during
martial law, had arrived on the scene with the knowledge that
a wicked plot was hatched in order to kill the force that was sent
from Bombay, of which these lads were members. I refer to the
derailing near Nadiad, and in their fury to wreak vengeance upon
the Ahmedabad people without any nice or exact discrimination,
they may have been too free with their rifles. I describe this shoot-
ing in order to show that the people have been sufficiently punished,
and there should be no further punitive measures taken and no
prosecutions undertaken.
I shall now turn to the causes of this upheaval. I have talked
to over a hundred people myself, my associates of the Satyagraha
Ashram and my co-workers living in the city have each talked to
as many, if not more, and I find that satyagraha had nothing to
do with the excesses, that is to say, that it was not the alleged
inculcation of the spirit of disobedience which let loose the fury
of the mob. During the seven weeks that the satyagraha cam-
paign has been going on, there was not a word uttered to encourage
ill will against a single Englishman, and I can state positively that
whenever I addressed the people, the audience addressed by me
became sobered, and there was an appreciable change in their
attitude towards the English, as also towards those Indian leaders
whose policy they disliked. My chief work, however, is done through
private conversation with people who visit me, wherever I go. I
have noticed the vehemence of feelings against British administra-
tion, and have noticed too that it was transferred to the adminis-
trators themselves. After a searching cross-examination, I found that
they admitted their mistake and I can recall many conversions of
people, who came in to express their curses, and went away, if not
[with] blessings on their lips, with no unfriendliness towards the
British. I found mental lawlessness existing everywhere, and it was
with the greatest difficulty that I was able to drive home the neces-
sity for restraining this habit of continuous disparagement of law
and order, and to replace it by a disciplined and conscientious dis-
obedience, whose effect was to be confined to self-suffering and
not to involve any destruction of the life or property of their law-
givers or anyone else. The lawless spirit then was already there.
There was not much time given to the spirit of satyagraha, i.e., the
spirit of self-restraint, to have its effect upon the people, when the
Government of India criminally blundered in serving these orders
upon me and in arresting me. Nor were the forces of discontent
weak. Here they are: (1) Every Mahomedan is filled with bitter-
ness over questions affecting Islam, and every Mahomedan thorough-
ly distrusts England in this matter. The association of all classes
of Mahomedans with the Hindus is significant, and the upheavals,
wherever they have taken place, have, as is perfectly apparent,
strong Mahomedan backing. (2) The people have been taught to
distrust Reforms in anticipation. The masses are no longer inert.
They have a general understanding of the situation. (3) The
alarm produced by the Rowlatt legislation and deep resentment
over utter defiance of public opinion. I freely admit that there
has been much ignorant and even in some cases wilful exaggera-
tion of the effects of the Rowlatt legislation. But after you account
for all, there is a residue left, which in my opinion makes Row-
latt legislation impossible of acceptance. I wonder if it has ever
struck you that the amendment of the Preamble is of little conse-
quence. As Sir William Vincent very perfectly pointed out, the
spirit of the legislation was that it should have operation only in
cases where anarchical crime was found to exist. The whole ques-
tion turns upon, who is to be the judge? The judge is to be the
Executive Government, and is not this the procedure which the
Executive has always followed in forming its judgments on these
matters? A petty official of the C.I.D. submits a report stating
the existence of anarchical crime to his superior officer, who endorses
the report. The chief of the C.I.D. then handles it and he will
be an exceptionally bold Home Member who will challenge a
report from the chief of the C.I.D. He will naturally therefore
advise notification of the application of the Act to the area of
anarchical disturbance so called. Nobody has questioned the
drastic character of the legislation. But I must not labour this
point and make the letter long. These causes were bound sooner
or later to bring about furious deeds of violence, and I can only
say that satyagraha has served as a check, no matter how slight,
upon them. It is clear that the tragedy at Ahmedabad and Viram-
gam could have been absolutely avoided had I not been served with
those orders and subsequently arrested. The vast demonstrations
took place not because it was the satyagraha movement that was
in jeopardy but because it was I who was arrested. Such is the
blind affection of the people towards me.
My suggestions therefore would be that the Government
should recognize satyagraha as an estimable weapon in the arm-
oury of reformer; they should seek the assistance of Messrs Mahomed
Ali and Shaukat Ali, who, so far as I am aware, are able, equally
upright and well informed, and solve the Islamic question to the
entire satisfaction of the intelligent Mahomedan population. There
should be some assuring declaration about the Reforms, and the
Rowlatt legislation should be withdrawn. Until these things
are done, I apprehend there will be no peace in India. The feel-
ing in India today is like a barometer, sensitive to the slightest
atmospheric pressure or change in the political field. If you at
all accept my suggestions, I know you will do all you can to secure
their adoption in your own special way. I may add that I have
passed on most of these suggestions to the Viceroy, and those that
can be locally handled to the Governor of Bombay.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 6534
