71. LETTER TO ALVI
June 29, 1927
I have your straightforward letter.
Of course, you have
addressed it to the Editor but I shall not reply to it in Navajivan
because the question you have raised is not likely to occur to
many. I suspect from your letter that your study of the Gita is
not deep enough. There is no difference between nishkama karma
and tatastha karma . You take it for granted that a benevolent act is
an unattached one. But non-attachment and benevolence are two dis-
tinct qualities. In this world one sees attachment in benevolence
everywhere and hence numberless sins have been, are being and
will be committed in the name of benevolence. The reason why
the Gita is dear to me is that the divine author has seen this
distinction through experience and has in the course of his work
endeavoured to explain it minutely and repeatedly in varying
words and also in identical terms.
It was certainly no selfish
act on my part to have helped the vegetarian movement, but des-
pite this fact I looked upon it as my own rather than God's;
and where personal attachment develops there is no impartiality
and no detachment. Today I clearly see my attachment and
desire in having been emboldened to deploy my client's money
for that work because I regarded that work as my own. Khadi
work certainly is benevolent. Suppose I have some money be-
longing to you and of course I intend to return it to you. I may
even be able to return it forthwith. Now if I am carrying on
khadi work without personal attachment, I would never use your
money. It should be my dharma to carry on the business of
khadi only with the money specifically received for it. And as long
as that work can be carried on without attachment and desire, I
would not make use of any other money. Now you must have
seen how in that case I lost my impartiality. Had I used my own
money, there would have been no difficulty. Staying impartial
does not mean withholding help. Where one feels one should help
and if one has the capacity, one should certainly do so; one should
not however press into service another's resources without his per-
mission. And even in seeking such permission one ought to be
discreet. I had the late Bhai Badri's permission though I do
not regard it as such. He was not capable of thinking indepen-
dently and giving his opinion. He had given his consent merely
because of his faith in me. And that too in the distinct belief that
I would never allow his money to be misused. Under such cir-
cumstances it was my dharma not to risk his money to the slight-
est extent. If you do not understand me after all this, do ask
me for further clarification.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
