253. LETTER TO JAIKRISHNA P. BHANSALI
June 20, 1933
CHI. BHANSALI,
I was delighted to see a letter from you after so many days, I
mean so many months, but I was also pained to read it. I hold
that the remedies you are adopting for attaining self-realization
are not right. If anybody stitches up his lips in order to observe
silence, his silence would not be the real thing. One can observe
silence even by cutting off one's tongue, but that also will not be
real silence. He is truly silent, who, having the capacity to speak,
utters no idle word. The type of tapas which you are practising
is described by the author of the Gita as tamasi tapas, and I
think that is correct. You eat uncooked flour, but that is against
medical science. Shastras never enjoin anybody to do so. If
you have decided to eat nothing but uncooked things, you can eat
only fruits, etc. You may add milk or curds, that would be com-
plete food. I think it would be better if you gave up this un-
natural effort completely. Reflect over the bhajan given below:
Oh good man! Natural communion is best. Ever since by the Grace
of God it was achieved, it has been growing. Wherever I wander it is
a circuit round the Deity, whatever I do is an act of service, every lying
down of mine is an act of prostration before God. Every utterance of mine is
God's name—I worship no other God—and all hearing is a remembrance
of God. Eating and drinking are acts of worship and living in
a house or in the wilderness are the same to me. I shut not my eyes,
neither do I stuff my ears; to no torture do I subject myself. I open my
eyes to find nothing but the beautiful manifestation of God everywhere
to greet and delight me. My mind ever intent on Him, all corrupt thought
has left me; so very much I am engrossed in contemplation of Him
that there is no room in me for aught else. Kabir says—This is a state
to be silently enjoyed but I have dared to sing about it. It is a state
beyond misery and bliss, I am merged in it.
You should live in peace in the Ashram or anywhere else that
you like and go on doing some work of service. You may then,
in the course of time, attain self-realization if you are fortunate
enough. Probably you know that I completed a 21-day fast three
weeks ago. I had a special reason for undertaking the fast. I
am still confined to bed, but am gaining strength day by day.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 21491; also Harijanbandhu, 25-6-1933
