327. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SAMBALPUR,
December 22, 1928
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
After finishing the work at a meeting, I had my meal and
am now working at the spinning-wheel. I have some quiet time
and so have sat down to reply to your letter which was received
here. I had kept aside the other letters with the intention of
replying to them in detail. You may, therefore, expect a reply
to every point.
So far I have been able to keep to third-class travel, and all
of us have been travelling in great comfort. From Nagpur, we
were given one section of the carriage, the label "reserved" put
on it, so that we experienced no difficulty on the way.
In the meeting here, I sold khadi to my heart's content. There
are a number of Gujaratis here. They gave more than eight
hundred rupees. I expect that they will make up one thousand
before I leave this place. The untouchables here gave me self-
spun yarn and also khadi woven by themselves.
The question of agency was discussed in the meeting of the
Spinners' Association. I did not have to sit through it. But I
had liked your suggestion in principle and, therefore, pressed it
at the meeting. All the members have approved of it. It has now
been finally decided that, if we are to keep the agency, it will be
not in the name of an individual but in the name of the insti-
tution. They may let the agency remain with the institution so
long as they are satisfied with its work. I have told them that,
if they find some other arrangements more convenient, they may
certainly make it, and that, if they do so, it will not displease
me or any of us. The committee should do fearlessly what they
find, on an objective consideration of the matter, to be in the
best interest of khadi. A subcommittee has been appointed to
take a final decision, and it will do so and inform us. Narandas is
included in that committee. The matter will be settled in a few days.
The Mandir will get some money for the expenses which are
incurred for Devdas and others. You should pay Devdas's bills.
If you have anything to say with regard to the actual figures of
expenditure, you may draw my attention to them or make a
suggestion directly to Devdas.
Mirabehn and Chhotelal have stayed back in Wardha.
Mirabehn will return to the Ashram after completing the work she
has started in Bihar. Chhotelal will go to Bombay in a few days
and return to the Ashram after learning some details there about
bee-keeping. It has been decided that he should finally return
there. All the same, it will be good if you and Gangabehn keep
up your efforts to attract him there. I suppose those two have
gone out to Savali to see the work being done there. Chhotelal
gained five pounds in Wardha. Vasumati's weight, too, has gone
up and is still increasing. She has gained nearly eight pounds
at least. The causes for the increase in the weight of both are
oil and mental peace.
Umi must have recovered now. In whooping cough the most
important remedy is proper nursing. And we hear of more and
more instances of the wonderful effect of sun-bath. This field,
of restoring health through the sun, has hardly been explored so
far; all the facts about the power of its rays have not been fully
investigated yet. I for one believe that innumerable diseases can
be cured mainly through different treatments with the sun's rays.
Revashankerbhai's Dhiru recovered through such treatment. One
of his bones was infected from within. About one pound of pus
used to flow out every day. He has now recovered completely
through treatment with the sun's rays. Hence complaints like
weakness, cough, getting out of breath with the slightest exertion,
etc., can certainly be cured by treatment with the sun's rays.
Kishorelal, too, has come to Wardha. But I may say that
as he arrived I left. We could, therefore, have no talk. His
health may be described as so so. I keep very well. Keshu's
low fever has gone and he has gained 4¼ pounds in weight.
More in the next letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised the letter.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 35-
