165. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
August 11, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I got your letter. Kakasaheb has liked your translation of the sthitaprajna.
I had expected something different. I cannot of course make any corrections
from here 2 and send the thing back to you. For the present, therefore, the
translation will remain with me. Your effort is certainly very good. Continue
learning in that manner. It will be good if now you go to Almora as early as
possible. Let me caution you somewhat regarding your model of the spinning-
wheel. I am of no use and you may take it that Kakasaheb is of no use
either, nor Vinoba. Our reasons for desiring that you should study the matter,
are different from one another's. But from your point of view, it is sufficient
that we are useless for your purpose. Your reasoning does not seem to be
correct. The experiences which you have gathered through others, convincingly
show that there will not be much increase in speed, nor will the yarn spun
be even. The fact is that your model of the spinning-wheel follows the model
in use at present, that is, it is not purely a machine. A machine is that which
requires no intelligence or dexterity. Plying the spinning-wheel is an art and
it can, therefore, be mastered only by one who has the required skill. You
should copy the Singer [sewing-machine] or the spinning-jenny but you are
not such an expert mechanic. It seems that a spinning-wheel on which the
speed can be increased only with great difficulty and which moreover is costly,
has no place in our programme. Have I been able to make this quite clear to
you? If not, write to me again. It will be a different matter if, though you
have understood what I have said, you think that my reasoning is faulty. I
have not written all this to dishearten you, but only to suggest that you should
not lose your head over this particular model of the spinning-wheel. You have
many other things to do in that direction.
Try to understand what I have been saying about the takli. I do not
propose the takli as a substitute for the spinning-wheel but the takli can enter
a field where the spinning-wheel cannot. The whole plan of spinning depends
upon the number of people who take it up. If merely a handful of us had
occupied this vast country, spinning would have had no place here. If a small
number of people occupy a large area, that small number has to be violent
by nature. Of what use is the takli or the spinning-wheel to them as a symbol
of ahimsa? The takli or the spinning-wheel is a tool to man as man and
1 Presumably the verses 54 to 72, chapter II of the Bhagavad Gita which describe
the characteristics of a sthitaprajna, i.e., of one who is firmly established in spiritual
wisdom.
2 In Yeravda Prison
127
128
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
destroys the very basis of competition. We must not think of either of them
from the present day commercial point of view. Rather, they imply the
transformation of the commercial point of view itself. In Almora, therefore,
you should pursue your work in regard to wool from this point of view and
not from the point of view of Kashmir. If you give more and more importance
to the principle that one should wear cloth made from yarn spun by oneself,
you will have no cause to be disappointed, and will readily appreciate the
great value of the takli. Yes, if you can make suitable changes in the spinning-
wheel so that wool can be spun on it, do so. That is done even in this jail.
With but a few changes, even the spinning-wheels in current use will permit
the spinning of wool and will produce more yarn than the takli. However,
for the roaming tribes of cowherds and shepherds, etc., the takli will certainly
remain. In that way, on the whole, the takli will be found superior from the
point of view of numbers. If you have still not followed all this, ask me again.
Belief in the usefulness of the takli is a matter not of faith but purely of
reason. In such a matter, to depend on faith may be a sign of indolence.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33018
