32. LETTER TO B. G. TILAK
[August 25, 1918]
I have your letter. I am grateful to you for your sympathy.
How can you not be concerned about my health? God be thanked
I am now well. Of course I shall not be able to leave my bed
for a few days. There was great pain. It has only now subsided.
I do not propose to attend the Congress or the Moderates'
Conference either. I see that my views are different from those
of either. I have already told you about them. My view is that
if all of us take up the work of recruitment for the war and en-
list hundreds of thousands of recruits we can render a very great
service to India. I know that Mrs. Besant and you do not share
this view. The Moderates also will not take up the work earnest-
ly. This is one thing. My other point is that we accept the sub-
stance of the Montagu-Chelmsford Scheme, explain clearly the
improvements that we wish to be made in it and fight till death
to have these improvements accepted. That the Moderates will
not accept this is clear enough. Even if Mrs. Besant and you accept
it, you will certainly not fight in the way I wish to fight. Mrs.
Besant has declared that she is not a satyagrahi. You recognize
satyagraha as [only] a weapon of the weak. I do not wish to get
caught in this false position. And I do not wish to carry on an
agitation in the Congress in opposition to you both. I have un-
shakable faith in my own formula. And it is my conviction that if
my tapasya is complete, both Mrs. Besant and you will accept my
formula. I can be patient.
That the Moderates and the Extremists should each abandon
some minor positions and come together is a thing repugnant to
me. There are two wings in the country. I do not believe that
it will do any harm to make the positions of both clear to the
Government and the people. I do not at all like the attempt to
bring together the Extremists and the Moderates. It will do much
good if both the parties boldly proclaim their respective positions
before the Government and the people. May God help you in
your undertaking.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhai ki Diary, Part I
