269. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
The monster petition, along with the forms containing the signatures,
has been dispatched to the Colonial Secretary, with a forwarding letter
by the Chairman of the British Indian Association, Mr. Essop Mia,
a summary of which was reproduced under "Late News" in the last
Issue. We now give the letter in full:
Sir,
I have the honour to forward, by parcel post, the petition of the
British Indians throughout the Transvaal, in connection with the Asiatic
Registration Act, and herewith a copy of the instructions issued to the
canvassers.
1 For the original letter in English, vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary",
pp. 320-. It is reproduced here with some changes needed to bring the text into
conformity with the Gujarati version.
When the forms were distributed through the Colony, the letter
addressed to the Government on behalf of certain Indians, asking for
a modification of the regulations framed under the Act, was still un-
answered and the letter not withdrawn. But though since then Messrs
Stegmann, Esselen and Roos' clients have not received a reply to their
satisfaction, and although they have therefore withdrawn the letter, the
committee of my Association desires me to forward the petition, as
it embodies the sentiments of those who have signed it. In the humble
opinion of my Association, the petition forms a complete vindication
of the attitude adopted by it, and shows that it is representative of the
vast majority of Indians in the Colony. The petition has been ready for
some time, but my Association delayed its presentation, in order to test
the action of the community during the period that the Registration
Office remained open in Johannesburg.
There are 4,522 signatories to the petition, and they are drawn
from 29 towns, villages and districts in the Transvaal. The following
is the analysis according to the centres: Johannesburg, 2,085; Newclare,
108; Roodepoort, 136; Krugersdorp, 179; Germiston, 300; Boksburg,
129; Benoni, 91; Modderfontein, 51; Pretoria, 577; Pietersburg and
Spelonken, 90; Vereeniging, 73; Heidelberg, 66; Balfour, 14; Standerton,
123; Volksrust, 36; Wakkerstroom, 12; Piet Retief, 3; Bethal, 18;
Middelburg, 29; Belfast, Machadodorp, and Waterval, 21; Barberton,
68; Potchefstroom, 114; Ventersdorp, 12; Klerksdorp, 41; Christiana,
24; Lichtenburg, 7; Zeerust, 59; Rustenburg, 54; Ermilo, 2.
The following, then, is the religious and provincial classification:
Surtis, 1,474; Konkanis, 141; Memons, 140; Gujarati Hindus, 1,600;
Madrassis, 991; Northerners, 157; Parsees, 17. In order to avoid a
separate classification for the Sikhs and the Pathans, they have been
included among the Gujaratis, if Hindus, and among the Surtis, if
Mahomedans. The Christians have not been separately classified as
they are nearly all Madrassis, and are not more than 200 in all.
With the exception of the Memons, there are hardly any absten-
tions, but the task of reaching every Indian in the isolated parts of the
Transvaal—as, for instance, farms, etc.—has been beyond my Associa-
tion during the time that was allotted for the canvassing of signatures.
Canvassers, who were in all cases responsible and representative men,
have reported that a large number of Indians have already left the
Transvaal. It is common knowledge that nearly 13,000 permits had
been issued to British Indians before the struggle commenced in
September, 1906. Today the British Indian population of the Transvaal,
according to the information at the disposal of my Association, does
not at the outside exceed 8,000, but it is probably nearer 7,000 than
8,000, the rest having preferred to leave the country rather than be reduced
to slavery. My Association is aware that pressure was brought to bear
by white employers on most of those who have registered, excepting
a few Memons. Moreover, according to the information received by
my Association, no more than 350 Indians have applied for registration
throughout the Transvaal during the period from July 1 to October
31, and that 95 per cent. of these applicants are drawn from the Memon
section.
In conclusion, my Association begs to draw the attention of the
Government to the intensity of the feeling of the community represented
by my Association against the Asiatic Law Amendment Act. In taking
up the attitude the community has felt called upon to adopt, there has
been no intention of defying the Government; rather, it is a proof of
the community's intense sense of the wrong done to it. This sense of
injury is so deep that the community has felt compelled to prepare for
undergoing a course of suffering which passive resistance, as under-
stood by British Indians, involves.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 9-11-1907
