26. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
BOMBAY,
August 18, 1919
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES OF INDIA
[BOMBAY]
SIR,
No possible exception can be taken to the impartial manner
in which your South African correspondent has given a summary
of the Indian position in the Transvaal in your issue of the 18th
instant. He has put as fairly as it was possible for him to do both
sides of the question.
It is not the additional "brown burden on the top of the black
one" which agitates the European Colonists in South Africa, but
the crux of the whole question is, as your correspondent puts it,
"that South Africa cannot be run economically with the Indian
in it, and the white people who have made the country, cannot be
expected to commit race suicide". This is not the problem that
presents itself to the Boer living on the Veldt to whom the
Indian trader is a blessing, nor to the European housewife in the
big towns of the Transvaal who depends solely upon the Indian
vegetable-vendor for the vegetables brought to her door. But
the problem presents itself in the manner put by your correspon-
dent to the petty European trader who finds in the thrifty and re-
sourceful Indian a formidable rival, and with his vote, which counts
a great deal, and with his influence as a member ofthe ruling race,
he has succeeded in making his own economic problem a race
problem for South Africa. In reality, the problem is whether the
petty trader for his selfish end is to be allowed to override every
consideration of justice, fair play, Imperial policy and all that goes
to make a nation good and great.
In support of the gradual but certain squeezing-out process,
what has been called the Smuts-Gandhi agreement has been
pressed into service. Now that agreement is embodied in two letters
and two only of the 30th June, 1914: the first one addressed to
me on behalf of General Smuts by Mr. Gorges, Secretary for the
Interior, and the second my acknowledgment of it bearing the
same date. The agreement, as the letters conclusively show, is an
agreement on questions which were the subject of civil—in the
correspondence described as passive—resistance. The settlement
stipulates only for an extension—never a restriction—of existing
rights, and, as it was intended only to cover questions arising out
of civil resistance, it left open all the other questions. Hence the
reservation in my letter of the 30th June, viz:
As the Minister is aware, some of my countrymen have wished me to
go further. They are dissatisfied that trade licences, laws of the differ-
ent Provinces, the Transvaal Gold Law, the Transvaal Law 3 of 1885,
have not been altered so as to give them full rights of residence, trade and
ownership of land. Some of them are dissatisfied that full interprovincial
migration is not permitted, and some are dissatisfied that, on the marriage
question, the Relief Bill goes no further than it does.
In this correspondence, there is not a word about the Indian
settlers not getting trade licences or [not] holding fixed property
in the mining or any other area. And the Indians had a perfect
right to apply for and get as many trade licences as they could
secure and as much fixed property as they could hold, whether
through forming registered companies or through mortgages.
After a strenuous fight for eight years, it was not likely that I would
give away any legal rights, and if I did, the community I had the
honour to represent would naturally and quite properly have
dismissed me as an unworthy, if not a traitorous, representative.
But there is a third letter, totally irrelevant considered as
part of the agreement, which has been used for the curtailment of
trade rights. It is my letter of the 7th July addressed to Mr. Gor-
ges. The whole tone of it shows that it is purely a personal
letter, setting forth only my individual views about "vested rights
in connection with the Gold Law and Townships Amendment
Act". I have therein stated definitely that I do not wish to restrict
the future action of my countrymen and I have simply recorded
the definition of "vested rights" I discussed with Sir Benjamin
Robertson on the 4th March, 1914, saying that by "vested
rights I understand the right of an Indian and his successors to
live and trade in the township in which he was living and trading,
no matter how often he shifts his residence or business from
place to place in the same township". This is the definition on
which the whole of the theory of evasion of law and breach of
faith has been based. Apart from the question of irrelevance of
the letter, I claim that it could not be used, even if it could be
admitted as part of the agreement, in the manner it has been. As I
have already stated on previous occasions, there was a prospect
of an adverse interpretation of the Gold Law as to trade licences,
and there was the tangible difficulty in getting land or leases of
buildings and it was by the most strenuous efforts that Indians
were able within Gold Areas to retain their foothold. I was
anxious to protect the existing traders and their successors even
though the legal interpretation of the law might be adverse to the Indian
claim. The vested right, therefore, referred to in my letter of the
7th July was a right created in spite of the law. And it was this
right that had to be protected in the administration of the then
existing laws. Even if, therefore, my said letter can be incorpora-
ted in the agreement, by no canon of interpretation that I know
can it be said to prevent the Indians morally (for that is the mean-
ing of the charge of breach of faith) from getting new trade licences
in virtue of the law of the land. Indians openly and in a fair fight
gained in their favour a legal decision to the effect that they could
obtain trade licences against tender of the licence fee even within
the Gold Area. To this they were perfectly morally entitled. There
cannot be any question of a legal breach. Their trade rivals would
long ago have made short work of any legal breach. Lastly, sup-
posing that the law was adverse to the Indian claim, my definition
could not be pleaded to bar any agitation for amendment of the
law, for the whole of the settlement, in the nature of it, was of
a temporary character; and the Indians, as definitely stated in my
letter of the 30th June, "could not be expected to rest content until
full civic rights had been conceded". The whole of the plea, there-
fore, of breach of faith is, I venture to submit, an utterly dishonest
and shameless piece of tactics, which ought not to be allowed to
interfere with a proper adjustment of the question.
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 19-8-1919
