46. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
May 3, 1935
BHAI PURUSHOTTAMDAS1,
I saw your letter only today. I returned from Ahmedabad
this very day. I went through the article sent by you. The
tears shed by the author towards the end are improper. If the
Government is awake why cannot we wake up? It is for persons
like you to wake the people up. If, however, you also look to
others, won't it be like the sea losing its salt and then bemoaning
the fact? Wake up yourself, show the way and others will
follow.
Exchange and similar issues are matters of high finance. What
can the Congress do about them? Those who know the subject
do not, cannot, join the Congress. Those who are in the Congress
naturally do not know much about such matters. This is a
work for experts on finance. They should set up a special body
for that purpose and take the necessary steps.
The author of the article says that if India had been awake
when the country went off the gold standard, the step would
not have been taken. What ought to have been done to prevent
it?
What can we do today so that the right policy will be
followed?
Do you think there is any connection between this problem
and that of village industries? Won't the villagers have to learn
to be clean, irrespective of whether or not the right policy is
followed; and know what proper diet is? If the revival of
[Village] industries is desirable, shouldn't it be carried out?
Do you think carrying it out will interfere with currency agitation?
Hardly any currency experts have joined in it. And those who
have joined can still continue working in the other field.
What is the remedy if finance experts do not take up this
burden? Who will wake them up? I myself do not know
enough about the subject to be able to do so.
I understand about cement. I am writing to Bapa asking
him to send an application.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From Gujarati: Purushottamdas Thakurdas Papers. File No. 159/1935.
Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
