359. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
August 11, 1932
I understand that you have not yet resolved to give up cin-
namon and cloves. I intend to write to Nimu. If she has
already taken a vow, I will not press her to give it up. I will
only explain what her dharma is. I think that one should not
press anybody to give up a vow like this. The effect of such
persuasion on a person is to tempt him to give up his firmness
and in consequence his mind becomes weak. I do not regret
the strictness which I imposed on the occasions which you mention.
It was justified at that time. Now I feel the slightest degree
of strictness to be as heavy as the weight of the Himalayas.
Formerly, I had to fast in order to make people do what I can
now persuade them to do with a mere rebuke; and other people,
too, had to act more or less similarly. If I continue to act as I
used to do, I would be a cruel man. Does this mean that others
also have advanced, as I have done? We have no reason to be-
lieve this. But since I can now influence people close to me,
nothing more is necessary. In other words, you need not yourself
be strict with Nimu or yourself, for I am here to keep a strict
watch. After my death, all of you will have to be vigilant. It
is because of this state of affairs that we often find laxity creep-
ing in when I am away. That is so all over the world. We should,
therefore, learn to be fully vigilant in our own lives. At present
we may be growing as a creeper does with the support of a tree.
But this is a form of dependence. We should shake it off and
learn to stand on our own feet. The cause of the electric effect
on Nimu is what I explained above. Conditions were not the
1 The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, pp. 279-80, has: "Today's letters were
all from prisoners. One of these was from Ramdas who complained that
Bapu who was very strict at a time in doing and imposing penance had now
become too lenient and people took an undue advantage of this leniency. He
seems to have taken a vow not to take cinnamon and cloves . . . with the result
that his wife Nirmala has given up milk and ghee."
50-23
same at the time of my life which you remember, because the
atmosphere then was not responsive. It had not been purified
sufficiently to be so. If I were to write anything harsh to Nimu,
she would feel miserable. Do you now understand the reason
for my liberal attitude? There was the same love behind the
strictness of the past as there is behind the liberal attitude of the
present. What you say, however, is quite correct. It would cer-
tainly be bad if anybody misunderstood my liberal attitude and
became lax. The reason for entertaining such fear is different.
It is that I have become less exacting to myself. My former strict-
ness has gone. The body does not obey me. I naturally feel
reluctant to ask others to do what I myself cannot. I, therefore,
often told the inmates of the Ashram that I was no longer fit
to be in charge of it. The gate-keeper who guards the Ashram
must be an ever vigilant and strong man. Formerly, I used to
work as much as anybody else did, and so the others, too, had to
keep pace with me. But now they do not have the example of
my work. They have to follow my preaching. It is not surpris-
ing, therefore, that you see laxity in the atmosphere. I hope you
have understood all this fully.
I like your vigilance. In this case, however, you should not be
strict with Nimu. My ideas about the relations between husband and
wife have changed of course. I would not like any of you to behave
towards his wife as I did towards Ba. She has lost nothing through
my strictness, of course, for I never regarded her as my property.
I always had love and respect for her. I only wished to see her
grow spiritually. However, she could not be angry with me,
whereas I could with her. I did not give her the same freedom
of action which I enjoyed and she did not have the capacity to
exercise it either. Hindu women never have such capacity. That
is a defect of Hindu society. I, therefore, wish that you should
treat Nimu as having the same freedom which you have. I once
wrote to her and asked her jestingly not to regard herself as
dependent and harass you for every little thing.
She replied
saying that she was dependent and that you knew that it was
so. The language is mine, but this is the meaning of what she
said. This sort of dependence ought to be removed. If she
wants a servant, why should she ask you? She can ask Naran-
das to provide one and may even quarrel with him on that issue.
This is but a trivial example. She should, however, be free in
matters which concern herself. If you wish to enjoy immoral
1 Vide p. 178.
pleasure with another woman, you will not be afraid of Nimu.
That you may be held back by your love for Nimu is another
matter. Similarly, Nimu should be free to enjoy immoral pleasure
with another man without any fear. Mutual love may save a
couple from sin, but there should be no fear of each other. I
began to teach this [equality and freedom] only in the Ashram.
My behaviour towards Ba at Sabarmati progressively became in
line with this attitude, and the result was that she changed. Her
old fear of me has disappeared mostly, if not completely. Even
if I feel angry with her, I turn the anger on myself. The cause
of anger is my attachment to her. This is an important change
which has taken place in me and it has had beautiful results.
The results will be more beautiful only if my love becomes purer
still. Numberless women trust me spontaneously. I am sure that
the reason of that is my love and respect for them. Invisibly they
produce an effect all the time.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 355-
