56. LETTER TO K. KELAPPAN
November 23, 1932
MY DEAR KELAPPAN,
I have your letter. I wish you would write daily and give
me a full report of progress from day to day. Of course you will
cheerfully resume your fast if it becomes necessary. But we must
strain every nerve to prevent its resumption.
Do not for one moment imagine that I promised to fast with
you because of anything you had said in your telegrams. I know
that you would be better pleased if I did not join you. But
with me it was a point of honour that I should join you if the
fast which was suspended upon my advice had to be resumed.
After all you should have no difficulty in believing me when I
tell you that at least during the days of the fast all my acts were
prompted by the inner voice. All the movements of a life of
perfect surrender to God are so directed, and it is my perpetual
endeavour to make my life one of perfect surrender. Therefore
I would like you not to expend your energy in dissuading me from
the fast if it becomes necessary, but devote every ounce of your
energy to organizing public opinion so that the temple is opened
to the Harijans before the due date. I have read your letter to
the Zamorin. I think that it is quite all right. It would have
been better if you had omitted all reference to the Vaidiks and
Tantriks. Your position with regard to them was already known.
I had long conversations with Sadashiv Rao. He told me
all about you. I have given him my views fully but in order to
make assurance doubly sure I reduce them to writing.
Our claim is that the proposed fast can never savour of coercion
because it is based on the assumption that the vast majority of the
temple-going savarnas are in favour of temple-entry. If this cannot
be proved up to the hilt there is no case for fasting by us. Fasting with
the knowledge that savarnas are opposed to temple-entry by Harijans
would undoubtedly amount to coercion. If we make that painful
discovery, it would not mean that we cease to agitate for temple-
entry by avarnas, but the movement will then have to take a
different turn. I can even conceive the possibility of a fast in
such an event, but that could only be in an unmistakably different
setting. In order to demonstrate to all concerned the fact that we
have the majority of temple-goers on our side, there should be a
methodical taking of a referendum of temple-goers, say within a
ten-mile radius. And in order to have the thing absolutely above
the board, signatures should be taken at public meetings in the
presence of witnesses known to the signatories with their full
names, addresses and occupations, together with age and sex. It
is being suggested that whilst many people have been in favour
of Harijans entering temples, they may be afraid owing to pressure
from their landlords or otherwise to say so openly. I should
say that even in that case we must be declared to have lost. What-
ever the cause of abstention may be, if we do not get the majo-
rity of votes we must be declared to have lost the battle so far as
the proposed fast is concerned.
Needless to say that there should be no coercion of any kind
on our part during the taking of the referendum. On the con-
trary every endeavour should be made to carry on the referen-
dum with the co-operation and goodwill of the opponents. The
points of difference between the so-called orthodox party and the
reformers should be reduced to a minimum. The orthodox party
can have nothing to say against the reformers so long as they do
not resort to any coercion. If they are assured that there will be
no attempt whatsoever made either on the part of the reformers
or Harijans to force entry, there would be no opposition by the
orthodox, and even if there is, it is bound to fall flat. Real
non-violence can never beget violence. Too much emphasis
cannot be laid upon the point that the removal of untouchability,
apart from the political side of it, which is settled, is a wholly
religious matter.
Question was put to me whether sympathizers of temple-
entry may start fasting a few days before the second of January,
in order, I suppose, to force the issue. This must not be done on
any account whatsoever. Nor, if the fast begins, can anyone join
us in the fasting out of sympathy.
Fasting by you, if it comes, must not take place on the public
road. It must be in a house or a hut. There can be no public
exhibition of you, whilst you are under fast.
Urmila Devi, the widowed sister of the late Deshabandhu Das,
will be leaving here on the 27th by the Madras Express. She
will be accompanied by her son. She is being sent there in
response to Gopala Menon's suggestion that a sister from the
North may be sent. She has a weak heart, she must not there-
fore be rushed too much. She leads an austere life of a Hindu
widow. She is an accomplished English scholar and has been
doing public work for years in Bengal. I could not think of a
fitter woman for work to be sent from the North. Urmila Devi can
address men as well as women. She must be taken to the homes
of the orthodox and she must be taken to Harijan quarters. I
do not know where it is proposed to house [her]. [If] no other
arrangement has already been made, I suggest the Gujarati
house where I was taken during the last tour. She should be pro-
vided with a mosquito curtain if [there] are mosquitoes at all.
She should be provided with a commode wherever possible. She
is a pure vegetarian.
You must keep yourself in perfect order. There should be
no loss of confidence and no work under a nervous strain. We
can but work with zeal and honesty. The result lies in God's
hands. Purest instruments alone should lead the movement. Give
me a list of all the active workers. I suggest that Malaviyaji be
not worried to go to Kerala. He is too weak and he has his
hands otherwise absolutely full. You should even telegraph to
him saying that if he sends his blessings and messengers it would
be deeply appreciated, but Kerala would spare him the trouble
of undertaking the long journey whilst he is occupied in national
work of the highest importance.
From a microfilm : S.N. 20004
