27. LETTER TO SIR REGINALD MAXWELL
DETENTION CAMP,
May 21, 1943
DEAR SIR REGINALD MAXWELL,
It was only on the 10th instant that I read your speech
delivered in the Legislative Assembly on the 15th February last
on the adjournment motion about my fast.
I saw at once
that it demanded a reply. I wish I had read it earlier.
by yourself and the Congress Party during the present war has com-
pelled me, with almost all the friends of the Indian national movement in
this country, to take up an attitude of opposition, and how much I should
rejoice if the case should be altered."
I observe that you are angry, or at least were, at the
time you delivered your speech. I cannot in any other way
account for your palpable inaccuracies. This letter is an endea-
vour to show them. It is written to you, not as an official, but
as man to man. The first thought that came to me was that
your speech was a deliberate distortion of facts. But I quickly
revised it. So long as there was a favourable construction pos-
sible to put upon your language, the unfavourable had to be
rejected. I must assume, therefore, that what appeared to me to
be distortions were not deliberate.
You have said that "the correspondence that led to the
fast is there for anyone to interpret as he chooses," yet you
have straightway told your audience that "it can perhaps be
read in the light of the following facts." Did you leave them the
choice?
I now take your "facts" seriatim:
1. When the Congress Party passed their resolution of August 8,
a Japanese attack on this country was thought to be likely.
You seem to have conveyed the meaning that the thought
was that of the Congress and that it was gratuitous. The fact
is that the Government gave currency to the thought and em-
phasized it by action which even seemed ludicrous.
2. By demanding the withdrawal of British power from India
and by placing the Congress in open opposition to it, the Congress
Party might be thought to have hoped for some advantage to them-
selves if the Japanese attack succeeded.
Now this is not a fact, but your opinion wholly contrary to
facts. Congressmen never hoped for, nor desired any advan-
tage from Japanese success; on the contrary, they dreaded it
and that dread inspired the desire for the immediate end of the
British rule. All this is crystal clear from the resolution of the
All-India Congress Committee (8th August, 1942) and my writings.
3. Today, six months after, the Japanese danger has, at any
rate for the time being, receded and there is little immediate hope from
that quarter.
This again is your opinion; mine is that the Japanese dan-
ger has not receded. It still stares India in the face. Your fling
that "there is little immediate hope from that quarter" should
be withdrawn unless you think and prove that the resolution
and my writings adverted to in the previous paragraphs did not
mean what they said.
4. The movement initiated by the Congress has been decisively
defeated.
I must combat this statement. Satyagraha knows no de-
feat. It flourishes on blows the hardest imaginable. But I need
not go to that bower for comfort. I learnt in schools established
by the British Government in India that "freedom's battle once
begun" is "bequeathed from bleeding sire to son". It is of
little moment when the goal is reached so long as effort is
not relaxed. The dawn came with the establishment of the
Congress 60 years ago. Sixth of April 1919, on which All-
India satyagraha began, saw a spontaneous awakening from
one end of India to the other. You can certainly derive com-
fort, if you like, from the fact that the immediate objective of
the movement was not gained as some Congressmen had expect-
ed. But that is no criterion of "decisive" or any "defeat". It
ill becomes one belonging to a race which owns no defeat to
deduce defeat of a popular movement from the suppression of
popular exuberance-maybe not always wise-by a frightful ex-
hibition of power.
5. Now, therefore, it is the object of the Congress Party to rehabi-
litate themselves and regain, if they can, the credit they have lost.
Surely your own experience should correct this opinion.
You know, as well as I do, that every attempt at suppression of
the Congress has given it greater prestige and popularity. This
the latest attempt at suppression is not likely to lead to a con-
trary result. Hence the question of "lost credit" and "rehabili-
tation" simply does not arise.
6. Thus they are now concerned to disclaim responsibility for
the consequences that followed their decision. The point is taken up by
Mr. Gandhi in his correspondence with the Viceroy. The awkward facts
are now disowned as unproved.
"They," here can only mean me. For, throughout your
speech I was the target. "Now" means at the time of my fast;
I remind you that I disclaimed responsibility on 14th August
last when I wrote to His Excellency the Viceroy. In that same
letter I laid it on the Government who, by the wholesale
arrests of 9th August, provoked the people to the point of mad-
ness. "The awkward facts" are not awkward for me when the
responsibility rests on the Government and what you put for-
ward as "facts" are only one-sided allegations awaiting proof.
7. Mr. Gandhi takes up his stand: "Surely I can say with safety
that it is for the Government to justify their action by solid evidence."
To whom are they to justify themselves?
Was not Sardar Sant Singh's answer a proper answer? How
nice it would have been, if you had not put in the interjection.
For, have not the Government of India been obliged before now
to justify their acts by appointing inquiry committees as, for in-
stance, after the Jallianwala Bagh massacre? But you proceed:
8. Elsewhere in his letters Mr. Gandhi makes this clear. He says:
"Convince me that I was wrong and I will make ample amends." In
the alternative he asks: "If you want me to make any proposal on
behalf of the Congress, you should put me among the Working Com-
mittee members." So far as can be seen, these were the demands when
he conceived his fast. There is no other solid demand made.
Here there is a double wrong done to me. You have ig-
nored the fact that my letters were written to one whom I
considered to be a friend. You have further ignored the fact
that the Viceroy in his letter had asked me to make clear pro-
posals. If you had borne these two facts in mind, you would not
have wronged me as you have done. But let me come to the
ninth count of your indictment, and it will be clear to you
what I mean.
9. But now, fresh light emerges. Government without granting
any of his demands informed Mr. Gandhi that they would release him
for the purpose and for the duration of the fast in order to make it
clear that they disclaimed responsibility for the consequences. On that Mr.
Gandhi replied 4 that if he was released, he would at once abandon the
fast, and that he had conceived the fast only as a prisoner. Thus, if he
were released, the objects for which he declared his fast, although still
unfulfilled, would recede into the background. As a free man he would
neither demand these objects nor fast. Interpreted in this way, his fast
would seem to amount to little more than a demand for release.
Together with the letter containing the offer of release, a
copy of the draft communique that was to be issued by the
Government was delivered to me. It did not say that the offer
was made in order "to make it clear that the Government dis-
claimed responsibility for the consequences". If I had seen that
oft ending sentence, I would have sent a simple refusal. In my
innocence, I put a fair meaning on the offer and in my reply
I argued why I could not accept it. And, according to my wont,
in order that the Government may not be misled in any shape
or form, I told them how the fast was conceived and why it
could not be taken by me as a free man. I went out of my way
even to postpone for the convenience of the Government the com-
mencement of the fast by a day. Mr. Irwin who had brought
the offer and the draft communique appreciated the courtesy.
Why was this reply of mine withheld from the public at the
time the revised communique was issued, and why was an
unwarranted interpretation given instead? Was not my letter a
material document?
Now for the second wrong. You say that if I were released,
my objects for which I had declared the fast would recede
into the background, and even gratuitously suggest that as a
free man I would neither demand these objects nor fast. As a
free man I could and would have carried on an agitation for an
impartial public inquiry into the charges brought against Con-
gressmen and me. I would also have asked for permission to
see the imprisoned Congressmen. Assume that my agitation had
failed to make any impression on the Government, I might
then have fasted. All this, if you were not labouring under in-
tense irritation, you could have plainly seen from my letter,
supported as you would have been, by my past record. Instead
you have deduced a meaning which, according to the simple
rules of construction, you had no right to deduce. Again, as a
free man I would have had the opportunity of examining the
tales of destruction said to have been wrought by Congressmen
and even by non-Congressmen. And if I had found that they
had committed wanton acts of murder, then also I might have
fasted as I have done before now. You should thus see that
the demands made in my letter to His Excellency the Viceroy
would not have receded to the background, if I had been re-
leased, for they could have been pressed otherwise than by the
fast, and that the fast had not the remotest connection with any
desire for release. Moreover imprisonment is never irksome to a
satyagrahi. For him a prison is a gateway of liberty.
10. I could quote several resolutions of the Congress Working
Committee against him . . . Mr. Gandhi himself took up the subject
in Harijan dated 19th August, 1939. There he says: "Hunger-strike
has positively become a plague."
ll. On the ethics of hunger-striking, Mr. Gandhi had something
to say in the Harijan of 20th May, 1939, after his Rajkot fast: "I now
see that it was tainted with himsa." Further on he remarks: "This was
not the way of ahimsa or conversion."
My views quoted by you have not undergone the slightest
change. If you had read the quotations without passion, it would
have prevented you from putting upon my letter the construction
you have.
I am sorry to have to say that you have wholly misread my
article. Fortunately I happen to have Anand Hingorani's col-
lection of my writings, To the Princes and Their Peoples. I quote
from the Harijan article referred to by you:
At the end of my fast I had permitted myself to say that it had
succeeded as no previous fast had done. I now see that it was taint-
ed with himsa. In taking the fast I sought immediate intervention of
the Paramount Power so as to induce fulfilment of the promise made
by the Thakore Saheb. This was not the way of ahimsa or conver-
sion; it was the way of himsa or coercion. My fast to be pure should
have been addressed only to the Thakore Saheb, and I should have
been content to die, if I could not have melted his heart. . . .
I hope you realize that you misapplied the stray sentences
taken from their setting. I described my fast as "tainted" not
because it was bad ab initio but because I sought the interven-
tion of the Paramount Power. I have given you the credit
of being unaware of the article. I wish you could read it. In
any case, may I expect you to correct the error? For me the
Rajkot episode is one of the happiest chapters of my life, in
that God gave me the courage to own my mistake and purge
it by renouncing the fruits of the award. I became stronger
for the purging.
12. I must confess that speaking for myself it is certainly repug-
nant to Western ideas of decency to exploit against an opponent his
feelings of humanity, chivalry or mercy or to trifle with such a sacred
trust as one's own life in order to play on the feelings of the public
for the sake of some purely mundane object.
I must tread with extreme caution upon the ground with
which you are infinitely more familiar than I can be. Let me,
however, remind you of the historic fast of the late MacSwiney.
I know that the British Government let him die in imprison-
ment. But he has been acclaimed by the Irish people as a hero
and a martyr. Edward Thompson in his You Have Lived Through
All This says that the late Mr. Asquith called the British Govern-
ment's action a "political blunder of the first magnitude". The
author adds:
He was allowed to die by inches, while the world watched with a
passion of admiration and sympathy, and innumerable British men and
women begged their Government not to be such a damned fool.
And is it repugnant to Western ideas of decency to exploit
(if that expression must be retained) against the opponent his
feeling of humanity, chivalry or mercy? Which is better, to
take the opponent's life secretly or openly or to credit him with
finer feelings and evoke them by fasting and the like? Again,
which is better, to trifle with one's own life by fasting or some
other way of self-immolation, or to trifle with it by engaging
in an attempt to compass the destruction of the opponent and
his dependants?
13. What he says, in effect, is this: 'You say, Government is right
and the Congress is wrong. I say the Congress is right and the Gov-
ernment is wrong. I choose to put the burden of proof on you. I am
the only person to be convinced. You must either admit you are
wrong or submit your reason to me and make me the sole arbiter in
the matter. . . .' It seems to me that Mr. Gandhi's demand is rather
like asking the United Nations to appoint Hitler to adjudge the respon-
sibility for the present war. It is not usual in this country to put
the accused person on the bench to judge his own case.
This is an unbecoming caricature of my letters to the Vice-
roy. What I said, in effect, was this: 'You have allowed me to
consider myself as your friend. I do not want to stand on my
rights and demand a trial. You accuse me of being in the
wrong.
I contend that your Government is in the wrong.
Since you would not admit your Government's error, you owe
it to me to let me know wherein I have erred. For, I am in
the dark as to how I have erred. If you convince me of my
guilt, I will make ample amends.' My simple request you have
turned against me and compared me to an imaginary Hitler
appointed to adjudge his own case. If you do not accept my
interpretation of my own letters, can I not say, 'let an im-
partial judge examine the rival interpretations'? Will it be an
offensive comparison, if I recall the fable of the wolf who was
always in the right and the lamb who was always in the wrong?
14. Mr. Gandhi is the leader of an open rebellion. . . . He for-
feits that right (the right of being heard) so long as he remains an
open rebel. He cannot claim to function except through the success
of his own method. He cannot take part in public life under the protec-
tion of the law that he denies. He cannot be a citizen and yet not a
subject.
You are right in describing me as the leader of an open
rebellion except for a fundamental omission, namely, strictly
non-violent. This omission is on a par with the omission of
'not's from the Commandments and quoting them in support
of killing, stealing, etc. You may dismiss the phrase or explain
it away in any manner you like. But when you quote a per-
son you may not omit anything from his language, especially
an omission which changes the whole aspect of things. I have
declared myself an open rebel on many occasions, even during
my visit to London on the occasion of the Second Round
Table Conference. But the anathema that you have pronounced
against me has not been pronounced before. You will perhaps
recall the time when the late Lord Reading was willing to hold
a Round Table Conference in which I was to be present, although
I was leading a mass civil disobedience movement. It was not
called because I had insisted that the Ali Brothers who were then
in prison should be released. British history which I was taught
as a lad had it that Wat Tyler and John Hampden who had
rebelled were heroes. In very recent times the British Government
treated with Irish rebels whilst their hands were still red with
blood. Why should I become an outcaste although my rebellion
is innocent and I have had nothing to do with violence.
In spite of the validity of my claim that you have enunci-
ated a novel doctrine, I admit that you made a perfect state-
ment when you said, "He cannot claim to function except
through the success of his own method." My method, being
based on truth and non-violence, ever succeeds to the extent
it is applied. Therefore I function always and only through
the success of my method and to the extent that I correctly
represent, in my own person, its fundamentals.
The moment I became a satyagrahi, from that moment I
ceased to be a subject but never ceased to be a citizen. A
citizen obeys laws voluntarily and never under compulsion or
for fear of the punishment prescribed for their breach. He
breaks them when he considers it necessary and welcomes the
punishment. That robs it of its edge or of the disgrace which
it is supposed to imply.
15. In some of the published correspondence, Mr. Gandhi has
made much of his intention to seek an interview with the Viceroy.
But the Congress resolution still stood, together with Mr. Gandhi's
own words "do or die". The Government communique on the subject
of his fast has already reminded the public of Mr. Gandhi's statement
made on 14th July that there was no room left in the proposal for
withdrawal or negotiation. . . . I may again quote Mr. Gandhi's own
words: "Every one of you should, from this moment onwards, consider
yourself a free man or woman and act as if you are free and are no
longer under the heel of this imperialism." Now listen to this:
"You may take it from me that I am not going to strike a
bargain with the Viceroy for Ministries or the like. I am not going to
be satisfied with anything short of complete freedom. We shall do or
die. We shall either free India or die in the attempt. This is open
rebellion."
Let me first of all make a vital correction of the quotation
you have taken from my Press statement made on the 14th
July and reported in the Harijan of 19th July. You have
quoted me as saying that "there was no room left in the pro-
posal for withdrawal or negotiation." The real quotation is,
"there is no room left for negotiations in the proposal for with-
drawal." You will admit that the difference is material. The
faulty quotation apart, you have omitted from my statement,
which occupies nearly three columns of the Harijan, all the
things which amplify my meaning and show the caution with
which I was working. I take a few sentences from that state-
ment.
It is possible that the British may negotiate a withdrawal. If
they do, it will be a feather in their cap. Then it will cease to be a
case for withdrawal. If the British see, however late, the wisdom of re-
cognizing the freedom of India without reference to the various parties,
all things are possible but the point I want to stress is this.
Here follows the sentence misquoted by you. The paragraph
then proceeds:
Either they recognize independence or they don't. After recogni-
tion many things can follow; for, by that single act, the British re-
presentatives will have altered the face of the whole landscape and
revived the hope of the people which has been frustrated times without
number. Therefore whenever that great act is performed on behalf
of the British people, it will be a red-letter day in the history of
India and the world. And, as I have said, it can materially affect the
fortunes of the war.
From this fuller quotation, you will see how everything
that was being done was done in order to ensure victory and
ward off Japanese aggression. You may not appreciate my wis-
dom but you may not impugn my good faith.
Though I have no verbatim report of my speeches before
the All-India Congress Committee, I have fairly full notes. I
accept the correctness of your quotations. If you bear in mind
that all things were said with non-violence always as the back-
ground, the statements become free from any objection. "Do
or die" clearly means do your duty by carrying out instructions
and die in the attempt, if necessary.
As to my exhortation to the people to consider themselves
free, I take the following from my notes :
The actual struggle does not commence this very moment. You
have merely placed certain powers in my hands. My first act will be
to wait upon His Excellency the Viceroy and plead with him for the
acceptance of the Congress demand. This may take two or three
weeks. What are you to do in the mean while? I will tell you. There
is the spinning-wheel. I had to struggle with the Maulana Saheb before
it dawned upon him that in a non-violent struggle it had an abiding
place. The fourteenfold constructive programme is all there for you
to carry out. But there is something more you have to do and it will
give life to that programme. Every one of you should from this very
moment consider yourself a free man or woman and even act as if
you are free and no longer under the heel of this imperialism. This is
no make-believe. You have to cultivate the spirit of freedom before
it comes physically. The chains of a slave are broken the moment he
considers himself a free man. He will then tell his master: 'I have
been your slave all these days but I am no longer that now. You may
kill me, but if you do not and if you release me from the bondage,
I will ask for nothing more from you. For, henceforth instead of de-
pending upon you, I shall depend upon God for food and clothing.
God has given me the urge for freedom and therefore I deem myself
to be a free man.'
Apart from your resentment of the "Quit India" cry, ask your-
self whether the quotation as found in its own setting is in any
way offensive? Should not a man, longing to be free, first of all
cultivate the spirit of freedom and act accordingly irrespective of
consequences?
16. It is not the method of peaceful persuasion to go to the per-
son whom you wish to convince armed with a resolution declaring
mass rebellion. The essence of negotiation is that both parties should
be uncommitted and that neither should exert the pressure of force on
the other. That is true in any circumstances. But as between a sub-
ject and the State which rules him, the position is still more emphatic.
It is not for the subject to deal with the State on equal terms, still
less to approach it with an open threat.
At the outset let me make one correction. The resolution
did not "declare" mass rebellion. It merely sanctioned the
"starting of a mass struggle on non-violent lines on the widest
possible scale so that the country might utilize all the non-violent
strength it has gathered during the last twenty-two years of peace-
ful struggle". I was to "guide the nation in the steps to be
taken". The paragraph sanctioning the mass struggle also "appeals
to British and the United Nations in the interest of world freedom".
The essence of negotiation should undoubtedly be that the
parties are uncommitted and that neither "exerts the pressure of
force" on the other. In the case under consideration the actual
position is that one party has overwhelming force at its disposal
and the other has none. About non-committal too the Congress
has no commitments except the immediate attainment of freedom.
Subject to that there is the widest latitude for negotiation.
Your proposition about the subject and the State is I know
a reply to the cry of "Quit India". Only the cry is intrinsically
just and the subject-and-the-State formula is too antediluvian to
have any real meaning. It is because the Congress has felt the
subjection of India as an insufferable reproach, that it has been
against it. A well-ordered State is subject to the people. It does
not descend upon the people from above but the people make
and unmake it.
The resolution of 8th August did not contain any threat
open or veiled. It prescribed the limitations under which the
negotiations could be carried on and its sanction was free of
all "force", i.e., violence. It consisted of self-suffering. Instead
of appreciating the fact that the Congress laid all its cards on
the table, you have given a sinister meaning to the whole movement
by drawing unwarranted inferences. In so far as there was any
violence after the 8th of August last on the part of any Con-
gressman, it was wholly unauthorized as is quite clear from the
resolution itself. The Government in their wisdom left me no
time whatsoever for issuing instructions. The All-India Congress
Committee finished after midnight on the 8th August. Well
before sunrise on the 9th, I was carried away by the Police Com-
missioner without being told what crime I had committed. And
so were the members of the Working Committee and the principal
Congressmen who happened to be in Bombay. Is it too much
when I say that the Government invited violence and did not
want the movement to proceed on peaceful lines?
Now let me remind you of an occasion of an open rebellion
when you played an important part. I refer to the famous
Bardoli satyagraha under Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. He was con-
ducting a campaign of civil disobedience. It had evidently reached
a stage when the then Governor of Bombay felt that there should
be a peaceful end to the struggle. You will remember that the
result of an interview between His Excellency the then Governor
and the Sardar was the appointment of a committee of which
you were a distinguished member. And the committee's findings
were for the most part in favour of the civil resisters. Of course,
you may say, if you wish, that the Governor made a mistake in
negotiating with a rebel, and so did you in accepting the appoint-
ment. Consider the reverse position, what would have happened
if, instead of appointing a committee, the Governor had attempted
heavy repression. Would not the Government have been held
responsible for any outbreak of violence, if the people had lost
self-control?
17. Government does hold Mr. Gandhi responsible for the recent
happenings that have so disturbed the peace of India, caused so
much loss of life and property of innocent persons and brought the
country to the brink of a terrible danger. I do not say, he had any
personal complicity in acts of violence . . . but it was he that put
the match to the train carefully laid beforehand by himself and his
colleagues. That he was forced to do so prematurely was not his
fault but our fortune. This was the method by which they hoped to
gain their ends. They may seek to repudiate it, now that it has proved
unsuccessful, but the responsibility is theirs none the less. . . . If Mr.
Gandhi wished to dissociate himself from them, he could have spoken
for himself without consulting the members of the Working Com-
mittee. Can he then, without cancelling the Congress rebellion, with-
out reparation, without even assurances for the future, claim at any
moment to step back as though nothing had happened into the
public life of the country and be received by Government and society
as a good citizen?
I can accept no responsibility for the unfortunate happen-
ings described by you. I have no doubt whatsoever that history
will record that the responsibility for the happenings was wholly
that of the Government. In the nature of things I could not
put a match to a train which for one thing was never laid.
And if the train was never laid, the question of prematureness
does not arise. The deprivation of the people of their leaders
you may consider "our fortune". I consider it a misfortune of
the first magnitude for all concerned. I wish to repudiate no-
thing of what I have done or intended. I have no sense of
repentance for I have no sense of having done any wrong to
any person. I have stated times without number that I detest
violence in any shape or form. But I can give no opinion
about things of which I have no first-hand knowledge. I never
asked for permission to consult the Congress Working Commit-
tee to enable me to dissociate myself from violence. I asked
for permission to see them, if I was expected to make any pro-
posals on behalf of the Committee. I cannot cancel the Con-
gress rebellion which is of a purely non-violent character. I
am proud of it. I have no reparation to make, for I have no
consciousness of guilt. And there can be no question of assur-
ances for the future when I hold myself guiltless. The question of
re-entering the public life of the country or being received by
Government and society as a good citizen does not arise. I
am quite content to remain a prisoner. I have never thrust
myself on the public life of the country or on the Government.
I am but a humble servant of India. The only certificate I need is
a certificate from the inner voice. I hope you realize that you
gave your audience not facts but your opinions framed in anger.
77-
To conclude, why have I written this letter?
Not to
answer your anger with anger. I have written it in the hope
that you may read the sincerity behind my own words. I
never despair of converting any person even an official of the
hardest type. Gen. Smuts was converted, or say reconciled, as
he declared in his speech introducing the Bill giving relief in the
terms of the settlement arrived at between him and me in 1914.
That he has not fulfilled my hope or that of the Indian settlers
which the settlement had inspired is a sad story, but it is
irrelevant to the present purpose. I can multiply such recollections.
I claim no credit for these conversions or reconciliations. They
were wholly due to the working of truth and non-violence
expressing themselves through me. I subscribe to the belief or
the philosophy that all life in its essence is one, and that the
humans are working consciously or unconsciously towards the
realization of that identity. This belief requires a living faith in
a living God who is the ultimate arbiter of our fate. Without
Him not a blade of grass moves. My belief requires me not to
despair even of converting you, though your speech warrants no
such hope.
If God has willed it, He may put power in some
word of mine which will touch your heart. Mine is but to make
the effort. The result is in God's hands.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
THE HON'BLE SIR REGINALD MAXWELL
HOME MEMBER
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 58-70; also Correspondence
with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 17-24
