180. LETTER TO KANTI PAREKH AND JAYANTI PAREKH
October 29, 1933
CHI. KANTI, JAYANTI,
I got your postcard.
I think both of you have acquired use-
ful capital. Take care of your health. Maintain the utmost
purity of character. Write to me whenever you can. Kakasaheb
is here. Today is the fourth day of his fast. He has taken a
vow for a fast of seven days. He will break the fast at 1.15 on
Thursday. His health is good. The fast is for atonement of sin.
Surendraji and Durbari look after him. Prabhudas takes down
what he dictates. He is extremely cheerful. He can drink suffi-
cient quantity of water and so there is no trouble. Kishorelal and
Gomatibehn are at Akola. They will go to Bombay at the end
of this month.
The condition of Ramabehn Joshi's arm can be described as
fairly satisfactory now.
She will come here tomorrow and then
stay here. More and more girls are joining the Ashram here.
The daily programme for them is craft for four hours and study
for four hours. Marathi is a compulsory subject of study.
Balkrishna is experimenting with milk diet for building up
good health. He fasted for four days and lived for another
four days only on fruit. Now he only drinks milk, not even
water. Today is the third day since he started drinking milk.
He increases the quantity daily by half a pound. Today he will
drink three pounds. We may not predict the result just now.
Swami Anand is here. All of them will be here only for
a few days now. Kumarappa came and went back.
Vinoba has composed the following verse enumerating the
eleven vows. It is sung daily once or twice.
Ahimsa, truth, non-stealing, brahmacharya, non-possession;
Body labour, control of the palate and complete freedom from fear:
Equal regard for all religions, swadeshi and looking upon all human
beings as touchables:
These eleven vows one should observe, with humility and resolve.
Mani and Bablo left with Anandi. Vanamala and Mohan
must have joined them from Kathlal.
Totaramji and Hariprasad are here. They will be sent to
Sabarmati for Harijan work.
Vithalbhai's body will reach Bombay on the 9th. It will
be carried to the cremation ground with due honours and Dahya-
bhai will light the funeral pyre. Manibehn and Mridulabehn
were here and stayed for three days.
If in giving all this news I have repeated any details, I hope
you will remember that I have grown old and forgive me. If
I remembered all the letters which I write, I would be crushed
by the weight of that memory itself. Just as the power of
memory is worth preserving, so also the ability to forget is worth
cultivating. If we don't have it, we would always be either laugh-
ing or crying. However, this was a little sermon by the way.
Instead of omitting any news, would it not be better to take the
risk of repeating some details?
And now replies to your questions. What you say is per-
fectly true. "What can physical control avail?" Can we force
anyone to remain unmarried? Devdas and Prabhudas remained
so till the age of 32, and married only when they found that they
could no longer control themselves. Is it not better that one
should humbly admit one's weakness rather than let the mind run
after lustful thoughts?
I can testify that both of them tried hard
to remain unmarried.
He who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to dwell
on the sense-objects-such a one, wholly deluded, is called a hypocrite.
If, then, both of them humbly express their desire to marry, it
would be violence on my part to refuse them my blessings. They
will continue to cherish the ideal of brahmacharya. One should
strive hard to live up to an ideal, but if, despite one's best efforts,
one cannot control one's mind, it would be better to be content with
what one can do rather than live as a hypocrite. Anybody who
acts in this manner deserves the blessings of his elders. One
should stretch one's limbs, as the saying is, according to the length
of the covering. In short, he who does not deceive himself or
the world goes forward in the end.
If I have not succeeded in
explaining this idea, you may put me your questions when you
get an opportunity.
I have had no letter from Indu recently, but Keshu had one.
He is quite happy.
Balbhadra and Dhiru also are with him.
Manibhai Kothari is in Wadhwan. He is doing Harijan and
khadi work there. My tour will commence on the 8th. I have
already given you the names of the persons who will accompany
me. The name of Ramnath 'Suman' should be added to the list.
He is a lover of Hindi literature, and a good writer. He wishes
to join the Ashram, ultimately.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6275
