164. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
March 15 [1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Yes, you may expend the amounts you suggest on the stones. The
inscription on both should be the same, only the names and the dates
will vary.
I know that I have your sympathy and more in the affliction that
has befallen me. But I must not say thanks to you. We are so indivisible
— one soul in two bodies.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
Bananas are and should be unripe. Remove the outer skin, cut them
into thin discs and dry in the sun 3 days. They are ready to be stored
1 From the contents
away when they are quite dry and brittle. They can be ground to any
fineness or thickness and can be cooked as they are. With nuts and
oil and tomatoes they make a perfect meal. But, of course, this is not
ideal. The ideal is the uncooked meal. It is however the nearest approach
and the least expensive. For travelling where you may not get fresh
fruit it is perfect in the form of biscuits. These with dried unripe mangoes
could be carried for an army. And they would form a most nourishing
diet not at all sweet. Mrs. Gandhi is better but not satisfactory. I fear
that she has a fatal trouble in her stomach. The only cure for her
so far as I can see is a prolonged fast with the neem leaves water.
She may have cancer of the stomach. This never yields to medical
treatment but it must yield to fasting treatment if the patient has stamina.
Mrs. Gandhi has that yet, I think. This information is however only
for you. This is alarming and I am only conjecturing. I have informed
Chhaganlal. She moves about but in the heart of her hearts she herself
is not satisfied. The swelling recurs most obstinately. I am slowly
preparing her for the worst again. But the agony may be prolonged.
What a cruel man I must be or can be to thus contemplate the death
of others. However, such is my state just now. Nothing moves me
permanently. If Eric has not the cheque he may have it without
questioning. I think you should discuss these things with Polak. The
latter may not with the family so long as he is not persona grata.
The report will be out on Wednesday I think. This is still supposed
to be private. We may then expect the Bill early.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 The Solomon Commission Report was presented to Parliament on March 17,
Tuesday.
2 The Indians' Relief Bill which was published on May 28, vide Vol. XII, pp.
421- and Appendix XXV.
