311. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Kartak Shud 9 [November 11, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Today I saw the letter you mentioned.
When Narandas wrote to me to send my letters to him through
you, I did not find fault with his action as a piece of cowardice. I had
no such idea in my mind at all. In reply to his question as to what he
should do, I wrote to him saying that first he should attain fearless-
ness as described in a{'wi ~c(l3~f~: (fearlessness, purity of heart,) etc.
And I wrote it with the idea that he should first acquire that virtue if
he wanted to engage himself in any public activity. True public service
can be rendered only if fearlessness can be achieved as regards [the
loss of] prestige, money, caste, wife, family and even life. Then only
will moksha (liberation), the ultimate end of life, be attained.
1 This telegram, sent by the British Indian Association, was presumably drafted
by Gandhiji; vide "Letter to the Press", p. 352.
2 Vide "Telegram to Minister of Interior", p. 349.
3 The Minister in his telegram of November 12 replied: "Reference your telegram
10th, Immigration Officer at Volksrust was instructed to give Mrs. Sodha option of
returning to Natal instead of having steps taken against her under Immigration Act.
Minister regrets he cannot sanction temporary permit."
4 This letter appears to have been written subsequent to "Letter to Narandas
Gandhi", pp. 198-9, in which Gandhiji dealt with the subject of abhaya (fearlessness),
discussed here; in 1910, Kartak Shud 9 corresponded to November 11.
5 Vide "Letter to Narandas Gandhi", pp. 198-.
6 In the Bhagavad Gita, XVI, 1, abhaya is mentioned as the first among the divine
attributes.
I have no time to write a separate letter to Narandas. Please
therefore send this on to him. I shall write about the press when I
find time.
Please let me know how Manilal is getting on.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4941
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
