348. LETTER TO REHANA TYABJI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 21, 1926
DEAR SISTER²,
It was a delight to receive your letter, it would seem, after
ages. Do you want me to write to Sir Henry Lawrence directly
or to prepare a note for you which you can send? Whilst your
answer is quite good, he must have all the satisfaction that one
can give him in the way of statistics. After all the trouble one
may take, it is just possible what may appear to us to be solid
and tangible may not appear so to him. But that does not matter
as the inspirer of The Song Celestial would say. We must act with
detachment and leave the results to God.
I observe that, as behoves a good girl, your postscript is as
long as your letter and, perhaps, more important. Please tell the
sceptical sister that the revival of the spinning-wheel has actually
rescued from destruction many arts and crafts. Does she think
that there was no art in India before we received silk thread from
China and Paris which we began doing only a hundred years ago
or less? When spinning and weaving were at their height, we
were in possession of the highest art and all the art on fabric one
sees now is a copy of the Indian original. Personally, I do not
mind the use of Chinese silk for embroidery. But those who are
afraid of art destruction may use as much as they like of Chinese
thread so long as the background is hand-spun khaddar. No
amount of travelling and appeals to newspapers, etc., can possibly
rescue Indian art from destruction if we cannot rescue ourselves
as a nation from destruction. Revival of Indian art will only
come when we develop love enough for our country to enable us
to cling to one another and sink our differences and to sacrifice
our all for the sake of the country. The best way, therefore, to
preserve and revive the Indian art is for us to become sufficiently
Indian ourselves. But all this I don't need to say to you. You
are saturated with the national spirit. May God give you long
life and health for exhibiting that spirit as occasion demands.
Those who love to do certain things end by doing those things,
and if you are longing to meet Miss Slade whom we call Mirabai
and still more to sing to me some of your new bhajans then you
will end by coming here at the earliest opportunity.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BAPU
MISS REHANA TYABJI
CAMP, BARODA
From a photostat: S.N. 9600
XXXI-21
