5. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
BETTIAH,
January 24, 1927
CHI. MIRA1,
I have your interesting booklet from Kangri. I read it
through in a motor[-car] in full motion. There is no rest. But as
you have rightly judged, the whole tour is inspiring. Champaran
has sacred memories for me. Champaran really introduced me to
India. It is a perfect delight to see these tens of thousands of
childlike faces all shining with an indefinable hope. They readily
part with their coppers and rupees. Idleness which has now become
second nature they will not part with easily. But one feels that
even that is going.
Tulsi Maher is with me. We are very near Nepal as you must
know. You must locate the places I pass through in your map.
T.M. is eager to meet you before he ascends to the hills. But he
thinks you are too far away.
It was quite like you to have gone in an ekka to the Govern-
ment House. You have done your duty by the friends .
You will walk out in the jungles about you with the young
men there. They must have told you that the choice of the spot
was Shraddhanandji's. The whole of the Gurukul conception was
his.
Today we are in Bettiah-the place where I was longest when
I was working for the people.
You should perhaps know that I send most of your letters to
the Ashram for being read to the members. They are so beauti-
ful. Those that contained your criticism of the attitude of the
Kanya Gurukul I did not send. I destroyed them. Your final
and considered judgment on the working of the Gurukul I have
sent there. I mean the letter from which I have sent the extract
to Ramdevji. If henceforth you want me to do otherwise, you will
please tell me. I do not want you to restrain yourself because other
eyes may see your letter. Our attitude should be this: We can
pour out our hearts only where we can, but the waters may flow
where they will. But all may not easily be able to assimilate or
even appreciate that attitude. You will tell me how you feel.
Are you getting stronger?
In order that you may not be anxious, know that I shall
be writing to you every Monday at least. When the post will
reach you depends upon where I am.
Calcutta is the quickest
route for reaching Khandesh. I am therefore on the 1st at
Calcutta, Khadi Pratishthan, 170, Bowbazar Street. We reach
Gondia, B. N. Rly., on the 2nd. Then I do not know. But you
will be safe enough to locate me at Nagpur and Wardha on 3rd
and then continue to send letters to Wardha till you have definite
dates from me.
You are making your corrections in the autobiographical
chapters as they come to you. It will be interesting to see your
corrections when the tour is finished.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5200. Courtesy: Mirabehn
