40. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
June 15, 1932
CHI. BHAU,
I could not reply to your letter of the 6th last week. Mean-
while, I got another letter from you this week. I understand
your reason for discontinuing to send Vinoba's discourses. His
prohibition is right.
Yes, there was some misunderstanding on my part regard-
ing the paintings of scenes from the Ramayana. I do not see
anything objectionable in meditating over a figure drawn as
purely imaginary. If, however, meditating on the Gita can
satisfy you, where is the need for any other object of medita-
tion? There are two ways of meditating on the Gita. Since we
look upon the Gita as Mother, you may meditate on a painting
or photograph of your mother, if you require one (and if your
mother is dead), thinking of her as the kamadhenu in the form
of the Gita. Alternatively, you may have an imaginary picture
of the Gita in your mind. You may even think of her as Mother
Cow. I think it would be better if you could follow the second
way. You may, at that time, meditate on any verse or phrase from
the chapter of the Gita which you may have recited on that day
or from any other chapter. All the words in the Gita are so many
ornaments on the body of Mother Gita and, therefore, meditat-
ing on anyone of them amounts to meditating on the Gita her-
self, just as meditating on an ornament worn by the woman whom
one loves amounts to meditating on herself. But one may also
meditate on the Gita in any other way that one can think of.
There are as many ways as there are brains. No two persons
meditate in the same way even on one and the same object.
There will always be some difference between the exact pic-
tures of the object imagined by them and their descriptions of it.
According to Chapter VI, even the least sadhana is not
wasted, and we resume our sadhana in our next life from the point
where we had stopped. Similarly, a person who desires to turn
towards spiritual living but lacks the necessary strength for the
purpose will have greater strength of mind in his next life. I have
no doubt about this at all in my mind, but it does not mean that
we can relax our effort in this life. If we think in that manner,
our desire for a spiritual living is not sincere. Or, it is a desire
of the intellect and not of the heart, and a desire of the intellect
has no value at all. It will not survive one's death. On the other
hand, a desire which has been accepted by the heart cannot but
inspire sincere effort to fulfil it, though it is quite possible that
owing to various circumstances or weakness of the body our
desire may not be fulfilled during this life. We have experience
of this every day. But the desire will cling to the soul when it
leaves the body, and in the next life the difficulties which stood
in the way of its fulfilment during this life will diminish and the
desire will be fulfilled or will at least become stronger. Thus a per-
son who aspires after spiritual life is ever advancing.
It may be that Jnaneshwar Maharaj meditated on Nivritti-
[PS.]
Write to me about your constipation.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6731. Also C.W. 4474. Courtesy:
Bhau Panse
