486. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
May 3, 1932
DEAR SISTERS,
I had intended to send this letter along with the post dis-
patched today, but forgot to do so as I was in some hurry and
hard pressed for time. After the packet of letters was handed
over for posting, I remembered, and could still have written to
you and sent the letter, but decided to put off. I hope all of
you help in nursing Gangadevi. At the Ashram, it is our aim
to create such an atmosphere that no one, including children
and the old persons there, should feel the absence of relations.
Anybody who regulates his or her life by the principles of dharma
should first look after those whom he or she does not regard as
relations. For, one's relations are not likely to remain uncared
for, and if one makes it a point always to pay attention first to
persons who are not one's relations, by and by one would learn
to pay equal attention to relations and others. It is a matter
of congratulation that the children of Rabaris are attending Mani-
behn's classes. I was glad to read what you wrote about the
girls. You will have taken a great step forward if you are able
to act towards them exactly as you have indicated in your letter.
Two girls have put me this question in their letter: 'May girls
use bob-pins or hair-pins? Should they bind the hair with rib-
bons?' I have replied to them as I thought fit, but I put the
matter before you also. I think that neither of the two things
is necessary. At least they were not in the past. In the West
the women do their hair in different styles so that every woman
needs a great number of hair-pins and ribbons without number.
But we do not care for outward adornment and it does not befit
us. It is our duty to save every pie that we can, like misers;
for the money which is given to us is not our property, we are
only its trustees and, therefore, we are entitled to use out of it
only just enough to feed and clothe the body. I, therefore, believe
that hair-pins, etc., have no place in our life. We should seek
our happiness and that of our children only in such manner as
befits us.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9091. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
