284. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 10, 1927
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I have your bomb-shell. I had as long chats with Panditji
over it as it was possible for us both to have. Your draft state-
ment does not shock me. The atmosphere about us is so debili-
tating and irresponsive that the tallest of us becomes dazed for the
moment. The suffocation has clearly overtaken you. It is no
fault of yours. And as I could say to Khwaja in spite of his
going back upon his brilliant professions that I could love him,
so I can literally say of you in spite of what is admittedly a lapse.
I say "admittedly" because you still believe in Non-co-operation,
but the situation demands, in your opinion, a different conduct
and you deceive yourself into the belief that the different conduct
would hasten Non-co-operation. I don't believe it. But I can't
impart my belief or unbelief to you. You must act up to what-
ever is natural for you.
But I have this suggestion. Keep those views to yourself.
You are in no way called upon to publish them. For, if I am
no politician, you are still less. When swaraj is established, you
won't want to belong to the diplomatic service, nor to the mili-
tary. You would fight shy of the law department. You would be
content, if you are placed in charge of the medical service and
given a free purse for all your researches, intelligent or otherwise,
even as I would aspire after nothing more serious or important
than the spinning department, if hand-spinning has not become
universal by that time. The law, diplomacy, military and the
rest, we shall leave to Motilalji and company; and if Panditji thinks
that Shaukat Ali would be good company, he may throw at him
the military departments.
If my reading is correct, you and I, but you more than I,
will not be expected to contribute to the discussion over Assembly
and Councils programme, constitution making and what not or
better still, what rot. I, therefore, think that you will commit
no crime against God or Indian humanity, if you announce to
the world that you have no opinion on these matters which must
be left to specialists and politicians. I am sure you have not made
the mistake of supposing that I have sponsored your election be-
cause I considered you to be a brilliant political thinker or any-
thing near that state. The country has acclaimed your election
with one voice because you are a true and good Mussalman,
you are a lover of your country, there is no camouflage in you,
you know your limitations, you keep your head about you, but
because above all, Hindu-Muslim unity is a passion with you, and
you entertain ideas about it which you would gladly share with
your country and which you are impatient to share with it, and
enforce them even if it be at the point of the bayonet. Your
election is a demonstration, in spite of the madness raging round
us, that the country is thirsting for domestic peace, and that it is
sick over dishonesty, fraud, immorality and violence committed in
the sacred name of religion. I therefore ask you to tear your state-
ment to pieces. Keep that opinion to yourself, accept the elec-
tion with grace, dignity and thankfulness, and announce that you
have no political policy of your own to place before the country,
that so far as that is concerned, you will take up a strictly judicial
and impartial attitude and act merely as a chairman of meetings
guiding deliberations, keeping order and enforcing decisions of
majorities, that you have accepted the election with the sole in-
tention of guiding the country during your year of office, by all
the power at your command, to domestic peace. For, you owe
it to the country as a Mussalman and a staunch nationalist to vin-
dicate the religion of the Prophet and the honour of the country
by giving all the talents you have for securing a domestic peace
honourable to all parties. Nobody expects more of you. And,
if you meddle in anything else, you will be travelling outside your
province.
I have not telegraphed to you; for, I thought I would save
a few rupees of the poor spinners. That I have left to Panditji
who is better able to patronize the telegraph department. You
made him your carrier, and I give myself the same honour by
letting him carry my reply. And in the face of this reply, you
dare not refuse the crown of thorns that is offered to you by a
grateful country, and you dare not publish your statement, however
precious your views are. If you wish to place them before a few
friends gathered together in a drawing-room enjoying hookah,
you may certainly enliven the company with your views. But
beyond the four walls of such a drawing-room, your views may
not travel.
This letter gives you sufficient indication of my health and ill-
health. Health you may gather from the length of the letter and
the views expressed therein. Ill-health you are entirely to infer
from the fact that much against my will I have been obliged to
dictate what is purely a personal and affectionate letter of an old
friend.
You need not apologize for not coming. If I find myself on
the brink of the precipice, I shall not hesitate to telegraph for you,
nor, if I undertake a fast more prolonged than 21 days. And I
know that whatever your engagement may be, you will leave
them to see a friend patient if only to say good-bye to him or to
wean him from his mad fasting career. Meanwhile by all means
continue to make your thousand per day on condition that a
certain respectable percentage of your ill-gotten gains is reserved for
the poor spinners, if only by way of penance.
May I expect a reassuring telegram from you?
When you meet Hakimji, please warn him against forgetting
me altogether.
Yours sincerely,
DR. M. A. ANSARI
No. 1, DARYAGANJ
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12870
