405. LETTER TO R. P. PARANJAPYE
[BOMBAY,
July 14, 1919]
DEAR PROF. PARANJAPYE,
It was good of you to have permitted me in spite of differences
of ideals between us to address your pupils. I was therefore deeply
pained to see them hiss [at] your criticism. Having permitted me
to speak to the students, you could have done nothing less than
you did and I wish you could let the students know my own feel-
ings in the matter. I do think that it is no part of their training
either to applaud or to hiss. The period of study requires a calm-
ness of mind that shall not be swayed or dismayed by argument
addressed to sentiment or passion. Their duty is prayerfully to
weigh, consider and weave into their lives what appeals to cold
reason.
And now a word in reply to your criticism. As you addressed
yourself to what you thought I must have said, knowing, as you do,
my views on machinery, not to what I actually did say. I am
keeping swadeshi propaganda free of the application of my special
views on machinery, as will appear from the various pledges
drawn up by me. The carters' or the copyists' fate has therefore no
bearing on the movement. Both these classes have found other
employment. My point about swadeshi is that our farmers, whose
wives formerly spun yarn and who themselves wove it, have ceased
to do so without finding any other employment. I propose to utilize
this spare time of the nation even as a hydraulic engineer utilizes
enormous waterfalls. Surely you will not have our women to cease to
make pastry, even though you may get better and cheaper machine-
made pastry, unless you can utilize the labour thus set free for a
higher end. The problem before you and me is how to use the six
months of the 24 crores of the peasants of Hindustan, the months
during which they at the present moment do practically nothing.
It is this enforced idleness which is in my opinion responsible for the
growing poverty of the masses if not chiefly at least equally with the
heavy assessments. Your argument that if the votaries used up our
mill-made cloth, the poor would suffer is, I think, sufficiently ans-
wered in the plan suggested by me. Under it, the mill-made cloth
will be used by the 20 p.c. of the population which may not be
satisfied with the coarser though more artistic cloth woven from
hand-spun yarn.
If I have not made my position clear, I would like you to
spare a few moments and put down your counter argument. You
know I value your criticism. I shall learn much from friendly and
informed criticism like yours. And I need hardly assure you that
I shall not be slow to own and correct any proved errors.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6747
