427. LETTER TO SUSHILABEHN GANDHI
August 22, 1932
CHI. SUSHILA,
Though your letter of two pages seemed long to you, a lazy
woman, I found it much too short. Do you know that, whenever
I wrote to my brother from England, I used to fill 20 to 25 pages
and still I thought the letter was too short? I did not feel, either,
that Brother would find it too long and that it would be a bother
to him to read it. I was sure that he would like a long letter. I
would write about everything I might have done during the week,
everyone I might have met and everything I might have read
and every foolishness I might have committed. No wonder the
letter would be so many pages long. Moreover, I used to write
only to my brother, and so I would unburden myself completely
in the letter.
But you are a princess who would, if she could, write only one
line but writes 50 lines with the words written wide apart from one
another, and thinks that she has written quite a long letter. All
right. Please yourself and rule Manilal. You were married to him
because he is a rather simple man and you are deep. I always
believe that your judgement about people would be correct.
Exercise a little more control over him. Don't think that, because
he is your husband, you have done your duty when you have
advised or warned him. A good wife should hold the husband
back by the ear and save him from falling into a pit. I believe
that you have that strength. There is an agreement between
Manilal and me that he should not look upon you as his servant
but should regard you as his life-companion, his partner in the
duties of life and his better-half. You two, therefore, have equal
rights over each other. Since you are gifted with greater intuition,
you have, to that extent, greater authority over him than he over
you in matters which require it. He knows more about the press
and, therefore, he has greater authority in that field. Similarly,
he knows more about water-treatment, and so he may have great-
er authority in that field too. When you read my letter to Mani-
lal, you will understand what all this means. How is your ear?
Does Tara write to you?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4792
