509. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
September 11, 1941
BHAI MUNSHI,
I have read your long letter. I can understand your agony.
But it will take you forward. If at first you had my support, you
are not without it now. Is this not what many people believe?
I want to drive out from your mind the idea that we abso-
lutely cannot do without foreign help. The examples of China,
Russia and England cannot apply to us. China, after attaining
freedom, seeks outside help in order to fight Japan. Russia and
England are already free. We may also seek help from a thou-
sand quarters after we have become free, but only if we have
gained our freedom with force of arms. Freedom won through
non-violent means will need no help, or it will need the entire
world's. All this is so clear that you should have no difficulty
in understanding it. But if you do have any, please find some
time to come over here at least to get your doubt resolved.
This is a very important issue. In the context in which you
made your statement1, it does not at all seem proper. The fight
about Pakistan is a fight between two brothers. One can get
reconciled to one brother being defeated at the hands of the
other; but the one who wins with the help of a third party will
himself become a slave and also make the other a slave. Whom
are the British helping today? Where does Pakistan exist in the
present situation? Akhanda Hindustan on the other hand, does
exist as a dream at any rate. He who seeks to realize that dream
may be no more than a dust particle floating in the sky but
after all it is floating. Its dream lifts it above; it does not cast it
down. Its exercise of individual freedom makes it shine brightly
in the sky. Whose help can it require? And if all the particles
get together, that is, recognize their individuality, then they them-
selves will be the sky. Can you conceive a sky without particles?
You, therefore, who are out to fight for an Akhanda Hindu-
stan can never entertain the idea of seeking external help. It
does you no credit. It ill becomes the maturity of your think-
ing. If I go on further I would be only wasting time. But
what need to argue at length with the wise?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Chi. Sarala is upset because she has not received any reply
from her partners. Are you speaking on their behalf or on behalf
of you two? If you were not speaking on behalf of the partners,
please consult them if possible and convey their consent. If they
are hard-pressed and cannot give it, Sarala will immediately return.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7668. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
