251. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
CHANDA,
November 15, 1933
I should advise you not to put too much strain on your
body. It was not at all necessary for you to have run after the
bier all the way. It is not an absolute moral duty to do so. I
knew that my absence would be misunderstood, but why should
I forsake my dharma for fear that others might not understand
it? If I can live mentally outside jail, it can be only for Harijan
work. That being so, I can do nothing unconnected with such
work. Unable to offer civil disobedience, I am like a bird who
has lost its wings. I would not have been able to endure some
of the things which happened there. Looking at the matter even
from that point of view, therefore, I couldn't have come. More-
over, the date for the commencement of the Harijan tour had
already been fixed. I didn't go to see Motilalji's widow. I
haven't gone to see Rami's daughter, who is on her death-bed.
Similarly, I am not going to visit Brijkishan, who is as dear
to me as a son and who too is on his death-bed. . . .2 You should
write to him. Perhaps a wire may be necessary. . . .3 I did not
go to see Rasik when he was on his death-bed. I didn't go even
after he died. But I needn't tell you all this. I have given a few
instances thinking that perhaps you do not know about this
aspect of my life. In fact, even you need not reply to such
charges against me.
Those who have failed to understand me
till now will not be convinced by arguments. We must trust to
the effect which my life as a whole may produce. Our deeds will
have their effect sooner or later. No arguments can prevent them.
Your not coming did not please me. I had thought that you
would suddenly turn up on Sunday without previous intimation.
It seems that there will be no meeting . If it is held, it will be
in Delhi on December 14. Ansari wants it to be on that day.
If so, you should attend. . . .5
1 The addressee had attended Vithalbhai Pater's funeral.
2 & 3 Omissions as in the source
4 Of the A.I.C.C.
5 Omission as in the source
229
Do your best regarding Utkal. The article in Harijan seems to
have brought some money. You need not worry about this
problem. There is no necessity at all for you to strain your
health. As one should avoid indolence, so also should one avoid
excessive work. The verse l3l'fici ql11 '3'i5qij, etc., is ever fresh in my
mind. The Gita is like a living mother to me, like the Kamadhenu .
There is no exaggeration at all in this statement.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp.139-40
