295. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
October 6, 1909
MY LORD,
I enclose herewith the draft letter to Sir Francis Hopwood. As
nothing can be lost by sending a letter as per draft, it is not of much
moment whether that letter or the letter as per draft sent yesterday, is
forwarded. But the more I think [of] the matter, the more I feel that
we will not get any further satisfaction at the present moment, and that
the ambiguity is deliberate and diplomatic, and, therefore, it does not
admit of being cleared up. To me, who am so inexperienced in high
politics and diplomacy, the draft enclosed in yesterday's letter to Your
Lordship, appeals as the more correct letter to be sent, after an addition
to it sketching roughly the plan of campaign to be followed here and
the intended visit to India. However, I am entirely in Your Lordship's
hands, and would be guided by the advice you will kindly give.
I remain, etc.,
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT LETTER
[LONDON,]
October 6, 1909
SIR FRANCIS J. G. HOPWOOD
COLONIAL OFFICE, S. W.
SIR,
With reference to the letter addressed to me over your signature,
dated the 4th October, No. 31649—I venture to address you infor-
mally, [in ord]er to save time and in order to ascertain, if I may, the
[exac]t meaning of the communication. As you are fully aware of the
negotiations that have proceeded in connection with the British Indian
question in the Transvaal, I take the liberty of asking for my colleague,
Mr. Hajee Habib, and myself an informal interview.
The difficulty that faces us is this. The letter referred to by me
says:
The Colonial Government must first decide. . . whether they are prepared to
introduce legislation on the lines proposed by Mr. Smuts.
As reference is made to my attitude at the interview with the
Earl of Crewe, I do not know whether the legislation proposed by
Mr. Smuts is on the basis suggested by me at the interview, or whether
it is on the basis proposed by Mr. Smuts before he embarked for South
Africa. As you are aware, there is a fundamental difference between
the Indian proposal submitted by me, and what Mr. Smuts was pre-
pared to give. It will be admitted it is of the greatest importance to my
colleague and myself to know the exact position taken up by Mr. Smuts
after His Lordship's cable, which evidently was sent after the interview
question.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5114-
