199. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
February 9, 1906
TO
THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
My Association has been informed from various sources that, after
the change of the Permit Office, the following innovations have been
made, without any warning to the Indian community, whether through
my Association or otherwise.
1st. The age of minority of children who may wish to enter this
country has been reduced from under sixteen to under twelve.
2nd. Affidavits of guardians are not accepted; that is to say, only
those whose parents are residents of the Transvaal are allowed to come.
3rd. Witnesses for refugees outside Pretoria are now being examined
by Resident Magistrates in the various districts, with the result that the
applications of many refugees have, for the present, been indefinitely
hung up.
My Association respectfully protests against the Indian community
being thus taken unawares with reference to the above innovations. My
Association has, as a rule, been at least kept informed of any contemplated
changes, and, in some cases, the Government have been good enough
to even consult my Association. It has come to my Association, there-
fore, as a disagreeable surprise that serious changes affecting the Indian
community have been made in the Permit Regulations, without any notice
whatsoever, and then, too, the Indian community is allowed to know
these things only through actual instances.
As to the innovations themselves, it is submitted on behalf of my
Association that they are calculated to do very serious harm to the com-
munity. It is difficult to understand why the age of minority has been
still further reduced. My Association invites your attention to the fact
that nowhere else in the British dominions have children under sixteen
been prevented from entering British dominions where their parents have
been allowed the right of entry.
It is a matter of the gravest importance to the Indian community
that the domiciled Indians should be able to bring in their children with-
out any difficulty. Why a child of thirteen years or fifteen years should,
for instance, be prohibited from joining his parents, and receiving, say,
his education under them, it is difficult to understand. My Association
1 Vide "Transvaal Indians and Permits", pp. 192-.
further draws your attention to the fact that the rule does not apply to
the non-Asiatic communities in the Transvaal.
As to the second innovation, hitherto orphans have been allowed to
join their guardians. Under the new rule, such children will be pre-
vented from entering the Transvaal. My Association need hardly point
out that such a rule cannot but cause very great hardship.
As regards the third innovation, if the Resident Magistrates are to
carry on investigations, it will cause almost interminable delay. There
are refugees whose applications have been pending even for the last nine
months, and if all such applications are to be referred to Resident Magis-
trates in the various districts, enormous delay will be caused. Moreover,
there will be no continuity of procedure as to the evidence to be taken,
if each town is treated separately.
My Association further submits that, when witnesses reside outside
Pretoria, it will expedite matters considerably, and secure uniformity of
procedure, if the same official were to be appointed for the examination
of witnesses throughout.
My Association further begs to point out that it is necessary, in the
interests of justice, that there should be a periodical visit by an official
to attend to those requiring permits in Johannesburg, seeing that nearly
seventy-five per cent. of the refugees are destined for Johannesburg or
the surrounding districts. Whilst the central offices may remain in
Pretoria, the mechanical work of issuing permits and taking thumb-
impressions should, in the humble opinion of my Association, so far as the
Johannesburg refugees are concerned, be done in Johannesburg.
Nothing has yet been known with reference to the question of whet-
her Indian women are or are not to hold separate permits.
My Association submits that the matters referred to herein are of
very vital importance, and trusts that they will receive the attention they
deserve. I respectfully request an early reply.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDUL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 17-2-1906
