308. LETTER TO BAL KALELKAR
August 12, 1927
It is not enough merely to say that you do not like Kaka-
saheb turning a recluse. When I wrote to you that one's son
attaining the age of 16 becomes one's friend, I also meant that
you had acquired the capacity to think independently and one
who thinks independently should be able to give strong reasons
for one's opinions whether to convince himself or others. He must
give reasons why he likes one thing and does not like another.
Having developed such faculty from their very childhood some
men have become great such as the sage Dayananda, Chaitanya,
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and other historic figures. Let us
leave aside Hinduism and consider sannyasa independently. San-
nyasa is a mental state and it is reflected in a man's actions. But if
another man imitates these actions without the mental state, that
will not be sannyasa. In this way, we all and the entire world have,
to some small extent, to live a life of sannyasa and those who
don't do so writhe in triple agony. Sannyasa means abandon-
ment of worldly pleasures. Complete abandonment constitutes
complete sannyasa. Even a householder has always to observe
some restraint or other. He who does not has to suffer; he becomes
a burden to the earth and falls a prey to diseases of many kinds.
Thus we can see that restraint or renunciation should grow with
our progress in life and it is man's duty to develop restraint as
much as he can. If you accept the above argument that restraint
is a good thing, you will have to grant that for doing a good thing
a husband need not seek his wife's consent or vice versa. There is
only one way of maintaining the sanctity of the marital tie, name-
ly, husband and wife should both be willing partners in sensual
pleasures. One who wants to progress abstaining from sensual
pleasures should have the right to do so. Else there will be no
progress in the householder's order, and this would halt the ad-
vancement of the whole world. Will you not, at least now, admit
that Kakasaheb has a right to practise this kind of sannyasa?
That renunciation will not harm Kaki or anyone else but actual-
ly it will be in her own interest. I believe that the religion of
non-violence springs from the fact that the advancement of one
promotes the advancement of all, and the fall of one implies the
fall of all. We have therefore been enjoined to show compassion
to every living being. If Kaki or you, through ignorance or infatua-
tion, halt Kakasaheb's inclination towards sannyasa, it will harm,
rather than benefit, you, him and society. After realizing the need
for renunciation and attaining the strength for it, if Kakasaheb
still holds himself back to please Kaki or you, he would be
stifling his humanity. Would you let that happen? Please ponder
over what I have written to you and then write to me whatever
occurs to you.
I have to examine one more idea which you have expressed
in your letter. You seem to differentiate between devotion to
father and devotion to mother, but actually both are one. And a
son may not discriminate between them. But the devotion of a
wise son cannot be blind. Suppose a father is a drunkard, the
mother is a woman of restraint and the father asks the son to
help him with drinks. The mother entreats the son not to give such
help. The son submits to his mother and does not help his father.
Such a son has discharged his duty of being devoted to his
mother and his father, though in doing so he hurts his father.
This example does not point to the difference between the two
devotions but explains the nature of intelligent devotion. This
same argument would now apply to you. If Kakasaheb practises
mental renunciation, it will promote the well-being of all of you.
Kaki does not like this because of her ignorance and infatuation.
If you accept that Kakasaheb's renunciation is right, your devotion
to your parents would tell you to help Kakasaheb and to entreat
Kaki to agree to his resolve and even if she does not consent
you should agree and have faith that ultimately Kaki too will
appreciate this duty.
I can understand your desire to live with Kaki, but it is a
delusion. In your letter you have already approved of brahma-
charyashrama or sannyasa during the student days. In the olden
times pupils used to leave their parents' homes and stay with
their preceptors. In the Ashram we try to bring back that
state; you should help in this effort. One must learn to live with
contentment and restraint while one's parents are away. I admit
that the teachers do not yet have so much restraint, so much know-
ledge and so much love that pupils could easily forget their parents,
but you know that we want to revive a thing that is dead. The
teachers are trying hard and intelligent pupils ought generously
to help them in their endeavours. Wherever the teachers are not
able to fill the place of parents you should bear with them and
cultivate patience. If even a few among you begin to do so, we
shall be able to improve the Ashram.
Write to me always with the same frankness with which you
wrote your first letter. True modesty consists in laying open one's
heart before one's elders without reserve. We may make our
language sweet and polite but if we try to repress our thoughts and
hide them, we may commit a serious fault. Besides that would
not be modesty at all.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
309.
