368. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 23/28, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
Your packet was given to me on Wednesday (yesterday) in
two parts. It was divided into two parts by the authorities here.
Let me know when and in what condition you received the packet
which was dispatched from here on the 21st. It is enough for me
that you do not feel it as a burden to have to handle my corres-
pondence. So long as they let me, I shall continue to write as
I have been doing. Give me whatever news you get about Amidas.
If you have any comments to make about my views concerning
eggs, please do. I know definitely that Pyarelal has not been
transferred to Nasik. We shall meet again in a day or two.
Ascertain the position about Chitalia and pay him any sum you
think proper. We should not refuse to help him to face his diffi-
culties. Did you ask Chhaganlal Joshi? He may, perhaps, have
kept a note somewhere. Does he not live next to you? Also let
me know how he is. I am glad that Mirabehn has for the pre-
sent dropped her idea of going out of the Ashram. I have had
no letter from Devdas, whether long or short. Did he send it
directly from jail, or in some other manner? I will inquire about
it here after I hear from you. Ask Jivarambhai to write to me.
There was a note by Chandrakanta to the effect that a letter
by Kumarappa was included, but there was no such letter. Instead,
there was a letter from the Rev. Holmes. It is addressed
C/o Kumarappa. Kakasaheb thinks that that made Kanta say
that there was a letter from Kumarappa. Manilal has asked me
for suggestions for reading. I must have gone to sleep with this
thought in my mind, and so I had the following dream. My advice
for reading is as in the dream which I am narrating. I dreamt
that Manilal was standing by my side and that Devdas, a child,
had climbed on to my lap and had fallen asleep. Manilal told
me that he had wasted many years of his life without reading
anything and that the desire for reading had now awakened in him.
He, therefore, asked me to guide him. I expressed my regret that
I had not been able to do much for my children's education. I
then wrote down as follows for Manilal: "Study the whole of
Gokhale's book on arithmetic. Study his books on algebra and
geometry too, if you get time. You should learn the history and
geography of India in some detail, and of the world in outline.
You should read Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is within You, for
Sanskrit Bhandarkar's books and the Gita, in Gujarati Navajivan-
mala and K's Jivanshodhan, and finally Tulsidas's Ramayana and a
text on arithmetic, both in Gujarati. You should get the books
through Maganbhai." At this point I woke up from the dream.
There was something more still, but I do not recollect it. That
is, I had forgotten it even when I woke up at 3.30 a.m. I like
the advice I gave in my dream. Manilal may read what he can,
and what he finds interesting, from the above. Or, rather, it is
Mahadev who has awakened Manilal's interest in reading. He
should, therefore, be guided by Mahadev. I should not hold on
to an opinion expressed in a dream; and, moreover, I cannot at
present think out a reading list for Manilal. I would give the
same advice to Ramdas. I attach no importance at all to the
dream. Manilal's problem was in my mind. I had also been
thinking about Devdas's letter. It is not, therefore, surprising
that, owing to some disturbance in the stomach, I got such a
happy dream. Write to Brijkrishna and tell him that the under-
standing is that, as far as possible, I should not write to prisoners
and hence I do not write to him. I think about him every
day, all the same. Tell him that he should take the utmost care
of his health. He should make the best use of every minute and
keep note of how he spends his time. Let him take this as a
letter to him. And he should continue to write to me.
Tuesday morning, October 28, 1930
I wrote about yajna last week, but feel like writing more about
it. It will perhaps be worth while further to consider a principle
which has been created along with mankind. Yajna is duty to be
performed, or service to be rendered, all the twenty-four hours
of the day, and hence a maxim like "The powers of the good
are always exercised for a benevolent purpose" is inappropriate, if
benevolence has any taste of favour about it. To serve without
desire is to favour not others, but ourselves even as in discharging
a debt we serve only ourselves, lighten our burden and fulfil our
duty. Again, not only the good, but all of us are bound to
place our resources at the disposal of humanity. And if such is
the law, as evidently it is, indulgence ceases to hold a place in
life and gives way to renunciation. For human beings renuncia-
tion itself is enjoyment. This is what differentiates man from the
beast. Some object that life thus understood becomes dull and
devoid of art, and leaves no room for the householder. But I think
in saying this they misinterpret the word 'renunciation'. Renun-
ciation here does not mean abandoning the world and retiring
into the forest. The spirit of renunciation should rule all the
activities of life. A householder does not cease to be one if he
regards life as a duty rather than as an indulgence. A cobbler,
a cultivator, a tradesman or a barber may be inspired in their
work or activities either by the spirit of renunciation or merely
by the desire for self-indulgence. A merchant who carries on his
business in a spirit of sacrifice will have crores passing through his
hands, but he will, if he follows the law, use his abilities for
service. He will, therefore, not cheat or speculate, will lead a
simple life, will not injure a living soul and will lose millions
rather than harm anybody. Let no one run away with the idea
that this type of merchant exists only in my imagination.
Fortunately for the world, he does exist in the West as well as
in the East. It is true such merchants may be counted on one's
fingers but the type ceases to be imaginary as soon as even one
living specimen can be found to answer to it. All of us know of
a philanthropic tailor in Wadhwan. I know of one such barber.
Everyone of us knows of such a weaver. And if we go deeply
1 The allusion probably is to Kabir.
into the matter, we shall come across men in every walk of life
who lead dedicated lives. No doubt these sacrificers obtain their
livelihood by their work. But livelihood is not their objective, but
only a by-product of their vocation. Motilal was a tailor at first,
and continued as a tailor afterwards. But his spirit was changed
and his work was transmuted into worship. He began to think
about the welfare of others and his life became artistic in the real
sense of the term.
A life of sacrifice is the pinnacle of art and is full of true joy.
Such life is the source of ever fresh springs of joy which never
dry up and never satiate. Yajna is not yajna if one feels it to
be burdensome or annoying. Self-indulgence leads to destruction
and renunciation to immortality. Joy has no independent exist-
ence. It depends upon our attitude to life. One man will enjoy
theatrical scenery, another the ever new scenes which unfold
themselves in the sky. Joy, therefore, is a matter of education.
We shall delight in things which we have been taught to delight
in as children. And illustrations can be easily cited of different
national tastes.
Again, many sacrificers imagine that they are free to receive
from the people everything they need and many things they do
not need, because they are rendering disinterested service. Directly
this idea sways a man, he ceases to be a servant and becomes a
tyrant over the people. One who would serve others will not
waste a thought upon his own comforts, which he leaves to be
attended to or neglected by his Master on high. He will not,
therefore, encumber himself with everything that comes his way;
he will take only what he strictly needs and leave the rest. He
will be calm, free from anger and unruffled in mind even if he
finds himself inconvenienced. His service, like virtue, is its own
reward, and he will rest content with it.
Again, one dare not be negligent in service or be behindhand
with it. He who thinks that he must be diligent only in his
personal business and unpaid public business may be done in any
way and at any time he chooses, has still to learn the very rudi-
ments of the science of sacrifice. Voluntary service of others
demands the best of which one is capable, and must take prece-
dence over service of self. In fact, the pure devotee consecrates
himself to the service of humanity without any reservation what-
ever.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
The person in the Ashram who spins best on the takli should
write to me and explain how he spins, how he imparts spinning
motion to the takli, what is the length of the thread which he
draws out at one time, etc. I feel unhappy that I cannot go
beyond 44 rounds per hour. Prof. Trivedi has sent me a pair
of scales, and, therefore, you need not send one from there.
There are 72 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
