94. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 1935
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. How could you trust Harilal? How can we
believe in anything he says when drunk? But I am quite guarded.
I am not going to spend a single pie out of public funds for his
coming here or for keeping him here. I hope you also have not prom-
ised to pay him the [railway] fare from such funds. You know that
formerly he had asked me for the fare and I had plainly refused.
Why do you insist on calling away Kanu against his will?
He has settled down here now, his studies are progressing and
his health also is improving. He does not at all feel happy in
Rajkot. What is then the point in sending for him? He has been
here only for fourteen months. He has been entrusted with respon-
sible work. For that reason, too, it will be difficult for him to
leave.
If he is to accompany me on my tour, he wouldn't like to
miss even one day from it. Such absence would stand in the
way of his acquiring practical experience, and perhaps I may not
be in a position to spare him at that time. When he is needed
here, I am sure you will not call him away. Hence, the most
convenient and the best time for him to go there would be when
I am here. Let Santok therefore, come [here] any day be-
tween now and December 31 or she may do so after I return
and get settled here, that is, at the earliest after the end of
March. If you take into account Kanu's inclination and my
convenience, he should be called away only after March, or for
a few days just now. Personally he does not wish to leave this
place for the present. That also should be borne in mind. But
finally your wish is to prevail. I have simply given you the facts
which I know, to enable you to come to a decision. You will know
from his letter what activities he is engaged in here. Do let me
know your final decision. I will carry it out.
If Jamnadas remains so ill, how will he be able to take up
responsible tasks in his present condition? What arrangement
has been made for his expenses? What is the expenditure on
account of Chimanlal? Is all that met from the Ashram fund?
What are his activities there? Send me the figure of the expen-
diture incurred every month from the Ashram reserves.
The reasoning behind three yards and two yards of khadi
is this: Satis Babu and Jethalal think that any spinner who wishes
to consume three yards of khadi for personal use will, if he produces
two yards of khadi for sale, realize the cost of the three yards.
These figures have no importance. We have made the calculations
here on a different basis. I have not gone through them. I will
publish the figures when I get time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8482. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
