15. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
BANGALORE,
Jeth Vad 2 [June 17, 1927]
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. You want my permission to go and see
Chi. Harilal. A son need not seek his grandfather's permission
to see his father. No one can stand in the way of a son's wishes.
You have now come of age, and that is another reason why there
should be no question of my giving you permission.
All I can do is to explain to you your responsibility, and
this is my advice in regard to your seeing Chi. Harilal. I believe
he is at present following a wrong path. He leads an immoral
life. He has become an addict. He has forgotten his dharma,
and, therefore, he is not fit to exercise his right as a father. I
regard him as suffering from a kind of disease. His disease is not
physical but spiritual, and spiritual disease is more dreadful
than a physical ailment. It is not, therefore, your duty to go to
him to comfort him; on the contrary, it is your duty to keep away
from him. You, I and his friends and well-wishers should employ
spiritual non-co-operation against him. If you have intended to
go to him to reform him I regard your idea as worthy of support,
and in that case I would facilitate your going. But just now it
seems that you wish to go because of that letter. I feel, there-
fore, that your going to him will mean your encouraging him in
his intention. Moreover, if you wish to go to him in order to
reform him, you are not yet, from a practical point of view, fit
and sufficiently mature to undertake such a task. From that point
of view, you are yet a child. You are still studying. It is my
desire, and also my effort to see that as you study, you should so
develop your soul that you may acquire the power to do what
I could not in regard to Harilal, and you should so impress him
that the moment he sees you he would abjure his evil habits. I
have been bringing up both you brothers with that aim in view.
If you have the capacity, you will be able to benefit from such
education. I would, therefore, advise you to write to Harilal and
tell him firmly that until he gives up his addictions and his im-
moral life and is able to support you all, or until you are able by
the power of your tapascharya to awaken him from his slumber,
you cannot go and see him. I do not, however, insist that
you should forthwith accept my advice. So far, Harilal used to
admit his weaknesses, and has been saying that he would try to
shake them off; but now he has started writing letters against
me in the papers. I have not seen those letters, but I know their
purport. Harilal says that it is I who have forsaken my dharma,
not he, and that I have been propagating the Buddhist faith. And
he holds that such propaganda is harmful to people's welfare and,
therefore, regards it as an evil. His rebellion, he says, is against
that evil. And he intends to take you brothers away from under
my undesirable influence at the first opportunity. As such are his
views, you are likely to be assailed by doubts. If you have the
slightest doubt whether my ideas are right or Harilal's, I think
you should not be led away by my ideas. Hence this is my
further advice to you that you should humbly consult the teachers
under whom you have studied or those among the elders with
whom you have come in contact in the Ashram and who command
your confidence. Put all your problems before them and act
as they advise. If you ask me to solve your problems, I too will
help. The Gita which all of us study daily, which you have
been learning by heart and trying to understand with great devo-
tion, says that we should get our problems solved with the help of
those whom we regard as our elders by earnestly questioning them
with humility. We should have faith in them, accept what they
say as true and act accordingly. I wish, and I advise you, that
you should do what I have suggested. Do not reach a hasty
decision. Do not act with childish immaturity. Try to under-
stand what your duty at the present moment is, and act with
courage and determination in accordance with that duty.
Consider, not what you would like to do, but what you should
do. You may show this letter to anyone you may wish to consult.
I shall wait for your reply. Let me know how both of you are.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 7703. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi
