203. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
MYSORE,
February 22, 1934
BA,
I am writing this letter in a train. I got your letter. I had
so much work to do that I could not write on Tuesday. Today
is Thursday.
You can ask me to do anything for you or put
me any question that you may wish. I will attend to it or
reply to it. At least I will try. You have asked me about
Harilal. He had gone to Pondicherry. There also he begged for
money and indulged in drinking. He even got some money. I
do not know where he is now. I think he will now remain what
he is. We must wait till God gives him wisdom. Will not our
good and evil actions, too, have their effect in this? How sunk
in passion I was when he was conceived ! You and I must reap
as we sowed. Parents are in this way undoubtedly responsible
for the character of their offspring. Now there is only one thing
we can do, namely, purify ourselves. Let us be content with the
effort that we are making for that. Our purification is bound to
have a conscious or unconscious effect on Harilal.
There has been
no letter from Manu recently, but Jamnadas gave me news about
her. I will write to Sushila. Purushottam has been betrothed to
Harakhchand's daughter. His health cannot yet be considered
as good. The wife of Ranchhodbhai's brother has died, and
Motibehn remains depressed because of that. Her responsibility
has increased now. Ambalalbhai and Mridula came and saw me.
He and Saralabehn are going to England. They will stay there
for three or four months. Devdas-Lakshmi are all right. Lakshmi
does feel the burden of the pregnancy.
Ramdas-Nimu are well.
I am sending a copy of your letter to them. The original letter
I am sending to Manilal.
I have sent a copy to Vallabhbhai too.
He also worries about you.
There has been no reply yet from
Madhavdas. Mathuradas is with me. He will stay for a day or two
more and then return to Bombay. Esther Menon has returned from
England. She came and saw me. Miss Lester has gone to Ceylon.
Rajaji parted from us yesterday at the end of the Madras tour. It
seems he will go to Delhi. Amtussalaam is still weak, and so I
have kept her in Madras.
Rajaji will look after her. You must
196
have received the slivers. Write to me again when they are
exhausted. I will send some more. Kusum has been very much
affected by the death of her brother in Zanzibar.
Pyarelal was
released yesterday.
Kishorelal is at Deolali. He is somewhat
better now. Lakshmi will have her baby at Bardoli. Manjukesha
will look after her. Moti or Lakshmi also will be there at that
time. Nanibehn Jhaveri has been operated upon for the trouble
in her joints. I think I have given sufficient news. I will leave
Hyderabad on the 9th and go to Patna. Rajendrababu has
called me there. Prabhavati also is there. It seems I shall have
to stay in Bihar for quite a while. And now the discourse.
If you do not remember the bhajan "The Name is my support,
Your Name is my support", look it up. These days I keep think-
ing about the idea.
Tulsidasji has sung a great deal of the power
of the Name.
The Name means Ramanama or any name of God.
Tulsidas has said that the name Rama is more powerful than
Rama himself.
In other words, the man called Rama who lived
in the past was subject to limitations. His body was perishable
but his name is immortal. The qualities of the man who bore that
name had limitations, but the attributes of God signified by
Ramanama have no limit. We may imagine in Him any attributes
that we like. Because His attributes are infinite, God transcends
all attributes. That is, He is above all attributes.
Since we
cannot exhaust the attributes of God by any enumeration of them,
cannot we say that He is above attributes?
If we inscribe in our
hearts the name of God which has such power, there can be no
doubt that we shall cross this sea of life and reach the other shore.
Repeating that name will drive away all miseries. That is, we
shall endure whatever suffering falls to our lot.
If such repeti-
tion becomes automatic with us, we would need nothing else. That
is why the poet wrote and sang that song: "My only support is
Rama's name," all else is false. "All friends of the body are selfish
and will refuse to accompany us at the end." If we have learnt
to repeat Ramanama, it alone will go with us.
Blessings to all women from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 14-
