97. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
Monday [April 7, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your letter. It was Miss Schlesin's ordinary duty to inform
not only you but everyone interested in the movement. But I hope to
do better next time.
Ritch is entirely wrong. The feeling cannot be inflamed. I have
drawn attention to what is a fact. The idea is certainly to educate
the people into knowing how invidious distinctions are drawn. If truth
costs the advocacy of Lord Ampthill or one greater, we must pay the
price. Was I now prepared to sacrifice the goodwill of both Lord
Ampthill and Mr. Gokhale ? In these matters Ritch cannot be followed.
I never received the wire you refer to. I see you are getting bitter
against Mr. Gokhale. He certainly never considered you to be unworthy
and how could he who knew everything consider you to be in any
way interested ? On the contrary, he used to think of you as the only
entirely disinterested European of the inner circle. Now you are showing
your morbid sensitiveness which sometimes attacks you when you are
at your weakest. Your attack on him in defence of Mr. Hosken was
good. But your attack on him in regard to yourself is unworthy of your
better self. You have become like Cassius brooding too much. I hope
you have not also like him become lean on that account.
I hope your books will leave with this. No, Miss Schlesin now gets
nothing for all she is doing. Geevers was here to say good-bye. I
extended the usual hospitality to him but did not have many words with
him. We talked platitudes for a few minutes and I left him alone. He
understood the situation. I did not interrupt any of my work. When
he left he abruptly asked for 2511 0 which I gave as I did not want
to enter into discussion with him. He said he would return the money.
I do not even know his London address.
The concern that Dr. Mehta and Sorabji show about my health
shows what a low opinion they have of me. If they gave me any credit
for being a hygienist, they would never show that concern. Now you
want to add your quota. Is it not too funny for words ? How can
I be [a] hygienist if I do not show good health ? I assure you it is
not being neglected.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
