236. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Friday [April 8, 1927]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have not been writing to you at all, but I keep myself in-
formed all the time about your activities.
I had preserved one of your letters drawing my attention to
the expenditure on khadi work in Gujarat. I intended to discuss
it with Lakshmidas and you. But that could not be. Let us see
if we can take it up some time. I believe your contention is
that in enabling the spinners to earn Rs. 29,000 as wages we
have spent more than an equal amount and that this is too much.
Does this amount also include the expenditure incurred on our
work amongst the Raniparaj community? The answer to this
question should be that at this stage the work on khadi includes
awakening and educating the masses. If this is really so, it is
part of our policy; and so long as this policy is followed sincerely
we should bear with it as an experiment. But this is only my
view.
If you enlighten me on this point I shall discuss it with
Lakshmidas in case he meets me sooner or when all three of us
meet.
2. At the present moment, at any rate, I am afraid, I have
no time or energy to raise separate funds for khadi work in
Kathiawar. I, therefore, think that we should entrust it to the
Charkha Sangh and carry on such work as can be done subject
to its rules and regulations. In this connection I have written to
Bhai Fulchand. You may also think over it. Perhaps it had
better be merged with the work in Gujarat. As it is, I only see
this much, that it cannot be carried on as an independent unit.
You may, if you want to, discuss the matter with Lakshmidas, in
case he is there, and with Shankerlal. In the meanwhile you
may look after and promote the work in Kathiawar according to
facilities available in the Ashram and keep me informed. We
should be careful and see that whatever work has been or is be-
ing done is not undone.
3. Of late you have not been publishing in Young India facts
and figures [about khadi]. Figures of production, at any rate,
ought to appear. You should also keep sending any interesting
details about the yarn you receive from the members.
As I have now resumed working gradually, you need not
spare me. Do write to me and ask me whatever you want to.
I had a talk with Chi. Purushottam and we are in corres-
pondence. I could not speak to you about this; but the boy
seemed to have a pure heart.
Surely, God will look after him.
How is Kanu getting on?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9141. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi
