413. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
August 27, 1938
CHI. VALJI,
I read your third article and am returning all the three.
The idea of composing a new Smriti is a tempting one, but I am
not qualified. If I assume that I am qualified, I would require
the leisure that is possible in jail. Outside I have no choice.
I have to take up the work that comes to me and do it as best
as I can. There is some freedom of choice in jail. If you wish
to contribute in the composition of a new Smriti, you will have
to go deep into the thing. There are many interpolations in
the Smritis. Some portions, though not interpolations, deserve to
be rejected. Even in the Vedas everything contained is not eter-
nal truth. The Vedas are a mixture of poetry, history and
eternal verities. We should try to pick out the last. We should
formulate rules of interpretation. And after that, we may place
before the people our interpretations right from the Vedas to
the Puranas, as the substance of Hinduism. You have got the
necessary ability for this, but have I? This task is beyond the
ability of a single person. For this we should have a group from
among ourselves. You will now get some faint idea about how
my mind is working. I do know what is dharma, but I do
not know how to put it as the Vedas do.
I am not sufficiently
well-versed in the Shastras. And the most important thing is
that I am not completely free from attachment. I aspire to be
so in this life. But I will not feel sorry if I fail. I am using
all the strength God has given me to destroy attachment, etc.
It is not impossible for me to attain to that state, but I do not
know whether I have that much time left to me. Please, there-
fore, do not give me anything raw just now. Your language is
attractive, but I will not yield even to that attraction and
accept all that you send just now. Please improve your health
if you can.
Is the politics there unbearable?
Pyarelal is free from danger.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
