309. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIGH COMMISSIONER
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
December 3, 1907
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE HIGH COMMISSIONER
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
Mr. David Pollock has just brought me a message from
Mr. Hosken suggesting to me that I should approach His Excellency
privately in connection with the serious situation that has arisen regard-
ing the Asiatic Law Amendment Act, and to place before His Excellency
what I consider would be acceptable to the Asiatic communities and
would, at the same time, meet the main object of the Government.
I need hardly preface what I am about to say with the statement
that, in the position I have felt called upon to take up in this matter,
my desire has been to serve the Government equally with my country-
men. It is because I consider myself to be a lover of the Empire for
what I have learned to be its beauties that, seeing, rightly or wrongly,
in the Asiatic Law Amendment Act seeds of danger to it, I have advised
my countrymen at all costs to resist the Act in the most peaceful and,
shall I add, Christian manner.
The object of the Government being to identify every Indian
entitled to remain in and enter the Colony, in my humble opinion, it can
be met by amending the Immigration Restriction Act, which still
awaits the Royal sanction, and which, I trust, will not receive the
Royal sanction in its present form. In my humble opinion, the offer
for voluntary registration will not, in view of the prospective repeal of
the Peace Preservation Ordinance, be of much use, because any registra-
tion certificates that might be taken out would be of no avail without
the Peace Preservation Ordinance. I, therefore, venture to suggest as
follows:
(a) to withdraw the notices in the
Government Gazette
regarding registration under the Act;
(b) to amend the Immigration Restriction Act at the next
session of Parliament so as to provide for the issue of certificates of
domicile to those Indians who may be entitled to remain in or enter
the Colony under the Peace Preservation Ordinance, and those
who may hold £3 registration certificates under Law 3 of 1885,
who can establish their claim to the certificates. Certificates of
domicile will take the place of registration certificates, and will
contain full identification particulars. This does not contemplate
certificates for the minor children of domiciled Asiatics, but, in
order to prevent any fraud, children, with their names and ages, will
be described in certificates of domicile; so that, at the utmost, what
may happen can never be an unlawful increase in the number of
Asiatic children in the Colony, but, possibly, in the rarest cases,
personation, which can be dealt with stringently under the Immig-
ration Restriction Act. The amendment does also not contem-
plate certificates of domicile for Asiatics who will be able to pass the
education test, which, under the clause as it at present stands, is
sufficiently heavy and, therefore, provides complete identification
by itself. The amendment will also repeal the Asiatic Act.
Seeing that fifteen months have passed by without any registration,
perhaps three or four more would not matter; but, if the Government
think otherwise, it is respectfully submitted that they may, after the
withdrawal of the notices, issue registration certificates in place of the
existing documents, if only in order to test the bona fides of the commu-
nity. These may, at the time of amending the Immigration Act, be
recognised as certificates of domicile.
In my opinion, the chief reason for passing the Asiatic Act was the
charge of surreptitious entry on a wholesale basis. I have always felt most
strongly about it, as I have always known intimately the working of the
Asiatic Department under successive officers. The evidence that led
Captain Hamilton Fowle to suppose that there was little surrepti-
tious entry was the evidence that was used by Mr. Chamney to report
unfavourably. I still believe that Mr. Chamney is entirely incompetent
for the office he holds, in having no legal ability to sift evidence. I have
nothing against him personally. He is affable and above suspicion, but
these two qualities do not make up for the want of a further qualifica-
tion which is indispensable to an office such as he holds. I, therefore, as
an alternative to the exchange of existing certificates, venture to suggest
the appointment of a judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Magis-
trate for the Witwatersrand District, or some such high official with legal
knowledge to investigate the charge of surreptitious entry. He will be
able to report upon anything that the Asiatic Officers may have to place
before him; and, if the inquiry made is open to the public, and wit-
nesses are publicly examined, it will allay the anxiety of the people of the
Transvaal, and any report that might be made could not be questioned
1 These words are underlined in the original.
by any people and would, perhaps, pave the way for the amendment
suggested in this letter.
I purposely refrain from examining the methods of identification
and considering the question of finger-prints, which is only a secondary
matter. If the idea of repealing the Asiatic Act and seeking the co-opera-
tion of the Indian community be entertained, other difficulties can, I
have no doubt, be overcome.
If required, I shall be prepared to submit in legal phraseology
amendments to the Immigration Restriction Act that would, in my
humble opinion, completely fulfil the object of the Asiatic Act so far as
identification is concerned, without in any way wounding the suscepti-
bilities of British Indians.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Transvaal Governor's Archives, Pretoria: File 53/11/1907
