25. LETTER TO C. ROBERTS
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
AHMEDABAD,
August 17, 1919
DEAR MR. ROBERTS1,
I write this to you rather than to Mr. Montagu because I
do not wish to worry him when he is already over-weighted with
other worries and because I do not enjoy the privilege of knowing
him so well as I have of knowing you.
When I was about to renew civil resistance, I felt I ought
to send Mr. Montagu a personal cable which I did. I have
written to him too on the subject. He sent a confidential reply to
the cablegram through the Governor of Bombay. The reply strong-
ly dissuaded me from resuming civil resistance and said that, if it
was a mistake for me to have embarked upon it, it would be a
crime to resume it. It added that I ought to know that the Act
would not be repealed or withdrawn. So far as the "crime" is
concerned I must commit it, if I am driven to it, and take the
consequences. For I must frankly say that I remain unrepentant.
It is my firm belief that nothing but civil resistance can replace
criminal resistance. And it is surprising that Mr. Montagu, with
his very fine imagination, should not have seen the simple beauty
of the absolute efficacy and the necessity of civil resistance. How-
ever, time will do its work and show that it was not civil resis-
tance that was responsible for the circumscribed violence of the
people in April. In the Punjab, the people were goaded into vio-
lence. In Ahmedabad, they went mad to think that one who had
served them was arrested without reason. All the other parts of
India remained perfectly calm. My admission of my mistake is
limited to the underrating of the forces of evil pervading both the
Government and the people.
What however pained me most was Mr. Montagu's message
that I must know that Rowlatt Act was not going to be repeal-
ed. I know nothing of this absoluteness about the non-repeal of
the Act. I know that I shall give all I have towards securing its
repeal. It was conceived in unworthy distrust of the people; it was
brought forth amid the universal opposition of Indian opinion
and it was nurtured in repression. This is enough to condemn it.
Does Mr. Montagu propose to inaugurate reforms in the midst
of a people whose pride has been deeply wounded, whose opi-
nion flouted and many of whom have been wrong[ly] tried and
convicted? Is that a fit prelude to liberal reforms? Should they
not be heralded by a repeal of the Act?
And what is the Rowlatt Act? It is an Act from start to
finish designed to rob the subject of his liberty without the slight-
est necessity for it. Revolutionary crime is (or was) admittedly
confined to such a small area that it is an insult to the people to
fling in their face a repressive measure like the Rowlatt Act.
I would therefore like to paraphrase Mr. Montagu's warning
and say that, if it was folly to have passed the Rowlatt Act in the
face of Indian opposition, it is a crime to continue it, notwith-
standing the persistence of such opposition.
Will you please read this letter to [Mr.] Montagu when you
find he has leisure to listen to it?
Pray remember me to Lady Cecilia Roberts and tell her that
both Mrs. Gandhi and I often think with gratefulness of her
overwhelming kindness to us both during my severe illness
in 1914.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the copy in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6806
