61. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 28, 1934
CHI. PREMA,
I could only now finish reading your letter. I had to read
it in three instalments.
I was certain that you would not desire to come to see me.
When I heard, however, that you wanted to come, I advised
you to exercise self-control but did not forbid you to come. The
resolution which you and others made to return to jail as soon
as you were released was the only proper course for you. But
how can we force those others who have weakened?
I see from your letter that it is doubtful even whether you
will get this letter.
I had indeed preserved, with great love, the yarn spun from
the slivers sent by you.
Labels in Mahadev's beautiful handwrit-
ing were also attached to it. But I don't know what happened
to it during my fast. It is possible that Mahadev has preserved
62
it and got it stored away safely somewhere. Mahadev is at pre-
sent strictly forbidden to write letters and so it is a little diffi-
cult to write to him and inquire.
You should see that the yarn which you spun is woven into
khadi without delay. Ramji should be asked to weave it.
I see that you have done a very good amount of reading. If
you feel inclined, read carefully Tulsidas's Ramayana, the Bible
and the Koran.
If you can, complete the study of Urdu which
you have started. You have made excellent use of your time.
Many things have been left out in your letter. I do hope
you have written another after that.
What you write concerning Lilavati is correct. It is difficult
to say anything about her future.
I advised you to go through the issues of Harijan so that you
might know what developments had taken place on that Issue
during the past few months.
If, however, you did not get time,
it is natural that you could not read them.
This time you may get 'C' class. I would welcome that.
I see that Kisan's body and mind have improved.
She is still
weak, though.
I don't think we can burden her with any work.
She does whatever work she can do, but she soon gets tired.
She
needs plenty of sleep. The company which she gets here seems to
have proved congenial to her.
Though she is twice as old as
Om, the two have become good friends. It is difficult to say
which of the two has the chief share in this.
Both seem to be
extremely sociable. To me she doesn't seem to be 28 at all.
I didn't get, after all, the letter which you wrote from jail.
About myself, what should I write?
My health has remained
quite good and can stand the strain of work all right. I hardly
get time to write letters.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10354. Also C.W. 6793. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
