211. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
October 25, 1920
DEAR MR. JINNAH,
I have just returned from an exhausting tour. I have received
the letter addressed to me by you and 19 other friends, tendering
your resignation of the membership of the Swaraj Sabha, till lately
known as the All-India Home Rule League.
I am exceedingly sorry that you and your co-signatories have
thought fit to take the very serious step you have.
The reasons given by you are that the procedure adopted at
the meeting at which the change was made was "contrary to the
rules and regulations of the League" and that my ruling validating
the procedure was both incorrect and arbitrary.
I venture to think that the procedure adopted was in ac-
cordance with the rules and regulations and that my ruling was
strictly correct. The point you raised was that there was not a three-
fourths majority. The regulations cited by you referred to a change
in the constitution by the council of the League being legal only
if it was voted by a majority of three-fourths. The meeting at
which the vote was taken was not a meeting of the council, but
it was a general meeting of the League. And my ruling was that
as there was no rule, whereby the League had bound itself not
to change its constitution except by a majority of three-fourths,
it was competent and proper for the League to alter its constitu-
tion by a bare majority. Had I accepted your deductive or inferen-
tial interpretation of the rules, I feel that my ruling would have
been "illegal and arbitrary". Coming as the challenge did from
you, for whose legal knowledge I have high regard, I have since
the meeting endeavoured to examine my ruling and everyone of
the lawyers whom I have consulted tells me that it was not possible
for me to give any ruling other than the one I gave.
Your second objection is that the new constitution omits men-
tion of "British connection", and that it is permissive of "unconsti-
tutional and illegal activities".
So far as British connection is concerned I think you are clear-
ly wrong. Because the meaning of the word "swaraj" is deliberately
limited by the new constitution so as to keep the Sabha strictly
loyal to the Congress creed. Let me recall to you the discus-
sion that took place before the important alteration was adopted.
Speaker after speaker made it clear that the interpretation clause
was purposely introduced to keep the affiliation of the Sabha pure
and above board.
In my opinion, you may not allow yourselves to be affected
by any sentiments expressed by the speakers, including myself. If
I could help it I would certainly make it clear in any creed as I
have made it clear in my speeches, that I want my country
to have swaraj whether with or without the British connection.
I am not opposed to that connection by itself but I do not wish
to make a fetish of it. I will not keep India for a single minute
under slavery for the sake of that connection. But I and those who
think with me have limited our ambition in order that we can
carry the Congress with us and be thus enabled to remain affilia-
ted to that body. I venture to suggest to you that your amend-
ment and the original adopted by the Sabha, do not materially
differ, except in so far as the original keeps unadulterated swa-
raj constantly before the country as an ideal to be worked for.
I should think, therefore, that your objection to the alteration is
not so vital (if at all), as to warrant a separation.
There now remains for me to consider your objection to the
methods. I entirely dissent from your interpretation of sub-clause 2,
that it permits "unconstitutional or illegal activities". You will
admit that the words "unconstitutional" and "illegal" are highly
technical terms. An ex-Advocate General of Madras considers
non-co-operation to be unconstitutional. If I have understood
you correctly you consider it to be perfectly constitutional. The
president of the special Congress gave it as his considered ruling
that my resolution was not unconstitutional. As a not indifferent
lawyer of 20 years' unbroken practice, I confess it is difficult for
me to conceive an illustration under the British constitution of
unconstitutional activity except it be violence. And violence has
been specifically eschewed from the Sabha's constitution.
Similarly, about the word "illegal". Jurists have differed on
its interpretation. A cyclist cycling without a lamp to fetch a
doctor acts contrary to law but does not engage in an "illegal"
activity. He voluntarily pays the fine and thus honours the law.
To disregard a tyrannical administrative order may be contrary
to law but it is not in my opinion an "illegal activity". To make
strong speeches amounting in the opinion of an erratic judge to
sedition is not an illegal activity.
In placing before you for your consideration these homely
illustrations my purpose is to show that it is a most dangerous thing
for a country, fighting for its very life, its honour and its religion,
to tie itself down in a knot of indefinable expressions. Surely all
public bodies will think out for themselves the methods to be adop-
ted for winning freedom for the country. I personally hate un-
constitutionalism and illegalities, but I refuse to make a fetish of
these as I refuse to make a fetish of the British connection.
I therefore, venture to ask you and friends to reconsider whe-
ther you have not hastily severed your connection with a body
which you have hitherto nursed with industrious affection. If
you wish to take your share in the new life that has opened up
before the country, and benefit the country by your experience
and guidance, and if you do not consider that there is anything
fundamentally opposed to your conscience, I invite you and your
co-signatories to reconsider your resignations. But if, unfortunately,
you cannot see your way to revise your decision I trust you
will acquit the Sabha of any irregular procedure and me of any
illegal or arbitrary conduct and base your decision on grounds
other than those you have set forth in your letter.
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 26-10-1920
