112. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
After commencing silence, November 27, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I send with this a letter from the school for handicapped
children for the information of you all. I have written about that
school before. I have happy memories of it. I would very much
wish something like that to be done in the Ashram, too. . . . I was
half-asleep when I wrote the sentence which I have scored out.
I find now that it made no sense. The love which the teachers
of that school show to the pupils and their patience are worth
emulating. Anybody who wants more information about the
school should write to it and get it.
If you know the whereabouts of Khadagbahadursing please
inform me.
I hope Kusum gets the postcard which I write to her daily.
I could not write yesterday.
It seems after grinding the Jowar, the flour is not sifted. It
should be enough if the Jowar is carefully cleaned before grinding
it. And the same about wheat. I suppose you get the wheat
ground in a flour-mill outside. If we grind it ourselves in the
Ashram we should use the flour as it is without sifting it. If these
cereals are eaten with all their contents intact, they provide sub-
stances which help bowel movement. If anything is removed
by sifting, many essential elements are lost.
Purushottam should not wait there till he falls ill. Where-
ver he goes, he is bound to get opportunities for work and
service. He may certainly return when his health has improved a
little and can be depended upon better. If your experiments
succeed, anybody can come and live in the Ashram. I do feel
that you will succeed.
1 In the source, the sentence which followed has been scored out.
2 An Ashram inmate
I have already dropped a letter to Bhau. I hope he sees
you from time to time.
I have also written to you about Parashuram.
I am sending Madan's book. I forgot to send it immediately.
Tell everybody this about takli. If the spinning-wheel is the
king, the takli is the queen. Without a queen, a king is no king,
and without the king the queen can do nothing. It should also
be realized that without a queen the royal house cannot go on.
If the spinning-wheel is for thousands, the takli is for millions.
It is surprising that, though Bhau has demonstrated the great power
which the takli possesses, all the inmates of the Ashram do not
learn to spin on it. In the past people spun even the finest
yarn on the takli. The takli which they used was made of
bamboo. Even today, the Brahmins in the Madras Presidency
spin the very fine yarn required for the sacred thread on the
takli. Making a spinning-wheel takes time, but a takli can be
made anywhere. It does not get out of order and makes no
noise. It is quite possible that the takli will one day win over
the spinning-wheel. We, of course, do not wish either to lose
ground to the other. On the contrary, we wish to acquire
equal and great mastery over both.
If you have heard more news about Joshi, let me have it.
Where does Nanibehn live?
Send by registered post the receipt from the Goseva Sangh
for Mahadev's signature.
I hope Kanti is all right now.
Ask Hari-ichchha to write to me.
I have not received Appasaheb's letter.
You did right in keeping back Maganbhai's and Raojibhai's
letters. If you feel the slightest doubt about any letter, you should
keep it back. I have no desire at all to know anything which
should not be communicated to me. Any information concerning
matters about which I can say or do nothing cannot be anything
but a weight on my mind.
I get letters from Mirabehn regularly. She has again given
up salt. Since Kisan has been removed to Thana, Mirabehn is
once again without a companion. If we give up attachment to
particular individuals as friends, all human beings, and, if we can
see more truly, even animals, birds, trees, plants, even stones, are
our friends. The yoga of non-attachment does teach us that
lesson. My weight came to 103 pounds this time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 45 letters in all, including the letter from the school
for handicapped children.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8270. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
