157. LETTER TO DHANJI
March 20, 1926
BHAISHRI DHANJI,
I have your letter which I read to Gangaswarup Gangabehn
and Bhaishri Lakshmidas. What I wrote about Behn Moti had been
shown to Bhai Lakshmidas before it was published. Both of them
tell me that the practice of giving away a daughter for some consi-
deration is not unknown in the Bhatia community. But this does
not mean that every Bhatia family gives away their daughters
only for a consideration. If receiving a consideration is a general
practice I do not think I am guilty of exaggeration. You might
be aware that, since girls are not easily available, many Bhatias
get them from Hardwar. There too a payment has to be made.
Recently I came across an instance of a respectable family getting
a girl from Hardwar. She had to be paid for. This is a family
with some education. We have grown rather intolerant of criti-
cism, i.e., whether of persons or of our community. We should
change our attitude and be glad if someone were to point out our
shortcomings, whether in good faith or otherwise. Since my return
home I have of course been in the company of Bhatias, all of whom
informed me about the sale of brides and other practices. But if
you still think that I am making some mistake, do write to me
again. I do not at all like to find fault with an individual or a
community, whether native or foreign, nor to discuss and much
less to dwell upon such faults. I am eager to adore virtue. But it
is not proper to shut our eyes or ears to failings which are mani-
fest and resounding. Therefore I speak about them whenever
necessary with all possible restraint.
A wedding is no doubt an auspicious occasion but music, fun
and the like, far from enhancing, reduce its sanctity. Auspicious
means blissful. An auspicious occasion brings bliss only if we
realize its religious significance and act upon it. Tulsidasji has
not described weddings with a view to setting models for imita-
tion. His object is not to describe marriages but to propound
moksha. While doing this through poetry he has incidentally des-
cribed popular practices. I am a worshipper of the Ramayana, i.e.,
not of its letter but of its spirit. Tulsidasji writes about many other
things which we have ceased to observe, in fact we cannot. He
describes only contemporary customs and manners. But our
worldly experience now is much wider than Tulsidasji's. And we
can become true devotees of Tulsidas only when we assimilate his
religious approach and with the advantage of our new experience,
we introduce such changes in our social life as our times demand.
Tulsidas, for instance, says that woman only deserves spanking.
Now, do we believe this today? Marriage is intended to help us
cultivate restraint and therefore, we should recall this implication
of marriage from time to time. We omit to do this and so adultery,
indulgence and the like are now on the increase. Marriage is thus
reduced to mere gratification of animal desires. Thinking deeply
over all this, we ought to get out of this state of things.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19877
