371. LETTER TO SECRETARY, PASSENGERS'
GRIEVANCES COMMITTEE, RANGOON
MOTIHARI,
July 25, 1917
TO
THE SECRETARY
PASSENGERS' GRIEVANCES COMMITTEE
RANGOON
SIR,
I have the honour to submit the enclosed note on the matter
before your Committee for its consideration.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
[ENCLOSURE]
NOTE
PART I
GRIEVANCES
The undersigned has considerable experience of travelling,
having travelled in several parts of the world during the past
25 years.
The undersigned had occasion during 19011 and again in
1915 to travel to Burma. The undersigned used to travel, as a rule,
first class up to nearly 4 years ago. Latterly he has travelled as a
deck passenger. In the opinion of the undersigned:
1. Deck passengers making use of the British India Steam Navi-
gation Service do not receive adequate attention from the
Company's employees or the police.
2. The passengers are hustled about by both, are spoken to
roughly, often sworn at and not unoften assaulted.
3. The employees do not put themselves out for receiving com-
plaints.
4. The crew maltreat the passengers and almost invariably take
bribes.
5. Passengers are huddled together anyhow, there being abso-
lutely no supervision as to how and where they seat them-
selves; the result is that the strongest or the richest secure the
best accommodation.
6. Female passengers are similarly treated as in clause (5) and
have no privacy of any kind reserved for them.
7. The deck is often in a filthy condition.
8. There is no control over the passengers' behaviour; the result
is that dirty passengers spit and eat anywhere and anyhow,
much to the discomfort of the cleanly ones.
9. Closets are filthy beyond description; closets allotted for females
are often used by men; Mrs. Gandhi had to be specially
accompanied each time she wanted to use the closets. There
are, as a rule, no locks to the doors.
10. Bathing accommodation, such as it is, is often taken up by the
crew. There is hardly any facility for washing clothes.
11. Accommodation referred to in (9) and (10) is too little for the
number of passengers taken.
12. During his voyages, the undersigned felt that the passengers
taken were too many for the space reserved for deck passen-
gers.
13. There seemed to be no control over the disposition of the
luggage of the passengers; the result was that much space
was taken up by the passengers' luggage.
14. The undersigned found that through ignorance, fear, laziness
and such other causes, passengers seemed to be reluctant to
make complaints.
REMEDIES
PART II
In the opinion of the undersigned:
1. There should be special, trusted representatives of the Company
approved by the Government who would go out of their way
to understand deck passengers and their grievances.
2. For the wharves assistance of trustworthy volunteers should
be sought from known organisations conducted in the interest
of the passengers.
3. Deck, closet and bathing accommodation should be increased.
4. The representatives mentioned in clause (1) of Part II
should inspect every ship and satisfy themselves as to [ clause]
(3) [of] Part II.
5. The representatives aforesaid should meet every steamer and
inquire of the passengers as to their experiences.
6. Medical Officer on board should be empowered and be
expected to look after the physical comforts of the passengers
in every way. The undersigned was told by a medical officer
that the looking after the accommodation of passengers, their
cleanliness, the closet arrangement, their condition did not
fall within his province.
7. An instruction book in several vernaculars should be issued
for the passengers and a copy handed to each passenger on his
receiving his ticket.
Should the Committee desire further information from the
undersigned, he will gladly endeavour to give it.
From a photostat of the typewritten draft with corrections in Gandhiji's
hand: S. N. 6382
