491. LETTER TO SAUDAMINI MEHTA
September 12, 1934
CHI. SAUDAMINI,
I got your letter.
I agree with you that if I knew as much about . . .'s
case as I do about . . .'s, my opinion would perhaps soften.
I made the remarks in question when I read . . .'s defence
and . . .'s outpouring of her grief.
However, if I became
more intimate with all the persons involved, I would perhaps
have a better understanding of their points of view. The con-
clusion to be drawn from this is that before criticizing any-
body's action one must go deep into the matter. Since this is not
easy to do, the golden rule is not to criticize anybody. I know
how to follow this rule and rarely criticize people, though it is
true of course that I occasionally pass hasty criticism on persons
with whom I am connected in some way. I am still not free
from that measure of attachment. Such subtle attachments cannot
be overcome by an act of will. They weaken gradually through
prolonged effort.
Let me give you some more information about . . .'s case.
Even today all his elders except . . . are against his marrying
again. If I had not supported his intention, the idea of second
marriage would have been abandoned.
I came to know . . .
first. The moment I saw her, I felt that a girl like her was
unfit for conjugal life and that she would never be able to satisfy
. . . sexually. Before I came to know her and take interest
in her life, she used to tremble in . . .'s presence, talked
with none and always wore an unhappy look. Now she talks
frankly with everybody and can even joke. She expresses her
views quite freely. She and . . . gave me their letters to each
other to read. The sole cause of her worry is the fact that . . .
has not taken another wife. As long as he has not done so, she
does not feel herself safe in her relations with him and with their
elders. Other members of the family keep taunting her for her
inability to satisfy . . ..
She, on her part, being a loving
girl, keeps thinking about her inability and feels miserable.
I
doubt if you have come across any other instance like hers.
Being a woman yourself, you can certainly claim to know a
woman's heart better than I do. But as against that I can
claim many years' longer experience than yours.
Though a
man, I have been striving for many years to reach women's heart,
cultivating and preserving complete passionlessness. As a result,
I have had intimate knowledge of the lives of hundreds of women
of every class and religion and of different countries of the world.
I know of several instances in which women urged their husbands
to marry again. This is not a peculiarity of Hindu women. You
will perhaps be surprised to know that such instances are to be
found in England also.
I have a motive in writing such a long letter to you even
under all this pressure of work. I am pleased that you have
taken interest in this matter. . . . had been after me.
She
also had expressed her pain. I have promised her that I would
welcome a deputation of women headed by her and put this
case before them. For me this is an issue of dharma. It is one of
my experiments in truth. I feel no shame about what I am
doing. I am not taking interest in this case because of the bond
of friendship. This is part of my service of women. I think of . . .
as a helpless cow. I should like to protect her as much as I can.
I want the help of you women in that task. That is, if in the
name of dharma I am in fact yielding to self-delusion of any kind
and following a course contrary to dharma, please wake me up
and save me. If, therefore, you can keep up your interest in this
case, meet . . . and discuss the matter with her and then
three or four of you may come and see me. I will put my case
before you and listen to what you have to say. I am not
concerned with what happens to . . . or . . . as individuals.
Such cases will always arise. Ill-matched unions are no rarity in
this country. I have told . . . that when her body has deve-
loped and grown to the size natural for her age and if she feels
sexual desire then and wishes to remarry, I will be ready to help
her at any cost to myself. If, however, despite . . . having
married a second time she prefers to live with him and if . . .
is inclined to agree to that, I shall be helpless. . . .'s father
would of course desire that she should share his bed even though
he might have another wife. My effort is to save both of them
from such a position. This is a very complicated case. In solving
it I shall be solving many problems. I, therefore, do not mind
giving my time to it.
I don't know if I am imposing an unwelcome burden on
you through this letter. If you do not wish to go so deep into
the matter, you need not reply to it. Please consider the letter
to have been written by me more for my satisfaction than for
yours. I seem to feel that I know my dharma, but I am always
liable to err in my reasoning. I, therefore, cling to any person who
points out my error. This has saved me from many errors.
SAUDAMINI GAGANVIHARI MEHTA
CALCUTTA
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy; Narayan Desai
