25. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday Morning, December 18/23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet yesterday evening. The letters to the Ashram
which I handed in this time, that is, on Tuesday last, should reach
you on Thursday, that is, today. I suggested to the official here to
post them immediately, if possible, and he told me afterwards that
this week's letters were posted on Tuesday itself.
I welcome your long letters, but I shall not be happy if you
take special trouble to make them long. I can understand what a
burden you are carrying. I did not want an explanation in regard to
Keshu. But I can understand your having given it so that you
could pour out your heart and satisfy yourself.
I had a postcard from Surajbhan, in which he says that he
would be happy if Yashodadevi was called to the Ashram. She
lives with the family of Lala Dunichand, a lawyer, in Ambala.
Write to him.
The Ratilal episode is both happy and painful. His foolishness
is painful, but the display of humanity by the merchant, who re-
turned the diamond, and by Gopi, who returned the money, makes
one happy. In my eyes, their subsequent conduct wipes out their
initial guilt. Champa, of course, has always been foolish. She listens
to no persuasion and remains fond of diamonds and other jewels,
and loses money in consequence. Ratilal must have returned. Even
if he has not returned, that will not worry me. God always saves
him. But this is what life is. We pass our time in undoing the conse-
quences of one another's errors. For those who can remain un-
attached while doing this, their labour is not wasted. To them it
is a spiritual striving and they realize God through it. I had an
experience of this yesterday when I saw God in a worm and a
weevil. You are wrong if you think that you know Pyarelal fully.
Being a poet, he is bound to be dreaming always. I asked him to
remove a worm from the dates. He should have put it in a
safe corner, but, instead of thinking about his duty, he was
thinking of something else, God knows what, and he put the
worm in the wash-basin. The weevil, too, was dropped into the
same. If now I washed my hands or face in the basin, I would be
the cause of the death of both. I, therefore, decided not to wash in
it. But when, after I had finished my work, I got ready to wash
my hands, I did not see the worm and the weevil in the basin.
They had slowly moved away. I look upon this experience as seeing
God in the two worms. An atheist or a rationalist would describe
the incident as mere accident. It was an accident, no doubt, but
seeing God is also an accident. If we but understand the truth, we
would see Him every day; otherwise our whole life would pass
without our seeing Him. But I will not dwell further on this. I want-
ed to note this incident in the diary yesterday, but, in my pre-
occupation with other work I wrote in it only about the daily
sacrificial work and forgot to note this. While writing about the
merchant and Gopi, I remembered this holy experience and have
shared it with you. I learnt much else, too, from it yesterday. God
alone knows whether I shall be able to digest all that. I will now
answer your question here. As we reflect deeper and remain peace-
ful, the meaning of ahimsa and truth becomes clearer. I even rea-
lize the supreme utility of these two.
I believe we realize
God in the degree to which we practise them. I am getting more
convinced than ever in my view that seeing God except through
truth and ahimsa is an impossibility. How can members of a group
practise ahimsa towards one another? They can do so by dis-
playing generosity towards co-workers and their faults and every-
one regarding his own faults with strictness. Anyone who observes
the faults of others believes, whether he is conscious of the fact or
not, that he does not have the same faults. This gives rise to pride.
The true rule is that one should oneself observe all rules strictly
and tolerate others who seem slack in observing them. This is not
kindness but strict justice. Do we really know what effort is made
by a person in observing a rule even as slackly as he does? If our
seeming strictness in observing rules comes naturally to us, what
is the value of that strictness? Is it any cause for wonder if a man
like Bhima can lift a weight of four pounds with the utmost ease?
A girl, however, might slip down while trying to lift one pound;
what would we think of that Bhima if he laughed at her then?
Really speaking, the effort of that girl to lift one pound is of much
greater value than Bhima's lifting the weight of four pounds. If
Bhima had not lifted that weight, somebody else as strong would
have lifted it; but by her effort to lift one pound that girl taught
the world a lesson in doing one's duty and earned God's grace. Our
dharma therefore does not lie in criticizing others and thereby
committing violence; it lies in becoming more vigilant ourselves.
If a strong bullock is yoked with one seemingly or really weak,
the former's duty is to do more work and make up for the defi-
ciency of the latter. The driver goads it to labour harder. If the
strong bullock does not do the work expected of it, it is looked upon
as a shirker; it is selfish and has no pity on the other one. Let us
never be shirkers. Let us always do our duty. God will judge us
and our co-workers. He can see into the hearts of all. We scarcely
can see into our own. We easily learn this if we strive sincerely to
cultivate ahimsa.
Through the pursuit of truth, we know the measure of purity
in our motives. It increases our vigilance in regard to the smallest
social duties and to our daily work. If we strive for truth, we
would not be content merely to attend prayers but would try to
concentrate our attention on them. We would try to follow
the songs and the discourses, be punctual in attending the
prayers and respond to them as to a fresh experience every day.
The freshness does not consist in the variety of bhajans or other
recitations, but should result from the increasing purity of our
heart. We should grow daily more contented and feel greater peace
of mind. If we do not have this experience, the fault will lie not
with the quality of the prayers but with the element of untruth-
fulness in us. If we attend the prayers with sincere devotion to truth,
we would experience nothing but peace. The faithful who visit
temples do not observe the lack of cleanliness in them, or pay
attention to the hypocrisy of the priest. They do not see the image
as a stone. They experience peace in the midst of noise and return
from the temples purified in heart. A person like me who feels suffo-
cated by the noise there and sees the image only as a piece of stone
should never visit a temple. God appears to us in the form in which
we worship Him. For He is not outside of us. He is in the hearts of
us all. If we understand this truth, our simplest and smallest actions
would shed lustre on us and help us to see God. In order that we
may learn this, prayers, spinning, and other daily duties are like a
spiritual lighthouse to us or a right angle which is the standard
of measurement.
Saturday Morning
If Giriraj remains quiet, that problem will then be over. I see
that it will not be possible now to get the children to the Ashram.
He has entrusted them [to somebody else]. Trust them to their
fate now. I am going on quite well at present. I have gained a
pound or a pound and a half in weight this week. I cannot say that
I have at last succeeded in giving up dates and raisins. Only a few
days ago, Jamnabehn and Vithaldas sent some dates and I ate
them for two or three days. And now again I have stopped eating
them. I am thus observing the effect of eating them and not eating
them. I do want to give them up if I can. At present, therefore,
my diet includes a little quantity of greens or cabbage or beetroot
or turnip or pumpkin, bhakhari of bajra or jowar, four tolas of almonds,
and lemon. If God keeps me fit with these, so far so good; otherwise
I will humbly resume milk or curds. I cannot say yet that I am able
to live on this diet. I will not say, either, that I shall not be able to
do so. I had never expected that I would be able to digest jowar and
bajra. At present, however, I seem to have no difficulty in doing so.
I have noted what you say about yourself. Your selection of
the items and their quantities is correct. I see that you have given
up groundnuts; there is nothing wrong in that. The fact that you
are losing weight will do you no harm at all. You should not
lose strength, however. If you find it necessary, increase the quan-
tity of milk or curds. It will perhaps help you if you add just one
tola of almonds to your diet. Solve the problem of Parnerkar firmly.
It seems to have turned out a painful chapter. I got the chapters of
Gitabodh. So far I have not received the piece of leather.
You may extract from any of my letters what I say about the
yajna of spinning and publish it. There is no harm in publishing
similar other material of public interest. The more the people do
yajna for self-purification, the better. A mass yajna has an altogether
miraculous effect. If you can, keep up with what you have started.
The spinning-wheels and all other things must be in perfect condi-
tion. These things produce an effect on our minds and make
a difference to the speed. Your speed has increased well enough. I
have not been able to go beyond 200 on the spinning-wheel and
60 on the takli. But I do hope to do so. I do not know if there
is something wrong with my fingers. If the nerves running
through them are weak, it is possible that they may not be active
enough. Just as you go to bed early, it will also be good if
you make it a rule not to rise earlier than a fixed hour. You
should do what you can between 4 and 9 and then stop. If you
have more things to do than you can finish during that time,
you may omit those which you safely can. You should entrust to
others the things which they can attend to. It is really not
necessary to give you advice in this matter, but I have said some-
thing all the same in order that you may be more careful. One
test of non-attachment is that a person who is non-attached always
feels as if he had no work, though he is never inactive even for a
single moment. At present, however, that state of mind "is a
wish beyond our reach". All the same, we should grasp with
our intellect the meaning of that verse and, having done so, strive
to reach that state. The condition of a non-attached person should
never seem pitiable. He should never have an expression on his
face which might make anybody feel sorry for him and think
that he was carrying an excessive burden of work.
Think what
"burden" of work God has to carry. Nevertheless He is the king
of those who do not work. He is an object of pity to no one.
On the contrary, we hunger for His mercy. We should never be
satisfied with a state a whit inferior to His, though He may carry
the burden of the entire universe and we that of something small-
er than even a particle of dust. Just as He ever feels light, though
carrying the burden of the universe, so should we do though carry-
ing the burden of a mere fraction of a particle of dust. We can
easily attain such a state of mind if we reduce ourselves to a
cipher. Mirabehn finds it impossible to become non-attached, but
she is a good woman and, therefore, will one day approach that
state. From here I think she would do well not to undertake
the responsibility of a new paper. I had understood about Sitla
Sahay even without a letter from him, and that is why I wished
to get one from him.
I do not like to give to anyone the impression of my palm.
Apart from that, it would be against jail rules to do so. I have,
therefore, no choice in the matter. Kakasaheb could not even
give his signature on his photograph. And I think that it is a
good rule too. I have written a letter to Purushottam; read it.
Kanu, too, seems to have been upset a bit.
Sunday Morning
I was not at all satisfied by . . . letter. I take it that you
will see him personally, or probably you have already seen him.
Discuss the matter with him and convey to me the impression
you form. This case, too, seems like . . . The latter would
not admit anything more than what had come out and produced
an impression on Surendra, Chhaganlal and others that nothing
wrong had happened. He did not succeed in producing that
impression on me, and ultimately confessed having been guilty of
a serious lapse. I would not be surprised if a similar thing should
happen in . . . 'S case. His language gives the impression of a
guilty person attacking an innocent. Look into this.
Kusum has referred in her letter to the problem that has
arisen about the offer of a job to her in Porbandar. Read my
reply to her and guide her as you think best. My compliments
to Jaya for having gone to the rest-house . Has she any relation
there to whom I can write? If Kakasaheb has not been able to
win over the others, I think it would be best to let the Gita reci-
tation go on as at present. The suggestion to complete the whole
recitation in seven days by reciting some verses in the morning and
some in the evening has not appealed to me. I will congratulate
ourselves if we can improve upon the present practice. I have
noted that you took two and three-quarter hours to write your
letter to me. The time taken in dispatching the letters must have
been in addition to this. It is fine indeed if you can get all this time.
If you can reduce it a little, however, you should certainly do so.
I see that I made an amusing mistake about Vidyabehn .
I will be more careful in future when several persons claim the
same name.
I think you did right in detaining Bhagwanjibhai's Manibehn.
She will be welcome to the Ashram when the two reach a level
so that they feel as brother and sister to each other. At present
it is best that they remain away from each other.
Bhansali has been testing you a good deal. I got two Godrej
boxes. I have written to the dealers to inquire for more. You
may use the donation by Soniramji for any cause that you think
good. Inform him to what account you credit the sum. Take
Nayan to a doctor, if necessary. She must be helped to get rid
of her fever. Your solution concerning Kashinath seems all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
The responsibility for Amina's Urdu education rests on us.
Giriraj used to teach her. He should start doing so again, or some
other arrangement should be made.
December 21, 1930
If you have kept a copy of my letter to Hari-ichchha, show it
to Radha. Read my letters to Kaka and to Mirabehn. Did you
show Shanti's letter to Manilal? If you did not and if you re-
member its contents, acquaint Manilal with them. Read my letter
to Shanti. I have gone through Gitabodh again. I have not been
able to read your letter, though. If you do not follow any point
or if my explanation is incomplete, write to me about it.
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 72 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
