233. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February [27] /28, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
The date of your release is approaching.
I didn't wish to write to you in jail. What could I write
about? There was no need to express sympathy and no special
news to give. You would hear the ordinary news from others.
And so I did not write. But I did inquire and get news about
you from time to time. Pyarelal has given a more detailed report
about you. You should now narrate all your experiences.
Dharma requires that you should return to jail as soon as
you are released. That is what Prema did. I would not suggest
that you must necessarily do so. It may even be your duty to
remain outside for some time and observe things. If your health
has suffered, it may be necessary to recover it first. Or it may be
your duty to go to Bihar. I will not think about all these points
and decide. You should do that yourself. I am sure that what-
ever decision you come to will be in accordance with dharma.
If you remain outside, you may come and see me at Wardha.
If you wish to go to Rajkot first, you may do that and then see
everybody in Ahmedabad, discuss all matters with them and
then come to see me at Patna.
I will reach Patna on the
11th.
Chimanlal will explain to you the reason why the dairy
has been sent back to the Ashram. It has been decided to make
a new trust, but that will be done after I know your views in
the matter. It has also been decided to hand over the land
at Bidaj to the Harijan Sevak Sangh. But I will change my
mind if you have some other plan.
Chhaganlal will be released on the 3rd. See him if you
can.
We have stopped using the Red Bungalow, because Champa
has changed her colour. She does not want to do even her
clear duty to Jeki and others. We cannot, therefore, live in her
bungalow as her dependents.
Lakshmidas is seriously ill in Patna. He is suffering from
typhoid.
There was a wire from Swami to this effect the day
before yesterday.
Prithuraj is with me. He joined me at
Calicut. Velanbehn also is very ill. It seems an operation will be
necessary.
Devdas's Lakshmi, Maruti's Lakshmi and Ramdas's Nimu are
pregnant. The time for all three confinements is almost the same.
It is approaching now.
I was glad to know about Purushottam's engagement. The
marriage should take place after some time. He is not yet fully
restored to health. If, however, Purushottam himself desires
that the marriage should take place immediately and the girl also
is of the same mind, we are helpless. Purushottam intends to
undergo Dr. Sharma's treatment. Sharma will most probably
come and stay in Wardha. If he does so, Purushottam may
certainly get himself treated by him. But what can we do if Dr.
Sharma doesn't come over?
If you have not heard about N. you will hear it from some-
body. Amala is at Sabarmati. Mary Barr is at Wardha, or
under the charge of the Ashram at Wardha. Duncan is living in
a jungle. His tapascharya is hard indeed. He lives on a hill near
Betul. He recovered from a serious illness and went back to the
same place.
Amtussalaam came to see me but fell ill. She must be in
Rajaji's Ashram now. I have had no news about her after leav-
ing Arkonam, i.e., after the 22nd.
I finished this letter in three parts in the midst of loud noises.
I began writing this yesterday. I get up at 2.45 every day, and
only then can I write fairly detailed letters. If anything is left out,
then sometimes it is completely forgotten afterwards.
You
should write to me regularly—if you do not come to see me
immediately.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Kanu is displaying great courage. 2
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8394. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
