289. LETTER TO VICEROY OF INDIA
DURBAN,
November 18, 1907
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY [OF INDIA
YOUR LORDSHIP,]
We beg, with your permission, to enclose herewith copies of resolu-
tions and a cablegram unanimously passed and adopted at a Mass
Meeting held at the Congress Hall, Pine Street, Durban, Natal, sympa-
thising with Ram Sundar Pundit, a Hindu priest, who has been
sentenced to one month's simple imprisonment at Germiston, Transvaal,
under the new Asiatic Ordinance.
The iniquity of this prosecution is apparent to Your Lordship and,
being confident of Your Lordship's personal sympathy, we beg respect-
fully that the Government of India will extend its protection and
support to British Indians in South Africa who are being subjected to
humiliation and degradation. We trust that our application will be
harkened to.
We have, etc.,
DADA OSMAN
M. ANGLIA
JOINT HONORARY SECRETARIES,
NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS
[ENCLOSURES]
The following resolutions were passed at a Mass Meeting of Indians
held under the auspices of the Natal Indian Congress on the evening
of Thursday, the 14th day of November, 1907.
The copy of the cablegram below was also passed and adopted,
the meeting resolving that copies of the same be sent to His Majesty's
Secretary of State for the Colonies and the Honourable the Colonial
Secretary, Transvaal:
Resolution No. 1: That this meeting of Indians, representing the
Indian population of Natal, has heard with deep regret of the injustice
and hardship the Transvaal Legislature are meting out to loyal British
Indians.
Resolution No. 2: That this meeting resolves to send letters and
telegrams of sympathy to Ram Sundar Pundit and his family, and to
congratulate him upon the stand he has made to secure for himself the
right of a priest to minister to the spiritual needs of his congregation.
It is further resolved to suspend business [for] one day throughout Natal;
this to be effected by the closing of all Indian shops and places of busi-
ness on Saturday, the 16th instant, in order to more practically place
on record the disabilities of the Indians in the Transvaal. This meeting
also extends to the Hindu congregation its heartfelt sympathy upon being
deprived of a spiritual leader and guide, and grieves to think that any
Government should be so unreasonable as to indirectly interfere with
the due performance of religious rites and ceremonies by depriving
the Hindus of a religious guide and that copies of these resolutions be sent
to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Transvaal Government,
and the English and Indian Press.
Cablegram — Natal Indians respectfully protest against arrest and
sentence of Ram Sundar Pundit as being undue interference with the
personal liberty and religion of British Indians in a British Colony.
Request intervention by Home Government for sake of Empire.
India Office Records: J. & P. 598/08
1 In the original, the signatures appear below the enclosures.
