296. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
October 6, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letter from Kathore. Can you not dismiss me from
your conversations, at least with me? I think, for the sake of the cause,
too, you should leave me out of consideration except where you may
find it necessary to bring me in. I know you will retort that you never
unnecessarily discuss me, but that is really not so. Your enthusiasm at
times, as you will admit, does carry you away. You will find that, if
you persist there will be a reaction, not against me, which would be
quite bearable, but against the cause, which you at any rate will not
like. I had to speak somewhat like this to Mr. Gokhale also, when I was
with him in Calcutta and when he heaped upon me praise that I thought
was excessive. Indeed, I spoke to him somewhat bitterly.
I am glad that the life over there does not appear to you to be
strange. I never expected it would. You had already sufficiently pic-
tured it in your imagination.
1 Gandhiji had stayed with Gokhale for about a month, after the Indian
National Congress session, in 1901. Vide An Autobiography, Part III, Chs. XVII to XIX.
The cuttings received this week are very meagre. Whoever is res-
ponsible has not done his duty. I have not even the Times of India
report nor the Bombay Gazette. I never received a report of the ladies'
meeting you addressed, nor the verses composed in your honour. I want
badly to see the original.
I am dictating this letter after the receipt of Lord Crewe's reply,
of which by and by. And yet I wish to say that our friends over there,
who are so despondent in spite of enthusiastic meetings, have evidently
either little faith in the righteousness of our cause, or in the right pre-
vailing in the end, and by the end I do not mean the dim and distant
future, but within a measurable time, the measure being the measure of
effort put forth. Can you not make them see that the real success lies
in the effort itself, which in our case is passive resistance, that we are
giving ourselves the finest type of education, better than any university
education, that the more prolonged the struggle is, the better will the
people be when the end comes, and the better prepared for deserving
and procuring further reforms? If the meetings are held there by the
leaders without faith in the cause, or in their efficacy, they will inevi-
tably fall flat. They may appear to be enthusiastic, but the under-
current, which the leaders themselves will have seen, will not be missed
by the Government either. Can you not make them see that, although
we have no real freedom in India, that is no reason why the Trans-
vaal Indians—if they are worthy of their salt—should not be able to make
good their position and why they should not receive from Indians in
India that support to which they are entitled? Will they not see that the
effort in the Transvaal and the corresponding activity in India must
in their very nature bring India nearer her goal, and that, by means of
the purest type? Without being impertinent, can we not show to them
that no part of the struggle has been idealised in India as the Transvaal
one has? Every reform that the Congress has been asking for is inten-
ded to bring forth some tangible and worldly good, but not purely and
simply that form of good which simply adds to the national manhood,
without any visible signs. If a handful of the Transvaal Indians are
determined to sacrifice themselves for the honour of India, why will not
India rise to the occasion and place this thing in the forefront of its pro-
gramme? Leaders of India can and ought to place the question boldly
either in India or the Colonies. The latter cannot with impunity hurl
insult at India and yet pretend to own the Union Jack. We know that
the theoretical equality of a very limited type that we are fighting for
is of no immediate good. That, to you and to me, is all the greater
reason for putting forth the best that is in us. Will the leaders over there
not see it? Will they not see that, in fighting the battle, we are present-
ing the Indian Motherland with a disciplined army of the future; an
army that will be able to give a good account of itself against any amount
of brute force that may be matched against it? Let the leaders there
write to us through the Chairman of the British Indian Association,
asking us to go on with the fight and giving us their blessing.
I am speaking on Friday to the Emerson Club on the "Ethics of
Passive Resistance", and on Wednesday the 13th to the Peace and
Arbitration Society, Hampstead, on "East and West".
You will have received Nagappen's photograph. I wish you could
get the papers there to reproduce it. Will you please write to the
Indian Review and other papers in Madras, to take it up. I think I told
you that I suggested to our people in Johannesburg to found a Nagappen
Scholarship. If there is anybody in Bombay or in Madras who would
do so, it would be very striking. Let them realise that a youth of 20, of
unblemished character, has died for the sake of his country.
Mr. Doke's book will probably be in my hands next week.
Mr. Cooper promised a few copies even on Saturday.
On Friday came off the function in honour of Mr. Ali Imam. Quite
unexpectedly, a toast was drunk for the South African deputations. Sir
Mancherjee had charge of it and he spoke grandly. There is no denying
the fact that he realises the full significance of the struggle. In reply-
ing, I gently took Mr. Ali Imam to task for not having referred to the
South African question in his speech, and appealed to the Indian mem-
bers of the Council that they should demand redress, and if the Indian
Council refused to move, they should give up their posts. The Moham-
medan member of the Council was present at the function. Mr. Ali
Imam thereupon got up and explained why he had not referred to the
South African question, saying that it was too vast to be dealt with
among many other subjects, but that he had the question at heart and
that he would do all he could in India. There was an at-home to him
yesterday. I was unable to go as I had to be at a Gujarati Literature
Encouragement meeting, but he told Maud that, if you were anywhere
near Calcutta, he would ask you to be his guest. Mr. Ali Imam, let me
tell you, is a very genial man, and whenever you are on that side, if he
makes the offer to you, you should stay with him. You will be on the
look-out for him; he will be leaving for India this month.
1 Vide" Speech at Emerson Club", p. 471
2 Vide" Speech at Hampstead", pp. 475-.
3 Nasarwanji M. Cooper, editor of the Indian Chronicle, London, published Doke's
biography of Gandhiji.
4 Vide "London", p. 452.
Mr. Kaikobad Cowasjee Dinshaw and Mrs. Dinshaw left last
Saturday. They will be in Bombay by the same mail that will take this
letter. Mr. Petit knows him. You may meet his people at Zanzibar.
Mrs. Dinshaw has given me a letter addressed to the Editor of Indian
Opinion in Gujarati, sympathising with us and encouraging the women
who are suffering. Did I also tell you that Mr. Ramsay MacDonald
should be there by this time? Miss Winterbottom speaks highly of
him as a very earnest man. He was a member of one of the Ethical
Societies. I dare say you will make it a point to see him.
If you have not written short notes to Parsee Rustomjee, Randeri,
Sorabjee, Vyas, Nanalal, Cama, Daud Mohamed, Ravikrishna,
Medh,. . .3, Harilal, Chettiar and others, please do.
Continued 7-10-1909
From the copies of various letters and draft letters you will see how
the position stands. By the time this is in your hands, you will have
received a cablegram also from me. Lord Crewe's reply is as I have
described it in my letter to Lord Ampthill. One thing is now certain
and that is that the struggle is prolonged. I am looking forward to it.
My only regret is that, instead of being in the Transvaal, I am here.
There was a meeting of the Committee yesterday, principally to meet
the Natal delegates, but the Transvaal question must crop up wherever
there is a discussion on South Africa. Lord Ampthill happened to be there;
he had not seen my letter. I sketched the programme to him and he appro-
ved of it entirely so that there will be a distribution of the statement,
probably a meeting of the members of the House of Commons, and such
other things. This will take fully three weeks. Before the work is taken
up, I have to wait for Lord Ampthill's approval of one draft letter or
the other, then to forward it and then wait for a reply. This may mean
a loss of one precious week. The greatest question is, however, the
proposed Indian visit. In reality I should not go to India at all. My
place is in the Transvaal, but the reasoning that enabled me to come
here is the reasoning that is applicable to the visit to India. I feel sure,
however, that I must not come to India, if at all, without Mr. Hajee Habib.
He realises the importance of the Indian visit, but he has some important
business of his own in the Transvaal. He assures me that he sees the
inwardness of the struggle, and he wants to take part in it fully in the
Transvaal also. If, then, he must return to South Africa, I too must do
likewise. The odds, therefore, are that there will be no visit to India.
Lord Ampthill himself (this is quite confidential) seems to lay great stress
upon the proposed visit to India. Sir Muncherjee, who was present
at the Committee meeting yesterday, saw the report of the Bombay
meeting as published in Sarij Vartman. He was grieved that there was
no "anna" subscription. He thinks that there should be some workers
who will make it their business to collect an anna subscription or a pice
subscription, and that the papers there should give the widest publicity
to these collections. It is undoubtedly a fine method of education, but
for that we want an army of workers. If you can get them, it is worth
doing. The workers may be those who have South African experience.
They need not be very many. If you can get about five in each centre,
it is quite enough. Sir Muncherjee also thinks that the stopping of re-
cruiting should take place unofficially also; that we should have speakers
going to the places where recruiting agents are sent, and these men
should tell the would-be emigrants that they should not indenture for
Natal. This work you can only discuss in Calcutta and Madras. At
both these places, I trust, you will make it a point to see the Immigration
Depots, meet even the officials, and study the system and come in
touch, if possible, with the recruiting agents. So you see that your work
there is becoming more and more important, and that the centre of gravi-
tation is shifting to India. No effective work can be or is to be done
here without the fire of passive resistance being kept alive in the Transvaal,
and there being a tangible response to it in India. If Chhaganlal is
prepared to come, it may be advisable—after he has travelled with you
a bit—for him to come over here even before March and brave the cold
weather. As a matter of fact, Indians do not feel the severity of their
first winter in England, and so it may be with Chhaganlal. With Ritch
withdrawn—as I hope he will be—from here, Chhaganlal will be able
to do some useful work. Lord Ampthill will need somebody who can give
him information on points, as they may arise from time to time.
Will you please send important cuttings, both Gujarati and English,
to Dr. Mehta also?
I have told you that Mr. Badat, of the Natal deputation, left some
time ago. Mr. Bayat, seeing that really there is nothing to be done here,
is leaving next Saturday, that is the same day as this letter. Mr. Anglia,
I understand, is staying as long as we do.
1 Gandhiji had suggested a pice fund; vide "Cable to H. S. L. Polak" p. 367.
The pice subscription, known as "paisa-fund", originally sponsored by Lokamanya Tilak,
had by this time become almost an institution in the Bombay province. The fund was
used for the promotion of swadeshi.
2 Of indentured labourers for Natal
I send you copy of letter I have received this morning from Lord
Ampthill. The first draft letter will therefore be sent to the Earl of Crewe.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5113 and 5152 a
