424. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
November 13, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter. The arrangement about translating my remarks
on the Gita chapters is quite good. I shall look forward to the
joint handiwork. I want to pour myself out into those chapters.
This means additional work for you and will take up a great deal
of your time. However, I know you won't feel the strain of it,
as you love that work.
Here is a letter from Andrews, this time, for me to send you.
He could not restrain himself from writing to me directly. I
have at last given him a few lines. Don't give any time to the
Gandiv till Keshu has obtained mastery over it and gives you a
machine in working order. For me it continues to provide further
delights. The original mal for the motor wheel at last had to be
discarded, as I could not cut it any further for tightening it. It
has to be fairly stout and thick. I had nothing with me in the
hand-spun mals of the required thickness. As you know, I crimi-
nally neglected to learn how to make these little odds and ends.
And I was bent on having only the hand-spun stuff. I had to
give full two hours to the first attempt. It was successful and was
possible only because only a short length was required. My
second attempt took me barely half an hour. I had to make an-
other for emergency, which occurred at once, for the original threads
from which I made the mal were weak. I have now thought of
a device of quickly twisting to the required strength practically any
number of threads. My third attempt will therefore mean still
less time. And meantime I am having now an accumulation of
little bits of stout hand-spun chords which I can use for watch-
guards and the like. All this gives me delight and comfort, for
it means greater mastery over the wheel. And this has become
so easily possible because of the incredible simplicity of the Gandiv.
But I am not going to regard my opinion as final or authoritative
till I have corroboration from someone who knows much more
than I do of the mechanism of the charkha. But I warn you
against regarding this detailed description as any incentive for you
to tackle the Gandiv. I know if I was outside, I could not have
298
given all this time, thought and attention to the thing. It might
not have even been desirable if it was to exclude other urgent
matters. I have given you the details merely to share my joy
with you. The charkha, the takli and the bow have become a fasci-
nation with me. I do not seem to get tired of them. Daily I
wish I had more time to give to these things. I want to secure
greater output on all the three. But I am so clumsy and so
stupid and slow. Somehow or other I feel that it is not the
rigidity of old age that prevents from gaining a greater output.
I have not the proper knack I fear. However I find satisfaction
from the knowledge that God will accept this little offering as the
best possible for me in the circumstances. If you can stand the
cold bath in winter, nothing can be more bracing. You will not
strive against nature. If there is no instantaneous warm reaction,
you must revert to the warm bath. The condition of reaction is
vigorous rubbing with the bare hands. I had sorrowfully to give
up cold baths only after that wretched attack of pleurisy in
London in 1914. Your food is quite good. It may be necessary
to take more ghee. Experience has shown that you need a fair
measure to keep strength, heat and weight.
Gangadevi may walk a little. She must take measured steps
and begin with a few minutes only at a time. All risk of a set-
back should be avoided. She will get rid of the urinary trouble
by taking a hip-bath. If the water is chilly a little hot water
may be added to take the chill off. This hip-bath is almost an
infallible remedy.
Is not this uncle, who has married, somewhat elderly and who
vies with you in indifferent spellings, though very learned?
So according to your birthdate, you are only a babe a few
months old!! You have therefore many a summer to look forward
to.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5420. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9654
