341. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
BETTIAH,
June 9, 1917
MY DEAR ESTHER,
As you will have seen from the papers sent to you, I have
been to Ranchi, from which place I returned only yesterday to
find your letters.
Yours is a difficult question to answer. The total effect of
European activity has not been for the good of India. The general
body of Europeans who have come to India have succumbed to
the vices of the East instead of imposing their own virtues on the
East. It could not well be otherwise. Religion has not made a
lasting impression on them, as we see demonstrated even by the
present war. My theory is that modern civilization is decidedly
anti-Christian. And what Europeans have brought to India is that
civilization, not the life of Jesus. You and a handful of others are
striving to represent that life. It is bound to leave its mark upon
the soil. But it must take time. "The mills of God grind slowly."
You and people like you are not affected by the evil that stares
you in the face. You get behind it, discover the good lying under-
neath and add it to your own stock, thus producing a perfect blend.
What I want is a reciprocity of that method. And so I welcomed
your visit to the Ashram, as I welcome that of many European
friends who are true to their best traditions and are broadminded
enough to take in the best that this land has to give. Have I made
myself clear? Please discuss this further and freely with me.
I am likely to serve on the Committee the Government are
about to appoint. I am presently framing a general note which
will give you the details of the visit to Ranchi. It was a good thing
I went.
Mrs. Gandhi and Devdas are here now and so is Polak. Had
I been arrested, Mrs. Gandhi and Devdas would have worked
among the poor raiyats and heartened them for the struggle. I
am most anxious for you to meet Mrs. Gandhi at the earliest
moment.
Please don't think that I am killing myself with work.
With love from us all,
Yours,
BAPU
My Dear Child, pp. 11-
