48. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
January 13, 1933
MY DEAR C.R.,
Vallabhbhai had a battle royal with me last night on your
behalf. If a person, an utter stranger to him, had chance to be
there, from the vehemence of Vallabhbhai's language, he would
have concluded that we must be most quarrelsome persons.
He thought that I was doing violent injustice to you, in-
asmuch as, without consultation with you, I made proposals that
might prove to be utterly embarrassing, as had happened on two
occasions.
The cause of our quarrel was my compromise proposal. He
thought that I had no right to publish it without consultation
with you, and he was quite sure that though you were too good
to mention it to me, you had felt very much embarrassed by it,
if not also irritated. I told him that you were too good to con-
ceal your embarrassment from me, if you were really embarras-
sed, and that would be quite unlike you. I even added that in
this particular instance you happened even to like my proposal
and that even if it was discovered that you did not like it and
that you were really embarrassed, it was impossible for me every
time to consult you, or such other colleagues on such occasions. I
went further and argued that work on such lines would become
almost impossible. People act together when there is a general
agreement between them on fundamentals and [provided] that their
deductions from those fundamentals were, as a rule, identical, and
that if, at times, they came to different deductions, a timely
confession of error would keep their friendship in tact, as also
the common cause. Nothing that I could say, however, would
conciliate Vallabhbhai. The curfew bell, mutually agreed upon
by us, came to the rescue, and put an end to what promised to be
an endless discussion. But I retired to bed with a determination
that I would refer the matter to you. Your reply, one way or the
other, would bring some consolation to your counsel, and you
know that it won't make me disconsolate if you agreed with your
counsel on both his propositions, namely, that before giving to the
world the compromise proposal which I had given to Pandit
Panchanan Tarkaratna I should have consulted you, and that it,
as a matter of fact, did embarrass you. You would also add to
your opinion on these points, your opinion whether on merits you
consider my proposal to be sound or otherwise.
A perfect tragedy was enacted here yesterday. Five pandits
and their five advisers came to the jail gate yesterday an hour
and a half after the appointed time and took two hours and a
half in exchanging brief notes with me, the three notes that they
exchanged with me taking all the two hours and a half. And, will
you believe it, when I tell you that they would not come in and
carry on the discussion because I would not remove one word I
had added to their draft, the word being an adjective added to
the word 'untouchables'. The adjective applied was 'as at present
classified'. Of course it altered the whole scope of their discussion.
So they went away. Of course it is not our position that there
is no untouchability at all in the Shastras. Our position is that
there is no untouchability in the Shastras as we practise it to-
day. They were expected to prove that untouchability as at
present practised has sanction in the Shastras. It is an impossible
task to perform honestly. No text that has yet been cited on
their behalf has proved it. The Shastris on our behalf are real-
ly very learned men, and also pious men. It is their honest con-
viction that there is no warrant for the untouchability of the pre-
sent day in the Shastras. The real untouchability will be there
for all time. It is a sound hygienic rule practised all over the world.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18922
