53. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
Silence Day, [January 25, 1932]
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
Since I cannot write to each of you separately, I shall try
to write a joint letter to you all every week as before. I now
intend to write to you about the things I had been hoping to
explain to you when I would meet you. It is in God's hands to
fulfil the intention. We should live as He may ordain and feel
happy in doing so. This is why we sing that bhajan by Narasinh
Mehta: "Take to heart neither happiness nor suffering; they are
ordained for this body from its very birth."
I will now tell you a story. First I wish to tell you about the
school run by a lady named Doris. She is the sister of Miss Muriel
who came to stay with us at the Ashram. She has dedicated her
life to the service of children, and to that end she has been run-
ning a beautiful school for them. It has no male teacher. All the
teachers are women. The school is a two-storeyed building with
a spacious terrace above, a part of which is covered so that when
it is raining the children might play or go to bed under the roof.
I liked one thing which I saw there. All the children are made
to sleep in the school for half an hour in the afternoon, for which
purpose they have small folding bedsteads. You should note that
these boys and girls are not more than eight years old. The
children are made to do all that they can with their own hands.
In the games they play the teacher invariably joins them. The
teachers also show them how to wash their faces and hands and
how to brush their teeth properly. There is not a single activity
of the children which is not supervised by a teacher. All the
children belong to poor families and pay no fees. Games, physical
exercises and handicrafts also are there. These children became as
close to me as you had become. They sent me toys as a birth-
day gift, which I have carefully preserved and brought for you.
But now I don't know when I shall be able to give them to you.
This is enough for today.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8896. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
