314. LETTER TO VICHITRA NARAYAN SHARMA
March 1, 1945
CHI. VICHITRA,
I am answering in pencil. Later I shall have it copied out
in ink.
The truth is that I want to make the beginning with the
kind of person you mention. If with his help we can achieve
expansion, well and good, but if we cannot it will not matter.
Because in the long run only the new outlook can help us to
expand the work. If we stick to the old way, the work will
come to a standstill. Khadi will end up by being merely an
occupation for the poor. This will not satisfy anyone. If
workers have doubts in their hearts, we shall patiently have to
remove them.
When I say that we should sincerely believe in the Charkha
Sangh as the symbol of truth and non-violence and dedicate our-
selves to propagating the idea, it does not at all mean that what
we had so far been doing was a mistake. We have benefited
from that too. But it would be foolish to imagine that we can
continue to do so, for we have certainly gained in knowledge.
If the new outlook destroys the fruits of our past work, then
we have not understood the new outlook. It is like the elephant's
foot that covers all other things. Yes, what will certainly happen
is that we shall not be content any more to carry on in
the old way and we shall be spared the outcry for expanding
it. We have some recent instances of this which I shall not go
into here.
It will be false attachment if in our desire to expand the
old we forget the new which is priceless. It will be unbecom-
ing, if obsessed with the old, we lose hold of the new. If the
old activity can be competently pursued by others they may by
all means pursue it.
The question you ask as regards the institution I can answer
only if you show me that it is not merely hypothetical but is
based on facts.
We shall let the Punjab go ahead with the work if it can,
provided we do not have to invest any funds. There can of
course be no question of not wearing khadi.
190
Women spinners may continue to spin. How far we may
commit funds for this is a practical question. Each case can be
dealt with on the basis of its own merits. We should not invest
any capital in silk and allied activities. If, however, there are
funds to spare and it is found beneficial to have stocks in khadi
bhandars then we may have stocks of silks and woollens. There
must be the khadi spirit behind all this and we should ensure
genuineness.
In the case of Kashmir, if the State does not impose upon us
restrictions which we cannot accept, I should accept money from
them under two conditions. All the institutions should be pre-
pared to lose their funds. Maybe if the Charkha Sangh stakes
its all nothing will be lost. But they must do so on their own
responsibility. Whether the thing has my blessings or not
should make no difference. One must base oneself on the situa-
tion as it is.
It is indeed the duty of the Sangh to satisfy the public as
well as the workers. If however there is a higher duty, we must
pursue it, too. After all, khadi and all other work we have done
has been informed only by this view.
From Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
