360. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 21, 1934
CHI. MIRA,
You do not now need to be told how I am getting on.
This letter will be enough evidence of the progress made. The
food is almost normal.
Your letter is revealing.
But I do not want to change my
course of action.
The cause will be compromised by no one
except ourselves. Let them all do their little bit or their utmost
there. It is enough for us that they are all well meaning. As
you know, I have not set much store by the work that is being
done there.
Though I do not want to take any action on the
strength of what you say, I would like you to have a frank and
full discussion with both Agatha and Muriel and hear what they
might have to say. So far as the big folk are concerned, I entirely
agree with you that you should seek interviews yourself directly.
I am quite sure that they will all see you. If they do not, you
need not mind.
The question of Dara is different and difficult. One does
not know how to help. He has always appeared to me to be
mysterious. Brockway is supposed to be the leader. But he did
not seem to me to lead.
He was apologetic about Dara and in
no way enthusiastic. I am afraid we can do very little for
him.
Of course there is no difficulty about carrying on cor-
respondence with him. We do no more for the friends or the
fellowship group. We pay nothing. Agatha is paid and that is
all. It is well to follow Shakespeare's advice: "Give thy ear to
everyone, thy voice to none." You will gather all the informa-
tion and we shall confer when we meet, if we do at all. 'If' clause
is merely precautionary. Nothing hangs by it. I have no present
plans except the convalescence.
Andrews reaches Bombay on
25th. He should be with me on 26th.
The news about Jawaharlalji and the others you will get
from Mahadev and Pyarelal whoever may be writing.
Today is exactly one week after the breaking of the fast.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6296. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9762
