475. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
October 23, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I have your letter.
Jamnadas's case is a painful one. What can we do? No one
can escape his fate do what he will.
I had a long letter from Kisan. She has given a good des-
cription of her daily life. Hard work comes so naturally to her
that she got up at three in the morning to write that letter. I
thought I was the only one who worked so hard. It seems even
girls can humble my pride. You cannot do so, for in the Ashram
it is a rule that everyone should get up early and so it is not
surprising that you should do so. In Bombay, however, to get
up at six in the morning will be a favour to one's family. This
is, of course, not true of labourers. But Kisan is not one of them.
You should, if you can, spare some time and learn the art
of ridding the Ashram of its frequent illnesses. But your first task
is to learn how to make your body strong.
If maize doesn't grow on our farms, can we not buy it? If
that is what you require to increase your weight, the matter is
very simple. Here in jail they do say that maize gruel helps
easy evacuation and increases one's weight. Prisoners always get
maize gruel in the morning. They add salt to it. Bran does not
284
have to be removed from maize flour. It is worth while to make
this experiment for a few days for its own sake and feel one with
the prisoners. What do you serve in the morning these days?
If you have been serving wheat gruel as formerly, it should be
easy to switch on to jowar gruel. The women, Vithal, Kanti and
others are familiar with it from experience. Their judgment should
be final. I am only writing what I hear from others.
I did not follow anything of what Shanta said. She has told
me nothing. It would be good if she confided in you. Now that
I remember, 'confides' is an English word. The Gujarati idiom
is 'to open out the heart'. If Shanta wants anything to be kept
confidential, you should certainly respect her wishes.
I cannot just now answer the questions which you have put
to me. Have patience for some time.
There is no limit to your capacity and fitness for work. But
these can be seen only if I give you an opportunity to display
them. For the time being they waste their sweetness on the
desert air like the flowers in Gray's poem.
Our cat was really mad with joy when she saw us. She
simply would not leave us. She must have keenly felt the sepa-
ration from us. She is contented now.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10307. Also C.W. 6746.
Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak
