465. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
May 11, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
In your leaderette on Mr. Polak's letter regarding the Asiatic
Registration Act, you state that "the most bitter opponents of the Asia-
tic trader would, probably, not be sorry if the proposed passive resistance
movement resulted in the deportation of the most aggressive agita-
tors". Unfortunately for the "bitter opponents", so far I have been able
to see, there exists no such provision for compulsory deportation, as you
seem to think there is. If, therefore, their wish is to be satisfied, a new
act will be necessary to drive out of the Colony by physical compulsion
those Indians who, in their own opinion, are doing a service to their
country and the Empire in their struggle to retain for their countrymen
some degree of self-respect and manliness. You proceed to add :
Freed from the domination of the latter, we believe the great bulk of British
Indians lawfully domiciled in the Transvaal would soon learn to appreciate
the greater security which the Act confers upon them, and to recognize how
much they have been misled as to the real effect of the new legislation.
One can quite understand your inability to enter into the feelings
of British Indians. You have mis-read them entirely if you think that
there is a single Indian who is likely, after the withdrawal of the domi-
nation (which does not exist), to appreciate the "greater security"
conferred by the Act. In spite of my efforts to detect it, I have failed to
trace any greater security. There can be no question of misleading the
mass of the Indians as to the real effect of the new legislation. The issue
is simple. Compulsory registration involves a special restriction on the
1 This was reproduced in Indian Opinion, 18-5-1907.
personal liberty of the subject because of the colour of his skin. It has been
put before the Indians in the Transvaal that such legislation amounts to
a deep humiliation and a kind of slavery. They have, therefore, been
advised that they ought not to barter away their present comparative
state of freedom for the state prescribed for them by the new legislation,
no matter how tempting it may otherwise appear to be. The above is
the position they will be reduced to, according to my view, under the
new legislation.
In order to avert the degrading blow, I have ventured, also, to
tell them, first, that it is their duty firmly and respectfully to decline to
submit themselves to re-registration under the Act; secondly, that, seeing
that the Transvaal is their adopted home and that they are without
any voice in the choice of their legislators, the only effective way in
which they can make themselves heard is to submit to the ultimate
result of a breach of the conditions of the law, namely, to prefer gaol to
either re-registration or leaving the country or paying the fine; and,
thirdly, that, consistently with the above attitude, they should cease to
have any communication with the Permit Department, and should ask
their friends and other Indians who may wish to re-enter the Trans-
vaal not to apply for permits, either temporary or permanent, under the
new law.
If it be said that both the last-mentioned points distinctly advance
the anti-Asiatic purpose, so be it. It merely proves what I have often said
—that the struggle, on the Indian side, is not to grasp as much of the
Transvaal trade as possible, but to remain in the country with dignity
and self-respect, and not to sell their birthright for a mess of pottage.
I admit, and many English friends have told me, that my advice
may not be widely followed. I shall still be content if the misgivings of
such friends prove to be well-founded. And, if British Indians choose to
submit to the serfdom which the legislation seeks to impose on them,
I can only say that we shall have deserved the Registration Act. We are
undoubtedly put upon our mettle, and it remains to be seen whether,
as a body, we shall rise to the occasion. I consider that the attitude
above sketched is unexceptionable, and I claim for it from the brave
colonists not derision but praise. But derision or praise, it will be chur-
lish and sinful for myself and my fellow-workers to turn aside from a
course which has been dictated by a conscientious purpose.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 14-5-1907
