418. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[LONDON,]
Magshar Vad 8 [December 10, 1914]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I got the letters from all of you. In my present helpless
condition, I do not write to everyone. Hence, take this letter as
meant for all and, on your part, all of you continue to write to me.
You say you would ask me for permission for whey after I
return. But I give it straight from here. After observing the con-
ditions there, make any exceptions that you find necessary. Do
not wait to consult me. Only, in all that you do, remember the
need for self-discipline.
You are right in concluding that agriculture is the only real
prayer and service. It is not only fitting but it is actually one's
duty to keep repeating God's name, whether we are busy in the
fields or having our meal, whether playing or wandering aimlessly,
during a bath or at any other hour. One who wants to lose him-
self in Rama, who is striving to do so, requires no particular hour;
all the same, it is necessary to have some kind of a rule for the
young. And so the time not meant for work in the fields should be
specially appointed for prayers, that is, just before daybreak, when
it is still dark. The shastras lay down that sandhya1, etc., should be
performed before dawn. The evening hour that we have set
apart is the right one.
Intensify your interest in agriculture. Plant fruit-trees.
Send for wheat from Bombay. Use the indigenous grinding
stones. Make copra or ground-nut oil at home. You will get both
milk and ghee by crushing fresh cocoanut kernel to a fine paste
and straining it through a piece of cloth. It seems this is very
beneficial. Since it is certain that you will be there for quite
some time, there is nothing wrong in stocking the necessary
articles. Wheat must be available in Calcutta. It seems they
do not use tamarind there.
I have written a letter to Mr. Pearson, which I think he will
show you. It will be an excellent thing if the elders among you
undertake to do some service for every teacher.
As for the expenditure on all of you, that on Kuppu's and
Naidoo's sons and for Maganbhai will be met from the Satyagraha
Fund. For you, Manilal and others, I shall make some arrange-
ment. The money for Sivapujan, Shanti and Navin is to be
provided by the respective parents. The expenses for Chhotam
are to be met from the Satyagraha Fund.
From what Mr. Andrews wrote, it appeared that Gurudev
would bear the expenses. But you need not discuss the question.
Let him, if he does; if not, it should not matter.
Make everything you can with your own hands. Get used
to doing without the things which you cannot make.
If only we learn to maintain ourselves by agriculture and
manual labour, there will be nothing more for us to earn or learn.
That is what I too must learn. I may, however, pass away with-
out doing so. Let that not happen to you.
If Gurudev is likely to be put to inconvenience and if there is
not enough room there, ask him to let you live in a tent or make
some other arrangements.
Personally, I have always felt, and it now appears that there
is no institution today in the world to excel Phoenix in its ideals
or its way of life. If there is any, the civilized world has not
heard of it. I am happy that all of you have the same impression.
While I am yet to recover, Ba has had an acute attack of
menorrhagia since yesterday. I do not know what God has willed.
Ba is confined to bed and so I have forced myself to get up. Let
none of you be anxious, however.
Since my diet was deficient in organic salts, Dr. Allinson has
advised me to take roots and tubers and leafy vegetables. And so,
even in this dangerous condition, I am making experiments. My
diet is as follows: In the morning, I have soup with two or three
tea-spoonfuls of dry banana brought from there and ground-nut,
with tomatoes and a spoonful of oil added. At noon, I take a small
carrot and one half of a small raw turnip, with eight biscuits, made
of wheat or banana flour, boiled. Sometimes, in place of carrot and
turnip, I take two leaves of cabbage, crushed. In the evening, two
spoonfuls of rice, boiled, with vegetables as above or dry figs, soaked
in water, with a small piece of bread made of banana flour or
wheat. This is the routine at present. The intention is to replace
cooked items with uncooked articles and wheat by nuts. I take
two apples in the morning. I have been taking raw vegetables for
nearly a month now. I have observed no harm from this at any
rate. You used to say that vegetables could be eaten raw, but I
would not believe it. I find many persons here eating vegetables
raw. The practice has many implications. I cannot write about
them, however. Later, I may. I have taken a final vow here
not to have milk and ghee. Doctors were very insistent, and I
feared I might give in if I did not take a solemn vow. Hereafter,
I will never consume these things in this present life. I will take
other vows when I am there, though I cannot be sure that I will
not take some here meanwhile, occasion arising.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6097;
also Gandhijini Sadhana
