293. LETTER TO W. H. LEWIS
BETTIAH,
April 28, 1917
DEAR MR. LEWIS 1 ,
I have your note of even date. I thank you for having sent me
your letter to Mr. Heycock for perusal, I appreciate the frankness
that pervades it, and it is, on the whole, a very fair summary of
what has happened between us.
As to the guns, I think you are somewhat unnecessarily offended.
I mentioned the matter to you on Mr. Heycock's suggestion, and
if you admit the propriety of my having spoken to you about the
matter, I could not be blamed for having told the aggrieved parties
that there was a probability of their getting back their guns. This,
if anything, was done to create a good impression about yourself—
an impression which, I am happy to say, I carried with me [when]
I first met you and which I have had no reason to change since.
There was certainly no interference on my part with your authority.
I venture to think that your deduction, too, that in the estimation
of the raiyats I am superseding local authority is hardly warranted
by facts. My mission is to invoke the help of local authority in their
aid, and to stimulate its interest in them more fully than heretofore.
I anticipate no trouble, because I always make it a point to
seek an interview with the planters wherever I go, to tell the people
that relief is to come not from me but from the planters and the
Government, and that they are in no case to use violence or stop
work, but continue it as before as if there was no enquiry being made
by me, and also because the enquiry is absolutely open and attended
by representatives of the police department, as also the planters.
You are less than fair to Babu Brajkishore Prasad. Together
with other friends from Bihar, he is helping me very materially.
In this enquiry he has no status apart from me; hence he and
the other friends have not called on you. But I must state that
their assistance has been of the greatest value to me.
Perhaps it is but fair to the planters to say that Mr. Still has
of his own motion invited me to visit his dehat and remain there as
long as I like and that Mr. Cox has written to me saying that he is
arranging a meeting with some leading planters, and concludes
"you may be sure that we wish to assist you in your enquiry". This
perhaps is in conflict with your statement, "By the planters he(I)
is regarded with great suspicion as their natural enemy."
I wish to serve my countrymen and the planters through the
Government where their assistance is necessary.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 51, pp.
98-
