264. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 15, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter has arrived in due time. It is now nearly 4.20
and we have finished the morning prayer. Chhaganlal Joshi
makes the fourth member of the human family and if we add the
feline members, we make seven. Only the latter won't attend
the prayers. Their recognition of kinship is confined to the
common board.
Chhaganlal's arrival has facilitated despatch of work, but has
not reduced my hours of labour. It was not expected to. Things
that must be attended to by me, have to be. The pressure must
continue at least till 2nd January.
What is it that prevents the heart from following or co-
operating with reason? Can it be want of faith? Though I
have not come to any final decision, my opinion tends in that
direction. Though my reason tells me that there is no need to
avoid a snake if I have love in me, it must be my want of faith
that prevents my association with him. Instances of this character
can be multiplied. I would like you to make researches in this
direction and try to trace the cause of conflict between the heart
and reason in every case you can recall. By so doing it may be
possible for you to make the heart co-operative with reason. If
it is good for me and everybody that I should fast, why should the
heart refuse to rejoice? The heart does rejoice if I am healthy.
It is better in certain cases that I should fast than that I should
be healthy. Reason says so, yet the heart rejects the clear testi-
mony of reason. Does it do so for want of faith?
Or is there
here self-deception and as a matter of fact reason has not perceived
the necessity for fasting as it has for the preservation of health?
Here I have simply stated the problem for you without presuming
to decide. I cannot have sufficient data for coming to a decision
even if I wanted to come to a decision. I must leave this subject
at this point for the time being at any rate.
My weight is now 103. I have reduced the quantity of
milk, knocked off bread and increased the quantity of oranges
from eight to sixteen. Dates too have been dropped for the time
200
being. Of milk I am taking just one lb. Presently I hope to
increase the quantity of milk.
I have sent you Dr. Gour's book for the information it is
likely to contain. Justice Amir Ali's is likely to be a superior
book as a historical work. I may be mistaken.
It is useless to appeal The Times of India to publish my
statements in full. I shall try to get someone to send you copies
of the statements. There can be no objection to your receiving
them for they are to be found in the papers allowed to you if
you took them in.
Ba is expected to finish her tour on 16th and come to Poona.
Appa is not the Anna of Madras. Appa belongs to Maha-
rashtra. He is a learned man. He was a teacher in the Ashram
before you came. He is very lean. His brother Shripatrao you
must have seen. He was in charge of the sales department.
The whole incident was deeply interesting and very human.
We are all doing well. Dahyabhai has had a slight relapse
but no complications.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
I am sending the first nine statements save seventh and
eighth. These I must find out. . . . 4
From a photostat: C.W. 9511. Courtesy: Mirabehn
