335. LETTER TO KIRCHAND KOTHARI
December 21, 1932
BHAI KIRCHAND,
I got your letter, and also both the pamphlets. You probably
know that we are at present four kept together in this jail. When
your pamphlet was read, it seemed to be an occasion either for
tears or laughter. Ordinarily, I do not read the letters but they
are read out to me. But it happened by chance that I started
reading your pamphlet, and at the very first sentence, since I
could not weep as I have now grown stone-hearted, I burst out into
laughter and went on laughing to the end. But it was a matter
for tears, not for laughter. The language is not in the least that
of non-violence. It is not civil either. You are under the vow to
remain absolutely peaceful and non-violent. You have made no
effort at all in your pamphlet to win over the sanatani friends with
love. Every word of it is likely to make them angry. You have
invited them to belabour you. Your language is theatrical. It
will not teach the youths the lesson either of peace or of civility,
let alone truth. And there is no limit to self-praise. However,
what I fear is that I am not likely to succeed in explaining to
people my ideas. How can people change all at once if they
are accustomed to using such language?
I hope you got my reply to your previous letter . You must
have seen that my advice had been quite the opposite to what
has actually happened. If, however, you did want to hold a meet-
ing, you could have done so without issuing violent pamphlets.
Your duty was, before doing that, to see some reasonable sanatanists,
or, if you did not find any, to seek the help of the State and hold
the meeting if you got it. If you had not held the meeting, you
would not have failed to serve the cause of Harijans. I see no
victory in the fact that the sanatanists did not come to the meeting
to break it up. They must have felt very angry, but they may
have got frightened by the strength of your numbers. These
things betoken violence on your part.
Your variety of non-
violence puts my non-violence to shame, and I learn some truth
even from the poisonous writings of the sanatanists. This is not
252
the way to save dharma, and it is with that end in view that we
try to serve Harijans. What more shall I say?
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2861. Courtesy: Shardabehn Shah
