432. LETTER TO RAMU THAKKAR
ASHRAM,
April 24, 1926
BHAISHRI RAMU,
I have your letter. You have described me as the creator of
a new age and asked my advice. But after describing me thus you
have immediately proceeded to demolish that image; while seek-
ing my advice, you yourself have given me some. A person who
goes to a medical man who has but one remedy for all diseases,
and asks for one other than that, can only be said to be pulling his
leg. Don't you think you have done something like that? More-
over, this is your estimate of the achievement of the creator of an
age: "In your unfruitful effort to win swaraj, you have wasted
many years and much money and energy." Tell me now, what
sort of peace of mind do you hope to learn from a creator of an
age such as this? You may dislike the charkha, but why malign
Ramanama? If you only keep repeating that name, all the girls and
women who haunt your imagination will win their freedom. You
seem to think that Ramanama is for the passionless; what has such a
person to do with Ramanama? It was a person troubled by lustful
thoughts who discovered the power of that name, and it was be-
cause I used it to quench the fire of passion in me and found it
effective that I have been recommending it to men and women
who are troubled in the same way.
There are not as many unhappy women and girls as you think
there are. The unhappy ones can, if they choose, take the help of
the law. Yes, it is certainly true that these women are not con-
scious of their rights, and those who are do not have the strength
to assert them. The remedy is simply the spread of true edu-
cation. True education means building of character, and that
is not possible without Ramanama. Moreover, such unhappy women
are generally without any means and, if they wish to preserve
their virtue, the charkha is the only means for them. These are
some of the reasons why for me learning begins with these two,
[Ramanama and charkha]. But how can I expect you to approve
of my ideas? So you will have to look elsewhere for a remedy
for the suffering which you think exists. If you fail in your search,
you may come to me. My faith and patience are inexhaustible,
and I will, therefore, wait for you quietly.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
SHRI RAMU PARMANAND THAKKAR
SHAMALDAS COLLEGE
BHAVNAGAR
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19908
