571. LETTER TO T. PRAKASAM
AS FROM KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ POST,
DISTT. NOAKHALI,
CAMP: CHANDIPUR,
January 4, 1947
DEAR PRAKASAM,
I have your two letters dated 10th and 11th [ultimo] and telegram
sent from New Delhi. At the time of dictation they are not in front
of me. I am dictating this in the small hours of the morning. I am
glad the fast of Sriramulu ended in the happy manner you describe.
He had sent me a telegram immediately he broke his fast. I know
he is a solid worker though a little eccentric.
I am glad too that Shri Daniel Thomas never delivered the speech
attributed to him.
About the Madras quota spindles I am absolutely clear. If I were
the Government of Madras as you are and I had the backing of public
1 Potti Sriramulu had been fasting to secure temple-entry for Harijans in
Madras Province; vide Vol. LXXXVI, p. 242.
2 Minister of Prohibition, Madras
opinion in the shape of mass opinion I would do this in spite of the
manufactured opinion of interested parties and, if the worst happened,
I would pay for the spindles of my quota and yet not use them. I
regard mill-owners' and Chamber of Commerce's opinion to be
interested in the sense that they and their supporters have made up
their minds that what is good for them is good for the whole of India.
It is not a question of honesty and dishonesty, it is a question pure
and simple of conflict of ideals. Of course, it is open to these gentlemen
to retort that in my sense the opinion of the masses may also be called
interested. If such be the argument I would hold that the interest of
the masses as conceived by them must prevail over that of the classes.
It is conceivable that in certain cases the opinion of the classes may
be intrinsically right and that of the masses intrinsically absurd. This
to my mind is the crux of democracy. Hence, as the Government, if
I am confident about the backing of the masses, I would tell the Centre
that my Government would pay damages for breach of contract if that
be the legal result. I must serve the masses to the best of my
ability.
Jajuji tells me that the scheme you have announced has not been
put into operation. If you do not strike the iron while it is hot the
whole thing might become stale and might not produce the anticipated
result. Of course, I am utterly out of court here because I do not
know full facts.
Blessings from
BAPU 2
SHRI T. PRAKASAM
PREMIER
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Vide also Vol. LXXXVI, p. 282.
2 In Devanagari
