150. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 19, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
As soon as I have solved one moral problem, I am faced
with another. At the moment it seems that . . .1, in whom I had
put absolute trust, has fallen. He has become mad after . . .2. He
has been inflamed with passion. By chance his passionate letters
to . . .3 fell into . . .'s hands. He sent them to me. They give a
picture of one blinded by passion. He tried to get hold of the letters
by devious means, but failed. He met me yesterday with . . .5.
Her generosity of heart is in no way less than . . .'s. Her love
of me crushes me under its weight. I see that, instead of being
angry with me, she still shows me more love than a daughter to her
father. On the other hand, . . .7 makes me tremble. He now
says that it was never his intention to marry . . .8, but that he
was only testing her. I should like to believe that this is true,
though it would be bad enough. But it sounds incredible. Nobody
believes it. If . . .9 is even now deceiving, he is showing a greater
depravity than could have been imagined in him. Vallabhbhai,
who had great liking for . . .10 also seems to have lost it. Personally,
I have not been able to judge what is in his heart. My condition
is like that of Arjuna: "I do not know where I am, nor can shake
off my fear."11 I have work before me which I must do, and it
helps me to forget all my pain. But, unknown even to me, a fire
is raging inside.
I do not know what atonement I would do if I were outside.
Nor do I know what my duty is while I am here. I do not feel that
. . .12 has been guilty. She is a completely innocent and trustful
girl. Do show this letter to Panditji, Chimanlal, Gangabehn,
Durga, Lakshmibehn and Totaramji, and to others to whom you
may think it desirable to show. Ask them to write and tell me
what they think about this matter. If. . .13 is there, he also must
read it. I wrote to him only the day before yesterday. I have
asked Kaka to discuss the matter with . . .14. He was to go to . . .15.
I have advised Kaka to detain him. I should like you to throw
what light you can on this subject. I am not in a condition just
now to write more, for I am in darkness as to my dharma in the
situation.
I have faith that I will not fail to do my dharma and that, as
always, God is clearing my path even on this occasion. Hence,
even though you may see in this letter the anguish of my heart,
believe that I am calm.
BAPU
[Ps.]
You will find with this letters for Santokbehn and Lakshmi-
das.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8337. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
