213. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
SEVAGRAM,
August 20, 1946
CHI. KASHINATH,
I had thought of writing to Father. But then for the first
two days I forgot all about it. Later when I suddenly remem-
bered it no one could tell me his name. I think I had asked
you to leave me his name and address and you had said I
should ask someone or the other. No one however could give
me the name. It is possible that you left it with Krishna-
chandra, but he stays in Paunar. I could not get it from the
Mahila Ashram either. Now that I have to reply to your
letter I shall say here what I want to write to Father. Tell
him it is only natural for a father to be grieved by the pass-
ing away of a young son. But if one takes a dispassionate and
broad view, why should one grieve? Everyone who is born
must die, the only difference being whether death comes soon
or late. Why grieve over it then? And one who looks upon all
children as his own—and Father must adopt such an attitude—
over whom can such a person grieve? Thus I would suggest
that if the cause of this death has been found we should try
190
and remove the possibility of its recurrence in respect of others.
The main cause of typhoid is believed to be contaminated
water. Wherever this cause has been removed casualties from
typhoid have been reduced almost to nil.
Now the reply to your letter. Wherever there is a clash
between groups of workers it should be understood that neither
party seeks Government help. If this is assured the conflict
tends to stop. And if they do not accept Government help one
of the parties should wisely and courageously stay calm. The
conflict will then dissolve. Everyone does not readily realize
this. Hence, one should acquire enough strength for self-defence.
Detecting and removing the cause of conflict is the universally
accepted remedy. But where one party is determined to se-
cure power by resorting to conflict, then there is nothing one
can do. It is very clear and also painful. And the remedy
lies either in the violent or the non-violent way described
above.
SHRI KASHINATH TRIVEDI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
