644. LETTER TO G. B. PANT
'MANOR VILLE',
June 29, 1945
BHAI GOVIND BALLABH PANT1,
Yesterday I came to know that you had gone to Rajaji's
house and there all of a sudden felt giddy. I was given to un-
derstand that in any case you were not feeling too fit and that
partly I was responsible for it. That should not be so. I am
very firm in my view and I should be so. There may be
occasions when you do not agree with my views. So what?
All of us, if we want to serve the country, should have our own
opinions. Only then can the country forge ahead and a way be
shown to the people. I firmly believe that you should not work
at the cost of your health. Stop worrying and do not feel un-
happy that you do not agree with my views.
The more I think the more convinced I become that if the
Working Committee tries to select as many Hindus as there are
1 (1887-1961); Advocate, Allahabad High Court; in 1928, during demon-
stration against Simon Commission at Lucknow, suffered lathi blows from
which he never fully recovered; was leader of Swaraj Party in United Provinces
Legislative Council, 1923-30, and U. P. Premier, 1937-39; Chief Minister
of Uttar Pradesh, 1946-55; Home Minister, Government of India, 1955-61.
381
Muslims then the communal poison will spread throughout the
country and we will never be able to win freedom. What is the
harm if the Congress is reduced from a majority to a minority?
Must we do a wrong thing to maintain our majority? Will not
the Congress become a communal organization by selecting as
many Hindus as there are Muslims?
If the Congress takes the fewest of Hindus, and as many as
possible from the other communities, the communal poison will
be removed and it will succeed in bringing freedom nearer. I
quite see that now the first step towards freedom has to be taken
through the Government. The course should be straight so far
as we are concerned.
If people do not accept this, then let the reins of Government
be passed to those whom the people approve. Everything will
be all right even if there are only a few straightforward persons.
This is my opinion and I can never give it up.
You have taken for granted that the Working Committee at
Bombay has accepted the principle of parity. I have rejected it.
Please get well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
