363. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
SODEPUR,
December 23, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I got your letter of the 16th and postcard of the 19th.
No fee is to be charged from the poor who may be admitted
as indoor patients, but we shall accept what they can offer.
In other words, we shall follow the practice obtaining in Seva-
gram. At present even our expenses on food are so heavy that
no person of ordinary means can meet them. We shall have to
consider what diet we can devise for those people which will
cure them and help them to keep fit.
2. Along with the poor we shall admit only such wealthy
patients who agree to live as the poor do.
I can see no place for them in this sanatorium if they have to
be provided special facilities. I shall not permit even providing
a special room for a rich patient simply because he is rich.
The plan of constructing new rooms, etc., does not appeal to me
just now. For we shall know only from experience how many
poor patients will seek admission or how many of them we
shall admit. We shall see what to do when we run short of
accommodation. My view, therefore, is that we should incur no
expenditure just now except what is absolutely essential.
3. The chairs, etc., will of course have to be removed.
The Doctor himself wished to buy up some of the furniture. I
do not know whether he still wishes to do so. If he does not,
I am afraid I shall have to arrange for their disposal. I can
only hope that I shall be able to do so. We shall have to
make do with the number of beds we have at present. I see
that there will be no occasion in the immediate future to admit
a large number of patients.
4. The reply to this is contained in what has been stated
above.
5. If the boiler for heating water has become useless, it should
be replaced by a new one. I did have some talk with the Doctor
about it, but I forget what decision we took. If it is necessary
to seek the help of the mill-owner in the neighbourhood or of
Birlaji, I shall be ready to do so. Do what the Doctor suggests
in this matter.
6. There is no reason to believe that we shall start getting
patients right from January 1. We shall need to make arrange-
ments only for those who are already there. And they can even
sit on the floor and eat off porcelain plates.
7. I have made arrangements to buy the required quantity
of khadi. If, therefore, you let me know the requirements, I
shall be able to supply it. You yourself suggested five to seven
rolls for three dozen bed-sheets. Will that number suffice?
8. Please consider whether those among the workers there
who have their own arrangements for meals can continue the prac-
tice. I think it is our duty willingly to have meat served to
those who are used to it and whose need we ought to supply.
I see no harm or pollution—no one should—in the two kinds
of food being cooked in the same kitchen. The idea of pollution
is a mere excrescence [on our religion]. Those who are vegeta-
rians should follow their dharma. It is self-evident to me that
utensils used for cooking meat should not be used for cooking
vegetables. In this matter I think we ought to respect the wishes
of the Doctor and Gulbai. There should not be even the slightest
suspicion that we are indirectly trying to introduce vegetarian
food. But we welcome anybody accepting vegetarianism on his
own as being good for him.
I think it will be our duty to supply meat or eggs to those
patients for whom the Doctor may consider them necessary.
9. The selection of medical assistants will rest with the
Doctor.
10. Calls for no reply.
11. Just now I would regard Balkoba as representing the
standard for poor patients.
12. I agree with the Doctor that ultimately we shall have
to shift to some large place. I have the fullest faith that God
will make our path clear.
13. There is no need just now to call anybody from Seva-
gram. I have already written to you about Manibhai. He will
come whenever we send for him.
14. The expenditure will have to be met by me. Is there
no balance in the bank account there? I think I asked this ques-
tion in a previous letter too. Probably it was in a letter addressed
to the Doctor.
15. I have always held the view which you have expressed.
I think I have now replied to all your questions. If, however,
there is anything you do not follow, do write to me. Address
the letter to Sodepur.
I got your postcard today. The reply to the question you
have asked in it is contained in what I have said above.
I have not revised the letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 8622. Also C.W. 7195. Cour-
tesy : Munnalal G. Shah
