717. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
POONA,
October 21, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI 3 ,
As it is difficult to decipher my handwriting, I am dictating
this letter so that it can be written in a clear hand.
Sardar and I keep receiving telegrams suggesting that you
should be put up as a candidate for the Central Legislative As-
sembly. I myself have no interest in the elections. A durbar daily
assembles round the Sardar, but I know nothing about it. Ordi-
narily he does not talk to me nor do I ask him anything. I
attend to my work and he attends to his. The only reason for
our being together this time is his nature-cure treatment. He
does not have much faith in nature cure while I have. An
operation would be a very risky affair. No doctor except Dr.
Deshmukh advises it. That is why he has put faith in me and
is undergoing nature-cure treatment. I have, accordingly, brought
him to Dr. Mehta for I have faith in him. My own knowledge
of nature cure is superficial. I have given this introduction
because I thought it necessary.
If Sardar receives any suggestion regarding you, he puts it
before me. Since you have accepted my advice, I assume that
you yourself are not at all keen on getting into the Central As-
sembly, and that, therefore, those who send the telegrams do not
do so at your instance. Some big people naturally desire your
presence in the Assembly. If I were not there, perhaps Sardar
would have yielded to the pressure. But I am firm, for I am
acting as your well-wisher. I want a big service from you, if
you can give it. I wish to see you as a people's man. I don't
consider you an old man. Why shouldn't you also live up to
125? If you do not aspire to live that long, as I do, please re-
member that I try to persuade everybody to have such aspiration
for the sake of service. And it is not that there is no strength
or effort behind my aspiration. If there is none and my aspira-
tion proves fruitless, I will accept that. I am not, therefore,
afraid of death if it should come today. But I will cherish my
aspiration till my last breath, for I have to serve-I have not
yet finished with service. There is a spirit of competition to
serve which all of us should share.
From this standpoint I suggest to you that you yourself
should issue a graceful statement, thanking all those who are
trying on your behalf, explaining that you do not wish to be a
member of the Assembly at the moment and that you have been
doing, and will continue to do, whatever service you can from
outside, that if you live long enough and feel later that you
should also enter the Legislature, you yourself will come forward
and seek people's votes.
I like the work you are doing just now of defending the pri-
soners. It will bring you credit. I also wish that like Jawaharlal
and Sardar, and to a great extent Maulana Azad, you too
should come into contact with the masses. Perhaps I should cite
Rajendra Babu's case as offering the best example. Rajendra
Babu is sought after by Bihar, he himself does not go seeking the
support of Bihar. I can cite other similar instances, too. But
where is the need to do so for you? Even what I have written
above seems to me too long, but I cannot restrain my moha.
If desire also could be described as sattvika I am sure this desire
of mine is that and, therefore, I need not hide it. I trust you
are well and succeeding in your efforts.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
