410. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Phagan Shud 9 [March 9, 1911]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
From the serious attention you are giving to the study of Tamil, I
feel certain that you will some day master it.
I send one issue of Saraswati and Thoreau's biography today. I have
gone through the biographical sketch of Ramdasji in the first issue
today. It is very well written. Are you sure that you have sent me the
second issue? Please look up there and send it to me if it is there. I do
not find it here with me. Ask Purshottamdas if he has seen it. Thoreau's
biography is worth going through. Read it when you have the time.
Mr. West will see it when it is entered in the library. You may, how-
ever, draw his attention to it.
It appears that the struggle will definitely come to an end. There
is, however, little likelihood of my staying there. No one is likely to
stay [here at the Tolstoy Farm] after the struggle ends. Mr. Kallen-
bach has perhaps spent £600 on buildings alone. I see that the whole
burden will fall on him. To prevent this, I propose to stay on at the
Farm and make good as much of the loss as possible by means of physi-
cal labour. How can I leave Mr. Kallenbach immediately after the
struggle is over? At the same time it is necessary for me to go there
(Phoenix) but I do not see how it will be possible. My struggle will not
be over even when our satyagraha struggle ends. It is as it should be.
That I shall have to stay on at Mr. Kallenbach's Farm is something
not expected. I shall get plenty of experience even from that; and who
knows, it may be for my good.
As soon as the struggle is over, Mr. Polak will have to be sent to
England. He will take about six months to return. I want him to
return via India. It will be very good if Chhaganlal returns before
Mr. Polak leaves. I think in all probability he will.
I wish you to win over Harilal Thaker.
Please watch Manilal. Does he or can he put in any study?
How is Santok's health?
I give you a piece of information now which I have withheld so
far. Ba became nervous when she had a sudden attack of acute pain.
1 This letter must have been written before Chhaganlal Gandhi's arrival in
South Africa in July 1911.
2 A Hindi magazine published from Allahabad
3 Saint Ramdas of Maharashtra was a source of inspiration and strength for the
rise of the Maratha power in the seventeenth century.
I was busy and could not go to see her a second time. She must have
got angry and when I went to her she burst into tears and made it ap-
pear as if she would die. I felt somewhat awkward, but immediately
recovered myself and said to her with a smile, "Nothing to worry about
if you die. There is plenty of wood. We shall cremate you on this
Farm itself." At this she also laughed. Half the pain disappeared with the
laugh. Then I decided that very strong remedies were called for. Earth
alone would not do. So I suggested to her that she should give up vege-
tables and salt altogether. She should live on wheat and fruits only.
She might take, if she wanted, saltless rice with ghee. She said, "Even
you cannot do it." I said, "From today I give up salt, vegetables, etc."
How could she take these things then? The result is that for the last
one month both of us have been taking food without salt, vegetables
and pulses. As for myself, I have no desire for other food. Ba has it
sometimes. Once when she could not restrain herself, she took a little
gavar. Otherwise it appears she has lived on this diet. There was a mira-
culous change for the better. The bleeding stopped immediately. I got
the incidental benefit of extra self-control. This is my argument [as
regards the eschewing of salt]: Salt is a powerful chemical. Even a
little when added to something changes its quality and taste. Its effect
must be to thin the blood. So far as I can think, salt is bound to have
an instant effect on the sick—and mostly adverse at that. When I
first read the writings of Mrs. Wallace and others [on the subject],
they had little effect on me. On this occasion I felt all the time that it
would be fine if the doctor could be kept away. Thereupon, it occur-
red to me to note the effect of saltless diet. Even though Ba may
continue her [saltless diet] throughout this month, she won't keep it
up beyond that. I think of carrying on the experiment as long as
possible.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Please share this with Purshottamdas.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5079
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
