159. LETTER TO AKBAR HYDARI
SHREE RASHTREEYASHALA, RAJKOT,
April 10, 1939
DEAR SIR AKBAR,
Shri Ghanshyamsinh Gupta and Shri Deshbandhu Gupta
have followed me to Rajkot to seek my advice after the utter
breakdown of negotiations between the Government and the
Aryasamaj by reason of H. E. H.'s Government's denial of the
reports about negotiations.
I may state that for some time I have been advising the
Aryasamaj friends who have regard for my opinions to suspend
the civil disobedience part of their movement and give a chance
to negotiations. I need not go into the reasons that actuated
me to give the advice. The friends were seriously considering my
advice, when a door seemed to them to open to its acceptance
on grounds other than those I had advanced. I refer to the nego-
tiations. They thought that if their minimum demand could
be satisfied they would discontinue the civil disobedience. But as
stated, their hope was frustrated. Now they want me to guide
them as to the next step. They wanted to issue a manifesto
stating their ground for entertaining the opinion that actual nego-
tiations had started.
On reading the manifesto I felt that before I could give
them guidance I should write to you myself and know your
own opinion.
If the information I gather from the manifesto is true, the
Nizam Government's denial is inexplicable. Here are the rele-
vant paragraphs from the draft manifesto which has been with-
held for the time being at my instance:
About the last week of February, the Divisional Commissioner and
the Collector of Gulburga interviewed Mahatma Narain Swami Maharaj,
the leader of the movement, in Jail with a view to ascertain the griev-
ances of the Aryas, and promised to move the higher authorities to explore
the possibilities for an amicable settlement.
On the 27th March, 1939, Mr. S. T. Hollins, the Director-General
of Police and Jails, Hyderabad State, Nawab Ghos Yarjang Bahadur,
Commissioner, Gulburga Division, Mr. Razvi, the Collector, Gulburga
District, and the Superintendent, Gulburga Jail, interviewed Mahatma
Narain Swamiji Maharaj, Kunvar Chand Karanji Sharda, Lala Khushal-
chandji and Swami Vivekanandji in the Gulburga Jail and Mr.
S. T. Hollins made certain proposals, the substance of which was
that H. E. H. the Nizam's Government would take no objection what-
ever to the hoisting of the Om flags, that no permission would
be required for building yajnashalas and havan-kundas and all Arya-
samajs and Mandirs at present existing without any permission
having been obtained would be recognized, and in the matter of build-
ing new temples, machinery would be provided to secure the granting
of sanction within 15 days of the application, sanction not to be with-
held on any ground other than the ground of its location being such as
to give rise to communal disturbances and full liberty of preaching re-
ligious doctrines (dharma-prachar) with due regard to the feelings of
the followers of other faiths would be secured.
Mahatma Narain Swamiji and his colleagues expressed their willingness
to recommend the above proposals as the basis for negotiating the settle-
ment, provided the settlement conformed to the spirit of the Sholapur
Resolutions. Swamiji made it clear to Mr. Hollins that the authority to
call off the satyagraha movement rested with the Sarva Deshik Sabha.
Mr. Hollins thereupon undertook to arrange a meeting of the re-
presentatives of the Sarva Deshik Sabha and the Government Officers
concerned at Hyderabad and also to arrange for the transfer of Swamiji
Maharaj and his three colleagues to Hyderabad for participating in the
discussions. On the request of the Swamiji, Mr. Hollins and the Com-
missioner Nawab Ghos Yarjang Bahadur promised that the representatives
of Sarva Deshik Sabha would not be molested and their records would
not be seized or otherwise interfered with.
Swamiji Maharaj, having been thus assured, called Swami Swatantra-
nandji, Secretary, Satyagraha Committee, Sholapur, by telegram and
also forwarded the notes recording the substance of the above con-
versation duly countersigned by Jail Superintendent, to the President,
Secretary and some other members of the Sarva Deshik Sabha. On the
7th instant when I, Messrs G. S. Gupta and Deshbandhu Gupta saw
Narain Swamiji in Gulburga Jail, the Jail Superintendent told us that
before putting his own signature he had shown the notes of the con-
versation contained in Swamiji's letters to the Talukdar, Gulburga,
and had got his approval.
Swami Swatantranandji went to Gulburga and interviewed Narain
Swamiji Maharaj who asked the former that an emergent meeting of
the working committee of the Sarva Deshik Sabha should be immediately
convened at Sholapur before 10th April 1939.
Swami Swatantranandji convened the meeting at Sholapur and wrote
to Sir Akbar Hydari sending him a copy of the gist of the conversation
Narain Swamiji Maharaj had with Mr. Hollins and his colleagues and
informing him that the representatives of the Sarva Deshik Sabha would
be reaching Hyderabad to meet the State representatives on the 9th April
to discuss the question and requesting him to communicate the time
and place of the meeting. In a letter dated the 1st April, 1939, Swami
Swatantranandji also wrote to the Superintendent, Gulburga Jail, inform-
ing him that in addition to the members of the Executive body of the
International Aryan League, the gentlemen named in the letter would
represent the Sarva Deshik Sabha at the Hyderabad meeting.
Swami Swatantranandji received a letter No. 2697, dated the 3rd
April, 1939, from the Superintendent, Central Jail, Gulburga, which is
very important, as it throws considerable light on the present controversy;
it reads as follows:
"With reference to your letter No. 37060, dated the 31st March, '39,
received today, I write to inform you that it has been decided to hold
the meeting of your representatives with Mahatma Narain Swami, Mr.
Khushalchand and others at Gulburga but not at Hyderabad. Please get
all your representatives to Sholapur and send to Gulburga by the
morning mail of the 7th April, 1939, so that they may see Mahatma
Narain Swami and others beforehand and be ready for the 8th instant
to talk with the State officers.
"I assure you that your representatives would never be harassed by
police nor would your papers be seized here provided there would be
no demonstration on your part. Kindly let me know the date and
time of their arrival at Gulburga by telegram so that necessary arrange-
ments may be made here. I am writing this to you with the approval
of the First Talukdar, Gulburga."
The letter speaks for itself and shows that the Jail Superintendent
wrote with full authority because he distinctly states that the deputation
was to meet the State officials on the 8th April, 1939.
While the leaders of the Aryasamaj were on their way to Hydera-
bad, Hyderabad Government issued the surprising communique that
the news published in certain sections of Press that H. E. H. the Nizam's
Government were negotiating with the International Aryan League with
a view to arrive at some settlement or compromise was totally incorrect.
The letter dated 3rd instant and signed by the Superinten-
dent of the Central Jail, Gulburga, seems to be conclusive. I
suggest that even if Mr. Rollins and other officials were over-
enthusiastic and went beyond their authority, their action should
69-
be endorsed by H. E. H.'s Government for the sake of the good
name if for nothing else. Public confidence in the word of such
a great Government as H. E. H. the Nizam's ought not to be
shaken, but perhaps there is a sound answer to what prima facie
appears to be unanswerable. May I expect an early reply?
I
am fixed up in Rajkot at present.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10216
