273. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
January 30, 1933
BHAI MUNSHI,
I read your three speeches. Two of them do not help one
much to understand you but I did get something from the third.
I liked it. The speeches would have told me more about you if
the dates of all of them had been given. I will now try to glance
through some of your books which have been received here and, if
I feel like it, will write to you about them. You have aroused
my interest. I do want to get much public service from you, and
your books will help me to know you well.
Now about another matter. You are one of the trustees appo-
inted by Kabibai's will. I saw your scheme for the high school.
It was shown to me by Bhai Mulji. You must be aware that
the High Court's order includes primary education. Despite that,
why have you decided to start only a high school? And even in the
high school I see that you have given place only to pupils drawn
from a higher social level. Think over the following points and
let me have your views:
1. What is meant by "high class Hindus"?
2. Does not the clause of the will under which you have
framed your scheme also include primary education?
3. If it does, why have you excluded primary education?
4. Don't you think that you have made the hostel of the
high school very expensive?
5. What place have you given to the mother tongue in your
scheme?
6. Does the phrase "for high class Hindus" mean that the
untouchable communities cannot take advantage of the high
school? I have heard of a case in which it was ruled that, if an
institution was established for a particular class, there was no
bar to the admission of other classes if they could be admitted
without injury to the interests of the former and if that class did
not raise any objection to these others being admitted.
I hope you are all right. If you cannot write with either of
the two hands, you need not write yourself. You may take the
help of one of your companions.
Lilavati has not yet come and seen me. We are all well.
Regards from us all to you and your companions.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20144
