78. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Vaisakh Vad 14 [May 27, 1911]
CHI. HARILAL,
I have the letter you wrote before leaving Delagoa Bay. It
is desirable that Rami grows up under the influence of strictly
Indian ideas. Accordingly, I think you have done right in deciding
not to send her chocolates. However, I should caution you against
taking the line that 'this must be done because Bapu wants it so'.
From among the ideas I suggest, you should put only those into
practice that appeal to you. I should like you to grow up in
freedom. I know your motives are good. Whenever your ideas
are mistaken, they will therefore get corrected automatically.
The prisoners have not been released so far but they will soon be.
It appears that the cable I sent you about [the need for] your
applying for registration has not reached you. I sent it care of
Nanji Dulabhdas.
Keep reading Indian Opinion carefully while you are there.
The following Gujarati books are eminently worth reading:
Kavyadohan, Panchikaran, Maniratnamala, Dasbodh, Chapter VI of
Yogavasishtha—Hindi translation available—Poet Narmadashanker's
Dharma vishe Vichar6, two volumes of Raychandbhai's writings.
And, of course, there are Karanghelo and other books. Karan-
ghelo evidences the maturity of the Gujarati language. Taylor's
grammar and his introduction to it are both very good. I have
forgotten whether it is a preface or a separate essay on the
Gujarati language.
I should advise you to make it a regular practice to read
Tulsidasa's Ramayana. Most of the books I have listed at the end
of Indian Home Rule are worth going through. In order to learn
Sanskrit well, I would advise you always to start your reading with
it. Only then will you remember and understand it all. You
won't find it difficult after the first book is properly done. Do not
take up the second book before you have mastered the first.
Whenever you come across a Sanskrit verse, you should immediately
try to understand its meaning in Gujarati.
Please write to me in detail and regularly.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9532
