260. LETTER TO SRI PRAKASA
BOLGARH (ORISSA),
December 11, 1927
MY DEAR SRI PRAKASA,
You must forgive me for not replying to your letter for such a
long time, but I have been worked beyond my strength and have
had no time left for dealing with voluminous correspondence. It
is only because I am having enforced rest at an unknown and
out-of-the-way village in Utkal, that I am able to deal with the
arrears, and in the natural course I have come upon your letter.
Here is the receipt sent to me with your letter from the Ashram.
The Aaj people should not complain. Complimentary copies
have been sent only to well-known English papers. Even well-known
friends have not been supplied with copies simply because after
all Young India and Navajivan are at present very poor concerns.
They do not command the circulation of 1920 and 1921, and yet
the rigid rule of remaining self-supporting in spite of the handi-
caps in the shape of not taking advertisements, etc., is observed, and
whenever there is anything left over from the running of these
papers, the whole of it goes for public cause. Should Aaj then
expect a free copy, it would be simply taking so much out of poor
people's pockets. If, in spite of this explanation, you or the workers
at the Aaj office expect a free copy, tell me and I shall ask Swami
Anand to send one. Of course I know that Aaj is a leading paper
on your side as is Basumati for instance in Calcutta. But so far as
I am aware, no vernacular paper has had the English copy.
Do please take me in your confidence either by letter or by
coming to me. I would love to share your burdens. Do regard me
therefore as a friend who would treasure your confidence and
endeavour to lighten your burdens. I am at Sabarmati in Janu-
ary. I am sorry I shall have to go to Kathiawar for a few days
during that month. But if you will be there for the whole of the
month, you can go with me to Kathiawar also and see that weird
country.
Do take up the charkha regularly and once you have obtained
mastery over it, you will not want to give it up, and it will be a
faithful companion speaking to you only at your behest. But you
will find all the joy in the handling of it only if you will connect
it and through it yourself with the meanest of our people. And
why should there be any shame in carrying on the takli, if there is
no shame in identifying with the poorest. I suppose you do know
that the shepherds in Almora and in many other parts of India
carry their taklis, spinning wool wherever they go.
Yours,
SJT. SRI PRAKASA
BANARAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 12646
