113. LETTER TO SARALADEVI CHAUDHRANI
ON THE WAY TO MANMAD FOR BOMBAY,
August 24, 1920
MY DEAREST S.,
Your letters have caused me distress. You do not like my
sermons. And yet so long as you remain a school girl, what should
I do except giving you sermons? If my love is true it must ex-
press itself in sermons so long as you do not realize the ideal
accepted by you as worthy. I do not at all like your doubting
the necessity of the life adopted by you or the life you are trying
to adopt. What can be the reward of always speaking and doing
Truth even at the peril of one's life? What can be the reward of
dying for one's country? What is the reward of your having given
years to acquiring perfection in piano-playing? You give all for
the cause you represent because you cannot do otherwise. Your
satisfaction must depend upon complete surrender. A surrender
XVIII-13
that gives not satisfaction is compulsory surrender, unworthy of a
self-respecting person. And if your association with me does not
teach you this simple truth, I must be unworthy of your love. For,
if my life has not taught you this much, I am a worthless being.
There is no worth in me except the capacity for unlimited self-
surrender and truthfulness. All have noticed these two qualities
in me and there must be something wrong in me if you who have
penetrated my life so deeply have failed to notice them. And what
can I give you to share except my richest possessions? And so,
you must not resent my giving you sermons but receive them in the
same loving manner in which they are delivered. If I am your Law-
giver and if I do not always lay down the law, surely I must at
least reason with you on things of eternity or supreme Impor-
tance for the country for which we live and which we love
so well.
But this does not mean that you must not write nasty things
if you think them. My plea is that you must cease to think nasty
thoughts.
With love,
Yours,
L. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
