494. LETTER TO SHANKERRAO DEO
July 20, 1937
MY DEAR DEO,
I have now heard from Shri Kelkar. He has forgotten to
return the cutting which I had sent him. I, therefore, send
my reply from memory.
About Shri Savarkar, I did refuse to sign the memorial,
for, as I told those who came to me, it was wholly unnecessary
as Shri Savarkar was bound to be released after the coming
into force of the new Act, no matter who the Ministers were.
And that is what has happened. The Savarkar Brothers, at
least, know that whatever the differences between us as to cer-
tain fundamentals, I could never contemplate with equanimity
their incarceration.
Perhaps, Dr. Savarkar will bear me out when I say that
I did whatever was in my power after my own way to secure
their release. And the barrister will perhaps recall the pleasant
relations that existed between us when we met for the first time
in London and how, when nobody was forthcoming,
I presi-
ded at the meeting that was held in his honour in London.
As to my relations with the late Lokamanya Tilak, our
differences were well known and yet we were on the friendliest
terms. After all, you, Gangadharrao Deshpande and others who
know me would perhaps testify that I yield to no one in my
regard to Lokamanya for his burning patriotism, his fearlessness,
his magnetic personality and his great learning.
As to office-acceptance, I have not retraced my steps. I
have no repentance for the advice I gave in 1920 to boycott
the Legislatures. I have not a shadow of doubt that the absten-
tion of the Congress deprived them of the false halo of glory which
they had acquired. In now strongly advising the Congress
to send its representatives to the Legislatures and even to accept
office I have responded to the wholly new circumstances that have
since come into being. I have never made a fetish of foolish
consistency.
Whilst you are at liberty to publish this letter, my personal
inclination is that I should suffer in silence the cruel misinter-
pretation that Shri Kelkar has given of my motives and atti-
tude.
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-7-1937
