552. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 2, 1935
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
You must have read the explanation about how to make bone-
manure. About the other processes, I have got an article specially
written. Read it carefully and try the methods or induce somebody
else to do so. They are such as can be tried without any help.
You can even send somebody here and get him trained. Lakshmi-
das intends to send someone.
I have preserved the report of the Sangh in the hope of being
able to read it some time, but I do not know when I shall be.
I alone know under what pressure I am working.
It is true that I have given up fruit. They cost too much.
I do eat those which are cheap, but no fruit is cheap just now.
Orange peel is certainly cheap and whenever there is any I get it
made into jam. I then need less of jaggery and the purpose of
eating fruit is also partly served. I am experimenting just now
with such jam. But generally I depend only on milk and green
vegetables, besides honey of course. There has been no ill effect.
It remains to be seen how long I can go on with this diet. We
cannot judge in a short time. I eat green leaves, as also pumpkin,
gourd, etc., which grow in the garden here. Just now we get
lady's fingers and pumpkin, besides bhaji.
Bhansali is behaving with great self-restraint. He submits
to my control and takes care of his health. He keeps very cheer-
ful. If I restrain him too much, I am afraid, I would lose him.
So I restrain him only as much as he will bear. His path is entirely
different from ours. How can we, therefore, compare his way of
life with mine or anybody else's? Who knows who is right?
May it not be that both of us are right? How can one blind person
judge another blind person? Both will deserve compliments if
they escape falling into a ditch. I have given your message to
Bhansali. Whenever he laughs, he fills the whole room with his
laughter. We don't have the privacy of the Ashram here. He
occupies one corner in a big room, which is shared with him by
Kanti, Navin and three or four others. No extra space is left.
The picture of the conditions here is quite interesting. With
me are Mahadev, Kanu, and Mirabehn as permanent fixtures.
Others come and go
Another room is occupied at present by
Nimu and her three children, and three more women. Amtus-
salaam spends the day in the kitchen or in my room. And so
also does Prabhavati when she is here. When it is raining, all of
us sleep in the verandah or in the room; at other times, we
sleep in the open on the terrace above. This will give you some
idea of the conditions here. The expense on food comes on an
average to between seven and seven and a half [annas]. We wish
to reduce it. Let us see if we succeed. We hope to reduce it to five!
At present I wouldn't feel unhappy at all in accepting the
services of a teacher in a Government school who otherwise
did not violate our ideals. I made all possible inquiries regar-
ding this friend's character and his love of khadi. He wrote
to me a letter which I found satisfactory. He believes in khadi
and wears it for the most part. He has not been able to go
as far as to wear dhotis of khadi. He had even a tussle with
his superior for wearing a khadi cap and other garments of khadi,
and he won. His relation with a lady which was the subject of an
allegation against him still continues, but he says that it has always
been pure. His letter seemed to me quite truthful. This inquiry
was completed only recently. I didn't wish to involve you in this
matter, but now if you can throw some light on it please do.
I have exchanged letters with Narahari and Vallabhbhai
on this subject. Sardar has nothing to say about it. Narahari
seems to be satisfied with Narandas's statement. It has also
been sent to Vajubhai and Jethalal and they have been requested
to send their replies. I found nothing to criticize in that statement.
There seem to be some differences of principle between Vajubhai
and Narandas, but they also are not clear to me, except that the
latter may have laid greater stress on crafts and expected the
teachers to pay attention to them. I wouldn't regard that as a
difference of principle. Have you read Vajubhai's and Jethalal's
letters? If you are prepared to take interest in the matter and
give your time to it, I will send their explanations to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My blessings to Rama and the children.
Today's letter
reminds me of the long letters I used to write to you formerly.
On days other than Monday, I mostly write with the left hand.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5533
