350. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
DELHI,
December 12, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,
I got your letter, as also Jayaprakash's. If both of you come
to a firm decision that you would dedicate yourselves to service, I
shall have nothing to say. I only explained to you both that
it was not morally wrong to do one's duty towards one's own
family, but that, if one wished to follow the path of service, one
must renounce such private duties.
If you try to do both, you will probably fail in both. There
will be no difficulty in sending Rs. 50 every month for Rajeshwar .
But that does not satisfy me. What arrangement have you made
for your own expenses? What have you decided regarding the
debt? By solving these problems anyhow, you will not have
solved the basic problem.
But I will not dwell further on this
matter. I don't wish to discourage Jayaprakash. We should
hope that, since his motive is pure, everything will be all right.
You have not yet gone and seen Mother. You should do so
now. Since your visit to me has been delayed so long, I shall
now be far away. If you do not wish to get arrested there, you
may come and see me during my Andhra tour, and then from
Wardha you may go wherever you like. I think it would be best
to go to Bihar. If you decide to go to Bihar, it is not very
necessary for you to come and see me. If, however, you are very
keen to come, by all means do come. I leave it entirely to
your own wish. I shall be in Madras on 20, 21 and 22. I will
start from here on the 14th. From the 16th to the 19th, I shall
be around Bezwada. I shall be back in Andhra from 23rd to
31st, and the headquarters will be at Bezwada. You may now
decide as you like.
Vidya felt bored and has come here.
She has brought Kanta
with her. I have not decided yet whether to let Vidya go to
Multan or ask her to return to Wardha.
Om has been with me. I continue the same diet. The
quantity of milk varies from three pounds to one pound. The
1 Vide "Letter to Prabhavati", pp. 266-.
2 Younger brother of Jayaprakash Narayan
323
cold which I had has gone. The weight was 108 pounds when I
was weighed in Jabalpur. I have not been weighed after that.
You need not worry about me at all.
God will keep me in what-
ever condition He wishes and get work done through me as He
wills.
Could you see Rajendrababu? Did you see Father? How
is he?
I hear from Ba from time to time. Mani is still with her.
Sushila, Pyarelal's sister, is here. Her mother also is here. I
have not met her yet.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3436
