26. LETTER TO ROMAIN ROLLAND
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 14, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
Mira has translated your latest letter for me.
My whole soul goes out to you in your grief especially because
it comes over a letter which makes you suspect me of hardness of
heart. I appreciate your desire to find me correct in all I do and
think. I do indeed want to stand well with you, but I must be true
to myself if I am to continue to deserve your warm friendship.
Let me first tell you that Mira's letter reflected her own views
though they were found to coincide with mine. Neither Mira, so
far as I know her, nor I had the remotest idea of judging those two
good peasants. Their action was undoubtedly one of heroism.
What we had in our minds was the heroism of a war-resister, and
from the record sent by you and as it was interpreted to me by
Mira, I missed that particular type of heroism which a war-resister
demonstrates in his own life. Joan of Arc was a heroine. So were
Leonidas and Horatius. But the heroism in each case was of a
different type, each noble and admirable in its own sphere.
In the answers given by the peasants, I do not notice any defi-
nite repugnance to war as war and a determination to suffer to the
uttermost in their resistance to war. These peasant friends, if my
recollection serves me right, are heroes representing and defending
the simple rustic life. These heroes are no less precious than those
of a militant war-resister type. We want to treasure all this hero-
ism, but what I feel is that we will serve the heroes and the cause
of truth better if we treated each type separately.
You have curiously raised the question of my participation in
the late War. It is a legitimate question. I had answered it in the
last autobiographical chapter as if in anticipation of your question.
Please read it carefully and tell me at your leisure what you think
of the argument. I shall treasure your opinion.
Lastly, I do want to reach perfection, but I recognize my limi-
tations, and the recognition is becoming clearer day after day.
Who knows in how many places I must be guilty of hardness of
heart, and I should not be surprised if you have noticed want of
charity in my writings in more places than one. I can only tell
you that the lapses are there in spite of my prayerful effort to the
contrary. I suppose it was not without reason that the early
Christians considered Satan to be not merely an evil principle but
evil incarnate. He seems to dominate us in every walk of life
and man's mission is to overthrow him from power.
This letter of yours to Mira makes me more and more anxious
to see you in the flesh, and there is just a distant hope of my be-
ing able to do so this year if I keep good health and if other-
wise the inner voice guides me towards Europe. I am seriously
considering two invitations, and the desire to meet you may preci-
pitate my decision in favour of accepting those invitations.
Yours sincerely,
ROMAIN ROLLAND
From a photostat: S.N. 14942
1 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. IV, Ch. XXXVIII.
2 To this Romain Rolland replied: "Pardon me if I say to you that, in
spite of all my desire to enter into your thoughts and to approve of them, I
simply cannot do so. . . "
