434. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
3 a.m., September 3, 1934
CHI. PREMA,
Your letter was full of descriptions.
It seems your work is
going on very well. Continue to send accounts of it in the same
manner.
There is an article in Harijan about the work to be done in
villages. Read it. One and the same method will not work
everywhere. This is a virgin field of work. Hence there will
probably be a great deal of variety in the work to be done. The
plan which I have and which I have explained in Harijan is based
on one line of approach only.
But to whom can I explain this,
if not to you?
Let me see now to how many persons you can
explain it.
I am not surprised to learn about your being harassed.
I would advise you not to mention the name of the Congress at
all, let alone civil disobedience. For the present, only explain
to the village people the pros and cons of your programme.
Speaking of the Congress serves no purpose if its programme is
not carried out. If the programme is carried out, there is no need
to speak of it. The real worshippers of Shri Krishna are not
those who shout "Krishna, Krishna", but those who do His work.
Our hunger is not appeased if we keep shouting "bread, bread".
It is appeased by eating bread.
Your assumption is correct. If you receive an order to
leave the village, you should readily obey it.
Only those who
willingly obey laws which they do not like earn the right
sometimes to disobey a law.
This is rarely remembered by
people.
Please do not assume that I shall attend the Congress. Many
plans are maturing in my mind. I don't get time to write to
you about all of them. Wait and see what happens.
You should
be satisfied that you have chalked out your work.
Kisan writes to me sometimes. Your letter to Amtussalaam
was a good one.
You know that Ramdas does not keep good health.
He has
gone to Sabarmati along with Sharma.
Ba has gone with him
to look after him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10359. Also C.W. 6798. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
