30. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
Shravan Vad 10 [August 31, 1918]
WITH HUMBLE RESPECTS TO MU. BHAISHRI,
Your letter arrived just a little while ago and I am replying immediately.
You have a right to write to me even in bitter words. Who else would write
to me in this manner if not you? I also understand your being shocked. But
there seems to be some misunderstanding as to the fact of the case. I do not
at all desire that kind of change in the society at large. In the Ashram,
however, from the beginning, it has been our rule not to observe the
Varnavyavastha because the position of the Ashram is different from that of
the society outside. When you were here on a visit, the same practice was
1 An Ayurvedic medicine for building up strength
2 The letter was evidently written after an untouchable family, Dudhabhai, his
wife and infant daughter Lakshmi, were admitted to the Kocharab Ashram on September
11, 1915 and the Ashram was shifted from Kocharab to the western bank of the
Sabarmati in July 1917. Shravan Vad 10 in 1917 fell on August 12, when Gandhiji
was in Bettiah in Bihar; in 1918 on August 31 when Gandhiji was in Ahmedabad; in
1919 and 1920, on August 20 and 9 respectively; on both of which days Gandhiji was
in Bombay. The letter was, therefore, presumably written on August 31,1918.
3 The traditional Indian social system based on birth and hereditary occupation
28
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
followed. Dudhabhai, his wife and L[akshmi] all three lived with me at
Kocharab and had their meals with me. Dudhabhai's wife used to enter the
kitchen, too. There was also another antyaj boy. What we are doing at present
is not new. I really believed that nobody had any objection to L(akshmi). It
was only by chance that I discovered that such objections to her existed, and
that too in a manner which was rather amusing. I have said all this to show
to you that the present position is not new. That Chi. Kashi looks after that
girl is a new position, but in itself, it is not a new practice. Now about the
propriety or otherwise of the practice. If I had insisted that the inmates of
the Ashram should observe the Varnadharma, I would have been guilty of
the impropriety you have imputed to me. However, for those who have
renounced Grihasthashram who have accepted a particular ideal and observe
the rules of self-control, to behave towards the antyajas differently from the
way they behave towards others would be adharma 3 , not dharma, violence
and not ahimsa, expression not of love but of hatred. In the Ashram kitchen,
Luharas, Bhatiyas, Brahmins, Khatris, Rajputs, Mussalmans, Banias all have
been taking their meals together. You know of course that all these classes
of people inter-dine with one another; the whole of India knows it. Nobody
has expressed disapproval of the practice. Why, then, should anybody be
shocked by it now? If you have not considered the practice such as I have
described above a radical one, what objection can there be against an innocent
girl L[akshmi] having her meals in our kitchen? It is but proper to respect
customary practices as long as they are not contrary to universal principles
of morality. If, however, they are contrary to such principles, their violation
is the real dharma. I, at any rate, have learnt this from our shastras themselves.
Since, therefore, this practice is not new, I beg of you not to consider it as
such and feel hurt, and if you consider it to be an old one, regard it as
unavoidable and so not feel hurt. Please believe that I have not taken a single
step out of self-will or thoughtlessly, but have done what I have done only
after the most careful consideration of its moral propriety or otherwise and
only because I believed it to be dharma. And, therefore, I wish you to have
patience with me. If our caste-men are offended by my step, I will ask their
forgiveness, and all of us will patiently suffer their boycott. From you, I ask
for a blessing, and it is this: "My own brother is fearlessly doing what he
believes to be dharma. O God, help him in that". I do beg this much of you
that you should not in the least feel hurt by this step and bear with what you
cannot understand. Very often, we simply cannot understand what is dharma
and what is adharma. Vyasji has with great skill presented numerous instances
1 Untouchable
2 The householder's stage of life
3 The opposite of dharma
LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
29
of such confusion in the Shantiparva. When such is the position, what should
one do? Only that one should fearlessly go on doing what one's conscience
bids one to do and bear the sufferings which follow as a result of doing so.
Respectful prostration by
MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 33104
