105. LETTER TO MAHOMED ALI
SASSOON HOSPITAL,
POONA,
February 7, 1924
MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,
I send you as President of the Congress a few words which I
know our countrymen expect from me on my sudden release. I am
sorry that the Government have prematurely released me on
account of my illness. Such a release can bring me no joy, for I
hold that the illness of a prisoner affords no ground for his release.
I would be guilty of ungratefulness if I did not tell you, and
through you the whole public, that both the jail and the hospital
authorities have been all attention during my illness. Col. Mur-
ray, the Superintendent of the Yeravda Prison, as soon as he sus-
pected that my illness was at all serious, invited Col. Maddock to
assist him and I am sure that the promptest measures were taken
by him to secure for me the best treatment possible. I could not
have been removed to the David and Sassoon Hospitals a moment
earlier. Col. Maddock and his staff have treated me with the
utmost attention and kindness. I may not omit the nurses who
have surrounded me with sisterly care. Though it is now open to
me to leave this hospital, knowing that I can get no better treat-
ment anywhere else, with Col. Maddock's kind permission I
have decided to remain under his care till the wound is healed
and no further medical treatment is necessary.
The public will easily understand that for some time to come
I shall be quite unfit for active work, and those who are interested
in my speedy return to active life will hasten it by postponing
their natural desire to see me. I am unfit and shall be so for some
weeks perhaps to see a number of visitors. I shall better appre-
ciate the affection of friends if they will devote greater time and
attention to such national work as they may be engaged in and
especially to hand-spinning.
My release has brought me no relief. Whereas before release
I was free from responsibility save that of conforming to jail disci-
pline and trying to qualify myself for more efficient service, I am
now overwhelmed with a sense of responsibility I am ill-fitted to
discharge. Telegrams of congratulations have been pouring in up-
on me. They have but added to the many proofs I have received
of the affection of our countrymen for me.
It naturally pleases
and comforts me. Many telegrams, however, betray hopes of re-
sults from my service which stagger me. The thought of my utter
incapacity to cope with the work before me humbles my pride.
Though I know very little of the present situation in the coun-
try, I know sufficient to enable me to see that, perplexing as the
national problems were at the time of the Bardoli resolutions, they
are far more perplexing today. It is clear that, without unity bet-
ween Hindus, Mahomedans, Sikhs, Parsis and Christians and
other Indians, all talk of swaraj is idle. This unity which I
fondly believed, in 1922, had been nearly achieved has, so far as
Hindus and Mussalmans are concerned, I observe, suffered a severe
check. Mutual trust has given place to distrust. An indissoluble
bond between the various communities must be established if we
are to win freedom. Will the thanksgiving of the nation over my
release be turned into a solid unity between the communities?
That will restore me to health far quicker than any medical treat-
ment or rest-cure. When I heard in the jail of the tension between
Hindus and Mussalmans in certain places, my heart sank within
me. The rest I am advised to have will be no rest with the bur-
den of disunion preying upon me. I ask all those who cherish love
towards me to utilize it in furtherance of the union we all desire.
I know that the task is difficult. But nothing is difficult if we
have a living faith in God. Let us realize our own weakness and
approach Him and He will surely help. It is weakness which
breeds fear and fear breeds distrust. Let us both shed our fear,
but I know that, even if one of us will cease to fear, we shall cease
to quarrel. Nay, I say that your tenure of office will be judged
solely by what you can do in the cause of union. I know that we
love each other as brothers. I ask you, therefore, to share my
anxiety and help me to go through the period of illness with a
lighter heart.
If we could but visualize the growing pauperism of the land
and realize that the spinning-wheel is the only remedy for the
disease, the wheel will leave us little leisure for fighting. I had
during the last two years ample time and solitude for hard thinking.
It made me a firmer believer than ever in the efficacy of the Bar-
doli programme and, therefore, in the unity between the races,
the charkha, the removal of untouchability and the application
of non-violence in thought, word and deed to our methods as in-
dispensable for swaraj. If we faithfully and fully carry out this
programme, we need never resort to civil disobedience and I should
hope that it will never be necessary. But I must state that my
thinking prayerfully and in solitude has not weakened my belief
in the efficiency and righteousness of civil disobedience. I hold
it, as never before, to be a man's or a nation's right and duty
when its vital being is in jeopardy. I am convinced that it is at-
tended with less danger than war and, whilst the former, when
successful, benefits both the resister and the wrongdoer, the latter
harms both the victor and the vanquished.
You will not expect me to express any opinion on the vexed
question of return by Congressmen to the Legislative Councils and
Assembly. Though I have not in any way altered my opinion about
the boycott of Councils, Law Courts and Government Schools, I
have no data for coming to a judgment upon the alterations made
at Delhi, and I do not propose to express any opinion until I have
had the opportunity of discussing the question with our illustrious
countrymen who have felt called upon, in the interest of the
country, to advise removal of the boycott of legislative bodies.
In conclusion, may I, through you thank all the very nume-
rous senders of congratulatory messages. It is not possible for
me personally to acknowledge each message. It has gladdened
my heart to see among the messages many from our Moderate
friends. I have, and non-co-operators can have, no quarrel with
them. They too are well-wishers of their country and serve to the
best of their lights. If we consider them to be in the wrong, we can
hope to win them over only by friendliness and patient reason-
ing, never by abusing. Indeed, we want to regard Englishmen
too as our friends and not misunderstand them by treating them
as our enemies. And if we are today engaged in a struggle
against the British Government, it is against the system for which
it stands and not against Englishmen who are administering the
system. I know that many of us have failed to understand and al-
ways bear in mind the distinction and, in so far as we have failed,
we have harmed our cause.
I am,
Your sincere friend and brother,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 14-2-1924
