484. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
May 30, 1907
[TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
The arrival of General Botha and the fact that the Asiatic Registration
Act, though it has received the Royal sanction, is still the subject-matter
of correspondence between the Imperial Government and the local
Government, encourage me to appeal once more to your good sense
and, through you, to that of the colonists. Now that the anti-Asiatic
party has obtained what it wanted, is it impossible to arrive at a reasonable
compromise and to save British Indians from being considered untrust-
worthy and feloniously inclined? The Act is not yet gazetted, and
it need not be until the Government wishes to do so. I, therefore, suggest
that, before it is gazetted, a form for new permits may be mutually
agreed upon, and, in accordance with it, Indians and other Asiatics
may be registered afresh in exchange for proper documents they may
possess. If, then, all Asiatics thus voluntarily surrender their documents,
there can be no occasion for submitting them to the degradation
contemplated by the Act. If, however, there are Asiatics in the Colony
who do not surrender their documents, the Act can be immediately
gazetted, and be made applicable, by a short Bill, to them. Thus, those
who are bona fide holders of permits and are honest will be automatically
separated from those who are guilty.
I do not know whether you can see any flaw in this proposal, unless
you think that the object of the legislation is not that illicit traffic in
permits may be stopped, but that it is to, openly and boldly, put an
unwarranted affront upon British Indians and other Asiatics. Let
me remind you, before any such declaration is made, of Lord Ampthill's
remarks:
This is not a matter which only touches our honour. We are pledged
to our fellow-citizens in India—pledged by the solemn declaration of the
Sovereign, by the pronouncements of our statesmen, and by all that is implied
in the whole method of our administration of that great dominion-to treat
the people of India as fellow-citizens in every sense of the word. We invite
them to be proud of their citizenship of the Empire. We tell them, again
and again, that there is nothing to prevent their rising to the same positions
as are held by Englishmen in India, and we imply, in all that we do for them
and say to them, that, whenever they are under the British flag in any part
of the world, they will be treated as British citizens.
Lord Lansdowne feels so keenly the humiliation in which British
statesmen are placed by this Act that he questions whether to wound
the susceptibilities of the whole Indian nation is not more injurious
and imprudent than to allow the surreptitious entry of a few Indians
into the country. But the proposal I have ventured to sketch above
is just as effective against surreptitious entry as may be by [sic] the
Asiatic Act.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 8-6-1907
