529. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[After October 14, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Yesterday I got the post in the evening, two days' post to-
gether. I got Prithuraj's letter too.
As for the problem of disposing of Gujarat's khadi, we shall
discuss the matter when I arrive there, and after I have thought
about it I will write on the subject in Navajivan. It will not be
difficult to dispose of it. You need not get alarmed if a small
stock accumulates. It may prove useful at a time of difficulty.
Only, we should have the necessary facilities to store it.
You may certainly go to the Punjab. The climate there will
become colder day by day and the cold will be more intense
than in Ahmedabad. You should, therefore, take sufficient warm
clothing and covering.
We shall certainly have to keep a watch over Bhansali.
Narandas feels that you have no faith in his capacity for
work and that, deep in your heart, you do not want his help.
He even suspects that perhaps you do not wish his presence in
the Udyoga Mandir at all. I have written to him and told him
that this might possibly be his illusion. But, so long as he enter-
tains this fear, he will not accept responsibilities with an open
heart. You alone can remove his suspicion. How, it is difficult
to say.
If the work in Vijapur goes on all right, I would advise
you not to worry about the slightly high cost of khadi for some
time. I am sending your letter to Chhaganlal. I feel that, when-
ever anyone writes such a letter to me, it would be good if I
sent it to the person concerned. Anyone would understand the
frank sincerity behind your letter.
I see no need to invite a doctor to live permanently in the
Ashram. If the secretary's notebook is maintained properly, it
would give the correct information about such matters. How
often in the course of a year do we require a doctor's services?
A few visits, but in quick succession, may sometimes appear numer-
ous. I do feel, however, that we should offer something to the
doctor, though I would not mind if he refused to accept anything.
Whatever he accepts will not be sufficient to cover his fees. The
only return we can make to him is through our vigilance, our self-
control, our daily growing spirit of service and our devotion to
duty. The very fact that the doctor comes every time we call
him shows that he looks upon us as worthy servants.
I shall have no objection if dispensaries are opened in places
where spinning work is going on. Only, we should take care to
see that the former do not overshadow the latter. Govindbabu's
activity in this field certainly does that. I have an impression
that the Abhoy Ashram at Comilla has combined the two in a
beautiful manner.
What you write about the Maganlal Memorial is correct. I
suppose you will be there in Wardha, will you not?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5477
