194. LETTER TO THE PRESS
NADIAD,
March 27, 1918
TO
THE EDITOR
THE LEADER
ALLAHABAD
SIR,
Perhaps I owe an explanation to the public with regard to my
recent fast. Some friends consider the action to have been silly,
others cowardly and some others still worse. In my opinion, I
would have been untrue to my Maker and to the cause I was
espousing, if I had acted otherwise.
When over a month ago I reached Bombay, I was told that
Ahmedabad mill-hands had threatened a strike and violence if the
bonus that was given to them during the plague was withdrawn.
I was asked to intervene and I consented. Owing to the plague
the men were getting as much as 70 per cent bonus since August
last. An attempt to recall that bonus had resulted in grave dissatis-
faction among the labourers. When it was almost too late, the
mill-owners offered in the place of the plague bonus and for the
sake of the high prices a rise of 20 per cent. The labourers were
unsatisfied. The matter was referred to arbitration, Mr. Chatfield,
the Collector, being the umpire. The men in some mills however
struck work. The owners, thinking that they had done so without
just cause, withdrew from the arbitration and declared a general
lock-out to be continued till the labourers were exhausted into
accepting 20 per cent increase they had offered. Messrs Shankarlal
Banker, V. J. Patel and I, the arbitrators appointed on behalf
of the labourers thought that they were to be demoralized if we
did not act promptly and decisively. We, therefore, investigated
the question of increase. We sought the mill-owners' assistance.
They would not give it.
Their one purpose was to organize
themselves into a combination that could fight a similar combi-
nation of their employees. One-sided technically though our
investigation was, we endeavoured to examine the mill-owners'
side and came to the conclusion that a 35 per cent increase was
fair. Before announcing the figure to the mill-hands, we informed
the employers of the result of our inquiry and told them that we
would correct ourselves if they could show any error. The latter
would not co-operate. They sent a reply saying as much, but
they pointed out in it that the rate of increase granted by the
Government as also the employers in Bombay was much less than
the one contemplated by us. I felt that the addendum was be-
side the point and at a huge meeting announced 35 per cent for
the mill-hands' acceptance. Be it noted that the plague bonus
amounted to 70 per cent of their wages and they had declared
their intention of accepting not less than 50 per cent as high
prices increase. They were now called upon to accept the mean
(the fixing of the mean was quite an accident) between the mill-
owners 20 per cent, and their own 50 per cent. After some
grumbling, the meeting accepted the 35 per cent increase, it always
being understood that they would recognize, at the same time,
the principle of arbitration whenever the mill-owners did so. From
that time forward, i.e., 26th February last, day after day thousands
of people gathered together under the shade of a tree outside the
city walls, people walking long distances in many cases, and solemn-
ly repeated their determination in the name of God not to accept
anything less than 35 per cent. No pecuniary assistance was given
to them. It is easy enough to understand that many must suffer
from the pangs of starvation and that they could not, while they
were without employment, get any credit. We who were helping
them came, on the other hand, to the conclusion that we would
only spoil them if we collected public funds and utilized them for
feeding them unless the able-bodied amongst them were ready to
perform bread labour. It was a difficult task to persuade men,
who had worked at machines, to shoulder baskets of sand or
bricks. They came but they did so grudgingly. The mill-owners
hardened their hearts. They were equally determined not to go
beyond 20 per cent and they appointed emissaries to persuade the
men to give in. Even during the early part of the lock-out, whilst
we had declined to help those who would not work, we had assured
them that we would feed and clothe ourselves after feeding and
clothing them. Twenty-two days had passed by. Hunger and the
mill-owners' emissaries were producing their effect and Satan was
whispering to the men that there was no such thing as God
on earth who would help them and that vows were dodges resorted
1 Vide "Speech to Ahmedabad Mill-hands", February 26, 1918.
to by weaklings. One morning instead of an eager and enthusias-
tic crowd of 5 to 10 thousand men with determination written on
their faces, I met a body of about 2000 men with despair written
on their faces. We had just heard that mill-hands living in a
particular chawl had declined to attend the meeting, were pre-
paring to go to work and accept 20 per cent increase and were
taunting us (I think very properly) that it was very well for us
who had motors at our disposal and plenty of food, to attend their
meetings and advise staunchness even unto death. What was I
to do? I held the cause to be just. I believe in God as I believe
that I am writing this letter. I believe in the necessity of the
performance of one's promises at all costs. I knew that the men
before us were godfearing men, but that the long-drawn-out lock-
out or strike was putting an undue strain upon them. I had the
knowledge before me that during my extensive travels in India,
hundreds of people were found who as readily broke their pro-
mises as they made them. I knew, too, that the best of us have
but a vague and indistinct belief in soul-force and in God. I felt
that it was a sacred moment for me, my faith was on the anvil,
and I had no hesitation to rising and declaring to the men that a
breach of their vow so solemnly taken was unendurable by me and
that I would not take any food until they had the 35 per cent
increase given or until they had fallen. A meeting that was up
to now unlike the former meetings, totally unresponsive, woke up
as if by magic. Tears trickled down the cheeks of everyone of them
and men after men rose up saying that they would never go to the
mills unless they got the increase and that they would go about
the city and steel the hearts of those who had not attended the
meeting. It was a privilege to witness the demonstration of the
efficacy of truth and love. Everyone immediately realized that
the protecting power of God was as much with us today as it
used to be in the days of yore. I am not sorry for the vow but
with the belief that I have, I would have been unworthy of the
trust undertaken by me, if I had done anything less. Before I took
the vow I knew that there were serious defects about it. For me
to take such a vow in order to affect in any shape or form the
decision of the mill-owners would be a cowardly injustice done to
them and that I would prove myself unfit for the friendship which
I had the privilege of enjoying with some of them. I knew that I
ran the risk of being misunderstood. I could not prevent my fast
from affecting their decision. Their knowledge, moreover, put a
responsibility on me which I was ill able to bear. From now I
disabled myself from gaining concessions for the men which ordi-
narily, In a struggle such as this, I would be entirely justified in
securing. I knew, too, that I would have to be satisfied with the
minimum I could get from the mill-owners and with a fulfilment
of the letter of the men's vow rather than its spirit and so hath
it happened. I put the effect of my vow in one scale and the merits
of it in the other. There are hardly any acts of human beings which
are free from all taint. Mine, I know, was exceptionally tainted
but I preferred the ignominy of having unworthily compromised
by my vow the position and independence of the mill-owners rather
than that it should be said by posterity that 10,000 men had sudden-
ly broken a vow which they had for over twenty days solemnly
taken and repeated in the name of God. I am fully convinced that
no body of men can make themselves into a nation or perform
great tasks unless they become as true as steel and unless their
promises come to be regarded by the world like the law of the
Medes and Persians, inflexible and unbreakable, and whatever
may be the verdict of friends, so far as I can think at present,
on given occasions I should not hesitate in future to repeat the
humble performance which I have taken the liberty of describing
in this communication.
I cannot conclude this letter without mentioning two names of
whom India has every reason to be proud. The mill-owners were
represented by Mr. Ambalal Sarabhai who is a gentleman in every
sense of the term. He is a man of great culture and equally great
abilities. He adds to these qualities a resolute will. The mill-
hands were represented by his sister Anasuyabehn. She possesses
a heart of gold. She is full of pity for the poor. The mill-hands
adore her. Her word is law with them. I have not known a
struggle fought with so little bitterness and such courtesy on either
side. This happy result is principally due to the connections with
it of Mr. Ambalal Sarabhai and Anasuyabehn.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Leader, 3-4-1918
