120. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
MOTIHARI,
Paus Shukla 2, January 14, 1918
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I can now understand your criticism of the translation of the
section on education. I started reading it with the idea of writ-
ing the introduction. The very first sentence put me off. My
trepidation increased as I read further on. It seems to me that
it would be unfair to put this translation before the public. Hence
even though it would mean so much money wasted, we really have
no alternative. Right now we need do no more than take the
decision. We shall hold back this translation and not get it bound.
We shall have the second and third parts published as volume one.
The pages should be renumbered. I assume from what you say
that we can bring out the volume before 19th February. The
Gujarati of the translation should be simple, natural, free from
grammatical blemishes and should possess literary beauty. I see
none of these qualities in the present translation.
Please feel free to make such critical comments on parts two
and three as you consider necessary. I shall start drafting the in-
troduction after I have received at least some of the proofs.
Arrange to have the first forme printed after I get the proofs.
I shall return the forme immediately. We shall have to make the
full payment to the printer. It will be nice if he can reduce the
printing charges when we reprint the section on education. If
you feel so inclined, you can take up the translation of the part
covering the translation we have rejected. In that case please
send me the translation of the first two speeches so that I can go
through it.
I can see that you have done very well in correcting the
proofs. As a rule, we should work in such a way that we do
not have to give errata. From whatever little I have read, I can
see that you have been able to follow that rule.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
