432. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
June 27, 1905
TO
THE EDITOR
The Star
SIR,
I trust you will allow me to trespass on your courtesy to enable me
to reply to certain statements made by your correspondent at Potchef-
stroom with reference to a letter I wrote to you on Mr. Loveday's state-
ments at the Inter-Colonial Council meeting. Your correspondent states
that I "regretted the continued stream of Indians, particularly those of the
lower class". I am not aware of having ever expressed any such regret
for the simple reason that I have never believed in a continued stream
of Indians pouring into Potchefstroom or elsewhere. I speak with certain
knowledge when I deny any such influx at all. That there has been some
increase in the number of Indian traders in Potchefstroom, as well as in
other places, is not to be denied, but the increase in the number of white
traders is out of all proportion to the increase in the number of Indian
traders. In your leaderette on the Krugersdorp meeting, you say that
"Pietersburg has undoubtedly been one of the favourite places to which
the Asiatic traders have gravitated of late". This has been shown to be
wrong. The fact is that Pietersburg had a fair proportion of Indian traders
before the war but there has been no great influx since.
In this connection, may I say that the British Indian community
in the Transvaal has never received sufficient credit for the spirit of con-
ciliation and compromise it has throughout shown. Whilst all kinds of
impossible remedies are being suggested, the only two infallible tests pro-
posed by the British Indian Association still remain untried. In order
to prevent any possibility of the Indians "invading" the country, an Immi-
gration Restrictions Act on the Cape model has been suggested. The
Act has been tried not only there, but in Australia, Natal and elsewhere,
and has not been found wanting. It is useless to say that there cannot
be strict watch on the border. Natal has succeeded in keeping that
watch. Many an Indian has found out to his cost that he cannot enter
Natal territories through Charlestown or any other inland stations, unless
he can prove that he is entitled to enter the Colony under the Immigration
Act. To prove that the Indians do not in any way mean to usurp the
European trade, they accept municipal control over the licences, in such
a manner that any Municipality will have the power either to refuse or
to grant a licence to trade, subject in extreme cases to revision by the
Supreme Court. It is true that such legislation will not be class legislation,
and will be of general application. Does it, however, matter? It can
be passed without any bother, if all parties agree upon the main principles,
and it will set at rest the unhealthy agitation against the Asiatics that
springs up in the Colony from time to time, and settle the minds of the
Indians. There is no finality to any legislation under a progressive Govern-
ment. If, therefore, the two measures above mentioned are, in practice,
found not to answer, it will be time to consider what more is necessary.
The Indians need not accept any such compromise, especially in
view of Mr. Lyttelton's emphatic declaration that nothing that they
enjoyed before the war would be taken away from them. They certainly
enjoyed the rights of free immigration and free trading, and it is exactly
[on] these two points that they have offered the above compromise; if only
the very un-British Law 3 of 1885, and other harsh and needless regulations,
which have nothing to do with the economic conditions, be removed from
the Statute-book. Mr. Brodrick has only lately stated that British trade
with India is greater than that with Australia, Canada and South Africa
put together, and that, therefore, Imperially considered, India occupies
a place second only to Great Britain. Will the Colonists continue to sub-
ject the inhabitants of that country to constant pin-pricks?
We are told that the Chinese guilds have been successful in bending
the American Government. Lord Curzon has already talked of retaliation.
Is it not possible, then, to realise what India could do if retaliation were
seriously taken up ? China and America are not under the same flag, whereas
South Africa and India are. Would it not be a calamity if there arise
permanent estrangement between the local Governments in South Africa
and the Indian Government, and if Lord Curzon carries out his threat
deliberately uttered in the Imperial Legislative Council at Calcutta?
Some such thing is inevitable unless the Colonists see the sweet reason-
ableness of the compromise above offered.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 8-7-1905
