144. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
KUMBAM,
February 819, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I am in Dindigul. We resume travelling in a little while at
seven. It is 6.40 just now. I will try to write as much as I
can. We get our morning, midday and evening meals at different
places. God has kept me in health so far. He will pull back the
thread of life when He wills. "The Lord has bound me with a
slender thread, I turn as He pulls."
I got Ratubhai Desai's letter yesterday. He has given a full
description. You have really used your time well for reading
and studying. I regard it as God's kindness that prisoners are
not permitted to read at night. If you think it necessary to see
me after your release, do come over. I shall probably be in
Utkal about the time you will be released.
Muriel Lester is touring with me these days. I suppose you
remember that I had stayed with her. She has been to China
and Japan. Most probably she will remain with me till the 21st.
(At this point we had to leave and resume the tour.)
We are now in a place called Kumbam situated in a valley
between the Eastern and the Western Ghats. We held a meeting
here at the end of day-long wandering and, after dinner, I received
some visitors and am now writing this.
It is past 7.30 p.m.
Thakkar Bapa and others are having their dinner. After they
have finished we shall have prayers. These days the prayers con-
sist only of the Sanskrit verses and the Ramdhun. The recitation
of the verses is led by me and the dhun is led by Mirabehn. She
can sing a few bhajans, but I myself prevailed upon her not to
take all that trouble. In the morning we recite verses from the
Gita, completing all the chapters in a week so that we have
enough verses to recite. The bhajans, therefore, have been omitted.
Prithuraj has joined me from Calicut. He gives good help to
Chandrashankar. And now another friend, selected by Swami,
will be joining us. Perhaps Valji also may join us. He has
made the request because of his poor health. The other mem-
bers of the party remain the same.
My body is in excellent condition and gives very good service.
Recently I have even stopped drinking warm water with honey
in the morning. I am living on milk, fruit and one boiled and
unsalted vegetable. I don't feel the need for anything else.
You must have heard that some of the towns in Bihar have
been razed to the ground by the earthquake. Because of that,
I have sent some of the inmates of the Ashram, who had been
released, to Bihar to help Rajendrababu. For the present,
Panditji, Parnerkar, Bal, Soman, Maganbhai and Raojibhai gone
there. Swami and Dhotre have gone from Bombay. Most prob-
ably Lakshmidas also will go. He has stayed back because
Velanbehn is ill. She is suffering from some vaginal disorder. Did
I write to you that Dudhabhai's Lakshmi is pregnant? Radha
is so so. She is still at Deolali. Keshu may be said to have
settled down finally. Ramdas is comfortable where he is, but is
restless all the time as is his nature. Prabhudas is likely to settle
in a village near his father-in-law's place. He and his Amba are
very happy indeed. Devdas has joined The Hindustan Times on
a pay of Rs. 250. Lakshmi is expecting a child. She is with him
in Delhi. The delivery will take place there.
Pyarelal's time to be released is drawing near. Mahadev is
being tested well. And so is Manibehn.
(I was again interrupted at this point.) I am now completing
the rest of the letter at three in the morning after cleaning my
teeth.
Rama has expressed a desire to leave the Ashram and go to
live with her relations. I have told her that I do not approve
of her intention, but I have permitted her to do as she pleases.
I did not approve because Wardha suited both mother and daughter
and they kept good health there. It is not necessary that she
should stay with you when you are released. But you can go
and see them and also take that opportunity to observe how things
are at Wardha. You don't have to make a journey to see your
family. That they may require you to do so is another matter.
My present attitude is that everybody should choose his own
way and progress along that way, and that nobody should copy
me or anyone else. Ba is all right. It is a rather different tale
this time. Be it so. If all the castles we build in our fancy were
to materialize, the earth would soon be destroyed.
Amina must have gone by now to live with Pyare Ali. Her
children seem to be quite at home in Anasuyabehn's home. But
I have heard that Qureshi has other views on the subject. Even
if that is so, there will be no harm whatever. Gangabehn has gone
on a pilgrimage to Wardha. Everybody writes and tells me that
all of them will settle down in a short time.
Sardar is enjoying himself. Chandrashankar and Mira are
quite well. Chandrashankar continues to acquit himself well in
Mahadev's place.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5515
