738. LETTER TO V. V. DASTANE
October 23, 1945
BHAI DASTANE,
I have your postcard. It is not that I have not replied to
your letter owing to lack of time, but since I have something new
to say, there is no need to reply to your other questions. The new
thing is that till today you have considered public service as pri-
mary and have devoted to the family only whatever time was
available after that. Now having heard everything from Akka1,
I feel that you are no longer in a position to do so. Naturally you
have to take care of Akka and also look after your other daughters
and manage their affairs. You have to support your wife. If
you do not, who else will? So it is the duty of people like you
to give primary importance to the family responsibilities and devote
to public service only as much time as you can after that. One
who shoulders the burden of the family as dharma also renders
service. One must clearly distinguish between family responsibility
and family enjoyment. You have long since given up indulgence.
Why should I discuss these things at length ? You should be able
to understand them from what I have already said. It should be
clear enough that if you do not abide by what I have said the
result will be quite to the contrary of what it should be.
I cannot say what I had in mind when I wrote "I cannot
give" [answers to your other questions]. And what will you gain
by thinking over it again and again? If I was short of time, I
should have said that I would reply to the other questions some
other time. At any rate, I was quite clear in my mind when I sent
a letter through Akka that I should tell you what according to me
your dharma was without bothering you about other things. Now
the question arises only if you are not able to understand and
approve of my stand. You can discuss this letter with Vinoba and
Kishorelal. Of course also with Dhotre and other relatives there.
VASUDEV DASTANE
BHUSAWAL
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
