161. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[March 24, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
The letters written on the ship were posted yesterday and you
must have received them. On reaching Calcutta I saw your letters.
You did right in running down to Vadaj to put out the fire
there. We may not take out an insurance, but should certainly
possess fire-fighting equipment and practise with it once every
month. This will stand us in good stead. We should also so
arrange things in the house that the danger of fire is minimized.
We should make children conscious of their responsibility in this
matter. The rule is this: to the extent that we protect our-
selves with external means, to that extent our soul is injured
and loses its strength.
Everyone should make it a rule that they do not bring
buffalo's ghee into the kitchen.
I shall talk to you about the yarn spun by the members of
the Khadi Pratishthan. There is little possibility of anyone from
Bengal coming there to learn the work.
If you ask me about suspiciousness when I am free, I shall
explain at some length.
You can send to Calcutta the khadi which is lying in Bom-
bay and elsewhere. It should not be moth-eaten or too old. The
store here is short of khadi stocks just now. After the bonfire
of clothes, the demand for khadi has gone up very much.
Hasn't Bichaldas, who came from Rohri, brought any
letters? Give him enough tailoring work and teach him to do it
well. See whether he obeys all rules. Introduce him to Mal-
kani. About the land in Chalala, ask me [when we meet].
When a death occurs in the Ashram, the common kitchen
should not stop, but it might be desirable that no cooking is
done. We always have a stock of ready food which we can sup-
ply to those who wish to eat. If necessary, discuss this matter fur-
ther with others. I would see nothing wrong even if cooking is
done. A death is not an occasion for mourning. No work or acti-
vity should be stopped as a mark of mourning, but some of the in-
mates who attend to cremation, etc., may not be able to eat.
There will also be some who, though not wishing to observe
mourning, will obey the custom in accordance with the nature
of their relationship with the dead person. It is with these consi-
derations in mind that I have suggested that cooking be stopped.
If death occurs while cooking is in progress it need not be stop-
ped. We do not observe the practice of sootak in the Ashram.
Send to Rajaji the money received for the South Relief Fund.
I regard the use of the hide of slaughtered goats unavoidable.
It is desirable to restrict such use to the minimum. It would also
be right that we manage with cow's hide as far as possible. The
restriction accepted by us on the basis of dharma stops at present
with cows and buffaloes.
I enclose with this a letter from Mirabehn. That part of it
which is about Yogendra should be read with attention. She has
already written to you about the matter. If, however, you
know more about him, it will help you when he comes there.
Rajendrababu is here. He has suggested that the couple be sent
there. We ought to take them in and train them.
They find
1 Vide p. 86.
2 Treating as polluted the food and water in the homes of the relatives
of the deceased
Mirabehn's work wonderful. Rajendrababu had gone there to
see it and was very pleased.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5498
