17. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 8, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your big packet of mail.
My views about the teaching of English, it may be said, have
changed to a certain extent. I feel that the older women in the
Ashram should be permitted to learn what they wish to. They
feel their deficiency at every step, and particularly, in our circum-
stances, their ignorance of English. They don't mind being igno-
rant of arithmetic nor do they mind their indifferent Gujarati, but
they feel unhappy that they don't know English. Our connections
with Englishmen will continue, ought to continue, and, there-
fore, we shall also continue to use the English language. Hence the
women feel that if they know a little English, they will be able to
use it every now and then. This argument is not altogether tena-
ble, but there is enough truth in it to make them wish to learn
English. It is certainly not immoral to learn English. I think
that, if the women do not feel interested in any other sub-
ject, it would be good to teach them even English to make them
study-minded. It is desirable that the older women should be-
come interested in study, no matter how. It is also desirable
that they should increase their knowledge. I, therefore, think that
we should provide whatever facility we can to any older woman
who may wish to learn English. Please point out to me any weak-
ness that you may see in this reasoning. I will try to explain again.
I see from Kikabhai's letter that a large crowd of Harijans
will be attending Lakshmi's wedding. I think that Jamna and
you are the right persons to give away the bride. I hope Jamna
does not harbour the prejudice of untouchability in her heart.
Don't make the Harijans who may attend sit apart from the
others. Since their proportion will be large enough for the gather-
ing, serve them some fruit as refreshment, as I have suggested. I
suggest copra and raisins. If possible, I will write something to be
read out to the assembled guests and enclose it with this letter.
You will have to give some dresses to Lakshmi as a gift from
the Ashram. Think over this. If you can, see Ba and ask her
advice. I should be happy if she gives one of her saris, a new one
or an almost new one. If she has preserved any jewellery, she
may give some of it too. Tell the Superintendent that you wish
to see her specially for this reason. If he permits you, well and
good, if he does not, don't mind. Discuss with the women this
question of what to give to Lakshmi. See that we omit to do no-
thing which would be proper on such an occasion. I will write
to you again if I think of anything more. You can ignore any
of my suggestions which you don't think appropriate.
I have replied to Parachure Shastri. Everything will depend
on your wire.
I have received Kellogg's book. Gangabehn and Sharda have
arrived here. They have not seen me yet. Gangabehn will not
be able to do so. Sharda will see me on Saturday if she is here on
that day.
You did the right thing in keeping Lakshmi's younger sister
with Anasuyabehn. I see that Dudabhai has stayed on. Dhani-
behn should be welcomed if she comes. You did right in agree-
ing to pay her the expenses of her journey.
For the present, at any rate, Anandi seems to be completely
free from danger. I will give her some work every day. She
lives on milk and fruit. For some time she must remain here.
You may ask Lakshmidas about the remedies which are being tried
for her. They will be useful to others, too. It cannot be said,
though, that they will agree with everyone. But they will cer-
tainly do no harm.
I have no fear about your health so long as your diet in-
cludes milk and curds. But I should certainly like you to ex-
clude gram from it. It makes the mental work you are doing more
difficult. The best food for mental workers is milk and fruit. If
you eat uncooked cabbage, it should be tender. But this is not
necessary if you eat it boiled. It would be better if you drink
milk without boiling it.
Jamna should take sun-bath, get her body massaged with
oil, do pranayama systematically and, for food, drink milk and
eat papaya, raisins and, if she wishes, some vegetable. I believe she
will be all right if she restricts her diet to these things.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8328. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
