421. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
LUCKNow,
February 6, 1931
CHI. NIRMALA,
I have your letter. If children do not like milk, the fault
lies with the mother. If milk is good and is kept in a clean
vessel, children will readily drink it. Flavouring must not be added.
Do not be put out if the infant does not accept milk for a day
or two. If we show the firmness to give only milk when she is
hungry, she will come to accept it. It is only a matter of habit.
Tea of course must not be given. Start teaching Sumitra from
today to breathe properly. If she learns to do it her nose will
not run.
I should no doubt be happy if you could stay at the Ashram
I suggested Bijapur because I felt that with Kashi there it might
suit you better and you would also not suffer from constipation
there. At present I eat only wheat rotis. I feel all right.
Jaggery and sugar are certainly harmful. If the infant asks and
if you feel that you must give her something, you may give
large dried red raisins after washing and removing the seeds and
teach her to suck them. Juice of black grapes may certainly
be given. It can be given warm or cold. But it will be better
if she forms the habit of sucking the grapes. Do not let her
swallow them whole. Give one grape at a time.
There is no harm in applying kohl to the eyes. On the
contrary, it is beneficial. The grease in it is useful. I do not
know if the soot itself has any beneficial property. Possibly
it helps the grease to stick well to the eyelids. The eyes should
be swabbed daily with warm water. The pad should be of clean
cotton. Letting the infant's hair grow, up to a certain age,
protects it. It does become necessary to cut the hair after the
age of, say, three. Oil should be rubbed daily to the roots of the
hair. Never apply so much of it that it drips from the hair.
After massaging the oil should be wiped off with a dry cloth.
Blessings from
BAPU
246
[PS.]
For the present I have to be in Lucknow. Where afterwards
is uncertain.
From the Gujarati original : Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
