53. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
September 9, 1918
It is true that cooking takes some time but I believe that this
time is not wasted. It is also generally not true that some more
important work could be done during that time. Ninety-five per
cent of the people waste more time every day than is taken up in
cooking. I am being rather liberal in my estimate in saying ninety-
five per cent. You will be surprised in how short a time a person
doing his own cooking finishes it when he is very busy. If I give
my own example, when I was very busy with studies in England
I did not take more than half an hour in the morning and in the
evening for cooking. In the morning, I used to prepare porridge,
and this took exactly twenty minutes; if I cooked in the evening, I
prepared soup. As it did not require stirring, the only time spent
was in getting the materials ready. After putting the thing on the
fire, I would sit by and read. Occasionally, students come to me
from Benares. I ask all of them what they do. Most Brahmins
cook their own food. One of them told me that he only prepared
khichdi and ate it with milk and pickles. While he was eating the
meal, the bhakhri would be getting baked. This bhakhri he would eat
with milk in the evening. In this, he spent three-quarters of an
hour in all. This is an extreme case I have cited. I do not
want you to be all that particular. This is only to illustrate that it
is possible to do one's cooking in a very short time. That student
was quite healthy and strong, because khichdi, milk or curds and
pickles gave him all the nourishment he needed. Anyone who can
get good milk or curds will care little for other things. Do not
imagine that I write this to suggest that you should always cook
yourself. I have said all this only in order that, on occasion,
you should not hesitate in the least to do your own cooking and
[when you have to do it] be so unhappy, all without reason,
that you were wasting your time. Otherwise, when you have mended
your ways, I can have no objection to your calling Chanchi1, having
good things to eat and enjoying life, within limits. Only see that
you do not repeat your mistakes. I want you not to be too eager
to get rich quickly.
Think of Sorabji's death, of Dr. Jivraj's being on his death-bed,
of the passing away of Sir Ratan Tata . When life is so transitory,
why all this restlessness? Why this running after money? Get
whatever money you can earn by ordinary but steady efforts.
Resolve in mind, though, that you will not forsake the path of
truth in pursuit of wealth. Make your mind as firm as you can
and then go ahead making money.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
