300. LETTER TO JUGAL KISHORE BIRLA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, August 7, 1926
BHAISHRI JUGAL KISHORE,
I have your letter. You will have seen what I have said
about the Bible in Young India. You ought to be satisfied. I have
also seen what is said in the Vishwamitra. I shall only say that if
the children have to be taught the Bible, it had better be done
by me. If they are taught by me they shall get but one thing,
viz., Ramanama, which is the essence of all religions. If people
abuse what I say or do, it cannot harm me or my principles. How
can truth be abused? Its abuse turns into its right use. That
is why truth is given the highest place in the Upanishads. It is
called God. If you are still not satisfied, do write again.
SRI JUGAL KISHORE BIRLA
SABZIMANDI, DELHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 12269
301. BULLOCK CAR
Kaka Saheb writes:
Kaka Saheb's argument deserves serious attention, especially
these days when, almost every week, Navajivan carries an article
on the best means of protecting cows. Just as, if we stop con-
suming milk, however hard we strike in the cause of cow-protec-
tion, people will never respond to our efforts, so also, if we stop
utilizing the services of bullocks for agricultural and other pur-
poses, it will be impossible to protect them. No person in this
world has found it possible to maintain something which is a
source of constant economic loss. That is why I have many times
suggested that if dharma and economic interests cannot be re-
conciled, either the conception of that dharma is false or the
1 Not translated here. Kaka Kalelkar had argued that the increasing
use of the motor-car held a threat to the village economy, since it would
deprive cultivators of the extra income earned by bullocks by transporting
goods. Vide also "Letter to D. B. Kalelkar", 4-8-1926.
economic interest takes the form of unmitigated selfishness, and
does not aim at collective welfare. True dharma always pro-
motes legitimate economic pursuits. For imperfect man, this
is a fine test of whether what purports to be dharma is true
dharma. In big cities cows and buffaloes have become a burden
from the point of view of general economy and that is why their
slaughter is increasing day by day. If we do not know the
right use of cows and buffaloes in big cities, do what we will, we
shall never be able to save them-let no one have any doubt
about this. At the moment it seems that we have reached a stage
when we simply cannot do without railways. If, however, we rea-
lize that railways have not been on the whole a blessing to the
country we can restrict their use when we get power. Similarly,
even if we cannot banish the motor-car altogether, we must limit
the sphere of its use. Everyone should feel that we simply cannot
have our fields ploughed by machine and leave the bullocks en-
tirely at the mercy of human beings. The economic structure of
the country will be worthy of our admiration and will endure
only if it is in keeping with the conditions in the country. Our
wisdom and our culture will be judged from our ability to plan
an economy which takes into account the conditions prevailing
in the country.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 8-8-1926
