9. LETTER TO MORARJI DESAI
November 12, 1947
BHAI MORARJI 3 ,
I am dictating this letter to you at 4 in the morning. Dr.
Dinshaw and Jehangir Patel are at present with me. We sat
together and came to the conclusion that Dr. Dinshaw should
earn as much as he needs for his maintenance by charging fees
for the nature-cure treatment he offers outside the Trust formed
in Poona. There was a time when we had thought of paying
Dr. Dinshaw his maintenance allowance out of the Trust funds.
But it was something Dr. Dinshaw could not bring himself to
accept. Then it was thought that he should engage himself in
some other occupation and earn enough for his maintenance.
That also is not possible at present. He should therefore accept
fees from the townspeople, offering them treatment in his own
style and practise nature cure as he conceives it. He should do
it either by expanding his own clinic which he runs in Bom-
bay or with the assistance of the hospital unit at Purandar.
From a broader point of view, between the two I would prefer
Bombay to Purandar. Neither institution has a place for nature
cure as I conceive it. It can be practised only with village
background and nowhere but in a village. At the root of it lies
the great question of changing individual life as well as social
life. This Trust therefore must maintain its separate identity. If the
treatment is meant for the townspeople it must have Govern-
ment's aid, without which nowadays no accommodation can be
had. In Bombay extra floors will be required where Dr. Dinshaw
carries on his practice, or he will have to have another building
to meet his requirements. The point is that you should offer
Dr. Dinshaw the necessary accommodation in Purandar through
a non-government source at a reasonable rent or cost without
bestowing any special favour on him. The main consideration
here could be nothing but service to the public. The rich can
get nature-cure treatment also by paying for it. We can expect
such accommodation for a person whom the Government regards
as suitable. This letter will not be out of place if only the
Government of Bombay could think about it from this point of
view.
We trustees are considering a different plan for the site
that belongs to Jagtap. If we expect the Government to do
anything about it I shall write to you some other time.
I cannot say from here how much land will be required
either in Bombay or in Purandar or where it should be. I ought
to have more information as well as understanding, neither of
which I have. Hence only Dr. Dinshaw and Jehangir can dis-
cuss the matter with you. A similar letter for Dr. Dinshaw.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
