62. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
September 22, 1934
CHI. PANDITJI,
I have read your letter to Kishorelal. Kaka's fever may be
said to have come down now. But he will still have to be
careful. What you write about him seems perfectly correct.
There will be a great deal of misunderstanding if he leaves
Gujarat. Probably you do not know the reason for his decision
to resign. It is not his failure to consult the other colleagues.
That was not a very serious error. And there is also some mis-
understanding regarding that. But though he had not consul-
ted the colleagues he stated in his letter to the Collector that
the trustees desired to make a gift.
A trustee ought not to be
guilty of such a lapse. And, therefore, as atonement for it he
resigned the trusteeship.
This was a correct step. Neither
Vallabhbhai nor anybody else had anything to do with it. It was
only a question of self-purification or self-awakening. Now Kaka
will refrain from leaving Gujarat at least for avoiding a mis-
understanding.
No senior woman worker from the Ashram will be at-
tached to Lakshmibehn. All of them are following their own
independent paths. I like this very much. We should be satis-
fied with whatever progress results from this. What Lakshmibehn
needs is not company but a co-worker. She seems to feel alone
here. Perhaps she will feel like that everywhere and always. I
think she would prefer to have three or four or some more
girls entrusted to her independent charge and be completely
free to manage them as she liked.
She would both need and
not need an adviser. That is, she would consult him whenever
she was in doubt, but act according to her own judgment.
This is not a defect, nor may it be a virtue; or it can be
either. It can be a shining virtue when it springs solely from
the spirit of service. But such is not Lakshmibehn's case. How-
ever, she has no clear plan for the future. I, therefore, wish to
discuss the problem again with her. I have already discussed
it once and this is the impression I have formed. Can she stay
with you? Do you desire it? How much do you earn there?
For how long do you intend to stay there? You do wish ulti-
mately to bury yourself in a village, don't you?
The Kanya Vidyalaya cannot be run today solely by women.
We do not yet have a sufficient number of such women workers.
A few institutions seem to be run by them, but even in their
case men help indirectly. There is no harm in this. Men's help
will be needed for some years at least for running institu-
tions in accordance with our ideals. They are part of our ex-
periment also. There must be some men who have something of
the woman too in them. If men and women can never live
together without getting disturbed by sex attractions, their
brahmacharya is not brahmacharya. Do not mother and son, father
and daughter, brother and sister so live? Why, then, cannot men
and women who are not so related live likewise? If we are
sincere, we shall progress through our mistakes and realize one
day that what seemed impossible has become possible.
I hope you don't believe that there was the slightest feeling
of despair in my advice to break up the Ashram. If despair
was the reason, I would have declared it. The sacrifice of the
Ashram was intended to add lustre to the great work it had
done. It is a pure thing, not an impure one, that is given as
sacrifice. The Ashram had purity enough for the cause for which
it was sacrificed.
The reason behind my desire to leave the Congress is not
corruption in it, but the increasing differences of principle with
the intellectual section in it. We can reform the constitution to
deal with corruption, but to deal with differences of opinion one
of the two parties should surrender to the other or they should
fight it out. The path of surrender is in conformity with ahimsa—
in fighting there is mostly himsa.
About other things Kishorelal will write.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 248.
Courtesy: Lakshmibehn
N. Khare
