260. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
September 13, 1909
MY LORD,
I am exceedingly obliged to you for your letter of the 11th instant.
The letter that I sent to Lord Morley was exactly as you suggested, and
I now see that I might have written a better letter. My difficulty has
always been as to what portion of the information you have given me
should be used by me. I send you the office copy I have of my first
letter to Lord Morley, and I send you draft copy of the letter I should
now write.
I have now received an appointment from Lord Crewe fixed for
the 16th instant. The appointment coincides with General Smuts'
arrival in Pretoria. I do not know whether it is due to coincidence or
deliberation.
I remain, etc.,
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT LETTER TO LORD MORLEy 3
SIR,
On re-reading my letter of the 6th instant offering to wait on His
Lordship, I see that I did not clearly put the position, so as to warrant
the offer to wait on His Lordship.
Lord Ampthill, who has taken a deep interest in the sufferings of
British Indians in the Transvaal, and has assisted us so very greatly,
informs my colleague and me that, whilst General Smuts is prepared
now to grant permanent certificates of residence to a limited number
of educated and cultured British Indians, he will not recognize the
right of such Indians to emigrate to the Transvaal, be it on ever so
limited a scale. The Indian struggle has been undertaken on the
question of 'right'. Whilst it is necessary for the domiciled Indians of
1 Vide Appendix XXIII.
2 This is not available. It was dated September 6.
3 The letter was sent on September 16 after making a few changes in the
draft; vide "Letter to Private Secretary to Lord Morley", pp. 406-.
the Transvaal to receive fresh immigrants from India possessing edu-
cational attainments, in the opinion of the British Indian community,
such a facility is not of so great an importance as the theoretical
right of a British Indian, under a general immigration test, to emigrate
to the Transvaal. But for the passing of another separate Asiatic Act,
namely, Act 36 of 1908, mere repeal of Act 2 of 1907 would have
been sufficient to guard the theoretical right above referred to, and
thus to save the honour of India, but today the existence of that Act
36 of 1908 renders it necessary to mention the question of educated
Indians separately, and slightly to amend the existing law of the Trans-
vaal. It is in order to show the fundamental distinction between what
General Smuts is now prepared to offer, and what has been and is still
demanded by British Indians in the Transvaal, that I have offered, as
I do again on behalf of my colleague and myself, to wait on His
Lordship if he can spare the time.
As I doubt not Lord Morley is aware, the presence of Mr. Polak,
the delegate from the Transvaal, has stimulated very great interest in
the struggle on the part of the Bombay public. Cuttings received by
me weekly show that the papers representing all shades of opinion have
been giving a large amount of space to the question. Mr. Polak has
interviewed prominent Indians and Anglo-Indians, and has received
very great encouragement from them. This activity in Bombay shows
that, as it is quite proper, India is deeply hurt by the insult that is
put upon her by the racial disqualification imported, for the first time,
into colonial legislation, and is much moved for the sufferings that have
been gone through by hundreds of British Indians in the Transvaal, for
the sake of realizing an Imperial ideal.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5066-
