283. LETTER TO N. SUBRAHMANYA AIYAR
December 17, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Do you not remember the saying of a
wise and learned man that the things you cannot say and in-
telligibly explain well inside of an hour are not worth saying
or explaining? But I promised you full one hour. You can still
take that hour if that will satisfy you.
Here are my answers to your questions:
1. A Hindu temple is one built by Hindus for worship by
Hindus in accordance with the requirements of Hinduism.
2. There is no such thing as Indian caste system in Hindu-
ism, but there is varnashrama. And varna is wholly different
from the current caste.
3. Custom that is not repugnant to the moral sense must
be recognized by courts of law.
4. Those who want to enforce a custom have to show that
it has been in vogue for a long time and that it is not in con-
fEct with the moral sense, but the burden may be shifted if a
custom already recognized is challenged.
5. A self-respecting court will not be bullied into giving
decisions by agitations, but it would be governed by well-recog-
nized rules.
6. The question is answered in No. 1.
7. When the religious texts differ, evidence as to usage
will be one of the determining factors.
8. Private property lawfully acquired is entitled to protection.
9. Communal property is also entitled to protection if com-
munal ownership is not in conflict with the common weal.
10. A private temple is entitled to the same protection as
private property.
11. I am not aware of anybody having agitated for con-
fiscation of temples.
12. Simple suicide is an offence under the present Law as
I have been told.
13. If Gandhi took up his stand at the Viceregal gateway
and threatened to fast even for one day unless the British Govern-
ment withdrew from the country, the Government would be justly
entitled to arrest him and imprison him till he came to his senses.
14. The contemplated fast does not make it impossible for
anybody to deal with the temple-entry question in a fearless and
reasonable manner; nor do I see any sign that the opponents are
in any way deterred from their purpose, and I think that they are
quite right in ignoring the contemplated fast.
15. I am sorry to have to remark that this question is packed
with ignorance of the true situation and is outside my limits.
Although I have, out of regard for you, answered your ques-
tions, you will permit me to say that many of them are argumen-
tative and take no note of the existing situation, and some of them
are based upon mere assumptions. It has filled me with sorrow
to discover that learned men have imagined a woeful state of
things to exist and have thrown themselves into rage over the
imaginary woe.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. N. SUBRAHMANYA AIYAR, M.A.
C/O THE RESIDENT MEDICAL OFFICER
GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL, ROYAPETTAH, MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 18731
