199. LETTER TO THE PRESS
INDORE,
March 31, 1918
At the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, just closing, a committee
consisting of the Hon'ble Rai Bahadur Bishen Dutta Shukla, Rai
Bahadur Saryoo Prasad, Babu Shiva Prasad Gupta, Babu Puru-
shottam Das Tandon, Babu Gauri Shanker Prasad, Pandit Venka-
tesh Narayan Tiwari and myself were appointed as a special com-
mittee to give effect to certain resolutions of the Sammelan. One
of the instructions given to the committee is to find out six Tamil
and Telugu youths of promise and good character who would
undertake to learn Hindi with a view to ultimately becoming mis-
sionaries for the propagation of Hindi among the Tamil and the
Telugu people. It has been proposed to locate them either at
Allahabad or at Benares, and to teach them Hindi. Expenses of
their board and lodging as well as instruction will be paid for
by the committee. It is expected that the course will not take
longer than a year at the most and, as soon as they have attained
a certain standard of knowledge of Hindi, they would be entrusted
with the missionary work, that is, the work of teaching Hindi to
the Tamil or the Telugu people, as the case may be, for which they
would get a salary to maintain themselves suitably. The com-
mittee will guarantee such service for at least a period of three
years, and will expect applicants to enter into a contract with the
committee to render the stipulated service faithfully and well for
that period. The committee expects that the services of these
youths will be indefinitely prolonged and that they will be able
to serve themselves as well as the country. The desire of the
committee is to offer liberal payment and expect in return absolute
faithfulness and steadfastness. I trust that you agree with the
Sammelan that Hindi and Hindi alone, whether in Sanskrit form
or as Urdu, can become the language of intercourse between the
different provinces. It is already that amongst the Mahomedans
all over India, as also amongst the Hindus except in the Madras
Presidency. I exclude the English-educated Indians who have made
English, in my humble opinion, much to the detriment of the
country, the language of mutual intercourse. If we are to realize
the swaraj ideal, we must find a common language that can be easily
learnt and that can be understood by the vast masses. This has
always been Hindi or Urdu and is so even now, as I can say from
personal experience. I have faith enough in the patriotism, self-
lessness and the sagacity of the people of the Madras Presidency to
know that those, who at all want to render national service or to
come in touch with the other Provinces, will undergo the sacrifice,
if it is one, of learning Hindi. I suggest that they should con-
sider it a privilege to be able to learn a language that will enable
them to enter into the hearts of millions of their countrymen. The
proposal set forth is a temporary makeshift. An agitation of great
potency must arise in the country that would compel the educa-
tional authorities to introduce Hindi as the second language in the
public schools. But it was felt by the Sammelan that no time
should be lost in popularizing Hindi in the Madras Presidency.
Hence the above-mentioned proposal which, I hope, you will be
able to commend to your readers. I may add that the committee
proposes to send Hindi teachers to the Tamil as also to the Andhra
districts in order to teach Hindi free of charge to those who would
care to learn it. I hope that many will take advantage of the prof-
fered tuition. Those youths who wish to apply for the training
above mentioned should do so under cover addressed to me care
of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Allahabad, before the end of April.
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi
