178. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
MEERUT,
October 31, 1929
DEAR SHIVABHAI,
I still cannot say that the printing of the Ashram Samachar
is such that it can be read in full. And it is likely that the
clearest copy is sent to me. If the lettering is faint even in
that copy, how much fainter it must be in the other copies! I
therefore feel that we must instal a litho or get the Ashram
Samachar printed. It must itself raise the money for that expense.
The list of the inmates is well given, but I consider it a
big mistake that you have shown the three untouchables sepa-
rately. You could have mentioned 'Hindus (including three
untouchables) 198.' I also do not like the statement that the
list of the labourers will be given later. The number of the
labourers staying there must be known and it should be easy to
give it. We cannot have in the Ashram a separate class of
labourers distinct from other inmates.
The labourers should be identified in some other way, be-
cause all of us are labourers. We should drive this point into our
heads as firmly as we can. And we must give up in practice and
in principle the idea which often persists that a particular job
is the responsibility only of the labourers.
We should make a distinction between students and paid
workers or members receiving maintenance and paid workers in
keeping with our principles. But even while making such a
distinction, we must strive to absorb the labourers among our-
selves.
In other words, the number of labourers should diminish day
by day and we should try to absorb among ourselves as many
of the present ones as we can. You have given the number of
Muslims as seven. Does this number include Amina's children?
If it does, according to my reckoning the number comes to
eight. Sixth is Imam Saheb, seventh Abbas and the eighth another
student whose name I have forgotten.
You wrote suggesting that I should check your figure with
Jethalal. I shall do so now, for Jethalal has returned to Bardoli.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9494
