78. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
March 25, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
You have kindly informed me that the Inspector-General
has replied to my letter of the 23rd ultimo saying that the decision
about the Vasant and the Samalochak was given by a competent
authority and that I was to be referred to the last paragraph of
the Government's letter regarding my inquiry about certain
applications for interviews with me.
XXIII-11
I beg to tender my congratulations to the I.G. for the prompt-
ness of his reply, but greatly deplore the position adopted by him.
I.G.'s competency to decide as to the periodicals was never ques-
tioned by me. And the paragraph of the Government's letter
referred to by him does not help me in the least. It says that you
may not discuss with prisoners the prison regulations in general.
I have asked the I.G. to do no such thing with me. I have merely
asked for the reasons of his decision. I may remind him that
when he was Superintendent, and applied on my behalf for the
Modern Review, the Government did give reasons for their refusal.
I venture to suggest that the present case in no way differs from
the previous one.
Moreover, the Inspector-General knows from his conversa-
tions with me that I regard these refusals to let me have the use of
periodicals a punishment in addition to that awarded by the con-
victing judge. I feel sure that, in every case, a person is entitled to
reasons for punishments inflicted on him by competent authorities.
With due respect to the Inspector-General, I venture to sub-
mit that he cannot take up the lofty attitude of indifference towards
prisoners that the Government may permit itself to take. Whilst
he was Superintendent, he taught me to think that as Superin-
tendent of a prison, although he undoubtedly carried out the
discipline of a prison, his appointment required him equally to
protect the rights, such as they were, of prisoners. He led me to
think that a Superintendent of a prison was, in fact, guardian of
the prisoners under his charge. If this is true, the Inspector-Gene-
ral is, I take it, the super-guardian of prisoners who, therefore,
expect him to press their just claims even before the Government,
when it happens to overlook or disregard them. A prisoner also
expects him not to evade his just inquiries, but to satisfy him in
every possible and reasonable way.
I am sorry for carrying on this correspondence. But, rightly
or wrongly, I believe that even as a prisoner I have certain rights,
for example, the right to have pure air, water, food and clothing.
Similarly, I have the right to have such mental nourishment given
to me as I am used to. I ask for no favours, and if the Inspector-
General thinks that any single thing or convenience has been
given to me as a favour, let it be withdrawn. But this matter of
receiving periodicals I consider as important a right as that of
receiving suitable food. I do, therefore, respectfully ask him not
to treat my application for reasons for his decision with the in-
1 Young India has "Government's".
difference that his letters have unfortunately hitherto betrayed.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 8024; also Young India, 6-3-1924
