330. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY, BIHAR
BETTIAH,
May 30, 1917
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 27th instant on the agrarian situation in Champaran.
I shall be pleased to wait on His Honour at Ranchi on Monday
next, the 4th June, at midday.
Your letter raises issues which it is impossible for me to ignore
if I am faithfully to serve the cause that keeps me in Champaran.
It is part of the raiyats' case that the planters will stop short
of nothing to gain their end. I have noticed ever since my arrival
the very great and undue influence that the planters enjoy over
everybody and in everything. They have striven their best to have
me removed from Champaran. They have not hesitated to impute
motives to the honourable men who at considerable personal sacri-
fice have been giving me valuable assistance. They have without
doubt used at least "moral suasion" in keeping the raiyats from
coming to me. At Dhokraha I witnessed the sorrowful spectacle
of two or three men declaiming, in the presence of the Manager and
the Subdivisional Officer, on the virtues of the kothi in front of a
crowd of nearly 500 men who complained bitterly against the kothi
about zirat land forced on them and fines exacted from them for
disobedience. These witnesses were brought by the Manager from
Loheria to say that Loheria had no complaint and that the Dhok-
raha complaints were due to the machinations of one or two agita-
tors. Since then many Loheria raiyats have come and complained
precisely in the same manner as Dhokraha men. It should be noted
that if full justice is done to the raiyats, planters stand to lose huge
yearly incomes and many privileges they have hitherto enjoyed.
In the circumstances, I do not entirely discount the statement the
raiyats make to me that the fires have been instigated by the kothis
in question to discredit my mission and to remove me from their
midst. The raiyats add that they might be given some credit for
selfishness and that their self-interest should deter them from incen-
diarism or such other acts. I have submitted to the District Magis-
trate the results of my inquiry into the Dhokraha fire. I beg to
enclose copy of my letter to Mr. Heycock. I am, however, willing
to disbelieve the raiyats' theory and put down the fire to natural
accidents. I may add, however, that in the Dhokraha fire, it was
the roofing alone that was burnt. But I venture to suggest that
even if it is the wilful act of a maniacal raiyat done in the excite-
ment caused by my presence, it would be no justification for my
removal, unless the Government are satisfied that I have been directly
or indirectly instrumental in causing the fires. Finally, there have
been fires in the kothis before my arrival and that the excitement
in Champaran as admitted by the Commissioner was in existence
long before I entered Bihar. I wish respectfully to warn the Govern-
ment that they will have utterly misunderstood the position if they
remove me from the raiyats. I have no desire to do aught except
promote peace between the planters and the raiyats so as to
secure to the raiyats the freedom and dignity that should belong
to all mankind.
I ask the Government to dismiss from their minds the theory
suggested by the planters that the present excitement is caused by
mischievous persons for private reasons. Planters are too powerful
to be touched by any person, no matter how mischievous he may
be. The raiyats say that they never deserved the police guards that
were placed in their villages and that they were part of the policy
of repression pursued by the planters. It is admitted that in Sathi
the Manager was more to blame than the raiyats, and yet the
raiyats had to pay with their blood and money. It is all peace there
now, because the Manager knows his work. I have before me
statements from over 7,000 raiyats from all parts of Champaran.
I have seen all of them though I have found it impossible personally
to take down their statements. It is difficult for me to believe that
they all tell lies at the instigation of a few mischievous men.
I enclose copies of my letters addressed to the Manager of the
Motihari concern. I have not had any reply to my first com-
munication. Probably there is the other side to the story, but the
incidents described show at what risk the raiyats come to me. I
quote what Mr. Johnston one time Subdivisional Officer in Bettiah
Subdivision, had to say in 1914 regarding the methods adopted
by planters to bend the raiyats to their will :
There are four methods prevalent in this subdivision compelling recalcitrant
tenants to pay up. The commonest way is by putting peons on, the petitions do
not allege that this has been done. The next way is to attach crops standing
on khalihan 3 , but this also is not alleged. Then sometimes the barbers and
washermen are stopped from rendering their services; the petitioners only fear
this, it has not been done yet. Finally, a very effective means is to impound the
raiyats' cattle either in a private pound or if the D. B. pound is leased out to the
landlord then in it.
The report itself is otherwise hostile to the raiyats. I am of
opinion that it did not do justice to the raiyats. I give this opinion
in all humility and after having thoroughly gone into the situation.
It is often forgotten that it is not necessary for the planters to resort
to force actually in every case. The fact that it is there to be
used on the slightest attempt at the show of independence is enough
to prevent recalcitrancy. I respectfully submit that planters have
had it their own way long enough [so] that the raiyats are in a con-
dition of paralysis. They are worthy of patient care and attention
from the Government. But the latter will not render that help,
unless they are prepared to believe the raiyats' story (exaggerated
no doubt it will be) in preference to the planters'.
I tender my apology for the length of this communication. If
I have been over-frank, the cause I espouse must be my excuse. It
is too great to admit of tinkering. I hope that at a crisis like the
one that faces the Government and the people of India, the Govern-
ment do not wish me to conceal my feelings.
I am deeply grateful to His Honour that he has decided to
have a personal conversation with me. I shall hope for the sake of
the raiyats that nothing I may say or do will adversely affect their
cause, and that I shall find the right word in His Honour's
presence so that he can appreciate the awfulness of the raiyats'
position even as I do.
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 109, pp. 174-
