281. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
[CAPE TOWN,]
Phagan Sud 4 [March 1, 1914]
RESPECTED KHUSHALBHAI,
How could I help being happy beyond words that, in deference
to my wish, you have sent on Jamnadas also? He has conducted
himself in gaol in the same spirit that moved him to come over
here. The courage and presence of mind he displayed when going
to gaol and while in gaol, few others could have shown in their
first experience. I can recall no such instance at the moment.
Jamnadas behaved as though he had already gone through the
mill. This shows that he had lived in thought through the ex-
perience of others and profited by it. Many people learn nothing
unless they themselves suffer; but I have observed that Jamnadas
has the gift [of learning from the experience of others]. His habit
of thinking too much has an unsettling effect on him, but I believe
this will disappear in course of time. He keeps well enough.
About the question of his marriage, it would be better, I think,
to talk over the matter when we meet instead of my expressing an
opinion right now. I have understood your point. After considering
all the circumstances, we shall take whatever step we may decide
on. I think Chi. Narandas should be able to meet all your spe-
cial requirements. It should be enough for you to have one son
to attend on you, if that is what you want. This too I should
like to discuss personally with you when we meet there. Provided
a settlement comes off, I hope to start in April. Should the
struggle start again, there will be nothing to think about. Jamna-
das must, in that case, go through it. I have seen in him a
courageous spirit which I should be very happy indeed to bring
out. I see that all your sons have it in them to be ornaments to
the family, to the community and to the whole world. From
among them all, Jamnadas may even prove to be the best, thanks
to his karma . And naturally too. He is the youngest of the four,
and so, when the two of you drew his life into being, your
spiritual state had attained full maturity and Jamnadas, too,
would have that maturity. He has also the advantage of several
other circumstances denied to his three brothers. All these,
however, are my conjectures. Our duty in the matter is to
encourage and develop whatever good we observe in our children.
The rest must depend on the working out of their prarabdha .
You have two daughters-in-law, at any rate, of the same
calibre as your sons. Having known Kashi and Santok, I have
always felt that I have been granted such tender-hearted children
because of some former good deeds of mine. They have spared no
pains to meet my wishes and have made my work here very easy.
As if fortune had not favoured me enough already, respected
Kalabhai also wants to entrust his son to me. I am not the one
to fight shy of accepting additional responsibilities, and my con-
science tells me that I have perfect faith in God.
With deepest regards from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
As Chi. Harilal was with you about a month ago, the letter
to him is addressed c/o you.
With deepest regards from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5637
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
