386. LETTER TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
[After June 24, 1945]
DEAR MAULANA SAHEB,
It was by mere chance that Pyarelal happened to see you. But
what you told him, if his report of the talk is accurate, is startling.
The Working Committee has not given you the right or the permission
to form a cabinet. You yourself told me that you could not do it without
the Working Committee. That is my view too. That was why I had
said that you should form a small committee with the assistance of
the Working Committee, which could be given that right and then act
through that committee or the Working Committee itself. Since you did
not react favourably to either of the proposals, I can only conclude
that I do not understand or do not know the stand of the Working
Committee in the matter. I understand from what Jamnalalji says that
you are going to summon the Working Committee anyhow. I consider
it improper. I would not wish you to be guilty of such a grave error
at this juncture.
I do not know what you have done and how you could persuade
the Viceroy. Even if you have committed yourself it is, in my view,
your duty to inform him that a mistake has been committed. So much
for the matter between you and the Working Committee.
Another thing I would like to tell you is that in anything you do,
you should take with you the Congressmen who are present and you
should put everything in writing.
The third is a personal matter. Ever since I first heard the Viceroy's
proclamation3, that is, while I was still at Panchgani, I have been shouting
that the Congress cannot accept the principle of parity between Muslims
and non-Harijan Hindus, an organization of Hindus alone. Even if I
am the only one among crores to do so, I shall refuse to be a party
to it. I do not care if the negotiations break down on this, for I know
and believe that the moment you try to form a national government
at the centre in this way you will be laying a wrong foundation. In
1 From the contents it is evident that this was written during Gandhiji's
stay at Simla where he had talks with the Viceroy, Lord Wavell, regarding
constitutional negotiations. Gandhiji reached Simla to attend the Conference
on June 24.
2 Vide Vol. LXXX, p.343.
3 Dated June 14, 1945; ibid., Appendix III.
4 ibid., pp. 382 and 390.
212
this respect I am neither a Hindu, nor belong to any other religion.
I belong to all faiths or to none. I only walk in the way of God. I
shall be very happy if you can lend me your co-operation in this matter.
But if you cannot do it wholeheartedly then I would rather do without
it. I shall keep you informed.
I trust you are well and the climate here has not disagreed with
you.
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
