371. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
MUSSOORIE,
June 6, 1946
CHI. MANUDI,
I shall be glad if Jaisukhlal and you come. If both of you
can live happily away from me and you get educated and
become wise there is nothing special to be gained by coming
to me. If there has been any misunderstanding the fire of
time will melt it away provided we let it do so. From your
doings there which you describe it seems that you are spending
your time well. By goondas you seem to mean the bad boys you
have come across. Your way of dealing with them may be said
to resemble partly that of Draupadi. The method worth emu-
lating is that of Sita. Though, of course, both have been counted
among the [five] satis It is worth thinking over why Draupadi,
though she had five husbands, was and is regarded as a sati. But
I leave that question aside. If your answer to the goonda
meant nothing more than what you did, if your heart was full
of anger, then you may be said to have replied to the goonda
with violence on your part. If you think over the meaning
of whipping out the sandal from your foot and throwing it at
him or striking him a few times with the sandal in your hand and
the goonda becoming cowed down, you will realize what you
did. Since you resorted to physical force in a crowded square
the other people also would take courage and the goonda being
a coward at heart, would be cowed down and run away. If
taking off the sandal was a sign of compassion on your part
then I would regard even your hitting the man with it as an
act of ahimsa. Ahimsa has its roots in the heart. And its
result should be that the other person submits, not to physical
force, but to soul-force because he is overwhelmed by the power
of compassion behind the physical punishment.
I will give
you an instance of this from my own life. Miss Schlesin in her
folly started smoking a cigarette in my presence. I slapped her
and threw away the cigarette. For the first time she cried before
me and apologized and wrote to me afterwards saying that she
would never do such a thing again and that she had recognized
my love. I have narrated this incident in my autobiography.
There have been many other similar incidents in my life.
Others also may have similar experiences about which we do not
know. Did the goonda recognize the love in your heart? Do not
be deceived by the admiration of the people. Know your own
heart and decide whether your action was inspired by violence
or non-violence. Ordinarily whipping out sandals is no sign of
culture or ahimsa. It is a sign of impulsiveness, that is, of lack
of culture. But in your case, the action may have been a sign
of ahimsa. Still you alone can testify which is the truth; or,
may be God. However, after analysing your action in such
detail, I only wish to compliment you. For I do not mind even
if your action was violent. It is enough for me that you were
not cowed down. I assume that you wish to cultivate ahimsa,
and therefore, even if it was an act of violence, you will try
and learn ahimsa from it. I, therefore, gladly gave your letter
to everybody to read. Akha Bhagat has said: "Live as you like
but realize Hari anyhow." Accordingly, if you learn to practise
pure truth and pure ahimsa even while living there I will
believe that you have learnt more than what you would have
by staying with me and learning them under my guidance.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXIV
