310. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[PHOENIX,
NATAL,
Sunday, Chaitra Vad 2, April 12, 1914]
CHI. MANILAL,
Whatever Mr. Kallenbach's hour for going to bed,
you must follow one rule alone. And the same about eating. Here
is the meaning of the sentences which you could not understand:
"All acts done in a purely legalistic spirit (in accordance with
the literal meaning) are, indeed, cursed. Even so, it is stated
that those who do not keep doing the things as indicated by [the
letter of] the law are all cursed." The point is that mere bookish
souls can never attain moksha. The Gita has a verse to the same
effect, which you may ponder over. "The Vedas keep on the plane
of the three gunas; be thou, Arjuna, beyond those gunas."—This
is what Shri Krishna said to Arjuna. This does not mean that
one need not do the duties prescribed in the shastras. It means
rather that doing them is not quite enough, that one must under-
stand their hidden significance, their aim, and go beyond the
actions themselves. The man who renounces the prescribed duties
and professes himself a barren Brahmavadin will have no footing
anywhere. He will have lost the support provided by the shastras
while the foundation of inward illumination has not yet been
built, so that he is bound to fall. St. Paul therefore told the
Galatians: "Do perform the acts enjoined by the scriptures; but
you will remain under a curse, if you have no faith in the
teachings of the Lord Jesus and do not follow his teachings." The
same meaning is to be read in "bond maid" and "free woman".
Bond means bandhan. Scriptures are compared to the mother in
flesh who, it is pointed out, has the status of a slave so that her
children are also born slaves.
Faith, which means bhakti, is described as a divine mother,
whose children are angels. Read the sentences which precede and
follow in the light of this explanation and tell me whether you
follow them properly or not. The 56 th verse of Chapter 15 in
I Corinthians means that sin is the sting of death, that, in other
words, that a sinful man alone feels death as a sting. For the
virtuous, it is the means of attaining moksha. The second line
means that mere dry knowledge of the scripture has the power of a
curse. We observe this at every step. Hundreds of sins are com-
mitted in the name of scripture. The meaning of Romans V, 20
is simple enough. Scripture made its appearance again and led to
more crimes. As the load of sins increased, however, God's grace
also increased in like measure. That is, even in such evil times,
men were found who broke themselves free from the chains of dry
learning and, teaching the way of bhakti, brought out the hidden
meaning of scripture; this was God's grace. St. John, XV, 3 means
this: "Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken
unto you." Here "are" denotes the future and "through" should
be taken to mean "by acting according to".
Think twice before introducing changes by way of reform in
your life. But I wish that, having once adopted a change, you would
cling to it like a leech. Love the virtues of Mr. Kallenbach. Know
his weakness when you see it and keep yourself away from
it. The latest change you have introduced has not been adopted
after due thought. You are not bound to adopt all the changes
which Mr. Kallenbach may make. You must learn to think inde-
pendently for yourself and stick to your judgement. It will not
matter if, in doing so, you sometimes go wrong. You are even
entitled to oppose my views after you have honestly thought over
a matter; in cases in which it seems right to oppose me, opposition
becomes your duty. It is my earnest desire that you should
understand the idea of moksha and aspire for it. This will never
come about, however, till you develop a capacity for independent
thinking and firmness of mind. At present, you are in the con-
dition of a creeper. It assumes the shape of the tree over which
it spreads. That is not what the atman does. The atman is free
and, in its essence, omnipotent.
"It is desire, anger, born of the quality of rajas, all-devouring
and sinful; know it to be the enemy." This is the reply that
Shri Krishna gave to Arjuna when the latter asked him what
it was that drove man to commit sin against his will. It means
this: "The cause of sin is desire, anger, which has its origin in the
quality of rajas; is all-devouring and drives men to sins with-
out number. Know it, for certain, to be the enemy." This is an
established truth. Hence you should have remained quiet when
Mr. K. lost his temper. When one's elders get angry, one should
be gentle and not answer back; if forced to reply, one should say:
"I will correct myself; please forgive me this time." There is no
admission in this of one's having acted wrongly on purpose. Later,
when the person has calmed down, one may politely put one's
doubt to him, if one has any. You can ask Mr. K., when he is
himself, how it was wrong to serve apples picked from a lot
which was getting rotten.
David's Psalm has a meaning which is worth understanding.
He desires in it the destruction of the wicked; the significance of
this is that he cannot bear evil. The same idea appears in the
Ramayana.
Gods and men both pray for the destruction of
rakshasas. The prayer Jaya Rama Rama is inspired by the same
sentiment. The spiritual significance of the Psalm is that David
(Arjuna— the god ward attributes desires the destruction of Dur-
yodhana and others [the satanic attributes]. This is the sattvic
impulse. It comes into play when one is in a state of bhakti.
When one attains to the state of jnana both the impulses subside
and all that remains is pure consciousness— Knowledge Absolute.
You will not probably find this state described in the Bible. Though
David was imperfect, he was a bhakta. His sentiments have found
expression in the Psalm in simple language and, though a great
man, he makes himself humble before God, looking upon himself
as a mere blade of grass.
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana
