357. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Silence Day, May 13, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Three letters from you of the 6th, the 8th and the 9th have
piled up. It is all right if you have changed the time for prayers
and meals; you have done nothing wrong in that.
You must have sent an acknowledgment to Lady Ramanathan.
Has not the sum been sent to Tiruchengodu? Has it not been
acknowledged in Young India?
The money which we receive from France is not from a
gentleman but from a lady. It is the same Mirbel, who had once
stayed in the Ashram for about a month.
Shivabhai must have recovered.
You need not insist on the students memorizing the verses of
the Gita. They themselves should insist on doing that. All of
us, of course, should know how to recite them correctly.
My having given up breakfast is not an act of sacrifice; it was
rendered necessary by my travels. I feel helpless at not being
able to go for morning and evening walks. When I teach the
Gita, I don't set aside a special time for it; my enthusiasm shows
me the way. When I was there, I used the time allotted to spin-
ning in discussions with inmates of the Ashram. Here I give the
first half hour to Prabhavati, and the half hour in the afternoon
to the workers. Since, instead of everyone joining in the
recitation at the time of the prayer, a different person recited the
verses every day, we could correct the pronunciation of the person
who was doing his turn. In this way we could effect much
improvement. People still commit mistakes, but they are getting
fewer. This does not impose the slightest burden on my mind or
my time; on the contrary, it gives me more peace of mind. The
person who learns in this manner likes doing so. He does not feel
that it is a task.
It is only after I arrive there that I think I shall be able to
write about the money received from Rangoon.
Do you examine the cash book every day? Do you sign it
daily? Do you inspect the vouchers every day? If you do not,
start doing it. Follow the rule no matter who is in charge of
the work.
Sitla Sahai seems to be busy all right. I was to reach
Bombay on the morning of the 23rd; instead I shall reach on the
evening of the 22nd. I expect to return to the Ashram before the
28th.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5417
