36. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Monday [On or before April 3, 1911]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your 'slating' letter. It is certainly a sign of 'thickness' that
I should not write to please you but write only when I have something
to say. The office news I purposely refrain from writing as I should
expect Miss S[chlesin] to give you the information you would need.
You have not become an expert in the question and I do not want
to give you details which only an expert may require. You are in fact
and in reality the angel of peace and mercy. These angels simply give
strength wherever it is required without knowing even that they are
doing [so]. With you, as I have so often said, the heart comes first.
Whenever the intellect has ruled, you have shown the worst side of
your nature.
Remarkable that the finger should not still be cured entirely. But
you never fasted, though you intended to.
You are 'crowing' too early. My telegrams were not intended to
convey that we had the victory. The wretched new Bill I certainly
think is as good as dead. But whether the Transvaal Law will be
amended or not is a different thing. I think it will be. Smuts is committed
to settling the question. But he is never certain as to anything. He
always waits till the last moment.
Harilal tells me you are going to England if I do. How so? Can
it be arranged? Who will look after the Farm? I should be far more
satisfied with your dispositions if Mountain View could be sold. But
I am inclined to blame you in the matter. You have never seriously
tried to sell it. Will you now do it? It is, I am sure, wrong to think
of clinging to both the Farm and Mountain View.
You will laugh when I tell you that the 2 lb. of butter is still lying
unpacked in Gopal's bag. Yes, I think, we have lost friend Gopal.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 From the contents; vide also the following two letters to the addressee; the
Monday before April 5 was April 3.
2 Vide Vol. X, pp. 516-28.
3 Probably Gopal Naidoo, who came to stay at Tolstoy Farm around June 13,
1910 and was looking after the cooking there; vide Vol. X, pp. 273 and 288.
46
