699. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,
October 10, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have received your letters.
I can see that you do not want me to write anything to Gokhale
right now. I have seen Gokhale's letter in the Chronicle today.
Your letter to Thakkar Bapa is full of anger. You seem to
have lost sight of one rule. You ought not to read in letters
1 Maganbhai P. Desai
2 Nirmala, sister of Mahadev Desai
3 Sharda C. Shah
4 Vanamala Parikh
5 Extracts from this letter appear in Vol. LVI, pp. 83-.
420
what is scored off. And if you happen to read it, you ought not
to read any meaning in it. A person should be given a chance
to modify his views. It is sheer ignorance to attribute wicked-
ness even to the most wicked thought once it has been modified.
The world would not go on in peace even for a minute if we
started throwing our views at one another. I think you have
been unnecessarily angry. Thakkar Bapa deserves to be compli-
mented on his alertness. Moreover, his age and his dedicated ser-
vice of so many years give him a right to say a great deal. When he
says something, there is no sting behind it. If there is anybody's
mistake in this, one might say it is on my part. I have written at
this length because I would not like even a trace of anger in you.
Now for the Ashram. I think you are mistaken in the matter.
If the Government does not take possession and we allow the
land to remain untended it means we are harbouring a feeling
of revenge. It would be an unnatural situation. There was
nothing to prevent the Government from taking possession of
the land and letting it lie fallow. But on what ground can we
allow the land to remain fallow if the Government does not
take it over? In that case, why should we not burn down our
movable property? According to what you are saying, those who
burnt their crops acted wisely. I am convinced that the
Satyagraha Ashram will fulfil its purpose if the land is donated
to Harijans. This is of greater moment than if the land was to
remain with the Government. Even if it should go to the
Government, we would always want to claim it back in the end.
But in this case, the Ashram inmates gave it up for good and
placed themselves in the hands of God. If we examine the
problem from this point of view, it would be clear that the path
adopted alone does credit to a satyagrahi. There has been no place
here for greed for money. It was merely a matter of what was
right, that is, of non-violence. The Government may well want
to turn this land into a wilderness, but we should not let that
happen if we can help it. If you are not convinced by these
two arguments, write to me again. It should not be difficult to
convince you in this matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Vide also Vol. LVI, p. 81.
