169. LETTER TO A. DONALD MILLER
WARDHA,
July 11, 1936
DEAR MR. MILLER,
Your letter of 3rd July to Mahadev Desai. Thank you for the
letters you have been contributing in connection with the terrible
leprosy in India. I know from personal experience of village
workers of the increasing number. Only this morning Mirabehn
who, as you know, has now for nearly 18 months settled down to
village life was telling me how many lepers have been coming
in contact with her, hoping to find some remedy for their disease.
I know that she will derive much help from your letters. And
1 Vide "Dr. Ambedkar's Indictment –II", pp. 153-.
2 Vide" The Leprosy Problem", p. 15.
3 At Varoda, a village near Wardha
now that I have just begun the village life, I am already making
use of the instructions which you have given in your letters.
Needless to say your fifth letter will be published. Of course
the readers of Harijan should know fully what missionary effort has
done to alleviate the suffering of lepers. It would be churlish of
me or anybody to ignore the medical work of the various missions
in India and elsewhere. My complaint is that that work is not
done without an alien motive behind it. I could not give you an
adequate conception of the barrier that this motive erects between
them and the thousands who would gladly take advantage of medi-
cal and other help that missionaries could render. You will pro-
bably rejoin that missionaries are not deflected from the call which
they consider to be divine, by knowledge of the barrier. Persons
like me who believe in the essential truth of all religions feel on
the contrary that the proselytizing effort prevents so many Indians
from benefiting by the unadulterated teachings of Jesus which
ennobles life in spite of their not believing in him as the only
begotten Son of God.
I hope you will not regard this paragraph of my letter as in
any way qualifying my gratefulness for your articles. I felt that
it would not be complete if I did not let you know that my view
on proselytization could not in any way affect my recognition of
the good that is done by the mission, apart from their proselyti-
zing attempt. I need hardly say that this little discussion of
my view is not meant as an invitation to a debate on the subject.
This letter itself does not call for any reply. It is merely meant
to be one of thanks and nothing more. You may expect ques-
tions on leprosy as may be prompted by personal contact with
lepers which will probably be my daily lot.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
