57. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 23, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Read my letters to Kusum and Bhau and then pass them on
to them. Kusum's illness requires care. There is no cause at
all for fear. She holds in her own hands the key to recovery.
If she lives all the time in open air and eats only what, and as
much as, she can digest, she will certainly get all right. The
only cure for loose motions is a fast. During the fast she should
drink as much water as she can. A little soda bicarb should be
mixed in every glass of water she drinks. It helps very much in
stopping loose motions. The proportion of one grain of soda
for every ounce of water will be all right. If she can digest fruit
juices, a fast is not necessary.
I have discussed about eggs before. Compared with fish-
liver oil, pure eggs are innocent. Pure eggs are those from which
no chickens come out, however long they are kept, and which
are laid by the hen without a cock having been brought to her.
Such eggs are not boiled but opened as they are and the liquid
consumed. They help in stopping loose motions and are more
nourishing than milk. If Kusum is willing, she may drink the
liquid of such eggs. They are available even in Ahmedabad. But
I realize that no value should be attached to my advice. Instead
of doing what I advise from this distance, the proper course would
be to follow the doctor's advice and you should do that. Show
my suggestions to the doctor and then do as he advises.
About Bhau, I do not wish to make any suggestion other than
what I have done in my letter to him. If Kanti has not got all right,
I would certainly say that his case requires careful watching. That
is, we should treat his disease to be a case of black fever. That
means that he should take complete rest, stop all food except
fruit-juices and, if he really feels hungry, milk in small quantities
at a time. If he does not pass stool, he should take an enema.
I would be happy if you or somebody else drop me a post-
card daily.
Ramji came and saw me yesterday. He had many complaints
against Mathuradas. The latter should remove his suspicions and
should even tolerate occasional troubles caused by him. He is
very eager to weave khadi of even texture from the yarn spun
by Mahadev. If he is really eager and if there is no definite
complaint against him, he should be permitted to weave that
yarn notwithstanding any loss that this may involve. About the
other matters, call him to you and ask him in confidence. We
should not feel hurt by anything he says. We should even put up
with insults from him. All this is part of our atonement (for
our treatment of the Antyajas). Show this to Mathuradas.
How is Hariyomal behaving?
In Poona, Ramji stayed in a room provided by the Christian
Seva Sangh. Ordinarily, there should be no objection to any-
one of us staying there. I would even welcome that. But I think
the fact that Ramji had to stay there only means that he was
not welcomed at any other place. You should have asked him
and made some arrangements for him. Perhaps you would have
found it difficult to do so. That is why probably you kept quiet.
I will fix up with some families who will put up friends like Ramji,
and then let you know.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8269.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1 A Sindhi inmate of the Ashram
