189. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
SIMLA,
July 20, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
I have a letter from Mian Ahmad Shah enclosing copy of a
letter addressed to the Deputy Commissioner, Peshawar and en-
closures thereto. I send you herewith copies of these papers.
And below is an extract from a letter just received from Khan
Saheb Abdul Ghaffar Khan.
The Government seems to be bent on repression. Two of the Khudai
Khidmatgars were shot dead and it is generally believed that the officials
had a hand in it. We inquired and discovered that those Khudai Khid-
matgars had no enemies, nor had they any quarrel with anyone. A young
man had informed me that a police sub-inspector had asked him to take
any kind of revenge he wants to take from his uncle, he could even kill
him if he liked. The sub-inspector assured the young man that no action
will be taken against him. The young man, my informant, and his uncle
were not on good terms and the latter is the President of the local
Jirga. The Government is arresting and punishing people under Sec. 40
F.R. Act and they have promulgated Sec. 144 Cr. P.C. in many places
without any reason. The police generally threaten and assault Khudai
Khidmatgars. It is generally believed by the people that the Government
is purposely provoking people to create disturbance.
The police severely assault small boys for crying Inqilab Zindabad. On
the 13th of June some Europeans were driving in car at Sudoom, Tehsil
Mardan, when a small boy cried Inqilab Zindabad. The Europeans stopped
the car and got down and caught hold of the boy and threw him in the
central canal. Then again, on the 13th of July at Nevakali, Tahsil Savabi
some Europeans severely assaulted a boy for raising the same cry.
For realizing rent, they put the people to all kinds of torture. They
are made to sit the whole day under the hot sun and then they are
put in small dungeons which have no ventilation.
I hope you will be good enough to take notice of these facts. While
our fight was going on there was not so much repression as it is now. I
have done my best to keep people quiet and once a Government official
paid me this compliment, but how long it will be possible for me to
make them remain quiet? In Kohat, village people were allowed to take
away salt free of cost before the fight but now after the Truce even this
has been stopped and they are no longer allowed to take away salt free
of cost.
These statements make confusion worse confounded. On the
one hand you give me information that the Khudai Khidmatgars
nicknamed "Red Shirts" are causing endless trouble. On the other
there are complaints on behalf of them, as now, that their liberty
is unduly being interfered with. There ought to be a way out
of knowing the real truth.
Could you please tell me what Malkand Agency is? Is it
or is it not within the zone of the Settlement?
Yours sincerely,
Encl.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
