187. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 21, 1926
MY DEAR GOVIND,
I have your letter. If I was a believer in miracles, I would
say that my not going to Finland was a miracle. I had actually
dictated a letter and telegram of final acceptance and the mere
accident of my having gone to the 'Library' and a flash light per-
ception altered the whole situation within five minutes.
I am certainly eager to go to China if I find the way clearly
open, but not for the reasons you mention. I do not believe in
imported credit and, therefore, I do not think that my way in
India will be smoother if the Chinese accepted it; nor am I in
any way hopeful of their acceptance. What attracts me to China
is identity of status in that both are nations under foreign domi-
nation. I came in very intimate contact with the Chinese colony
in the Transvaal. And, as a matter of fact, I believe that whilst
I would have readily got in Finland intellectual assent to the
their minds. I trust this statement imputed to you is not entirely true" (S.N.
11074). The "signed document" is the "Letter to Mahomed Ali", 7-2-1924,
which Gandhiji had intended to be "a message to his countrymen on his
release"; vide Vol. XXIII, pp. 199-202.
doctrine of ahimsa, I shall find it terribly difficult to secure that
assent from the Chinese, whether cultured or uncultured. But that
does not worry me as it does not worry me here whether people
accept ahimsa or not. What I am afraid of about Europe and
America is patronage. I entertain no such fear about China. You
will detect here in me a subtle pride and, if you do, you will not
be far wrong. But there it is.
I think that some friend did send me the book called The Arm
of God. I do not think I read it carefully. But, since you think
so highly about it, I shall ask our librarian to search it out and
give it to me.
By all means put into shape your economic arguments about
khaddar before you write on ahimsa. Whenever you send me
questions, I shall try to deal with them.
I must not stir out of Sabarmati at the present moment. I
am keeping well. I am trying the experiment of living on fruit
alone. This is the 9th day. I am not feeling weak. I do not expect
to be able to retain my strength indefinitely on fruit alone. I
have commenced the experiment to avoid constipation. I am
continuing it for pleasure. I should love to drop milk any time.
My food just now is grapes and mangoes.
Please tell Sundaram I have got his beautiful weekly gift and
tell him not to worry if he miss a week.
With love to you all.
Yours sincerely,
R. B. GREGG, ESQ.
C/O S. E. STOKES, ESQ.
KOTGARH
SIMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 19672
