61. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September [7]1/11, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
It is the morning of Wednesday, and the goats are being milk-
ed, singing to us the while. I duly got your mail last evening. I
send you my plentiful blessings. Why should I not? You are
fulfilling all my hopes and, by your incomparable and intelligent
service, fill all three of us with wonder. God seems to have gift-
ed you with the strength to face every kind of ordeal. May you
live long and realize the God of Truth through the goddess of
ahimsa and help others to do the same.
I got your two postcards about Baba, but each late by a
day. The reason is that they did not reach the post-office in time.
The words "detained-late fee not paid" are stamped on both.
And so find out from the post-office the time of the clearance.
Your bigger packet of mail posted on Monday and the postcard
posted on Sunday reached me on the same day.
September 10, 1932
I have had no special letter from you till today from which
I infer that Kanji Sheth is out of danger. Not only that, he must
also have regained strength. I hope Dahibehn is all right. I read
in the newspapers that you had very good rains there. Mahadev
has been able to go up to 105 counts with Keshu's slivers. I see
that if he gets a straight and thin spindle, he will reach 150
counts without difficulty. Though I have asked you to send a thin
spindle, we are trying to make one here. We must discover the
reason why the cotton grown in the Ashram is not of good qua-
lity. The fact that it is attacked by insects shows that the manure
is either too little or too much, or that it is not of the right
kind. You should ask somebody who knows the secret, or read
the descriptions of different types of manures and soils in a book
on cotton cultivation available in the market, and experiment
accordingly. Agricultural experts now believe that, within certain
limits, any crop can be grown in any type of soil. With the help
of the new methods they grow in France crops which were for-
merly thought impossible, and earn profits from them. If any-
body there can spare the time, he should study this problem. I
think that Maganlal had collected some books on agriculture.
We have a copy of the report of the Cotton Committee. You
may find some information even in that. If you write to Prof.
Higginbottom at Allahabad, perhaps he may help you. He has
inspected the soil in the Ashram fields.
If the Gandiva spinning-wheel is placed on one side at right
angles to our body, instead of in front, one can stretch one's legs if
one wishes to do so. If one wishes to spin sitting on a stool,
one can do that, too, with ease. The spinning-wheel can be placed
on a box or board on a level with the stool.
I did not follow your explanation about the Anantpur Report.
If it was sent by registered post, the post-office must have a copy
of the acknowledgement. It will serve. You can inquire in the
post-office and ascertain who has signed it. If you are required
to pay any fee for inspecting the record, you may do so. If you
have called for a fresh copy of the report, it means that this is
the third copy he will be sending. How can we put him to
such trouble?
What you say about Padma is correct. Read what I have
written to Panditji in regard to the temple. I understood that the
image of Ganapati would not be kept in the gymnasium perma-
nently. I have already written to you about Manjula and cod-
liver oil. Pay attention to Indu's condition. If there is a dan-
ger of his losing his reason, the condition is likely to become
extreme. But before that happens you should take steps to avert
the possibility.
The number in the Ashram is quite good. It is very good
indeed that Jamna has stayed on in Rajkot. I hope Devbhabhi
has fully recovered now. Where is Virmati kept? Amtulbehn
tells me in her letter that she liked my addressing her by her full
name Amtussalaam in Urdu. I am writing to her to ask her why,
but please know from her why she likes the full name and, if
that is the right thing, all of you should address her by that
name. It is possible that there is no such name as "Amtul",
and that "Amtussalaam" is one single word-just as we cannot
say "Ibra" instead of "Ibrahim" or "Brij" instead of "Brij-
krishna".
September 11, 1932
Dr. Sharma seems to want to come to the Ashram for a
temporary stay. Send him the list of the Ashram rules. If he
can observe them while he stays there, I see no objection to in-
forming him that he may come. However, do what you think
best.
Read my letter to Brijkrishna. He is a man of pure heart.
Discuss the matter with him. If it is possible to remove his
suspicion, try to do so.
You must have got the postcard which I wrote on Saturday
asking you to send me information about how bread is made
there. I have asked for details of the method. I have started
taking interest in the preparation of the bread here, and I, too,
eat it. The bread is excellent. Perhaps ours is not better.
Read my letter to Sharda. We have to think over the pro-
blem of the girls. I think I can now guess the reason for their
bad health. We wish to train all these women who have had
very little education, and it is for you to think how that can
be done.
There are 52 letters in all, 37 in a bundle and 15 loose.
[PS.]
You will find my Will lying in some place there. Send me
a copy of it. If it is sealed in a cover, break open the seal. If you
wish to make any suggestion about it, send it to me. I sup-
pose it will be necessary now to revise the names of the trustees.
Imam Saheb is no more. I do not remember all the names.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8250 and 8248.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
