273. LETTER TO MANILAL KOTHARI
February 9, 1930
BHAISHRI MANILAL,
. . .1 Shankerlal is not here at present. It is within his autho-
rity to call for the figures you have asked for. I have sent your
letter to the Charkha Sangh office and asked for the figures.
But I am afraid you are unnecessarily prejudiced against
Harjivan Harjivan is an experienced man. He has won the
confidence of all his superiors. He is a capable and self-sacri-
ficing worker. He cannot take more profit and put it in
a safe. He keeps accurate accounts. The Charkha Sangh has
not accepted the policy of taking limited profit on all varieties
of cloth, but has adopted the policy of limited profit on the
total stock and permitted more profit on some special varieties
of cloth because on some other varieties it takes even less than
the permitted limited profit. For instance, there should be no
objection to taking 100 per cent profit on khadi lace, while on
dhoti no profit need be taken or very little if at all. Some
things may even be sold at loss. Business can be carried on only
in this way.
Kashmiri items are made for luxury-loving people like you
and me, while the khadi sold in the general market is for
persons who do not know patriotism but are forced to adopt
simplicity. Hence some of the things are sold even at a loss.
If you have anything to say against this policy adopted by the
Charkha Sangh you may certainly do so. You and I get from
friends money for first-class fare when we ask them for third
class. Similarly we get the costliest variety of Kashmiri shawl
when we ask for an ordinary Kashmiri shawl. And when
we ask for dates from an orchard we get dates neatly packed in
elegant boxes more expensive than the dates. If we condemn
the people taking profit on such dates and shawls, don't you
think we would degrade ourselves? How many crores do you
think there would be in India who consumed such dates and
wore such shawls? As I am dictating this letter I have in front
of me a Kashmiri shawl which would cost not less than twenty-
five or thirty rupees. And though I know this, I am shamelessly
using it every day. I hope you will understand my meaning.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy:
Sabarmati Sangrahalaya
