210. LETTER TO THE TRUSTEES OF ALIGARH COLLEGE
October 24, 1920
GENTLEMEN,
I know you are about to meet in order to give your decision
on a most momentous issue for Islam and India. I hear that
you are calling in the aid of the Government and the police for the
occasion of your meeting. If the rumour is true you would be
making a grievous mistake. In a matter which is purely domestic
you need neither the intervention of the Government nor the pro-
tection of its police. Neither the Ali Brothers nor I are engaged
in brute war. We are engaged in a war in which our only weapon
is force of public opinion and we shall reckon ourselves beaten
in the battle if we do not carry the public with us. In the pre-
sent dispute the test of public opinion will be in the first instance
your majority. Therefore, if you after a full and free discussion
decide by a majority that the college and school students may not
remain in the college ground either as students or even as board-
ers if they persist in their demand of disaffiliation and the rejection
of the Government grant, they will be peacefully withdrawn. We
propose in that event to carry on their education if at all possible
in Aligarh itself, or elsewhere. The desire is not to suspend their
secular education for one moment longer than is absolutely neces-
sary. But it is our sincere desire that it should be given in
consistence with the law of Islam and the honour of India. I
understand that in the opinion of the recognized Ulemas it is not
lawful for a believing Muslim to receive the assistance of a Govern-
ment that has desired or indirectly sought to cause the destruction
of the holy Khilafat and to tamper with the exclusive Muslim
control of Jazirat-ul-Arab. You know as well as I do, how this
Government has wilfully trampled under foot Indian honour.
Consistently therefore, with the control of the passions by the
people, all voluntary association with the Government is being
withdrawn by the people. The least that you, in my humble
opinion, can do is to decline any further Government grant, dis-
affiliate the great institution of which you are the trustees and
reject the charter of the Moslem University. The least that
the Aligarh boys can do, if you fail to respond to the call of
Islam and India, is to wash their hands clean of an institution
acknowledging the aegis of Government that has forfeited all title
to the allegiance of Islam and India and to bring into being a
larger, nobler and purer Aligarh that would carry out the inmost
wishes of its great founder. I cannot imagine the late illustrious
Sir Syed Ahmed keeping his noble creation under the control or
influence of the present Government.
As I have been the originator of the idea of disaffiliation of
Aligarh and rejection of the Government grant, I feel that I
might be able to assist you in your discussions, and therefore, offer
my humble services to you, and will gladly attend your meeting
if you will allow me to do so. I am proceeding to Bombay and
shall await your answer there.
But whether you wish me to attend or not I hope that you
will not summon Government intervention in this purely domestic
matter.
And let me say to the Government through you, that one hears
all sorts of rumours of their intentions about the Ali Brothers and
myself. I hope for the peaceful evolution of the struggle, they
will not restrict our liberty. We are endeavouring in a most con-
stitutional manner to conduct our propaganda. We are seeking
to bend the Government to the people's will, or if it will not,
to overthrow it, not by brute force but by creating real public
opinion. We hold it to be perfectly constitutional, legitimate and
honourable to expose the Satanic nature of the Government, and to
ask the people by appealing to their heads and their hearts, never
to their animal passions, to express their will, not in words but in
action, i.e., by withdrawing all possible association with the Govern-
ment. But if the Government wish even to suppress the liberty
of opinion and peaceful action, I hope they will issue no intern-
ment orders against us, but that they will imprison us. For, in spite
of our sincere desire not to offer civil disobedience even in our own
persons, it will not be possible for us to respect any internment
orders. So long as our movement is not physically restrained, we
must use it in such a manner as we consider to be the best in the
interests of our mission.
With humble apology,
Your faithful servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 27-10-1920
