343. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 4, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
The packet of letters which I despatched this morning was a
large one as usual. Compared to it, this will be a much smaller
one. I despatched the packet in the morning because the letters
were urgent.
I did not find Dhanvant Raka's letter which you say was
included.
I return Narahari's letter with this.
This is my view regarding guests. Even if every guest is
given a copy of the rules to be observed by him, he should be
given a seat by the side of a responsible inmate of the Ashram.
The latter should take away from him his dish for cleaning and
also clean the spot where he is asked to sit. These two things
should be left to the guest only after he has himself started doing
them. About the food also, the neighbour should explain to him that
the general menu of the Ashram contains no rice, but that it is
included in the special menu and he can ask to be served accord-
ing to either. If there is only one solitary person who wants
rice, he need not be asked. As soon as a guest arrives, some-
body should elicit from him his special requirements and as many
of them should be provided as possible.
Potatoes and ratalu should not as a rule be served as vege-
tables. I would have them served only in place of bread or
rice. They are mostly starch. Vegetable means any green which
contains no starch. If people would agree, I would make it a
rule to serve rice only to persons who are ill. The quantity of
dal served should be very small. Rice is not necessary at all.
Those who get milk need very little quantity of dal. There is no
doubt that our diet contains an excess of starch. It is being pro-
ved day by day that the body needs very little starch. But we
cannot force this reform on unwilling people, and in any case we
should watch the result.
We should not tolerate snacks being bought from the market.
But we need the fullest co-operation of the families to put a stop
to this practice. If people went and saw for themselves how these
things were prepared, they would never eat them again.
You should insist on the children sleeping for eight hours at
night.
I believe that it is not proper to withhold a meal by way of
punishment. I myself, though, have been guilty of ordering such
punishment. I am also becoming more and more convinced that
there should be no physical punishment either. I have no doubt
that the very fact that the need for punishment is felt bespeaks our
imperfection. We must learn how to teach without the use of
any form of punishment, and we can do that only if we re-
frain from punishing even in extreme cases.
The suggestion about the dictionary should be immediately
implemented. A copy should be kept not only in the library
but also in the office. Everybody in the Ashram should form the
habit of consulting it. This will mean some expense, but it is
worth incurring.
BAPU
[PS.]
Narandas,
Please tell Titus that I will reply to him some other time.
I have not heard from you what you have decided regard-
ing Dhiru.
My suggestion about the women stands.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8849. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
