248. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
SRIRAMPUR, NOAKHALI,
December 5, 1946
CHI. NARANDAS,
Your letter calls for a reply. I have resumed my normal
food. Hence there is no cause at all now for worry. Really
speaking worry has no place in a thoughtful life. The present
mission is the most complicated of all I have undertaken in my
life. "I cannot see my path in the thick darkness of the night,
take this your child under your protecting care.
Light up the
path of my life." I can sing these lines with perfect truth. I
do not remember to have experienced such darkness in my life
ever before, and the night seems long. My only consolation is
that I have not accepted defeat or given way to despair. His
will be done.
I mean to do or die here. "To do" means to restore amity
between Hindus and Muslims; or I should perish in the attempt.
This is difficult to achieve. But it will be as God wills.
All the co-workers have offered themselves up in this sacri-
fice of their own accord, but if they repent, they are free to
leave. They have been posted, each in one village, with a Ben-
gali interpreter to help him or her. Kanaiyo also is away from
me as a part of this plan, and so is Abha.
I am camping in an unfortunate village in the interior.
Parasuram, who cannot be posted alone because of the lan-
guage difficulty, is with me. He is a silent worker and an expert
stenographer. The other is a Bengali professor. Both give me
personal services, too. Most of the others are at a distance of ten
miles from me. They can come and see me whenever it is neces-
sary. Pyarelal, Sushila Nayyar and Sushila Pai also are camp-
ing in different villages. Kanaiyo had fever for one day. He
is better now. There is no cause for worry. He himself is quite
cheerful. He leads the Ramdhun and remains fearless. God has
blessed him with fine health. Abha is perfectly safe.
She has
gone with Bapa. She is in a village sixteen miles away. Kanaiyo
preferred this arrangement. Bapa has taken great interest in her
and is pleased with her spirit of service. She makes rotlis for
him and, being a Bengali, works among Bengali women. She
was not happy to be separated from me, but dharma dictated
that course and so I sent her away. I had also started regarding
her services as a necessity. However, in this difficult sadhana of mine,
how can I afford to make a habit of getting service from others?
You will now see that every step taken is being dictated by
dharma. Everybody there should rejoice at what is happening.
I have now written enough. You should go on with your work.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C. W. 8637. Cour-
tesy: Narandas Gandhi
