81. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
February 1, 1934
DEAR AGATHA,
I am writing this between 3 and 4 a.m. Have just finished
a note to Henry. Andrews tells me you too have not been over-
well. Evidently you in England need more change and rest
than we here seem to need. And you must take it if you wall get
the maximum work from the body. I hope that this letter will
find you fully restored.
I do not even look at the letters Chandrashankar has been
writing to you. I hope that he has been keeping you fully posted
with news from here.
Of the desolation of Bihar you know as much as I do.
Rajendra Prasad is making a Herculean effort to relieve suffering.
He has rendered full co-operation to the Government. At this
instance I have made an appeal to the non-Indian friends all over
the world. You must have seen Reuter's cable. Chandrashankar
will be sending you a copy. The male members of the Ashram who
have just come out of prison have suspended their civil resistance
and gone to Bihar. The calamity is of such magnitude that all the
help that the whole world may give will be a drop in the ocean.
But I suppose there is a spiritual result seen and unseen of such
material help. The stricken people will derive comfort from the
thought that the whole world is thinking of them and coming to
their assistance. I am presently writing to Andrews and Holmes
and Rolland.
Of the gradual but sure dissolution of untouchability you
know all from the cuttings that Chandrashankar has been sending
you in addition to the copies of Harijan.
The measures the Government have adopted to crush the
spirit of the people defy description. The gagging of the Press
has made it well-nigh impossible to know the news accurately and
to publish what little oozes out in spite of the strictest censorship.
Copies I am sending you of original documents will give you an
inkling of what is happening. I do not want any public pro-
paganda but you may make what use you like among friends
and among the official world there. As you are aware, the two
attempts I made to gain the ear of the authorities ended in fail-
ure. True, I had courteous replies but no admission of error. On
the contrary both from Bengal and Bombay I received a blank
denial of the charges made including repudiation of the evidence
of what Mira had seen with her own eyes. I am trying my best
to find a way to honourable peace. But there can be none so long
as the Government persist in repression. My fear is that it has
been worse in the Frontier Province than in Bengal. But news
is more difficult to get from there even than from Bengal. All
this, however, does not mean that I have given up all hope. For
I can never lose faith in prayer which is the same thing as non-
violence whether it be through letter-writing or civil resistance or
mute prayer only. I simply mention the difficulties in the way.
Friends in England should have as accurate news as I can gather
or rather the news that comes to me unsought. My one preoccupa-
tion is war against untouchability. I wonder if you realize that
I hardly have time to read the voluminous post that follows me
during the tour. I read only the portion that Chandrashankar
thinks I ought to read. Things are worse than what you saw
at Knightsbridge.
It is only here in Coonoor where I am rest-
ing from incessant travelling that I am able to give you this
long letter.
Now a word about an Indian Bureau outside India. I am
opposed to the idea. I must not argue. The money given by
Vithalbhai Patel cannot be used for that purpose. It can be
used only for constructive work in India, e.g., untouchability,
khadi, national service. On this point I am perhaps the only
"whole-hogger" but there it is. I am convinced that when
India as a whole is awakened nothing can stop her march to
freedom. She is being awakened. This lull does not affect the
march. It is a precursor to the full awakening. Foreign propa-
ganda must be taken up by foreigners. That friends all over are
taking up to the best of their ability.
You will share this with friends.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1477
