54. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
April 27, 1933
BHAI RAJBHOJ,
Your letter I find is very much to my liking. I have written
today to Narandas about this matter. Enquire from him fully
and then write to me. It is bound to pain me if Ramji has not been
treated generously.
Do make yourself well acquainted with
Mathuradas. Mathuradas is gifted with great tolerance, he does
not at all believe in untouchability. If in spite of this there has
been some shortcoming in the treatment meted out to Ramji it
shall of course be rectified. Mathuradas is a gentle, sacrificing
and sensible man. He is quite capable of realizing his own mis-
takes; open out your heart to him too.
Now let me give you my experience of R. I was respon-
sible to a great extent in bringing him to the Ashram. I am very
fond of him and Gangabehn; he has earned well in the
Ashram. To my knowledge he has been paid adequately for his
living. I have always instructed that people like R. should be
paid liberally; but R. is greedy, hot-tempered and suspicious. It
is extremely difficult to disabuse him of a notion once it gets into
his head. You may take it that Lakshmidas has become a
Harijan. Someone asked his daughter Anandi as to her identity
and she called herself a Harijan girl. This happened only recently.
I know it that R. harassed Lakshmidas badly. I am not writing
this to point out R.'s faults. He is just like a son to me. But
you have evinced such interest in the well being of the Ashram
and because I have found you to be simple-hearted, I am writing
all this so that you may reach the correct conclusion and guide me.
I have replied to several of your questions in Harijan [Sevak],
which you must have seen. I now answer the rest of your ques-
tions. Spiritual progress is possible only through incessant effort.
The study of philosophical works is helpful in the endeavour but
I do not regard it essential because spiritual progress does not
depend on the intellect but on the heart. The people were un-
lettered in ancient times but nobody holds the view that none
of them could be spiritually advanced. We have had hundreds
of saints, they were not all learned men. Jesus, Mahomed and
others were unlettered. It should not at all be taken to imply
that I am opposed to formal learning but the importance given
to it today is beyond proportion. Hence I express my opinion
whenever questions about learning are asked.
In my opinion Malaviyaji's and Dr. Moonje's aim in teach-
ing the mantras and so on is the same as that of the Arya Samajists,
but untouchability has become so deep-rooted in the Hindu world
that mere teaching of the mantras would not suffice. They may
teach the mantras, or do whatever they please, but who can bring
round the Hindus? We have not yet reached the stage when
this act will necessarily carry conviction with the public. Even
the shuddhi performed by the Arya Samaj does not go very far al-
though there is certainly some effect. Now we notice that the poi-
son of untouchability has spread among the Indian Christians too.
God willing, we shall, by strenuous effort and even more strenuous
penance, remove this widespread poison.
The yajna started in
September last has not come to an end but is still continuing, it
can end only when untouchability is eradicated and no one is
considered touchable or untouchable, high or low by birth.
It is good that letters from Thakkar Bapa and Kakasaheb
keep coming. Do ask unhesitatingly whatever doubts arise in
your mind.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 785
