478. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
March 28, 1935
CHI. JETHALAL ,
I have received your detailed letter. I will pass it on to
Vinoba.
You should train the women who are staying there. There
is only one department of our work which needs to be under-
stood. It will be difficult to evaluate our strength if we do not
start the publicity work at home.
Vinoba has gone deep. My assessment of his work from the
shortcomings he could discern, can never be proved wrong. We
are all like castor-oil plants becoming important in the absence of
other trees. In comparison, in my opinion, your work is out-
standing. Take it that it is the end of your work if you are satis-
fied with it. However I am sure that such a thing will never
happen.
Vinoba's aim in staying here is that he can explain to us
our shortcoming.
Both the departments those of self-sustained khadi and
commercial khadi, are important for you. Commercial khadi,
without self-sustained khadi will remain ineffective. The latter
will not satisfy the poor. How much of it can they wear? They
can certainly produce more than that. If the poor do not wear
it, then there is a fear that they will even cease to produce
commercial khadi.
It is possible that even if one has faith in prayer, one cannot
sing well. In such cases it is all right if there are no bhajans and
slokas. Ramdhun will certainly serve the purpose. The slokas should
be correctly articulated if they are recited. Otherwise their trans-
lation should be read out. However, it should be dropped if it is
found to be dull. For singing bhajans it is necessary to have
a good voice. If that is not available, bhajans should also be
dropped. Everyone would know how to sing Ramadhun. But
that also requires a little practice.
Purbai will bring credit to herself if left alone. She will be
a misfit in a group. It is unlikely that Gangabehn will leave Bocha-
san. We do not have so many trained women, so for the time
352
being there is no other course for you but to manage your work
alone.
It is likely that the urinal which you have devised underground
will cause great damage one day, while it will serve both the
purposes if instead you make it on heaps of mud which can be
thrown into the fields daily. Urine is a valuable manure and
the less we use it the greater is the harm done.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9851. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat
