364. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 12, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
The following books are required for Parachure Shastri.
Send those from among them which you have there. I will get
the others from elsewhere. See if you can send them soon. Give
them to Manibehn or to Nandubehn. Either will send them to
Dahyabhai. Parachure Shastri was in the Ashram once. He is
a man of great learning. He is in this jail just now. He has been
suffering from leprosy. That is why I am in a hurry to send
the books to him. He spins daily. I am not permitted to see him,
but can write to him. His wife, too, is ill and confined to bed. She
is outside. The books are: (1) Imitation of Christ, (2) Works of
Swami Vivekananda (whichever volumes we have), (3) Works of
Sister Nivedita (whichever volumes we have), (4) Essays of Tol-
stoy, (5) Vyakarana Mahabhashya, (6) Yajurveda Bhashya, (7) Dispen-
sations of Keshab Chandra Sen.
Since Parachure Shastri has lived in the Ashram, he informs
me that the last three are available there. He seems to have read
them while he was there.
I got your letter. You seem to believe that I could write an
interesting letter whenever I wished to. But you see now that that
is not true. I cannot even judge which letter is interesting and
which is dull. I am telling the truth. Moreover, who can say
that the letter which you think interesting is in fact so? If there is
an independent yardstick for judging whether or not a thing is inte-
resting, God seems to have kept it under lock and key. On this
earth, therefore, everyone has his or her own yardstick for this
purpose. If I tried to come up to your standard, wouldn't I be
in a miserable plight? All my time would be taken up in trying
to succeed in the effort. Should I start writing a letter all over
again, or a third time, for fear that what I had written might be
uninteresting? And if I must write interesting letters to you, I
must write similar letters to others. And the result, bankruptcy! ! !
Instead of that, I follow a simple rule. Without considering whether
the letter will be interesting or not, I should write what I think in
such language as I can command. But you are foolish, and proud
too. How can you ever appreciate this simple reasoning? And
now I see that you claim to be omniscient. Any wise thing I try
to explain to you, you seem to know it. But pause a little. One
who believes in an idea or knows it to be true but cannot act
on it does not in fact know it, or knows it in a sense and yet
does not know it. Hence, as long as you go on writing foolish
things, get angry and feel proud, you will remain foolish in my
eyes. This does not mean that you should not let your pride,
anger and foolishness be seen in your letters. As long as you have
them in you, you must express them. The value of your letters
lies in letting yourself be seen as you are. I don't mind your
remaining foolish.
But you must overcome your anger and
be a little less proud. It is impossible to get rid of pride al-
together.
You cite the instance of Narada. But do you know the real
significance of his statement? By all means worship a personal
form in the manner in which he did. Such worship is proper. His
Krishna is as historical as the God in Vaikuntha . Narada's God
dwelt in the temple of his imagination. That Narada is alive to-
day, and so is his Krishna, for both live for ever in our imagina-
tion. According to me, imagination is superior to historical fact.
This is the only possible meaning of Tulsidas's statement that the
name Rama is more potent than the person Rama.
Is it not because you are caught in the whirlpool of worship
of the individual that you worry me again and again ? You have
not been able to free me from worries regarding the Ashram.
Narandas has succeeded in doing so. I can cite instances of
other persons too. They also worship persons, who doesn't?
But, ultimately, they go beyond the person and learn to worship
his virtues, that is, his creations. We forgot this priceless truth
and, in our ignorance, we taught women to burn themselves on the
pyre of their husbands. That is worship of the person taken to its
extreme! ! The real duty of a loyal wife is to immortalize in herself
her husband's life-work. If we purify the relationship of husband
and wife of sex and banish from it the distinction of gender, this
ideal will apply to every woman in the world, whatever her state
may be. In other words, love for the husband merges in love of
God. But I leave this subject now.
Why are you upset by the news that Dhiru is arriving? Have
confidence that you will be able to control him too; have that much
faith in yourself. Let the immortal statement, "Love conquers
all", sink into your heart. We should be pleased whoever may
arrive. Our only wish is to serve everyone as best as we can. Why
don't you have faith that, if the other children have become well-
behaved, under their influence Dhiru also will become like them?
It is also possible that Dhiru has become a wise boy now. Personally,
I have always hoped much from him.
You should dedicate your whole life to the service of the girls.
If they do not talk frankly about themselves to anyone, they are
bound to fall ill. Read my letter to Anandi. If she lets you have
that letter, all the other girls who have grown up should be asked
to read it.
I have never observed from my own experience that bananas
give rise to gas. I have consumed more bananas than anybody
else is likely to have done. For many years they were my chief
food. I neither took milk nor ate bread. My diet consisted of
bananas, olive oil, ground-nut and lemon. However, I never suffer-
ed from gas. After many years, I have started eating them again.
I observe no ill effects. You must, of course, observe one rule in
eating them. Either bananas should be cooked or they should be
completely ripe. An unripe banana is pure starch, and I saw in
Gopal Rao's experiment that starch should not be eaten uncooked.
Hence, one should not eat bananas which have not become soft
or ripe. They will become ripe if kept aside for two or three days.
If you want to eat bananas before they have become ripe, you
should either roast them or boil them in water.
The book which you read may have been published in 1924,
but the theory which it mentions has become outdated.
I had opponents in the past and have them even today. But
I have never felt angry with them. I have not wished them ill even
in my dreams. The result has been that many opponents have
become friends. No one's opposition has had any effect on me.
On three occasions they sought to take my very life, but I am still
alive. This does not mean that no opponent would ever succeed
against me in his plan. Whether he succeeds or does not is no con-
cern of mine. My dharma lies in wishing well even to them, and
serving them whenever an opportunity offers itself. I have tried
to live up to this principle to the best of my ability. I think this
thing is part of my nature.
I get physically tired by the worship of vast crowds. It has
never made me happy, nor have I ever felt that I was worthy of
it. On the contrary, I have always been conscious of my unworthi-
ness. I do not remember to have ever hungered for honour. I al-
ways want work. I have tried my best to make people who
honour me do work, and, when they refused to work, I have run
away from their honour. I will feel myself blessed only when I
reach my goal. But, as the saying goes, will that day ever dawn?
It is not necessary to cultivate pride or contempt in order that
one may be able to stand against the world. Jesus stood against
the world, Buddha stood against his times and Prahlada also
acted in the same way. All of them were humility incarnate. To
have such humility, one must have faith in oneself and in God.
Those who have opposed the world with pride have ultimately
fallen. Sometimes your pride and your anger are only pretended.
But even such pretence is an evil thing. It may ultimately become
a habit and often gives cause for unnecessary misunderstanding.
One should be very careful in one's conduct so as to guard against
such possibilities. I think it impossible for anyone to have the
strength to stand alone against the world at a critical hour unless
he or she has the utmost humility. And it is such strength which
has any value at all. It is tested only at such a time. Many of those
whom the world has believed to be brave, it had no opportunity
of judging whether they were really so. Now read my letter to
Amtulbehn too.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10298. Also C.W. 5752. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
