475. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 1, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
If the burden of work is excessive on you, I cannot accept
your view that it cannot be reduced. That view betrays ignorant
attachment and weakness. I can believe that the cause of your
irritability lies in yourself and not in the weight of work on you.
If that is so, you will gradually learn to keep your balance, for
you will not deceive yourself for a long time. I do not, however,
wish to pester you about this. Try to harden your sensitive nature.
Among our books there are some Urdu ones. A few of them
are likely to be with Imam Saheb. Inquire in the Ashram too. If
you cannot identify them, Parasram will certainly be able to
do so. If you find Sirat-Un-Nabi among these books, send it to me.
It is written by Maulana Shibli. There is another biography of
Nabi written by Dr. Mahomed Ali. Send that too. The Sirat is in
two parts.
You are surrounded on all sides by labourers, and the life
which they lead is the only true life. That has been the idea
behind the Ashram. True, the labourers should be seekers after
truth. Are you not one? Are not the other women and the men
also such seekers? I believe that everyone is so to the best of his
or her capacity.
You ask me when you will be able to visit me. If you use
your eyes, you cannot but see me. My spirit dwells there, though
the body may be here, and it will continue to dwell there even
if the latter is reduced to ashes. It is quite possible that when
I am there in body, my soul may not be there. Understand this
truth and give up your ignorant idea.
One must feel discontent, but it should be regarding oneself.
The day one believes that one has become perfect, one's fall has
begun. Hence one ought to be discontented about oneself. But
such discontent does not mean that one should wish all the time
to take up new duties.
I cannot, however, explain all this by argument. Time will
do its work. Where you see pitch darkness today, you will see
light tomorrow. "Premal Jyoti" seems to me to be the only bhajan
which truthfully describes this condition of mind. The meaning
is very well brought out in Gujarati. The original English is a
marvellous creation, though.
I have been told that Dhurandhar keeps fairly good health.
What is your present weight? How much milk and curds do
you take?
How many volumes do you think there are in the library?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10283. Also C.W. 6731. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
