115. LETTER TO YVONNE PRIVAT
BIRLA HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
November 29, 1947
DEAR BHAKTI 2 ,
I was so glad to receive your argued letter of 27th August.
I see that you have grasped the fundamental difference between
passive resistance and non-violent resistance. Resistance both
forms are, but you have to pay a very heavy price when your
resistance is passive, in the sense of the weakness of the resister.
Europe mistook the bold and brave resistance full of wisdom by
Jesus of Nazareth for passive resistance, as if it was of the weak.
As I read the New Testament for the first time I detected no
passivity, no weakness about Jesus as depicted in the four gospels
and the meaning became clearer to me when I read Tolstoy's
Harmony of the Gospels and his other kindred writings. Has not the
West paid heavily in regarding Jesus as a passive resister? Chris-
tendom has been responsible for the wars which put to shame
even those described in the Old Testament and other records,
historical or semi-historical. I know that I speak under correction
for I can but claim very superficial knowledge of history—modern
or ancient.
Coming to my own personal experience, whilst we undoubtedly
got through passive resistance our political freedom, over which
lovers of peace like you and your good husband of the West are
enthusiastic, we are daily paying the heavy price for the un-
conscious mistake we made or, better still, I made in mistaking
passive resistance for non-violent resistance. Had I not made the
mistake, we would have been spared the humiliating spectacle of a
weak brother killing his weak brother thoughtlessly and inhumanly.
I am only hoping and praying and I want all the friends
here and in other parts of the world to hope and pray with me
that this blood-bath will soon end and out of that, perhaps, in-
evitable butchery, will rise a new and robust India—not warlike,
basely imitating the West in all its hideousness, but a new India
learning the best that the West has to give and becoming the
hope not only of Asia and Africa, but of the whole of the aching
world.
I must confess that this is hoping against hope, for we are
today swearing by the military and all that naked physical force
implies. Our statesmen have for over two generations declaimed
against the heavy expenditure on armaments under the British
regime, but now that freedom from political serfdom has come,
our military expenditure has increased and still threatens to
increase and of this we are proud! There is not a voice raised
against it in our legislative chambers. In spite, however, of the
madness and the vain imitation of the tinsel of the West, the
hope lingers in me and many others that India shall survive
this death dance and occupy the moral height that should
belong to her after the training, however imperfect, in non-
violence, for an unbroken period of 32 years since 1915.
As to the last paragraph of your letter, I must confess my
ignorance of psycho-analysis. Richard Gregg of U. S. A. has put
the problem in a more concrete form than you have. You must
have seen his letter and my reply in the columns of Harijan.
I hope this will find you both in the same vigour in which
you used to be during those happy days that you passed with me
in India. I wonder if you will ever again come to India and see it,
not in her madness, but wisdom, inspiring every department of life.
Love to you both.
BAPU
MADAME EDMOND PRIVAT
1 AVENUE DE LA GARE
NEUCHATEL, SWITZERLAND
From a photostat: G. N. 2342
