212. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
[July 27, 1927]
Your letter (or ultimatum?) to hand. My letter appears to
have crossed yours. I urge you not to act in haste. You do not
think you are in a hurry because you are impatient to start your
fast. However, I do feel that you are in too great a hurry. If you
accept the moral position at any rate that when you take such
a step you should do so in my presence, please withdraw your ulti-
matum. I have received three strong letters urging me to dis-
suade you from undertaking this fast. One is from Bhai Kishorelal,
another from Ramniklal and the third from Mirabehn. Mirabehn
met you after a long interval, became very sad on seeing you
and found your countenance "queer". She found even your talk
"queer" and felt that you had become extremely "emotional".
All these words in quotes are hers. The letter was in Hindi but
she had used the English words in it. I suggested to her that she
write to you directly. I have received her reply also and she says
that she dare not go to that extent lest she should hurt you. In
spite of my reporting all these three opinions, if I were near you
and you could persuade me, I would grant you permission to
undertake the fast and also bless you. But since I am so far away,
I must also let these three letters make their impact on my mind.
Your letter appears to contradict your own earlier letter because
you were till now hoping for my permission, and I presumed that
you would not undertake the fast if you do not have it. But in
your last letter you say nothing about my permission, you no more
expect it but seek my blessings. If you are hoping for my permis-
sion, I shall not be able to grant it. How could I permit what I
do not consider right? Personally I think even if you have
my permission for your course of action, both you and I must
obtain the permission of the Managing Committee. If there is
anyone who can be free to do such things after obtaining such
permission, it is perhaps myself because, being the founder of the
Ashram and initiator of the new and vital experiments in satya-
graha, I may be expected to have such privilege, but I do have
some doubt in this regard too. Even I should not have the right to
take any steps that might harm the institution once it has been
founded. I was mindful of this also when I had undertaken the
seven days' fast. And even about that, there was some talk.
I have indulged in so much autobiography in order to make
you see your duty. I am one of those who believe that there is a
place for a fast like yours in certain situations. But I see clearly
from this distance that yours is not such a situation and how can
I bless a thing which I regard as improper? Hence if you would
be persistent I can only say that I shall bear with your persistence
and acquiesce in the inevitable unwillingly and painfully. Before
you take any step, discuss the matter with the Managing Committee
with a calm mind and also with those whom you regard as your
personal friends. Consider your duty towards Lilabehn; if she con-
sents to your step, I would not value her consent; but if she opposes,
I would value it greatly because you have sheltered her. If you can
and will withdraw your ultimatum and give me an assurance that
without my permission you will never embark on a fast, I am ready,
at present through correspondence and personally if necessary
and when an occasion offers, to discuss the ethics of fasting and
whatever points you have raised in your earlier letter. I wish our
friends and the Managing Committee to read this letter and you
should give it to them for reading. May God help you.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
