29. LETTER TO SIR RICHARD TOTTENHAM
DETENTION CAMP,
May 27, 1943
DEAR SIR RICHARD TOTTENHAM,
I received last evening your letter of the 24th instant re-
fusing my request to forward my letter addressed to Qaid-e-
Azam Jinnah. I wrote only yesterday to the Superintendent
of this camp asking him kindly to inquire whether my letter to
Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah, and the later one, dated the 15th instant
to Right Hon'ble Lord Samuel, had been forwarded to the
respective addressees.
I am sorry for the Government's decision. For, my letter
to the Qaid-e-Azam was sent in reply to his public invitation
to me to write to him, and I was especially encouraged to do
so because his language had led me to think that, if I wrote
to him, my letter would be forwarded to him. The public too
are anxious that the Qaid-e-Azam and I should meet or at
1 Vide pp. 75-.
2 This was from E. Conran-Smith; vide footnote 2, pp. 76-.
3 Vide the preceding item.
99
least establish contact. I have always been anxious to meet the
Qaid-e-Azam, if per chance we could devise some solution of the
communal tangle which might be generally acceptable. Therefore
the disability in the present instance is much more that of the
public than mine. As a satyagrahi I may not regard as disabilities
the restrictions which the Government have imposed upon me.
As the Government are aware, I have denied myself even the
pleasure of writing to my relatives as I am not allowed to
perform the service of writing to my co-workers who are In a
sense more to me than my relatives.
The advance copy of the contemplated communique with
which you have considerably favoured me requires emendation
in more places than one. For, as it stands, it does not square
with facts.
As to the disavowal referred to in the proposed communi-
que, the Government are aware that I regard the non-violent
mass movement, for the launching of which the Congress gave
me authority on the 8th of August last, as perfectly legitimate
and in the interest both of the Government and the public.
As it is, the Government left me no time to start the move-
ment. Therefore how could a movement, which was never started,
embarrass "India's" war effort? If then, there was any em-
barrassment by reason of the popular resentment of the Govern-
ment's action in resorting to the wholesale arrests of principal
Congressmen, the responsibility was solely that of the Govern-
ment. The mass movement, as the resolution sanctioning it
said in so many words, was sanctioned in order to promote
India-wide effort on behalf of the Allied cause, including the
causes of Russia and China, whose danger was very great in
August last and from which, in my opinion, they are by no
means free even now.
I hope the Government will not feel
offended when I say that all the war effort that is being put
forth in India is not India's but the alien Government's. I submit
that, if the Government had complied with the request of the
Congress as embodied in its August resolution, there would have
been a mass effort without parallel for winning the battle for human
freedom and ridding the world of the menace that Fascism, Nazism,
Japanism and imperialism are. I may be wholly wrong; anyway
this is my deliberate and honest opinion.
In order to make the communique accord with facts, I sug-
gest the following alterations in the first paragraph: After "Mr.
Jinnah" add "in response to his public invitation to Mr. Gandhi
to write to him, stating that he (Mr. Gandhi) would be willing
to correspond with or meet him according as he wished".
I hope that the remaining portion of the communique too
will be suitably amended in the light of my submission.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10433. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 73-4, and Correspondence with
Mr. Gandhi, pp. 15-
