250. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
May 18, 1938
STUPID DAUGHTER,
You have been proving your stupidity in every letter. Yes,
I did say that if you were tired of Segaon then I had not been
entitled to receive service from you. This could not in any
way imply that you should not come to me. It did imply
that you should hasten your return. If your mind cannot grasp
such a simple thing, ask me again. In this context let me de-
scribe to you my condition. These two days have not passed well.
Yesterday I worked for 12 hours. I was mentally exhausted. I
had a terrible backache. I slept well. I was alert again. But the
mental condition is not good. In such a situation I do feel your
absence. But how can I send for you, how can I ask you to
come so long as you do not feel drawn to this place? Would
I have been able to work so much if you had been near me?
Now do you understand what I want? But this certainly does
not mean that you should come here at once under any circum-
stances.
Now your second question. I accept your version of what
happened on the 9th night. There is no question of your account
being incorrect. Those who see silver in a sea-shell are right
at all times. But he who knows a sea-shell will see it only as a
sea-shell, will he not? Oh, the things that sexual impulse makes
us do! This does not even mean that I am in the right and what
you thought was merely imagination. Believe me, I admit I may
have been a prey to illusion; so you can stick to your own posi-
tion. Indeed it is your duty to do so. Ponder that verse in the
Bhajanavali. Only that is dharma which is followed by the learned
and practised by the saintly and by people free from attachment
and hatred, and which your heart accepts as dharma. What the
learned, the saintly and people free from attachment, etc., believe
can never be acceptable to us if our heart does not accept it.
I am neither a learned man, nor a saint; nor am I free from
attachment, etc. I have only appointed myself your godfather.
The words of such a man must be rejected unless your heart and
mind accept them. Whatever you do, your position with me will
always remain the same. In no way have you fallen in my
estimation.
Yes, a man's words should be taken at their face value. But
even so, one must consider their context. That is to say, while
it is necessary to exercise discretion, we must take it that if the
reasons which dictate avoidance of physical contact are applicable
to any other behaviour or gestures, such gestures too must be
avoided. So much for the literal interpretation. But even
this much is not sufficient. To know the meaning of words
it is also necessary to know their deeper significance. When
you recite the Gita every day, you know the literal meaning of the
words. But so long as you do not understand their deeper signi-
ficance, going by the literal meaning of the words would be
futile and burdensome. Does this fully answer your letter?
We shall probably leave here on the 20th. I have torn up
your letter. Mahadev does not read your letters these days. He
sees what I write. He continues to be miserable. That is in his
nature. Time will do its work. Is not Kaala one of the names
for God?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar
