365. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 11, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I am certainly happy that nobody comes
to see me. My chief reason is that such visits mean unnecessary
expenditure. It makes no difference who spends the money.
When a visit cannot be avoided, of course we don't mind. In
such circumstances we may go even to Ceylon. Having said this,
let me add that those to whom this view does not appeal need
not act on it. I certainly cannot measure the strength of feelings
of those who are outside.
I am sure Tilakam will not go to Malabar. He will have
to be sent somewhere else. If we can send him to Bombay, the
arrangement is worth trying. Sometimes it happens that Bombay
suits persons whom Ahmedabad does not suit. The air in Bombay
is certainly like what it is in Malabar. We know that it suited
Jamna. Write to Manilal (Revashankerbhai's) and ask his view,
or to Damodardas, if you approve of my suggestion. I hope Manu
has completely recovered now. If Amtul doesn't have enough
money, I think we should provide her the fare and other expenses.
I understand what you say about the Vidyapith library. Do
only what seems best to all of you.
It is now two months since I gave up milk. I have observed
no ill effects of the step. The weight is maintained, more or
less. The strength also has remained unaffected. I am, therefore,
continuing the experiment. As I have explained in a previous
letter, I am gradually coming to the conclusion that people who
do not lead a very strenuous life and who can sleep and rest
regularly, can do without milk. In other words, milk is necessary
only for a life of rajasik activities.
I do realize Hariyomal's worth. See that he does not ruin
his health through his obstinacy. All of us know what Krishna-
maiyadevi is, but we should tolerate her faults as we do the
faults of a member of our family, should indeed go a little further
than we would in the case of our own family members. When you
feel that the limit is reached, you may stop sending money. I
cannot say anything more than this from here.
You may give the permission asked for, for translating Anasakti-
yoga into Malayalam. I gather from your letter that Harihar
Sharma is not in the Ashram at present. My impression is that
he is with Rajagopalachari.
What you say about Mathuradas is correct.
I have not received Jethalal's report from Anantpur. Nor
have I had any letter from him. If Harilal comes to the Ashram,
I think he should be permitted to stay there only on condition
that now he gives up drinking. You should now consider how
long Padma may stay on in Almora. Ascertain her own view
and also that of Sitla Sahai's in the matter.
I think I have discussed sufficiently often in the past how
people should act if a tiger makes its appearance in the Ashram.
Let them follow what they remember and what they have im-
bibed in their lives from all that I have said.
I have sent from here directly, through Chintamani Shastri, a
letter of condolence about [the death of] Vishnu Kane of Sasvane.
Censor all letters. Raojibhai's letter should not have been
passed. I know that this will increase the burden on you. But
It is necessary [to do what I have suggested] in order to satisfy
that by which we are always guided.
Blessings from
BAPU
Enclosure:
An English letter for Hume.
An article on "Watching the Heavens-I'"
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
