359. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
February 8, 1942
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
As I have suspended civil disobedience, I make bold to write
this letter for humanity's cause.
The statutory law says that charitable institutions, though they
make profits, are free from income-tax. I am the founder and Pre-
sident of the All-India Spinners' Association. I can give you my
word that it is a purely charitable association. It exists to serve
the poorest in the land through hand-spinning and hand-weaving.
But simply through legal quibbles, disbelief of the evidence
tendered and, I apprehend, for its connection with the Congress
in that it got its charter from the Congress, the officials have deci-
ded to levy the income-tax. The profits are not denied but they
have never been used for private or personal gain. The whole of the
Executive of the Association is honorary. The Association has gone
to the High Court of Bombay which has thrown out its petition on
a legal flaw. It is appealing to the Privy Council. I do not know
what will be the result. Meanwhile the Association has already paid
a certain amount of the tax and is likely to be called upon to pay
up to five lacs. They will not stay the levy pending the proceedings.
But my request is for you to intervene and save the five lacs for the
poor. Let me tell you that during the past 20 years of its exis-
tence the Association has distributed among the poor nearly four
crores as wages.
298
I am not burdening you with further facts or any papers.
You can have these for the asking.
You will forgive me for inflicting this on you when every
moment of yours is pre-mortgaged for winning the war. Though
I cannot sympathize with your enterprise, much less help in the
manner you would wish, you will believe me when I say that I
am as much today a friend of your people as I ever have been.
Hence I understand what a strain it must be for you and Lady
Linlithgow.
When you write to Lady Anne and Southby2, please send
my love to them. I have purposely refrained from acknowledging
their letters in answer to my congratulations. I hope they with
the baby are faring well.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transfer of Power, Vol. I, pp. 135-
