23. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Jeth Vad 6 [June 11, 1917]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have come to Motihari for a day. I have noticed that by mistake, Devdas
has put the letter in my bag. I am returning it. I saw here the Nitishatak
which was sent for Prabhudas. It carries a shloka, the meaning of which is
given thus: 'Just as a good woman wants her breasts pinched with nails as
sharp as sword, similarly a brave man wants his chest-the symbol of victory,
attacked by swords as sharp as nails'. I felt very unhappy on reading it. There
is hardly any book which does not carry something that needs to be omitted
before we put it into the hands of the children. How could Bhartrihari write
such shlokas in his Nitishatak. Only in an age of extreme debauchery can
one think of such thoughts. I find it simply impossible that any woman,
leading a disciplined life, would want her breasts pinched or any good man
would enjoy making such assaults. That suggests a highly debauched state. A
good woman can never be in such a state. Such comparison cannot even be
thought of while writing shlokas for the Nitishatak. That such shlokas and
1 The Lt. Governor of Bihar had agreed to appoint an Official Committee to inquire
into the grievances of the peasants who were compelled to cultivate indigo on 3/20th
of the land rented to them by the European indigo planters. Gandhiji was appointed a
member of the Committee as a representative of the peasants.
2 From the place-name, Gujarati day and month as given in the dateline, as also
the first sentence of the letter ; Gandhiji was in Motihari for one day on Jeth vad 6
only in the year 1917 and it corresponded to June 11.
22
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
ideas are found even in good collections, brings to mind two things. First,
that in our original books, the periods of debauchery and self-control have
been mixed up. Second, that the compilers of this age give little thought to
the contents of the literature they place before the society. Under these
circumstances, we have to give books to the children after careful consideration
of the contents. After reading the above mentioned shloka, an innocent child
like Prabhudas would feel that to pinch a young woman's breasts is not
something bad and that even a righteous man can derive such pleasure. We
will have to make great efforts to improve this atmosphere and save our youth.
Some of these writings should be shown to the young people and then the
viciousness pointed out. For, we cannot keep such vicious books hidden from
them for long. So I feel that whatever book we give to our children should
bear our correction and comments. I feel the need for our teachers to deliberate
over such books. They, too, have to learn quite a lot and think quite a lot.
Even books like the Bhagawat should be read out to the children and they
may not be allowed to keep it with them.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have received a parcel of cloth. There is a dhoti in it. But the dhotis
woven by Valji have spoiled me. The 'spoilt me' hesitated to wear coarse
cloth. I will try to console my self arguing that one should not differentiate
between fine and coarse cloth in a gift of hand woven khadi which is a rare
thing.
Devdas too has given me some pieces. It is difficult for me to say whether
I will be able to come there or not.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32875
