146. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
May 26, 1909
SIR,
As there has been much talk, during my last incarceration, regarding
the treatment I underwent, I shall thank you to publish the following
statement. When I was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for three
months with hard labour at Volksrust, and taken to the gaol there,
I found myself in the company of over fifty fellow-workers, including
my son. This, in itself, was to me a great pleasure. The food supplied
was nice and clean, and included 1 oz. of ghee (clarified butter) per
day, and was cooked by Indian cooks. All Indian prisoners were comp-
letely separated from the Natives, and had separate sanitary accommoda-
tion also. Those who occupied cells had bed-boards, in addition to
the usual supply of blankets, etc., and all had a pillow each issued to
them. The work was out-door work, and consisted for about thirty
of us in road-repair or weeding the school ground, either of which,
so far as I was concerned, was very agreeable and healthy. I was
sentenced on the 25th February last.
"ISOLATED"
On the 2nd March, I was ordered to be removed to Pretoria. I
had to travel in a third-class compartment, and, as most of the travelling
was done during the night, it was naturally cold, more so as no blankets
are issued, evidently, to prisoners. Arriving at Pretoria on the 3rd
March, I was, after the usual formalities had been gone through, locked
up in a cell. For, I think, five days, I had to pass the whole of the time
in the cell or the corridor, except when I was allowed out for bathing
and for such other purposes. My cell-door was marked "isolated"
and I found, too, that I was isolated along with four other prisoners,
one of whom was convicted of having made an attempt to murder,
two of having committed sodomy, and one bestiality. Here there was
no pillow and no bed-board issued, and, for food, there was no ghee
allowed except on Wednesdays and Sundays. The work given to me
consisted in polishing the floor of my own cell and polishing the cell-
doors in the corridor of the section in which I was accommodated, along
with the Native prisoners. It was during this time that Mr. Lichtenstein
visited me, and I told him that I considered the treatment to be brutal,
and that there was evidently an intention on the part of General Smuts
to bend me, but that I was not likely to succumb. Subsequently, I
was given half-hour's exercise twice a day, and the work was altered
to that of blanket-quilting, or such other tailoring work.
ONE MEAL PER DAY
I went practically without any breakfast, because the mealie-meal
was not cooked sufficiently for my taste. I made no complaint about
it, as all the other prisoners, I noticed, took their porridge with relish.
I went without supper, because the rice issued contained no ghee. I
complained about the absence of ghee to the Chief Warder, but he
pleaded helplessness, because the regulations did not provide for the
issue of ghee to Indian prisoners. I may state, parenthetically, that
1 oz. of fat per day is given to all Native prisoners. I then approached
the medical officer and submitted that the Indian diet-scale should
include 1 oz. of ghee per day. He would not make the change, but,
for me specially, ordered 8 oz. of bread, along with the rice. I told
him that, while I appreciated it, I could not accept a special privilege,
unless ghee was issued to all Indian prisoners, as I considered it to be
absolutely necessary for their health. I then approached the Director
of Prisons in the matter. A fortnight after, an order was made that
I was to have 1 oz. of ghee allowed with my rice. I took this for a day,
believing that the order was generally applicable. When, however, I
found that it was a concession only for me, I was obliged to revert to
the original position, that is, one meal per day. I again drew the attention
of the Director of Prisons to the fact that I was being partially starved,
and a reply came, after I had served for a month and a half, that ghee
would be issued, pending an alteration of the Indian diet-scale, wherever
there was a body of Indian prisoners. I felt thankful for this, and had
no hesitation thereafter in taking my supper. After this, absence of
breakfast was no loss to me.
HEALTH IMPAIRED
The Director of Prisons paid a visit, and made kind inquiries about
myself, and, when he asked me whether I had any complaints, I pointed
to some of the facts I have already narrated; and a bed-board, felt-
mattress, night-shirt and handkerchief were issued to me, and I was
allowed the use of pencil and note-book, which had been hitherto denied
to me. I would also mention here gratefully that I was allowed an
unrestricted use of books, which to me were a source of the greatest
1 Lawyer and a professional colleague of Gandhiji
2 Vide "Draft Petition to Gaol Governor", pp. 203-.
consolation. The tailoring work in my cell, which required bending
to it for nearly seven hours per day, began to tell upon my health. I,
therefore, requested that I should have more active work, or, at least,
that I should be allowed to do the tailoring in the open. Both the
requests were at first rejected. I suffered, I believe, owing to this close
confinement in the cell, from violent neuralgia for nearly ten days, and
I developed symptoms, too, of chest disease. On repeating my request,
I was allowed to do the tailoring work in the open air.
GOVERNMENT ALONE TO BLAME
The opinion I expressed to Mr. Lichtenstein about General Smuts
underwent a change upon further observation, and I felt that he had
directly nothing to do with the treatment described above. Indeed,
I gratefully recall here the sending by him of two nice books for me
to read, testifying, as I took it, to the fact that he entertained no personal
illwill against me, and that he gave me credit for doing what I believed
to be right. Nor do I blame any of the officials for what I had to undergo.
They were all courteous and kind, and I cannot be sufficiently thankful
to the section warders, who seemed to realise the peculiar position in
which I was placed, and showed me every consideration. And yet I
must adhere to the opinion that the treatment itself was brutal. My
sentence was imprisonment with hard labour, but, for the larger part
of the term, it was practically solitary confinement. The officials of
the Prison Department could do no otherwise because, Indians being
classed with Native prisoners, I could only be placed in the Native
section. The same, however, can hardly be said of the Government,
who, having so many Indian prisoners on hand, gave no thought to
the matter. They must have known, when I was cruelly separated
from my fellow-prisoners at Volksrust, that, at Pretoria, I would be
obliged to undergo hardships not warranted by the sentence imposed
upon me. I do not say that Indian prisoners should be classed with
Europeans. Their lot would, then, probably, be much worse than it
is now. But I do say that they should be separately classed and separately
accommodated. I may be told that, having invited imprisonment for
myself, I can hardly complain of the prison system with any justification.
This taunt is inapplicable, because, I submit, avoidable misery was
inflicted upon me, and, in any case, it is as well for the public, in whose
name the Government is supposed to be acting, to know what is being
done to Indian passive resisters.
OTHER PRISONERS
After my discharge I learnt that, if I fared somewhat ill, the majority
of the other passive resisters fared no better, if not worse; for the majority
of the Indian passive resisters at the Johannesburg Fort were removed
to the penal settlement at Diepkloof, and the majority of those at Volksrust
to Heidelberg, at both of which places, in the initial stages, they had
to undergo hardships for which there was no warrant. The Indian
prisoner may not complain about the labour to which he is put so long
as it is tolerable, but I think that he has every right to complain about
improper, unsuitable, or insufficient diet. It is hardly any credit to
the Colony that one of the bravest and the truest of Indians in the Colony,
an Indian who has occupied the position of Acting Chairman of the
British Indian Association, and who is a well-known merchant, has
been made to carry slop-pails.
No amount of harassing that may be applied will turn those who
have passed through their experience during the last few months from
their purpose. Several have already again been imprisoned, one young
man of nineteen for the fifth time. The public has no knowledge of the
fact that an Indian is nearly every day arrested and imprisoned for
three months with hard labour, at Vereeniging, for managing the store
belonging to Mr. Aswat, who is himself locked up at Diepkloof. Eight
such Indians have already been offered up as a sacrifice, and volunteers
are still forthcoming to take charge of this store. Passive resistance
is not then dead. It cannot die, because it represents truth.
Indian Opinion, 5-6-1909
