205. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
June 7, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
I see why your body wears itself out. You insist on doing
everything thoroughly. Of course it is the right thing for any
seeker. But there is no warrant for any seeker taking over more
than he or she can well manage. I wonder whether I was
right in letting you come into my movements.
God will
take care of you. You must cut down the social functions of
Simla even though it may involve some seeming sacrifice of the
good you might do to the movements you may be in. No move-
ment designed for the multitude will suffer by your conserving
your time and energy by cutting down many social functions.
Now for khadi. All Punjab shops are not run at a loss. The
Simla one has always been. Management is no doubt defec-
tive. But the people in Simla look down upon khadi and there is
a class that is afraid to wear it. The wearers become marked men.
Your idea of having a swadeshi mart on the Mall is attractive
but its execution is risky. However good swadeshi articles may
be, they must suffer in comparison. And I doubt the utility of
aiming at gaudiness. I differentiate between art and gaudiness.
What one sees in fashionable shop windows is by no means all
art. To produce things of real beauty and hope to put them side
by side with the showy things of the Mall in Simla is an expen-
sive ambition which we had better suppress at least for this season.
Do what you can with the shop as it is. Convert it into some-
thing better. Let there be swadeshi articles in it. Arrange it after
your taste and gain experience before you take expensive quar-
ters. We must have this as one of the topics of discussion when
you come down in July or August—the earlier the better.
You will read what I have felt and done about the Quetta
disaster. You will read my letter to Charlie. He should know that
one swallow does not make a summer. He will have to trace me
in Orissa or some such place when I take up walking again.
Meantime I accept 12 miles on the hills as a fair beginning.
I am waiting for the analysis of falsa.
Note-paper and envelopes are nearly ready. Some slivers are
also ready. I want to put together a fair lot. I hope to give you
the cost price of everything, at the time of sending the articles. I
have kept no account of what has been already sent to you of
paper or slivers. Nor need you worry about these.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3537. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6346
