404. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
April 20, 1932
My fear has come true. You have seen a discrepancy between
my advice to you and the fact that I myself toured the country
to collect money for the service of the poor. I was afraid that
you would do so. I, however, see no such discrepancy. I did not
feel any inconsistency with my views in this matter even when I
started on my tour. The difference between our two cases is this.
Dakshinamurti is your institution, as the Ashram is mine.
Your duty towards it is not to go out collecting money for it, but
to teach and pour your soul into the pupils. Similarly, my duty
towards the Ashram is not to collect money for it but to observe
its vows and help the other inmates to observe them, and to help
in carrying on the various activities of the Ashram with greater
vigour. I must have faith that, if I do this duty, we shall get the
money that we need. The principle regarding the collection of a
fund for the poor should be the opposite of this. In that case my
chief aim was to raise a fund. You cannot go out to collect money
for Dakshinamurti, but friends may certainly approach people
for help to your institution. It is their duty to do so. Do you now
see the difference between the two cases? And this is not a new
kind of difference, nor have I thought of it recently. I bore this
distinction in mind even in South Africa. That is, when I realized
it, I stopped seeking help for Phoenix, but I begged from door
to door for a public institution there. I, therefore, still suggest that
you should resolve, if not immediately, as soon as may be, that
you will not go out to collect money for the institution. You
should write to all friends who have been helping the institution
and whom you know personally, and inform them of your deci-
sion, and then let the events take their own course. The argument
that our people do not yet appreciate institutions like yours and
do not realize that it is their duty to give help to them on their
own, is only a half truth. We who manage such institutions
lack faith in our work, and, therefore, the people have not been
rightly educated about their duty of providing funds for them.
This is a vicious circle. The people remain ignorant of their duty
because we have not tried to educate them about it; and till they
learn to give money on their own, we go begging from door to
door. Things will never change in this way. The people will
not learn their duty and we shall not acquire faith in our work.
And the result will be that all our labour will be wasted. Some
of us, therefore, should risk everything and follow the way of
faith. You are in every respect qualified to take such a risk. Your
institution is relatively an old one and has acquired a reputation
for itself. Some of your teachers are selfless workers, and the
pupils are taught with love. We have evidence of this in the
fact that you have succeeded in training some pupils by your
method and that you have friends who give monetary help regu-
larly. Hence, even from the practical point of view, my advice
does not seem unsound. According to me, absolute faith in one's
work is also the highest practical wisdom.
Why do you suppose that, if you raise your fees and become
self-supporting, only the rich will send their children to your insti-
tution? You must be admitting some children free. You should
pass on that burden to the rich. They will pay, and must pay,
that tax if they want their children to be educated in your institu-
tion. Why do you entertain any doubt about the value to the
people of the education which you impart? Personally I am firmly
of the view, and my view is based on actual observation, that even
our best institutions do not grow to their full capacity because
their heads spend much of their time in begging money for them.
The head of a school should devote himself exclusively to the
internal development of the institution. Instead, I have seen
heads wasting their valuable time in collecting funds. Personally
I feel that in doing so those heads betrayed ignorance of their
real duty. They did not have faith in teaching as a vocation.
We see the result. You and all the teachers should meet once
among yourselves, and then again in the presence of the friends who
have been providing you with funds. Make your resolution at
that meeting. The meeting should be called not to seek the
advice of those friends but to make your resolution and announce
it. Faith does not wait for anybody's advice, and if you wait for
advice you will stand to lose.
I stop here today. If you wish to differ from me on this
issue again, you may do so. If you can spare time to write
to me, I certainly have enough time to reply. I cannot get so
much time when I am outside. You should, therefore, take the
fullest advantage of my wider knowledge and experience. If
you fail to do so, you will be the loser. I do not hesitate in the
least or feel the slightest embarrassment in claiming that I am
something of an expert in this matter. It is for you to accept or
reject my claim. But just as a man who knows a cure for snake-
bite but doubts or hides his ability would be a great fool, so also,
if I know my special ability and still hide it from others I would
be as good a fool as he. I would not knowingly wish to become
one.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 112-
