401. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
October 12, 1928
MY DEAR BHAI,
I have your letter of well-deserved rebuke. But it was Ganesan's
oversight pure and simple. The sending was not done through
the Ashram. Ganesan is the publisher and he is a very careful
man. But somehow or the other he forgot to send a copy to
you. Andrews got a copy or copies because he cabled.
And for your rebuke about the omission of Gabriel Isaac,
I don't know that the name was omitted. I have just looked up
the index to the English translation. I missed his name in the
index. But of course that is no proof of the fact that the name
is not to be found in the History. But even if it is omitted,
of course it is an unintentional omission. I have often talked
about him and his sacrifice to the Ashram people. I often think
of him and his goodness and simplicity. But I can't account for
the omission, if there is an omission. I dare say that some other
dear names also have been omitted quite unintentionally.
The confusion about the jails does not much worry me.
These inaccuracies are bound to be found when a man with a
crowded past beyond, recalls events that happened ten years before
the time when he begins to recall them. Is it not enough that the
substance of the History is absolutely true and that it is free from
any bias? Such is the testimony given by those who have read
the book. And I dare say you too will give me the same testimony.
Probably by this time you know the nature of the Memorial
to be erected to the memory of Maganlal. But if you have
missed that number of Young India I may tell you that it is to
be a khadi museum in a specially erected building worthy of
Maganlal's love for khadi and his technical knowledge. Subscrip-
tions are coming in very slowly because of the interruption of
Bardoli, which naturally absorbed the attention of those who
would otherwise have paid far more liberally to the Maganlal
Memorial and that was as it should have been.
I have the beautiful Dutch postcard.
All goes well at the Ashram which is undergoing several
changes at the present moment. When they are fully developed
you will know all about them through Young India. Mira has
gone out touring in the spinning area. It is wonderful how she
makes herself feel at home in the villages she visits. The Hindi
that she has picked up is proving of good value.
At present an Austrian couple are staying here. They are
extremely good people. The husband is a professor in a Medical
College in Graz and the wife is a fine singer and a finer philoso-
pher. From the commencement of their marriage they have led
the life of brahmacharya. The merit is all the wife's. She says she
never had any sexual desire. They are a wonderful couple in
more ways than one.
Ramdas is in Bardoli, Devdas in Delhi. Chhaganlal is here,
Mahadev, Pyarelal, Subbiah and the rest of course.
With love from us all,
Yours sincerely,
H. S. L. POLAK, ESQ.
42, 47 & 48 DANES INN HOUSE
265 STRAND, LONDON W.C. 2
From a photostat: S.N. 14394
