639. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
October 15, 1945
CHI. MRIDULA,
I have your resignation. I think you have acted wisely in
tendering it. I know and I believe that in accepting the post of
Joint Secretary your intention was to render wider service to the
cause of women. Equally good is your motive in resigning because
you realized and I also saw that by continuing in that post you
would not be able to realize your ideal. There is temperamental
incompatibility between Bapa and you. You tried to adjust but
who can remove inherent differences? You saw that your method
of working did not satisfy Bapa. He, on his part, also tried to
adjust but with little success. I could see that the difference
was enormous. In my opinion neither of you is at fault. Very
often such differences are unbridgeable. In these circumstances,
the best thing is to work apart. Bapa was, and is still, ready
to quit. But this is Bapa's creation and Bapa is a seasoned hand
in this kind of work. It would be difficult for me, I think, to
carry this burden without him. It is Bapa's wish and mine
that all men should ultimately withdraw from the Samiti and the
entire administration should be handed over to the sisters. That
will bring it real credit. This effort will continue and none of
us will rest on our oars till it succeeds. Success will not come
early by Bapa's leaving it or allowing us to quit. Hence I am
allowing you to quit the Joint Secretaryship and am accepting
your resignation.
I know that I am not losing your services
thereby. You are and will continue to be a trustee. I am sure
you will continue to work for the local Kasturba Nidhi commit-
tee of Gujarat; and you will also assist the Central Committee
whenever it needs your help. Thus I am confident that you will not
lag behind in serving the Committee even when you relinquish
its Joint Secretaryship. Moreover, you should not forget that
you have resigned from Secretaryship, not from trusteeship.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Your decision to publish the resignation letter is well con-
ceived. That will scotch all rumours and speculation either in
private or in public. You are already on leave. Does it [resig-
nation] take effect from now itself?
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
