121. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
MATHURA,
November 6, 1929
BHAI RAOJIBHAI,
I got your letter. When we have several tasks on hand and
are not in a position to do full justice to all of them, we should
arrange them in order of their priority and assign each its place so
that we can know which task can be dropped. And if all the
tasks are of equal importance, we should drop those which are
beyond our capacity to manage. The latrines, the kitchen and
the accounts-these three I regard as having the highest priority.
If the accounts are not correctly maintained, money will be
wasted, our reputation will suffer and our conscience will be trou-
bled. I have often explained that care of the latrine and of the
kitchen are aspects of the same task. If either of them is im-
perfectly done, bodily health would suffer. I have also shown that
scavenging and cooking involve important moral and scientific
principles. A cook doing his or her duty religiously will not only
cook the food well but will also observe the principles of good
health, that is, of brahmacharya. And a scavenger doing his or
her duty religiously will not merely bury the night-soil but also
observe the stools passed by each and inform each person about
the state of his or her health. We have with us neither such an
ideal scavenger nor such an ideal cook, but I have no doubt that
the Ashram should produce a crop of them. There are several
defects about the kind of tank you suggest. We cannot of course
build a pukka tank. We may dig a temporary pit. But we can
think about this further only when I go over there. In any case
this much is certain, that the shallower the pit the better. The
first nine inches of the soil is exceedingly valuable. It is within this
depth that the germs decomposing the stools, etc., live. The effect
of the sun's rays also is the greatest up to that depth. Moreover,
a shallow pit is no obstacle to the use of night-soil as manure
wherever required. Instead of burying night-soil where we do
at present, we may adopt this method. We should get two pits
made side by side, each eighteen inches deep and having a surface
area of 36 sq. yards. After one pit is filled with night-soil we
might start using the other for the purpose and, after the night-
soil in the first pit has been transformed into manure, take the
manure out leaving the pit to dry up until the second pit gets
filled with night-soil buried there. This method will serve the
purpose behind Somabhai's suggestion and largely remove the
difficulty pointed out by you. The lavatories should remain as
they are, and we should master the art of keeping them as clean
as possible. For this one of us must shoulder the responsibility.
The working men will go on changing from time to time, and it
is necessary that they should. It is, therefore, essential to have
one inspector. It is not enough that he take a round in the
morning and inspect the places. He should inspect the lavatories
at least thrice a day. For maintaining greater cleanliness, it may
also be necessary to have more buckets.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8986
