500. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
May 10, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I left the bed at one in the morning and feel quite fresh. Please
do not get alarmed or angry or start worrying. This is simply
God's greatness. I am sitting on a bed of straw spread on the
ground in a small village. On one side are sleeping Mira and
others, and on the other Thakkar Bapa and other men. This is
a village named Chandanpur. Today is the third day since we
started walking. We are ten miles from Puri. Or it may be
eight. We started from Puri yesterday in the morning. Thakkar
Bapa has planned this march as you had planned the Dandi
March.
I got thoroughly upset in Puri. I was tired of travelling
by rail and car. I put my difficulties before Bapa and other
companions. Everybody recognized the need for doing what I was
suggesting, but they were afraid. They got over their fears and
we took the decision in Puri itself and implemented it immediately.
I went to the Puri meeting on foot.
The sanatanists seemed
subdued and there was less of noise and other disturbances at the
meeting. When we started yesterday in the morning, the news
had not spread, but in the first village where we halted more
and more people came as the day advanced. When we walked to
Chandanpur in the afternoon, the road overflowed with people
and the meeting which was held immediately on arrival here was
attended by crowds which had poured in from all sides.
We are camping in the open air on the outskirts of the village.
A hut-like structure has been put up for me, but the thing
only looks like a hut. The companions are the same. Harakh-
chand, Jivram and Purbai have joined the party. The local
leaders also have come. With them are the wife of Gopabandhu
Chowdhari and Sonamani, who once stayed in the Ashram. This
is how we intend to tour Orissa. I have appealed to the other
provinces, too, that they should permit me to complete the our
of the tour in the same manner and that, if I continue the tour
on foot, I should not be pressed to visit them. If they agree, I
would complete the remaining period of the tour in Orissa it-
self. However, when the rains set in we shall have to consider
477
whether this way of touring is possible. If we cannot continue
touring on foot, then I personally would prefer to camp in one
place. I will see how things shape. I shall be meeting all the
co-workers in Patna. I shall have a clearer picture there. I
will try my best to persuade them to fall in with me. I hope
you will have no difficulty in understanding this step. You know
that whenever you approve of a step of mine I feel pleased.
But I would not like you to give your approval just to please
me.
You must have read about the serious accident to the car
soon after we had left Ranchi. "Who can harm him whom Rama
guards?" Thus sang Dhiro Bhagat. How well-founded on ex-
perience!
Who can persuade the terrorists? And the Government?
See to what mad lengths they went in Darjeeling.
Did not I send you a copy of the accompanying Gita Praveshika?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 100-
