609. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
November 9, 1932
DEAR MOTIBABU,
Just now I must dictate my letters. Your book has been
received. Mahadev knows Bengali quite well. The book was
received today. He has already commenced reading it and fallen in
love with it. He will read to me extracts from it as soon as possible.
Your question about varnashrama you will find somewhat
answered in one of the statements issued to the Press. In my
letter to Sureshbabu I never said that varnashrama was in any
shape or form an evil, but I did say that caste was a social evil
and had to go some day or other. I draw a sharp distinction bet-
ween varna and caste. All I have written before on this subject
I hold by with perhaps this exception: I have vaguely expressed
in my previous writings what I have come to see now clearly,
namely, that the four varnas are no longer in actual working
order, even as the four Ashrams are not. Hence at the present
moment there is only one varna in existence. We are all Shu-
dras and if we can bring ourselves to believe this, the merger
of the Harijans in Savarna Hindus becomes incredibly simple
and in course of time, we might be able to reconstruct the
old varnas. I also seem to see more clearly than before that
the law our ancestors discovered was not that the varnas were
four and were always to remain four, but that everyone had to
follow his own varna which is most nearly expressed by the
word profession in English. It was no part of varnadharma to
regulate dining or marrying. Varna determined the profession.
Custom naturally grew up of people of the same varna restrict-
ing marriage to that varna. Restriction on inter-dining was of
a much later growth, but marrying outside one's varna did not
entail forfeiture of the varna. I hope to develop my idea of
varnadharma in the statements I am issuing, but I think I have
said sufficient in my letter to enable you to understand my position.
Love to you all of the Sangha.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 11039
