361. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Wednesday [April 23, 1924]
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
Herewith some Gujarati material. Vallabhbhai has passed
on to me the bundle you sent through him. However, I am not
taking anything from it this time. Your description of [the inci-
dent in] Visnagar is beautiful from the point of view of language.
From the point of view of the contents, it is enough to bring tears
to one's eyes. But I have made my heart as hard as stone. As
physical objects, we are more insignificant on this earth than even
the ant. To us the latter seems as of no account. And what are
we in the eyes of the Lord of the Universe? How, then, can we,
mere insects, rejoice or weep at anything?
A Muslim gentleman has addressed an open letter to me
through the Prajamitra. It is, of course, full of venom, but contains
a fine piece of advice: "If you cannot promote harmony between
the two communities, please keep quiet and watch the game like an
onlooker." Please go through my article, "Mari Bhasha", first .
You know, I am sure, who the dweller on the peak is. With what
laborious care has Valji read Navajivan! Many of his corrections
put us all to shame. I would certainly hold you responsible for
those mistakes if you regularly went through Navajivan articles
before they were printed. However, I have an impression that you
had not read them. You saw them only after they were printed.
Who, then, had read them? If it was not Swami Anand either,
whom should I hold responsible? The children? If, indeed, we
cannot correct glaring mistakes of language, have we any right to
run Navajivan? I myself am not yet in a position to go carefully
through everything I write, and that, too, from the point of
view of language. And if you or Swami do not take the responsi-
bility of going through the matter carefully, I would not hesitate
even to stop publishing Navajivan. A person who cannot do his
work to his own satisfaction had better leave it alone. It is his
duty to do so.
I would very much like to write on other subjects, but, for the
present, I must content myself with what little will serve our
purpose. One of you two should carefully go through the mate-
rial sent this time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have used the word vicharmanyata for "creed". Please re-
place it by a better word if you can think of one.
Why should anyone there feel worried about Radha? She is
all right now. Show this to Swami.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 8760
