390. LETTER TO MAUD POLAK
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 6, 1911
MY DEAR MAUD,
The enclosures will tell their own tale. You will have the full
text of the Bill in Indian Opinion. I do not envy your having to study the
Bill. However, I suggest your not writing anything at all about the
Bill, unless you hear anything from me by cable. I am not at all cer-
tain of the meaning of the Bill; nobody seems to be; and in the absence
of a certainty all presumption must be against the Bill. When agitation
there becomes necessary, you will have the views emphatically one
way or the other, and you will have objections from me in concrete
form. Till then, you can only give the information to inquirers. I have
refrained from cabling anything to you, because we do not want any
agitation there at the time of writing. I have anxious cable inquiries
from India, but have simply replied that they are to await further
cables. All that we for the time being should say is that no Bill will
satisfy passive resisters, unless two things are unconditionally granted
—repeal of Act 2 of 1907, and the entry of educated Indians who may
pass the education test without liability to any registration laws. If the
Bill clearly means the latter, as it clearly repeals Asiatic [Act] 2 of
1907, we shall lay down our arms, however bad in other respects the
Bill may be. This does not mean that we cease to worry the Government
here or the Government there with our other troubles, but we do not
take up passive resistance regarding them. For the time being, we still
endeavour to carry on a less active agitation. I do not call the petition-
ing agitation constitutional to distinguish it from passive resistance,
because passive resistance is just as constitutional as simple petitioning.
What a happy coincidence it is that Mr. Ritch should be here just in the
nick of time. I think that he himself will agree that his presence is far
more necessary here just now than there. You may unreservedly express
your opinion that with reference to the Cape and Natal, the Bill is as
bad as it possibly can be. There theoretical equality does not weigh so,
because we have it already. The deprivation of practical rights under
this Bill, therefore, is a very serious and tangible grievance requiring
redress, and, as you will see, the Cape and Natal are moving. I only
hope that they will move sufficiently to be able to make an impression
on the Government. I am perfectly at ease, seeing that Messrs Ritch
and Polak are on the respective spots. When I receive the address
for Mr. Ritch, I shall gladly buy an oak frame in accordance with your
instructions, send you a memo of charges, and present the thing to him.
This time, instead of sending £15 for the Committee, I am sending
£18. That ought to enable you to get on without a handicap, and
there should be no difficulty in paying the quarterly charges.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5236
