237. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[DURBAN,
Before March 10, 1906]
TO
THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
MARITZBURG
SIR,
The Committee of the Natal Indian Congress has read with pain
and anxiety Government Notice No. 150 published in the Natal Govern-
ment Gazette dated the 27th ultimo, imposing certain fees in connection
with various passes and certificates issued under the Immigration Restric-
tion Act No. 30 of 1903 as amended by Act 3 of 1906.
Our Committee ventures respectfully but strongly to protest against
the tariff of fees mentioned in the Notice.
It is submitted that the fees amount to a tax on British Indians
who are entitled to remain in the Colony or to pass through it.
It is well known that the Act is enforced very largely, if not entirely,
against British Indians. The various passes and certificates issued there-
under are granted more in the interest of those who desire their enfor-
cement than of those to whom the provisions are applied.
Our Committee, with the greatest deference, thinks that the fees
sought to be imposed are extortionate.
Our Committee reminds the Government of the fact that, during the
lifetime of the late Right Honourable Harry Escombe, an attempt was
made to impose a fee of £1 for visitors' passes. A respectful representa-
tion was sent thereupon protesting against the imposition and the late
Right Honourable Gentleman immediately withdrew the Notice regar-
ding the imposition.
At that time the Certificate of Domicile was free from the £1 fee.
Our Committee, moreover, draws your attention to the fact that
British Indians who may be residing in the inland colonies are at least
entitled to a passage through Natal without having to pay a charge of
£1 for the privilege of passing through the Colony.
Indeed, even from a selfish standpoint, the fact that such Indians
bring to the Natal Government Railways a certain amount of revenue
should weigh with the Government in not imposing a prohibitive fee.
Act 3 of 1906 contemplates a reasonable charge of £1. My Commit-
tee submits that a charge of £1 for a visiting or embarkation pass or
a Certificate of Domicile can never be considered reasonable, and if the
wife of a domiciled British Indian is entitled to remain in the Colony
or to enter it, and if an Indian who can satisfy the educational test is
also, as of right, entitled to enter the Colony, it seems, in the humble
opinion of our Committee, not only hard but insulting that either
the wife of a domiciled Indian or an educated Indian himself should have
to pay what is after all a tax of 5/- for not being a prohibited immigrant
within the meaning of the Act.
Our Committee does not understand the term transit pass.
Our Committee ventures to trust that the Government will be
pleased to withdraw the Notice and allow the charges hitherto imposed
to stand.
Our Committee hopes that your early attention will be given to the
complaint as the matter is rather urgent.
We have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,
O. H. A. JOHARI
M. C. ANGLIA
JOINT HON. SECRETARIES, N.I.C.
Indian Opinion, 10-3-1906
