36. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
MAHABALESHWAR,
April 27, 1945
CHI. MANI,
I got your letter. Immediately after reading it, I tore it
up. It had been kept aside by mistake, but it came to me as
soon as it was discovered that it was personal.
But what is there so personal in what you have written? I
myself opened it just to respect your wishes and to reassure you
and will post this in the same way.
As for fasts, perhaps I must have undertaken more of them
than anyone else in the group. In South Africa I used to fast
on any pretext. I must have taken only one meal a day for
more than a year. But I am of the opinion that moderation in
eating is more difficult than fasting. Fasts have a place in our
life but the death of a relative is certainly not an occasion for
them. Why shouldn't they be undertaken on the occasion of
birth? I have done that also but gave that up on further reflection.
From this you can judge your fasts. The human body is the
temple of God, and should be taken care of as such.
It is not that I do not know of your regular habits. Motilalji
gave you first rank in that. But you should be charitable to co-
workers. You fail in your duty to your neighbours because you
are not so. Moreover you admit your shortcomings. People admit
their shortcomings either because they wish to stick to them or
wish to cure themselves of them. Don't you wish to get rid of
your shortcomings? You should infect others with your regularity
and at the same time must preserve yours. You should act as I do
and keep your own surroundings clean. Didn't you learn this much
even after being so many times in jail? What have you learnt
from Mahadev ? Did you observe his generosity?
This should be more than enough for you. If all your ques-
tions have been answered, come over here. But do not come
simply to please me. Come only if you feel that it is your dharma
to do so, and with a charitable heart or with the aim of making
it generous. If you are resentful, what will you gain by coming
here? Let us magnify the molehills of our faults into mountains
and see the mountains of others' faults as molehills. Only then
can we live in harmony.
If you decide not to keep back anything from others, make
a copy of this letter and send it to me. It is worth pondering
over by many.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. MANIBEHN VALLABHBHAI PATEL
C/O DR. KANUGA
AHMEDABAD, B . B . C. I . RLY.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 133-
