253. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
GAYA,
Saturday [August 13, 1921]
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
I have your letter. Self-surrender does not, should not,
deprive one of one's originality. It only means that the person has
realized his littleness and, therefore, relies on somebody in whom
he has faith. When in doubt, such a person does not insist on his
own view but yields to the friend's. Arjuna harried Krishna with
no end of questions. The tortoise was a lover of God. His wife
would tempt God right till the last. Though [he] scorned the
counsellors and sent them away, she kept complaining to God all
the time. Self-surrender does not mean giving up one's judgment.
Sincere self-surrender is not inertia, it is energy; knowing that there
is someone to whom to turn ultimately, the person undertakes, with
due regard for his limitations, a thousand experiments one after
another. But they are all undertaken with humility, knowledge
and discrimination. I count Maganlal's self-surrender to be of
the highest order, but he has never, I believe, surrendered his judg-
ment. Your way is quite different. You have too little initiative
and, therefore, whenever you get someone to whom you can look
up, what little you have deserts you. Because too much reading
has dulled your originality, you want to be an assistant. One may
wish to work independently and yet be extremely modest.
Your motive in wanting to live with me is sincere, but it is
wrong. You merely wish to imitate the West. If I always keep
someone with me merely in order that a record of my activities
may be kept, I myself would come to behave unnaturally. It is
one thing that someone may remain by my side in the usual course
of things and keep notes unobtrusively, but quite another that
a person should keep notes of everything of set purpose. Did
anyone take notes of Rama's activities? The world has lost nothing
because no one did so. If extensive notes of Johnson's talks were
taken, they have conferred on the world no incomparable benefit
that I know of We do not at all look at this matter merely from
the point of view of literature. However, I do want you always
to be with me. Since your grasp is so good and you are so well-
equipped, I should like you to understand everything about my
life and work. I have a great many ideas, but they find expression
only as occasions arise. There are subtleties, sometimes, which no
one follows. My unexceptionable comments on Vasantram Shastri's
letter were understood neither by Kaka nor by Swami. You
understood them a little better than they. My considerateness in
those comments went unnoticed. The tempting thought does not
leave me, therefore, that if I had a man like you by my side he
could, in the course of time, take up my work. I do not wish yet
to employ you exclusively on anyone task, but want you, instead,
to gather experience. If, moreover, you get acquainted with every-
one whom I know, our work in the future will be easier.
There was a telegram from Valji and Swami promising that no
errors would be left in future issues. The Professor moreover,
wants me to have one Bengali with me. It will, therefore, be
convenient if you join me when you are free from there. If you
yourself feel like taking up Young India to run it independently
and develop it, I do not mind. Personally, though, I believe that
the paper will not be needed after I am gone. Perhaps some of
you believe that, if you continue to spread my message, you will
be able to run it. Even for this, it is not necessary that you should
Join it. On the contrary, I feel that after you have matured through
experience you will be better equipped to run Young India by your-
self. Talk to Jawaharlal Nehru about the Independent. He must
find someone from U.P. How is it he cannot find any from among
these vast Hindi-speaking people? What about Kapil Dev Mala-
viya1? In any case, place all the facts before Jawaharlal and dis-
cuss the matter.
You have done well to remind me about the matter of
Rs. 25,000. I am taking steps to make the necessary arrange-
ments. The printing must improve.
[PS.]
Blessings from
BAPU
I am advising Devdas to stay on there for the time being.
I don't have the time to go over the letter again.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 11417
