279. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
NANDI HILLS,
April 28, 1927
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
It was a treat to receive your letter. But you will remember
that you owe me a medical visit-can't call it professional be-
cause a professional visit will carry with it Rs. 1,000 per day if
not more, now that you have been twice to Europe since the
promise of a visit. And, is not each European visit supposed to
add to the capacity of doctors and lawyers and therefore also
their daily fees? Meanwhile, I shall bear your instructions in
my mind. My chief difficulty is how to control the mind
and not to let it think, unless I develop dementia. If you say I
may not reduce my thoughts to writing or not even give utter-
ance by speech even in the shape of conversation, I can somewhat
understand; but I do not know how I can prevent the doings of
Hindus and Mussalmans from making me think furiously. Nor do
I know how to prevent the growing starvation of millions acting
upon my mind. I do not need to read papers and get information
to make me continuously think of these things. The only way to
prevent me from thinking of these things is for Hindus and Mus-
salmans to behave like human beings rather than sub-human ani-
mals and for all of us who get more than our share of our daily
bread to think of the vast majority of the teeming millions and
for their sakes to discard foreign cloth and for their encouragement
to spin during every idle moment.
If it is really a fact that high blood-pressure is due to an over-
wrought brain, I seriously contend that the only way to remove
this tension would be to prescribe a starvation cure. Deep down
in me I do feel that a prolonged fast is the only radical cure
because during the 21 days fast1, I could see that after 10 days I
had ceased even to think of the outside world. The starvation had
created that temporary mental adjustment. Whilst I am eating even
if it was possible the mind refuses not to think. But under starvation
the mind will co-operate in ceasing to think and worry. And, if in
spite of the care that I am myself taking and in spite of the army of
medical friends who see me and examine me, in spite of the quacks
1 From September 17 to October 8, 1924; vide Vol. XXV.
whose opinion I voluntarily seek and in spite of the undivided at-
tention of devoted nurses, blood-pressure refuses to yield and
weakness persists, I shall certainly risk causing temporary pain to
many friends and impose a fast upon myself either to end or to
mend this vegetating and vexing state. But there is no cause for
any alarm. It seems that the pressure will go down. For the last
two days I am feeling stronger than when I came to Nandi. The
highest pressure during last week was 188. On Tuesday last it
was found to be 180. This was the first decline yet noticed after
the collapse.
This hill is 4,850 feet, therefore, not so high as Ooty nor so cold;
but it is cool enough and Doctor Mehta considers that I should
not [go] to a higher altitude. Others again say that higher the
altitude the better it is for . . .1 When doctors differ what is a
poor patient to do? Some day when you are free I shall certainly
expect you when we shall talk not merely of my health but
about several other things of infinitely greater importance.
Please give my love to all who think of me and accept it for
yourself.
Yours sincerely,
From the photostats: S.N. 14119 & 12949
