351. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
AHMEDABAD,
July 26, 1933
TO
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
POONA
DEAR SIR,
My first constructive act on return to India in 1915 was to
found the Satyagraha Ashram for the purpose of serving Truth.
The inmates are under the vows of truth, ahimsa, celibacy, control
of palate, poverty, fearlessness, removal of untouchability, swa-
deshi with khadi as the centre, equal respect for all religions and
bread-labour. The present site for the Ashram was bought in
1916. It conducts today certain activities mostly through the la-
bour of inmates. But it does need to supplement that labour with
ordinary paid labour. Its principal activities are: khadi production
as a village industry without the aid of power-driven machinery,
dairy, agriculture, scientific scavenging and literary education.
The Ashram has 107 inmates at present (men 42, women 31,
boys 12 and girls 22). This number excludes those who are in pri-
son and those who are otherwise engaged outside. Up to now it
has trained nearly 1,000 persons in the manufacture of khadi. Most
of these, so far as my knowledge goes, are doing useful constructive
work and earning an honest livelihood.
The Ashram is a registered trust. The funds at its disposal are
ear-marked. Whilst the aim has been to make every department
self-supporting, it has hitherto been obliged to receive donations
from friends to meet all the obligations. Experience has shown
that so long as it remains a predominantly educational service
(using the term in the widest sense) and not only charges no fees
but actually feeds and clothes the learners, it cannot be wholly
self-supporting.
The Ashram owns immovable property estimated at about
Rs. 3,60,000 and movables including cash estimated at over Rs.
3,00,000 1. The Ashram takes no part in politics so-called. But it
does believe in non-co-operation and civil disobedience as indis-
pensable, under certain circumstances, for the observance of truth
and non-violence. Hence, the civil disobedience campaign of 1930
was started by the march to Dandi of nearly eighty inmates of
the Ashram.
Time has now arrived for the Ashram to make a greater sacri-
fice in the face of the existing situation-on the one hand the grow-
ing terrorism by the Government and on the other the equally
growing demoralization among the people.
The statements that have come under my observation since
the breaking of my fast show that
1. methods of torture have been adopted by the police in vari-
ous parts of India in order to cow down individual civil resisters,
2. women have been insulted,
3. free movement of people has become almost impossible,
4. in many parts of India, village work by Congressmen has
become all but impossible,
5. civil resistance prisoners have been subjected to humi-
liations and bodily injury in many lock-ups and prisons,
6. unconscionably heavy fines have been imposed and gross
irregularities committed for their recovery,
7. peasants withholding revenue or rent have been punished
in a manner out of all proportion to their offence, obviously with
a view to terrifying them and their neighbours into subjection
8. the public Press has been gagged,
9. in short, freedom with self-respect has become impossible
throughout the length and breadth of the land.
I have no doubt that these statements will be denied or ex-
plained away in official circles. It may be that they are not free
from exaggerations. But in common with many Congressmen I
believe in them and therefore they are able to arouse us to action.
Hence, mere incarceration can bring little satisfaction. More-
over, I quite clearly see that the vast constructive programme of
the Ashram cannot be carried on with safety, unless the Ashram
ceases entirely to have anything to do with the campaign. To ac-
cept such a position will be to deny the creed. Up to now I had
hoped that the existence of the Ashram side by side with the civil
resistance of its individual members was possible and that there
was bound to be an honourable peace between Government and
the Congress in the near future even though the Congress goal
might not be immediately realized. The unfortunate rejection by
His Excellency the Viceroy of the honest advance of the Con-
gress through me, in the interest of peace, shows clearly that the
Government do not seek or desire peace, they want an abject sur-
render by the largest and the admittedly most, if not the only, popu-
lar political organization in the country. This is impossible so
long as the Congress continues to repose confidence in its present
advisers. The struggle therefore is bound to be prolonged and calls
for much greater sacrifice than the people have hitherto under-
gone. It follows that the greatest measure of sacrifice is to be ex-
pected of me as the author of the movement. I can therefore only
offer that which is nearest and dearest to me and for the building
of which I and many other members of the Ashram have laboured
with infinite patience and care all these eighteen years. Every
head of cattle and every tree has its history and sacred associa-
tions. They are all members of a big family. What was once
a barren plot of land has been turned by human endeavour into
a fair-sized model garden colony. It will not be without a tear
that we shall break up the family and its activities. I have had
many and prayerful conversations with the inmates and they have,
men and women, unanimously approved of the proposal to give up
the present activities. Those who are at all able have decided to
offer individual civil disobedience after the suspension period is over.
It may not be superfluous to mention that the Ashram has for
the past two years refused to pay revenue dues and consequently
goods of considerable value have been seized and sold in respect of
them. I make no complaint of the procedure. But it cannot be a
matter of pleasure or profit to carry on a great institution in such
precarious circumstances. I fully realize that whether a State is just
or unjust and whether it is under popular or foreign control, the
citizen's possessions may at any time be forcibly taken away from
him by the State, if he comes in conflict with it. In the circumstan-
ces, it seems to me to be simple prudence to anticipate the inevi-
table in a conflict which promises to be indefinitely prolonged.
But whilst it has been decided to break up the Ashram we
want everything to be used for public purpose.
Therefore, unless
the Government for any reason desire to take charge of any or all
of the movables including cash, I propose to hand them over to
those friends who will take them and use them for public bene-
fit and in accordance with the earmarking. Thus the khadi stock
and contents of the workshop and the weaving sheds will be handed
over to the All-India Spinners' Association on whose behalf that
activity has been carried on. The cows and other cattle will be
handed to a representative of the Goseva Sangh on whose behalf
the dairy has been conducted. The library will be handed pro-
bably to an institution that will take care of it. The moneys and
articles belonging to the various parties will be returned [to] them
or kept for them by friends who will care to take charge of them.
Then there remain the land, the buildings and the crops. I
suggest that the Government take possession of these and do what
they like with them. I would gladly have handed these also to
friends but I cannot be party to their paying the revenue dues.
And naturally I may not hand them to fellow resisters. All, there-
fore, I wish is that beneficial use be made of the land, buildings
and the valuable trees and crops instead of being allowed to run to
waste as I see has been done in many cases.
There is a plot of land with buildings occupied by Harijan
families. They have hitherto paid no rent. I have no desire to
invite them to take part in civil resistance. They will now pay
the nominal rent of one rupee per year to the trustees of the
Ashram and be responsible for the revenue due on that portion.
If for any reason, the Government decline to take possession
of the property mentioned, the Ashram will still be vacated by the
inmates as soon as may be after the expiry of the suspension
period, viz., 31st instant unless the date is anticipated by the Gov-
ernment. I request a telegraphic reply to this letter, at least, in
so far as the Government's wishes regarding the movables are con-
cerned so as to enable me to remove them in due time if I am
to remove them at all.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
From a microfilm: S.N. 21535; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40), Pt. 11, pp. 171-81
