479. LETTER TO FULCHAND B. SHAH
August 30, 1932
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I got your letter of the 21st. I see that my letter of July 3
was given to you on August 14. If it was kept back there all
that time, it would be better if you ask me to address my letter
to another prisoner whose turn for receiving a letter comes
earlier than yours and who does not expect a letter from anybody
else. In this way you will get my letter earlier. I always reply
immediately to a letter from any of you. If we look upon the
whole country as ours - and we do so-then everybody should
sincerely feel that every drop of water or blade of grass anywhere
in the country belongs to us. We would then use with the
utmost economy anything we get in any part of the country,
even if it is regarded as somebody else's property. Even the
things which are in our possession have been produced from the
wealth of this country. How can we use things belonging to other
people differently from those that belong to us, after we have
realized that the whole country is ours? It is very necessary that,
during this period of seclusion [in jail], all of us should ponder
over this again and again and understand it properly.
There
is a large number of boys in your jail, and that increases the
responsibility of the grown-ups.
Who supplied you all those
books of literature? It is very good indeed that the prisoners
there have been learning new languages and crafts. I will
tell you one thing in order to inspire greater enthusiasm
among you all. Here Sardar has been studying Sanskrit like
a very enthusiastic young man. He has completed six parts
of Satavlekar's Pathamala and learns five verses from the Gita
daily. He is in Chapter III just now. He gives to it what-
ever free time he gets. His progress is wonderful. He spins also,
and gives between two and two and a half hours to this
work. He spins yarn of 40 counts. All this is in addition to his
daily work of making envelopes. All paper with one side blank
or all other useless paper on which he can lay his hands is
turned into envelopes. As a result, for the last three or four
months we have not had to spend money for buying a single en-
velope. This is the meaning of turning dust into gold. He adds
to the wealth of the country, no matter in how small a measure.
Similarly, we exercise the utmost economy in using everything.
Mahadev is learning French and Urdu and spins yarn of up to
80 counts. Brelvi is studying French, and also intends to take up
Sanskrit afterwards. He, for his part, teaches Urdu to some
Maharashtrian prisoners who are with him. Gangadharrao is
learning Gujarati. Kishorelal is learning Kannada in Nasik [jail]
with the help of some Kannadigas. You have been doing good
work there, of course. I have mentioned all this to encourage
you in your efforts.
If we cannot expect ideal behaviour from the Ashram boys,
from whom else can we expect it? I am, therefore, not surprised
that you give them your certificate. Vithal must have been re-
leased now. But if he is not released, please tell him that according
to me, his mother's death was a deliverance for her, and, there-
fore, he should not grieve over it. He is a sensible man and
has learnt to look upon death as a friend. I am not surprised
to learn about Ravishankar's devoted service. Has his constipation
been cured, or does he still suffer from it? What is the news of
his son who was at Vedchhi? Where is he now? We often
talk about you all and think of you.
Blessings to all friends from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9445-a Courtesy: Chandrakant F. Shah
