329. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SHIMOGA,
Shravan Krishna 2 [August 15, 1927]
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL JOSHI,
I send you Shri Bhansali's letters along with this. You must
have seen my telegram and letter to him. You and others in the
Committee should read these letters carefully and think over them.
After doing so, hand them back to Shri Bhansali. The letter ad-
dressed to me, you may either file in the office or return to me.
Think over this matter quite impersonally. I believe that
Shri Bhansali will keep the promise, given to me in a letter which
he wrote before this, that he would await my return there; never-
theless, we must consider this thing for the future. My opinion is
that we should not permit Shri Bhansali to fast, and that, if he fasts
despite this, we can put up with it. We tolerate many things in the
Ashram, but would not permit them if our permission was sought.
There are also many things for which we would not give per-
mission and which we would not tolerate. We should think in
which category to place this idea of a fast. All of you should
consider the point and do what you think proper. I cannot guide
you from here, because in order to express an opinion it is neces-
sary that I must talk things over with Bhai Bhansali and let the
effect of the talk sink into my mind. Moreover, before you decide
anything you should hold talks with Shri Bhansali in private and
also in the presence of the Committee. Try to know the deepest
thoughts of Lilabehn, and write to me if you like. There is no
need for the slightest hurry to take a decision in this matter. If
Shri Bhansali cannot keep his promise in the present letter and if,
since I have suggested a reference to the Committee, you let me
hear from you after a talk with the Committee and if he asks for
the Committee's decision before my return, you will have to
give it. But it is necessary in any case that he look to the
convenience of the Committee. I also believe that we cannot decide
this matter without consulting the absent members of the Commit-
tee too. This is so because, on the one hand, dharma suggests
that even if we are not able to keep pace with an aspirant for
moksha and a seeker after knowledge like Bhansali and we disapprove
of a step contemplated by him, we should let him proceed, that
is to say, we must keep him in the Ashram; on the other hand,
dharma tells us that it is perhaps our obligation not to tolerate
his proposed step in the Ashram even if we consider it not as im-
moral but merely as thoughtless and dangerous. We have thus to
discover the point of balance between social conformity and indi-
vidual freedom, and we cannot do this in a hurry. Explain our
difficulties to Shri Bhansali and request him to respect our honest
efforts, if for no other reason, at least in order that he may then
more easily have the vision for which he is so eager. Keep me in-
formed about this from time to time and, if necessary, even send me
a telegram.
If Lala Mohanlal of Lahore is there and if he has been quietly
and honestly doing physical work, let him do so and live there till
I arrive. But this is my opinion only. Having observed his beha-
viour or having regard to the other arrangements in the Ashram,
if you think that you cannot keep him, ask him to leave. Give him
the accompanying letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12965
