162. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
CAPE TOWN,
March 9 [1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your two letters and wire.
If I were you I would not disturb the meals you have arranged.
Do not change what seems to agree so much only so that on occasions
you can do without them. Manilal won't save all the time you imagine.
Your description shows that the preparation must take 1½ hours. But
that loss of time need not worry you. So long as there must be cooking
so long must there be loss both of time and life. But habits of long
standing cannot be altered in a day. You will observe that my tolerance
is again reasserting itself and I am becoming more and more indifferent
to the surroundings. Mrs. Gandhi's sickness has given me food for
introspection and a review of the past. I am glad Manilal is regaining
his balance.
Mrs. Gandhi's recovery (if the improvement continues) is almost
a miracle. And she has responded to our natural treatment. I feel too
that medical treatment would have killed her, not that she is certain
now to live. But hope has revived. I had prepared her for death and
had made arrangements for her funeral. There is a crematorium here
built owing to the energy of Lucheram. She has remained very calm
and sweet. I have now introduced in my life the counting of beads.
I sing hymns to her in the morning and read the Ramayana to her
in the evening and also sing hymns. Mrs. Gool sometimes comes and
listens. My food you should know — tomatoes peeled by warming them
1 Chooharmal P. Lucheram
and banana flour and coconut biscuits, also ground monkey-nuts or dried
bananas stewed. The latter was tried for you. I had it for the first
time today. It takes no time and by itself makes a perfect dish. There
was very little water in it. Of course, there was oil. Mrs. Gool prepared
it. If Mrs. Gandhi or I had made it, it would have been better I fancy.
I add, of course, fresh fruit, principally grapes and a few almonds which
I have been taking for the past week to test their effect on the eyes
which have much troubled me. I take, I think, five tomatoes - though
I am not sure. The whole preparation does not take Mrs. Gool longer
than 30 minutes, if that. But on a good stove the tomatoes to be soft
should take no more than 5 minutes and the banana when done not
more than 15 minutes. This much cooking is a concession to Mrs. Gandhi
and a temporary indulgence for my palate. Peeling of tomatoes is a
necessity. But alone I should peel them without warming.
Now for P. K. Naidoo, I was bound to give him the best advice.
And I offered Phoenix. It is today partly a passive resistance farm.
Whilst we may not disturb the even tenor of the Phoenix life, force
of circumstances must interrupt and then the settlers are involuntarily
tested. We may not expose ourselves to temptation. But when it comes,
we must face it. Or we have no character. I may not put my hand
in a lion's jaw but may I flyaway from it when it is in front of
me? The simile must not be carried too far because I see it is not
a perfect illustration. For if you may not flyaway from the lion, you
may not from a seductive woman. As a matter of fact you must fly
away from both if you cannot face them without fear. You may not
kill the lion and you may not succumb to the woman. Reverting to
Naidoo, when a man asks me what he should do, must I not propose
the best for him? The secret of Phoenix is that it will and can harbour
those who will conform to its fundamental rules. And if Naidoo can
stand them he will be a help to himself and to Phoenix. Shelat came,
was found wanting and went. Even Harilal Thakar went. And Anandlal
and Virji. There is a natural process of winnowing going on at that
very wonderful place. I call it wonderful although it is partly my
offspring. I have no doubt it was conceived in the purest spirit, it was
born amid most strenuous and holy circumstances and it has been
nurtured on a spiritual diet which has been and is being continuously
purified more and more. It can become a place that would not hold
an impure soul. The future depends upon West and Chhaganlal mostly
and partly on Sam. Raojibhai and Maganbhai may be taken away from
Phoenix at an early date though not for a year or so perhaps.
Thambi has written to me. He is very bitter against us all. We
1 Umiashankar Manchharam Shelat
must meet his bitterness by the greatest gentleness. Simply walk over
to him. Tell him you do not want to hurt his feelings. And if he is
unwilling to talk, come away. Repeat the performance till your love
conquers his passion. This we must do so long as he is not found
to be, as he is not, a bad coin.
Your affairs I understand a little. I will say nothing. What I may
not like I shall tolerate and watch.
I have asked opinion today by wire to post you cheque for £200.
From this you should pay Eric in any event for the pressing calls upon
the family to the extent of £160. The Newcastle Hospital bill should
not be paid by you. But Miss Schlesin writes to me saying she has
transferred it to you for you to contest with the Government. But if
there is to be no contesting, please payout the Passive Resistance
funds, not your own.
Be cautious about paying P. K. Naidoo or others. Refer them to
me when you are in doubt.
What a long letter this ! I think I have covered all the points raised
by you.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
