530. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SEGAON, WARDHA,
July 30, 1937
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I hope Mahadev told you yesterday in addition to ac-
knowledging your essay on Hindi that the Viceroy had invited
me to Delhi on the 4th for no special reason but merely to have
the pleasure of meeting him. I replied saying that he had anti-
cipated me for I wanted to seek an interview with him about
the ban on Khan Saheb and my desire to visit the Frontier. I am
accordingly reaching Delhi on the 4th. The appointment is for
11.30. Therefore, I hope to be able to leave the same day,
returning to Segaon on the 5th.
But this letter is to send you a copy of Zakir's letter in
reply to my letter giving my reaction to the recent riot in Bom-
bay and the wretched Hindi-Urdu controversy. I thought that
I should share with you this considered letter.
I do not regard the Jhansi election as a rout. It is an honour-
able defeat, giving rise to the hope that if we plod away we can
effectively take the Congress message to the Mussalmans. But
I still abide by my opinion that the mere taking of the message
unaccompanied by substantial work in the villages won't answer
our purpose in the end. But it all depends upon the way in
which we want to generate power.
Meherally's speech in Madras is an eye-opener for me. I
wonder how far he represents the general socialistic view. Rajaji
has sent me a cutting containing his speech. I hope he has
sent a copy to you also. I call it a bad speech of which you
should take notice. This is going contrary to the Congress
policy as I read it.
There is also Roy's speech at Madras. I take it, you get all
such cuttings. Nevertheless, for ready reference I enclose the
cuttings which Pyarelal has made for me. Roy has been writing
to me, too. You should see his latest letter. It will go with this
if I have not destroyed it. What is your reaction to his atti-
tude? As I have already told you I find it difficult to under-
stand him.
Your calling khadi 'livery of freedom' will live as long as
we speak the English language in India. It needs a first-class
poet to translate into Hindi the whole of the thought behind
that enchanting phrase. For me it is not merely poetry but it
enunciates a great truth whose full significance we have yet to
grasp.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Though the paragraph about Roy's speech follows the one
about Meherally's it is not to suggest that it is on a par with M's.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1937.
Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 237-
