76. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
COONOOR,
January 30, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I have still not received your letter this time.
I think I
shall get it in a day or two. I am writing this in Coonoor, sitting
in sunshine. I first wrote the articles for Harijan.
Then I had my
meal. After that I finalized the programme of the Tamil Nadu
tour and had a nap. And now I have sat down to write letters.
These days Bihar takes plenty of my time. You know now
the extent of the destruction there. I get wires from Rajendrababu
almost every day. I do whatever he wants me to do. There is
no need for me to go to Bihar just now. He has asked for those
inmates of the Ashram who have been released. I have sent a
wire to the Ashram accordingly. As many of them as can go will
go. I have not received any reply as to who will be able to go.
I talk about Bihar at every meeting. I have even collected some
jewellery and cash. At the moment I seem to be getting a good
response. It remains to be seen how the aid is utilized.
Amtussalaam has come here. She was ready to return im-
mediately today. But I have detained her till the end of my
stay in Coonoor. She will descend with me on the 6th and
will go back to Gujarat to her work. Gangabehn and other
women are resting.
I shall be going to Belgaum towards the end of the next
month or in the beginning of March. But the plan may also
have to be abandoned if meanwhile I receive a call from Bihar.
If finally I do go to Belgaum, I will write for permission to see
Mahadev and Mani.
Kanjibhai is expected here in a day or two. Shantikumar
has undergone an operation for hernia.
He is better now.
Shankerlal came and saw me in connection with khadi work. He
is at present laid up with influenza in Bombay. Dr. Rajan and
Nageshwararao are with me here. We are staying in the latter's
bungalow. Kishorelal is still bed-ridden. I have sent a wire
to Swami asking him to proceed to Bihar.
Prithuraj has been helping Chandrashankar. Velanbehn has
gone to Lakshmidas at Baroda, taking Anandi and Mani with her.
She has lost 25 lb. in jail. Bablo and Durga have gone to
Bulsar. Amina will go with her children to Pyare Ali. Mani
Parikh has gone to Kathlal just now with the children. Afterwards
she will visit Narahari. They will then decide what to do. Prema
has gone back to jail. Though Lilavati is ill, she also seems to
have insisted on going.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 68-
