165. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Afternoon, February 19/21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your post in due time. Tell Bhai Valji that I have
started reading and revising his translation today.
You will of course inquire from time to time after those who
are imprisoned and lodged in the Sabarmati Jail, but you should
also keep yourself informed in which jails the others are lodged.
Lilavati came and saw me. It was good of her.
Read my letter to Champa. If she is willing to endure her
lot and live with Ratilal, there will be no problem. If, however,
she is not willing, I think we cannot force her to live with him.
Ratilal may have to be put in the asylum again. The whole pro-
blem is a difficult one. Do what you think best. In any case,
keep Doctor informed.
Chimanlal must take rest. His body gives no service and no
one is able to diagnose the disease.
Krishnamaiyadevi has certainly not acted properly in staying
on in Calcutta. You did well in writing to her. Did you get
Lakshmi examined by a doctor for her swelling? Is she expect-
ing? That can be a cause. You should ask her or find out
through Lakshmibehn.
Yajna does not merely mean work for the good of others;
it also means body labour. If men did not do body labour, that
is, did not cultivate land and grow crops, the rains would stop.
My own belief is that natural phenomena are connected with
moral behaviour. I have no proof for this. It is my faith.
Such faith can do no harm in any case. Little research is done
about such matters in the present age, and what is written about
them in ancient books is treated as superstition. It is true, of
course, that they contain many superstitious ideas. Who can sift
truth from error in these books? In the company of thieves even
an honest man is taken for a thief. That being so, we should
not interpret yajna strictly but accept all possible meanings which
satisfy our moral sense and connect the phenomenon of rain with
yajna so understood. In the Gita as in other scriptures, we find
one and the same word used in different senses. Of course, all
work done as yajna should be inspired with the motive of service.
Send this to Bhai Jivram.
Evening, February 21, 1932
I have just finished Chapter XVIII. You will see that I
have taken more freedom in this Chapter than in the others. So
far I used to give a simple translation, more or less, but I did not
feel satisfied with that. This time, I have given the general
meaning of the Chapter, with a few comments intended to make
the discussion easier to understand. I have even omitted a few
verses as unnecessary for our purpose. I don't think, however, that
I have omitted anything useful. God willing, I will make another
effort to explain the general meaning of the work for children.
The position about visitors seems to have become uncertain
again. Let us wait and see what happens.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 32 letters, besides this one and the discourse on
the Gita. A list accompanies.
Has Devdas's case been tried? Do you get any letters from him?
I have received none.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8210. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
