128. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
November 16, 1945
CHI. LILAVATI,
I have your postcard. You must give up the craving for
letters in my handwriting. I am dictating this lying down in
the evening after the prayers. Sometimes two lines suffice, but
at times I have to write at length. You had better leave it to
me when I should write myself or when and to whom I should
dictate.
Now that you have started the exercise do not give it up.
You can go up to 108 namaskars. Many asanas can be performed
while doing suryanamaskar. It is largely for you to see which ones
will suit you best. Consider also whether you should go up to
108 namaskars. There is no point in losing weight by starving.
One has to reduce weight if one has put on any because of
some disease, but that too not by starving oneself. If even with
regular exercise and balanced diet you put on weight, let it be so.
You need not worry about it in the least.
You have used the word 'stunt' in a wrong context. You can
translate it as dhating in Gujarati. The changes in diet or other
methods adopted for reducing weight cannot be called stunt. Those
who digest what they have studied keep on pursuing the study
in order to acquire more knowledge without even thinking about
the examination results. While studying they build up their bodies
as best they can because keeping the body healthy, strong and
lustrous is also a part of learning. I give you full encouragement
to study what you have undertaken not for the sake of getting
a degree but for the knowledge that you will acquire while
studying for it. Since you have already studied Gray once, it
should be a mere child's play to go through it a second time.
The oftener you read it, the more knowledge you will gain.
It will be good if you give up the habit of walking about
as you read. It spoils the eyesight and sometimes the thoughts
also wander. While walking one can think over and digest what
one has read or think of the work one has done during the day,
and so on. But the eyes have to look around and take note of
the surroundings and watch out for any obstruction in one's
way. One cannot walk with eyes closed but a person like me
who walks with the support of others enjoys the pleasure of
doing so. But that is not for you.
Stick to your decision not to attend Lakshmidas's wedding.
I have signed at two places. That shows how bad my
memory is.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
