192. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
ST. STEPHEN'S COLLEGE,
DELHI,
March 25, 1918
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
I can't describe to you how much disturbed I have been over
this affair of Ali brothers, but our talk of this morning has given
me much comfort and relief. It was a pleasure to see that you
had grasped my point in a moment. It would be a wonderful act
on the part of the Government if, without the knowledge of any-
body, an order was sent for their discharge. Such a manner of
discharging them would avoid all delirious demonstration that
would otherwise inevitably take place to receive them.
These are some of the reasons for their discharge :
(a) If they are kept interned in order that they may not do
anything hostile to the Government, the idea is frustrated
because they do correspond with, and otherwise send
messages to, whomsoever they choose.
(b) Their detention only increases their influence day after
day.
(c) Their detention embitters the feelings of their friends and
deepens the discontent of Mahomedans in general, which
the Hindus too share to a certain extent.
(d) Moulana Abdul Bari Saheb is a man wielding tremen-
dous power over thousands of Mussalmans. He is their
spiritual adviser and the Government would make him
theirs by releasing the brothers.
(e) The brothers are, so far as I am aware, men with a strong
will, of noble birth, men of culture and learning, possess-
ing great influence over the educated Mahomedans, open-
minded and straightforward. It was a great mistake to
have interned them. Surely the Government have ever
need of such men on their side. Lastly in my humble
opinion nothing can possibly be gained by keeping them
under detention.
It will be worthy of a great Government to discharge them
whilst all the clamour and agitation for their release are under
suspense.
If my presence is wanted I shall be at His Excellency's
service any moment I am required.
Please favour me with a reply. Between the 29th and 31st
I shall be in Indore presiding over the deliberations of the Hindi
Sahitya Sammelan. Thereafter at Ahmedabad.
N.A.I.: Home, Political (a): June 1918, Nos. 359-60
