87. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
MINISTER OF INTERIOR
JOHANNESBURG,
June 28, 1913
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
PRETORIA
DEAR SIR,
I have endeavoured to study the Immigrants' Regulation Act,
and observe with thankfulness that it is an improvement upon
the original Bill. But I respectfully beg to point out that it fails
to carry out the provisional settlement of 1911 in at least four
important particulars. In my humble opinion, if redress is granted
in regard to these four particulars, the policy of the Government
will not be affected, and yet the terms of the settlement, as my
countrymen read it, will be just, but only just, satisfied.
The points are:
(1) According to the definition of the term "domicile",
those indentured Indians who arrived after the Indian
Immigration Law Amendment Act of 1895 and their
descendants appear to become prohibited immigrants.
(2) The descendants of this class, although born in South
Africa, will, if the above interpretation be correct, be
unable henceforth to enter the Cape Province.
(3) Women married in South Africa according to the rites
of Indian religions, and going to India, and return-
ing with their husbands will not be on the same foot-
ing as those [married] in India. Nor are the hundreds
of women married according to non-Christian faiths
provided for by the amendment.
(4) The Free State difficulty seems to remain as it was before.
With reference to the first point, in view of the fact that the
Minister has respected the right of the South Africa-born Indians
to enter the Cape, if they are born of Indian parents domiciled
in South Africa, but not of indentured parents if they were inden-
tured after the Natal Act 17 of 1895. It seems to me to be a
small matter for the Government if they were to recognize the
status of the descendants born in South Africa of those Indians
who were indentured after the Act of 1895. I am sure the Gov-
ernment do not intend to set up distinctions between one class
of Colonial-born Indians and another. Nor can it affect the policy of
the Government to recognize the right of domicile of such inden-
tured Indians themselves. There could not be more than seven
thousand such Indians at the outside. This number, compared
with the Indian population of Natal, which is estimated at
133,000, cannot fairly be deemed a dangerous permanent increase
to the Indian population, especially when it is borne in mind that
these men are wanted by the Europeans of Natal.
To the Indian community both the first and the second points
are of the highest moment. According to the judgment of the Natal
Courts, these men, if they are paying the annual tax of £3, have
a right to remain in Natal as permanent residents. Are they now
to become prohibited immigrants? I presume that the Govern-
ment do not intend to deport them, but do they intend to enforce
the provisions of the Act as to trading or the holding of land by
them?
As to the marriage question, the difficulty raised by me is, in
my humble opinion, obvious and calls for consideration.
As to the last point, in the correspondence that took place bet-
ween General Smuts and myself, doubt was expressed whether,
in spite of the reservation clause, the declaration referred to in Sec-
tion 8 of Chapter 33 could be required of an Indian who might
be permitted to enter that Province under the new Act. What the
people of the Free State want, I hope, is not a humiliating decla-
ration from an Indian immigrant, but his legal disability to hold
land, to farm, or to trade. If this be particularly mentioned in
the Act itself, they cannot reasonably object to the removal of
the clause which requires the declaration.
For the moment, and for the purposes of a settlement, I do not
raise the question of the ousting (now only partial, I admit) of
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and the other drastic pro-
visions of the Act which at once make it far more illiberal than the
previous Provincial Acts which it replaces.
If Mr. Fischer considers that it is possible for the Govern-
ment to meet the Indian community, and give an assurance that
the necessary amendments will be made next year, and if he consi-
ders it worthwhile to discuss the points personally with me, I shall
be pleased to wait on him. I hope that Mr. Fischer will see his
way to consider my letter in the spirit in which it has been ad-
dressed. I beg to assure him that I have no desire to precipitate
an acute crisis, which is certain to arise if no settlement can be
arrived at between the Government and the Indians.
In the event of an appointment being made, it will be neces-
sary to discuss at the interview the administration of the Act as
to the admission of married women in cases where the marriage
is not monogamous, as also the mode of regulating the entry of edu-
cated Indians. I do not discuss them here for fear of making this
letter too long, and because I believe that, if the law can be set
right, the question of administration is a comparatively easy matter.
I need hardly say that I have throughout this letter assumed
that there are no other existing rights disturbed by the Act which
have not formed the subject matter of correspondence, telegraphic
or written, between the Government and myself.
As I shall await your reply before advising my fellow-workers,
may I ask for a telegraphic reply?
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5811
