497. LETTER TO PARESHNATH BHATTACHARYYA
February 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter of 15th instant for which I thank you.
I endeavour to be as precise as I possibly can about anything
I write and therefore when I am confronted with anything as
having been said by me, in justice to me I should have the very
words that I have said. You will understand what I mean when
I tell you what distinction there is between what you think I
have said and what I have actually said.
I do not consider "the Gita to be the only scripture of un-
questionable authority which alone should be our true guide".
What I have said and what I still hold is that for me in view of the
multitude of books claimed to be scriptural and [of] conflicting
texts, Gita is the only safe guide, because it contains the concentrated
essence of all that the Hindu scriptures have to teach and that I
would unhesitatingly reject anything that is in conflict with the
spirit of the Gita. Thus I would test the validity of every religious
precept or code of conduct on the anvil of that teaching.
Thus you will see that I exclude nothing. I take in all the
scriptures, but I use the Gita to unlock their meaning.
I quite agree with your view of the Samhitas, but my diffi-
culty in applying them to daily conduct arises from the fact that
there are conflicting statements in the same Samhita and there is
conflict among the different Samhitas. There again I summon the
Gita to my aid.
Whilst I agree also that rules of conduct will show variation
from the ideal and even between man and man, to be true to
the ideal they should conform to it and enable one to make
a progressive approach to it. They must not take one away
progressively further from it.
Examined thus, untouchability, as it is practised today, in my
opinion, is clearly contrary to the Hindu scriptures. As I read your
several propositions, untouchability stands condemned by them.
As to the referendum, you have evidently missed the strict
limitations placed upon its scope. If I had believed that current
untouchability had its roots in Hinduism and that untouchables
were clearly prohibited from entering temples, there would be no
question whatsoever of referendum. But since there are two
schools of opinion, why should not the people decide to which
school they will belong? Who will decide for the people whether
they should belong to the Shaivite sect or Vaishnavite, if not they
themselves? Is that not what the Hindus have done all through
their great history?
Yours sincerely,
PANDIT PARESHNATH BHATTACHARYYA, M.A.
VEDANTARATNA
COOCH BEHAR (BENGAL)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20315
