655. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[Before November 13]/14, 1932 1
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter on the usual day of the week. I got an-
other small packet too. You will find with this a letter for
Champa. Read it before you pass it on to her, for it contains my
views on thefts and so, if you read it, I need not write the same
thing again. You should explain my advice to others too, for
I have repeated it every time there has been a theft. It is also
necessary that you should glance through what I have advised
Champa concerning her duty.
In the existing circumstances, I will not include your name
among the trustees. I will never knowingly take any step which
will put you in an embarrassing position. Our ideal is to do
a duty which comes to us unsought. We have no other interest.
In any case, we should never seek a position of authority or
influence for its own sake.
If you remember, and if available, please send some oranges
and mosambis from there as samples with anybody who may be
coming here. I am very happy though the trees yield only a
few. I do not mind the expenditure on trees and other farm-
ing activities. It is possible that some of the expenditure was
unnecessary, but my impression is that on the whole it was all
right.
I hope you have written to Prabhudas and made the neces-
sary inquiries for Navin.
Damodar should have informed you that he had not gone to
the bungalow to sleep at night.
If you feel that it is impossible to influence the Chharas go
and see Mavalankar and do whatever is possible. In the last
resort, we can of course endure the present state of things.
I hope that Shelat's children have recovered. I know from
a letter of Chhaganlal Joshi that Shelat has got a book entitled
Flowers of St. Francis. If he has it, get it from him and send it to
me with somebody who may be coming here. Its value lies in
the fact that it was a loving gift from somebody.
I understand what you say about Balbhadra.
I got a postcard from Ramji, in which he says that, after
reading my recent statements about untouchability, he wished to
come and see me. I am sure he will also take the opportunity to
pour out his complaints. Even then, it seems to me that it will
be good to let him come here once. Moreover, he will be per-
mitted to see me whenever he comes.
As regards the rach and heddle which we require for weaving
khadi from fine yarn, I have just remembered that we had these
implements which were made for weaving khadi from very fine
yarn. We had got them from Adamji Miankhan. I also remember
that Maganlal had made a number of heddles for weaving khadi from
coarse yarn by breaking up this same heddle. In any case, we had
quite a large number of heddles. They are probably lying in some
corner among old discarded things. Ask somebody to search for
them and, if you cannot get them inquire at Miankhan's place.
They may be able to find another heddle of that type, or at any rate
get one manufactured. They were four brothers, Adamji, Gulam
Husain, Chandabhai, and one more whose name I do not recollect.
Of these Adamji is dead, Gulam Husain lives mostly in Natal
and Chandabhai divides his time between Natal and Ahmedabad.
Chhaganlal knows him personally. Even if none of you knows
his address in Ahmedabad, Chhaganlal is sure to know it. Most
probably his house is in Vohravad in Kalupur and he has also a
bungalow near Ellis Bridge. The elder Kusum is your neighbour.
Try to get some news about her if you can. And also go and
see her if any of you is permitted to do so, and send her books,
etc., if she wants them.
Rice and potatoes are like poison for Tilakam. Moreover,
both contain pure starch. Then how can he feel energetic? Starch
does not make one energetic, on the contrary it produces acidity
in the stomach.
Tilakam should only drink milk, as much as he
can digest, and eat fruit and green vegetables. After he is able
to digest these things, he can add bread.
Do what you think proper about Jethalal. As soon as Puru-
shottam feels constipated, you should understand that the trouble
has started. Trying city water will most probably not help him.
It would be much better for him to drink the Ashram water
itself after boiling it. To cure the weakness of his bowels,
pranayama exercises and light massage of the abdomen are
necessary.
If Kusum herself can live cheerfully in the Ashram and follow
the three important rules which I have suggested, I would be
relieved of my fear and worry on her account irrespective of what
the final result might be.
Why did not Raojibhai write the revised letter?
So you explained to Kasumba, with logical arguments, that
by eating in your company she had lost caste. If a person thus
states the plain truth, instead of deceiving himself or anybody
else, he would enjoy much greater peace of mind and also earn
greater merit.
The mendicant could have been the cause of so much fuss
only in the Ashram. Even if we do not discover the true mean-
ing of the Vedas, I am sure we shall be able to call ourselves vedias.
It is a mercy that in this world things people do are more
foolish than wicked. You know this very well indeed, otherwise
you would have had to be sent to an asylum long ago.
I have not yet read Parasram's letter, but even without read-
ing it, after reading your letter and your recommendation, I give
my consent for giving him the things which he has asked for.
Sunday Afternoon, November 13, 1932
[PS.]
I give to the hand as much rest as it needs. My weight has
reached 102 pounds this week. But my strength has not increased
to the same extent.
I hope my articles do not upset people there. It is an occa-
sion for rejoicing. I will ask Rajaji about Ba. Urmiladevi is
certain to go there.
Read my letter to Liladhar.
Morning, Silence Day [November 14, 1932]
[PPS.]
Vinoba's explanation of the importance of the takli is worth
pondering over by everybody. He should learn from Bhau the
art of spinning on it.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 501-. Also C.W.
8268. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
1 Pedants
