288. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 30, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have written to you separately about Chhaganlal. I do not know
whether you admire the man who can show patience or whether you
1 Son of Dawad Mahomed
2 Vide "Letter to Private Secretary to Lord Crewe", p. 438.
3 This letter is damaged and indistinct at some places. Where possible, words
in square brackets have been supplied by conjecture on the basis of the context pro-
vided by Polak's letters to Gandhiji.
admire the man who cannot. The sentence in the letter reads both
ways. Maud and Ritch read it one way, [I] the other.
I have your cablegram about the meetings in Ahmedabad, Kathore
and Surat. They will all carry.
I consider the writings of The Advocate of India very valuable.
Even cads render us a signal service . . .2 take what Cordon has written,
namely, that you have [ves ]ted interest in the question. The remark is
by no means unjustified. He has demonstrated the absolute necessity
for having there a permanent Committee, with some one like Ritch
working away day and night and keeping the pot boiling. I hope you
will succeed in finding such a man. Have you seen N. V. Gokhale of
the Gujarati? I do not wish to imply that he is the likely man. I can
think of no one. He will have to be a lover of his work, without many
irons in the fire, and with sufficient leisure to devote his attention almost
solely to the South African question.
I do not at all share your view that you are receiving an honorarium,
rather than a salary. If that were the only distinction, I would agree with
Cordon that it is a fine distinction. You will see how I have dealt with
it in my letter to the Advocate, copy of which I enclose. The distinction,
in my opinion, is fundamental. It is the manner of giving which makes
that essential distinction. To the outside world, whether it can be called
an honorarium or a salary, it is a matter of little concern. They will
look upon every payment with suspicion, they will look upon all work
with suspicion and refuse to admit that people work without selfish
motives or without great consideration. Everybody in Bombay has treated
[the edit]or's [views] with the contempt they deserve, and you may
have done likewise. Dr. Mehta who has seen your [let]ter writes to
me in Gujarati, of which I gave you a translation:
1 This was with reference to Polak's letter of September 10, in which he wrote:
" Yours is splendid patience. I envy you. I see more and more the beauty of the Gita
teaching — act, and don't worry about results. But I see more and more how difficult it
is to do this, and admire the man who can !" The letter is in Polak's hand-writing
and the exclamation mark is so joined with" can" that, if casually seen, it can also be
read as " can't".
2 Here a word is cut off.
3 He was in charge of the English section of Gujarati.
4 Vide" Letter to The Advocate of India ", pp. 436-.
5 In point of fact, Polak had not; this is what he reported to Gandhiji: "Nobody
takes the attack seriously, except to arouse indignation against Gordon. I sent a short
reply to the latest attack. It seemed called for. It will not appear until after the mail
has left. He sent me a note today asking me to call upon him. I told him what I
thought about the matter—that the expression gave people to understand that I was
a paid agitator. I explained to him that I was a solicitor, etc., etc., and that I received
a retainer for my legal work and that my expenses as a member of the deputation were
paid. I told him that what I received from public funds did not pay my expenses—
He (that is you), has been affected by the writing in The Advocate
of India, but it is too contemptible to be noticed. Where there are
no selfish motives, there is no occasion for being affected by an im-
putation of them. Why should one be touched by unjust criticism,
when one is doing one's duty? On the contrary, one ought to know
that such unjust criticism is due to ignorance on the part of the
critic. When a public worker has no money of his own, it is the
duty of those who have it to see to it that such a worker is properly
maintained. Certainly, the arrangements made in South Africa
about him (you) ought to have been made.
I am giving you a translation of Dr. Mehta's remarks, because he is
such a sober man with an exceedingly balanced mind, and also because
of the reasons you know, I want you to come in as close touch as possible
with him.
I am writing to Mr. Petit also this week. Copy of the letter to him
herewith.
Among the cuttings received, I miss the verses com[posed about]
you. I have seen the translation you sent to me, [I want] to see the
original. Nor have I received the [Pateti Number] of Sanj Vartman 3 .
[I am] delighted that you were able to see the G.O.M. Your [lines]
are most pathetic. I see too that you are now beginning to look beneath
the bright surface that presented itself to you on your reaching Bombay.
Millie will bear only too willing testimony to this! I did not conceal anything from him,
and he wound up by telling me that he thought that it was 'a fine distinction'. Then
I let fly. Afterwards I sent him my (your) biography from I[ndian] O[pinion]. But this
only shows that it will be better to call my remuneration a retainer rather than a salary.
It preserves the honorary nature of the work and after all, as a salary it is utterly in-
adequate, whereas as a retainer, it is fair. You and I understand all about it, but
people like this think it is 'a fine distinction', and can't understand disinterested
work. You might pass this on to South Africa."
1 This letter is not available.
2 On September 9, Polak had attended a meeting of the Indian Music Society
where he was presented with a composition about himself.
3 A Gujarati evening daily of Bombay. The issue carried Polak's photo and a
special article by him.
4 Polak had written: "On Saturday afternoon, his birthday, I saw the G.O.M.
It was a touching spectacle to see the little old warrior taking his rest, prior to the final
plunge. He was sitting in an armchair, when we arrived, looking out to sea. He wel-
comed us simply, thanking me earnestly for my work. I blushed to think of his thanking
me when he had done so much for which he had received no thanks. He asked me to
thank you for sending him Indian Opinion, which he read regularly. He also desired me
to tell you how much he admired your persistence and perseverance, and how right
he thought you were. We did not remain long. He complained of mental and physical
fatigue. He was 'simply living on'—it was all that there was left for him to do. He
has, however, sent a letter to the Mass Meeting. When we left, the last we saw of him
was sitting once more in his armchair, peacefully looking into the West again, gazing
I hope when Chhaganlal is with you, for his own sake you will use
him mercilessly, and let him see and learn all there is to be seen and
learnt. If the people do not realise thoroughly the spirit of passive re-
sistance, I know that you will make at least the leaders see it. Dr. Mehta
is most anxious that Mr. Gokhale should see the heart of it. I hope that
Mr.Omar will travel with you wherever you go, but if Mr. Hajee Mohamed
and others would travel also with you at their own expense, you should
invite them to do so. Your mission will carry greater weight. Has
anyone from there been sending detailed accounts in Gujarati for Indian
Opinion? If this has not been done, please attend to it. We have to
prepare for a prolonged struggle, and it is for that reason that I am
going into these details. If you find a thoroughly earnest man or men
who want to give themselves entirely to public work, but on the principle
mentioned by Dr. Mehta, if they need to be supported, you will recollect
we have already discussed that we could consider the proposition.
There is no news yet from Lord Crewe. I am doing my best to
speed him on, but the work is necessarily slow. I have seen Mr. Meyer
and Dr. Clifford. Mr. Meyer was very good and he says that, if the reply
from Lord Crewe is not satisfactory, he would call together influential
men and take the necessary steps. I send you a draft syllabus for the com-
petitors for the prize. Dr. Mehta's name is not to be mentioned as the
prize giver. Dr. Clifford will be one of [the] judges. I am to see the
editor of The British Weekly and be guided by him in finally shaping the
syllabus and discuss with him as to the best method of inviting com-
petitors.
I am due to speak to the members of the Emerson Club on "Passive
Resistance" on the 8th proximo and may speak at Hampstead Peace and
Arbitration Society on the 13th or 14th proximo. Both these meetings
will deal with the struggle indirectly. It will be on the same lines as
the Ger[ miston] meeting.
Please correspond with Dr. Mehta most regularly.
I think I told you last week that Dr. Mehta examined Millie.
Dr. Mehta thinks that there is nothing wrong so far as the chest is con-
cerned. From his diagnosis after talking with Millie, he did not consider
it necessary even to use the stethoscope. He said that the stethoscope
out to sea, as who should look for the soothing hand of Death. It was beautiful—but I
felt humbled and subdued. As Mr. Gokhale says, when one goes to see Dadabhai,
one performs a pilgrimage. 85! He may not last out another year. He is very frail."
could tell him no more. He thought that it was a . . .1 ing and
probably some irritation in the throat . . .2 belief I have held now for a
long time, and I suggested earth bandages for the throat some time ago.
I have made my suggestion and I think he will now have these applied
to the throat. Anyhow there is not the slightest danger. Can you secure
a special portrait of the G.O.M. for the Indian Opinion? If one is available,
well and good, or I hope he will exert himself to give a special sitting
for the portrait. You may also collect portraits with photographs of
those leaders whom you may consider to be good and really patriotic.
You do not mention having seen Professor Velinkar.
Mr. Ali Imam of the All-India Moslem League is at present here.
I have had a brief conversation with him. He appealed to me as a very
nice man; he is quite informal. He is the leader of the Bar in Patna and
a broad-minded man. A dinner is being given today to him; I send you
a copy of the notices that were issued. He will be leaving in a fortnight's
time for India. He has come here to put his sons at Oxford and, being
here, he has been naturally seeing Lord Morley and others specially in
connection with the Mahomedan representation. Will you please
watch the papers and, as soon as he comes, then place yourself in com-
munication with him. He will be of very great assistance.
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5102
