190. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
July 26, 1909
MY LORD,
I am obliged to Your Lordship for your letter of the 24th instant.
I do not put the interpretation you have upon the absence of reply
from Mr. Sauer, for I simply informed him that Your Lordship would
probably write to him. I am, therefore, rather inclined to think that
he is still in the same receptive mood that I found him in on board.
I told Your Lordship that Mr. Sauer was more enthusiastic than
Mr. Merriman.
Mr. Hajee Habib and I have just returned from a private visit to
Lord Morley. His Lordship gave us a very sympathetic consideration
and said that he would write to Lord Crewe, and on my suggestion,
agreed to discuss the question with Mr. Smuts. Lord Crewe has not
yet sent an appointment, but he has asked us to reduce to writing the
points we would discuss at the interview, if granted. The letter giving
the points went forward on Saturday.
Sir Richard Solomon has sent a confidential note saying that he
has already discussed the whole question with Mr. Smuts, but that
1 Lord Ampthill had felt that they could not profitably work in that quarter.
2 Vide" Letter to Under Secretary for Colonies", pp. 311-.
it might be some time before General Smuts decides, as he would be
very busy with the conference work. As I know Mr. Smuts so very
well, this delay is somewhat ominous, because he has more than once
put off friends who have approached him on inconvenient matters.
Should we, apart from an interview with Lord Morley and that with
Lord Crewe—if it is granted, make a written submission, a short state-
ment is quite ready. I have refrained from having it printed for
circulation because of the negotiations that are going on, but if the
progress of the negotiations virtually enforce silence upon us, that can
hardly apply to the friends of the cause. Would not the purpose be
served if Your Lordship wrote, or several public men jointly wrote, to
Lord Crewe urging him to use his good offices with the Transvaal
ministers to signalize the advent of the Union, by granting the small
concessions to British Indians in the Transvaal, who have suffered so
much and so terribly for them.
Your Lordship may have noticed that a deputation on behalf of
the Aborigines' Protection Society was to have waited upon the South
African Premiers and other public men, and that it did not so wait
only because Sir Charles Dilke who was to have led the deputation,
could not accept the time that was appointed by these gentlemen.
I cannot help feeling that, if Your Lordship were still to seek a
discussion with Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer or, failing them, with
Messrs Botha and Smuts, it cannot but be good.
May I also state
that it is very largely within the power of Sir George Farrar and
Sir Percy Fitzpatrick to bring about a settlement, and if Your Lordship
could even see them, I am sure a way would be opened to a satisfactory
solution.
I would venture to invite Your Lordship's special attention to the
current number of Indian Opinion; it contains three remarkable petitions
and facts about the Indian deputation.
I hope that Your Lordship will pardon me for encroaching upon
your time.
I am, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4960
