86. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
November 25, 1932
CHI. MANI,
I have your long letter, the first after you were informed
about Dahyabhai's illness. You are worrying unnecessarily. You
ought to be aware that when both Father and you are in jail,
those who are outside would not fail to do everything necessary.
As soon as the condition was diagnosed as typhoid, Walchand asked
Karamchand to engage two nurses for day and night duty and to
arrange for any doctor he thought necessary to visit Dahyabhai
every day, and offered to pay all the expenses himself. They come
to 30-40 rupees a day and are met by him. Thus Dahyabhai gets
better nursing at home than he would in a hospital. Those look-
ing after him are Karamchand, Chhotubhai (who is constantly
by Dahyabhai's side) and two nurses who are very kind and whom
Dahyabhai has come to like very much. Bakshi and other friends
too are there. It is natural for you to feel unhappy at not being
by Dahyabhai's side at this time. But God imposes the severest
tests on those who love him. We receive daily reports from
Karamchand, Chhotubhai and others. This is the third week.
The temperature now does not rise above 102°, and was even
normal yesterday. Doctors hope it will be completely normal
from next Monday. I had even sent to you the letter received
by Vallabhbhai from Dr. Madan, who is attending on Dahyabhai.
You will see from it that the Doctors, too, give him loving care.
He is being given mosambi juice, butter-milk, etc. In typhoid as a
rule the patient suffers from diarrhoea from the very beginning.
But Dahyabhai has had no such troubles. So there is no cause
at all for anxiety. You should go on doing your work there and
pray for Dahyabhai's speedy recovery. You should not be unhappy
at Grandmother's death. How many have the good fortune to meet
such a death? Whenever we feel that we did not get an oppor-
tunity of nursing someone whom we loved during his or her last
days on earth, we should console ourselves with the resolution
that in future we would never let go an opportunity to serve
people.
We are all well and all our waking time is taken up by
Harijan work.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro ‒ 4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 92-
