482. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
WARDHA, SEGAON,
February 24, 1938
DEAR DR. HARDIKAR,
I retain the same view that I held in 1920 as to volunteers.
You know that at Ahmedabad the Congress had passed a reso-
lution embodying a pledge for volunteers and certain instructions
to be followed by them. Experience has proved for me the correct-
ness of the position I then took.
It is true that there has not
been the response that I wanted.
The causes of the inadequacy
of response I need not go into at the present moment. Our
volunteers for me are, and should be, our non-violent army, irresis-
tible and invincible.
Therefore I would expect every adult
person to undergo a practical volunteer training for at least three
months. I would expect them to give at least one month every
year to practical service. Now that in seven provinces the Con-
gress runs the Government the thing should be easy. The first
thing, therefore, is to prepare a textbook, giving in minute
detail the course of instructions to be imparted to candidate volun-
teers and then begin the work of instruction not in cities but in
villages. I would concentrate all effort on villages. Whilst I
note the marvellous mass awakening that has taken place, I am
painfully conscious of the fact that a far greater and a far more
solid awakening has to take place before we can confidently say
that swaraj is ours for the asking. Any extraneous event may
put power into our hands.
I would not call that swaraj of the
people.
If what I have said appeals to your head and to your heart,
you should show this letter to Jawaharlal and if he approves, and
only if he approves, you should take the next step. I say this
with deliberation. I do not want to take a new step in life of a
political nature unless I can secure his approval and co-operation.
Secondly, there is not that meeting of our hearts which is necess-
ary for me to give guidance. You know the reason why.
I
know that there is no such barrier between you and Jawaharlal.
Therefore even though I may say something which appeals to
your head and heart, in my opinion I should have Jawaharlal's
hearty endorsement before you take any step on the strength of
what I say.
I hope you are now keeping perfect health.
Yours sincerely,
M . K . GANDHI
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. IV, between pp. 272 and 273
