197. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
June 2, 1910
SIR,
The Union has been ushered in among very general rejoicing among
the European races of South Africa. Asiatics have been also expected to
share in these rejoicings. If they have not been able to respond to
these expectations, the cause, so far at least as the Transvaal is con-
cerned, is not far to seek. On the day of the advent of Union, nearly
sixty families were deprived of their supporters, and were being main-
tained out of public funds. On the first working day of the Union, a
cultured Indian and representative Parsee, Mr. Sorabji, who has already
suffered six terms of imprisonment, was re-arrested, after having been
left free for over a month after his last discharge from Diepkloof; and
he is now under order of deportation. Other passive resisters, too, conti-
nue to be arrested. Mr. Joseph Royeppen, the Barrister and Cambridge
Graduate, and his companions are again in prison. And all this suffer-
ing is being imposed because an Act that is supposed to have become a
dead letter has not been repealed, and the theoretical legal position of
British Indians of high attainments to enter the Transvaal on the same
terms as Europeans, British or otherwise, is not recognised.
What can a Union under which the above state of things is conti-
nued mean to Asiatics, except that it is a combination of hostile forces
arrayed against them? The Empire is supposed to have become stronger
for the Union. Is it to crush by its weight and importance Asiatic sub-
jects of the Crown? It was no doubt right and proper that the birth of
Union should have been signalised for the Natives of South Africa by
the clemency of the Crown towards Dinizulu . Dinizulu's discharge
will naturally fire the imagination of the South African Natives. Will
it not be equally proper to enable the Asiatics in South Africa to feel
that there is a new and benignant spirit abroad in South Africa by
conceding their demands, which are held, I make bold to say, to be
intrinsically just by nine out of every ten intelligent Europeans in this
Continent?
Indian Opinion, 11-6-1910
