242. LETTER TO C. V. VAIDYA
December 13, 1932
I was delighted to receive your letter so full and instructive.
I wish you could have discussed your position with me before
sending your letter to the Premier; but nothing is lost yet, and if
you can conveniently spare the time, I would love to see you and
discuss the thing with you. Meanwhile, I present my doubts:
1. Do you mean to say that under no circumstances can
Hindu Law or Hindu practice be changed by Hindu public
opinion?
2. Do you say that Smritis are unalterable and that every-
thing said in them has to be carried out to the letter by a devout
Hindu?
3. Were not Smritis written or revealed in response to the
requirements of the age in which they were written?
4. Were not the Smritis written at different times?
5. If you hold that under no conceivable circumstance can
legislation alter prevailing practice, how would you deal with the
legal difficulty which is supposed to exist in Madras, viz., that
even one man can under the law decided by the present courts,
prevent the entry of untouchables to certain temples in spite of
the consensus of public opinion in favour of such entry?
6. Or, do you hold that the existing temples can never be
opened to untouchables?
7. Or, is not your opposition to legislation based on the
assumption that the mixed legislatures would be interfering with
Hindu religion, although if Hindu opinion was taken, such legis-
lation would be found to have no public backing?
8. What objection would you see to the mere Hindu legis-
lators first passing legislation regarding Hindu religion and then
for the sake of formality it being passed by the whole House or
Houses as the case may be.
9. Who are untouchables according to the Vedas, or, if
you like, traditional Hindu religion?
10. Does untouchability attach to birth and persist from
generation to generation?
11. Is such untouchability incurable by any penance or
purification undergone by such untouchables?
12. Is prohibition against interdining and intermarriage an
integral part of varna dharma?
13. Is varna dharma fully performed if a man belonging
to one varna desists from dining with those belonging to a differ-
ent varna and from contracting marriage relations with people of
a different varna?
14. Does a person so interdining or intermarrying forfeit
his varna?
15. Is not occupation the test of varna, and does not a
person who changes his occupation, say, Brahmin, to that of
another varna, pass on to that varna, or, it may be, forfeit his
right to any varna at all?
I will not exhaust your patience nor tax your energy by
adding to the already long list of questions, nor do I want you to
burn midnight oil in order to be prompt in your reply, as you
always are. Perhaps you will be able to give in a sentence or
two an exhaustive answer which will cover all the points that
have occurred to me. Anyway I shall look forward to your reply,
and still more eagerly to your saying that you will make time to
come to Yeravda to see me. I suppose you are older than I
am, but I am sure that it does not interfere with your vigour.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. C. V. VAIDYA, M.A.,LL.B.
GIRGAUM BACK ROAD, BOMBAY No. 4
From a microfilm: S.N. 18695
