161. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
July 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I got your letter. Stop worrying about your health. It will be as God has
ordained. Worrying about health will not improve it. We may try our best.
This is my emphatic advice. You should go away purely for the sake of your
health to some hill station where you can stay comfortably. You may do there
whatever khadi work in cotton or wool you can. Live as if the fight was not
going on at all.
If this advice does not appeal to you or is rejected by Chhaganlal or
Kashi, do as they advise you. You should not decide on your own because
just now, it is beyond your capacity to do so. You may, if you wish, consult
the Vaidyaraj at Morbi. I insist on one thing only. I cannot order you from
here. Do as Chhaganlal and Kashi advise you after reading this letter. Regard
their advice as an order. If Narandas has any suggestion to make in this
matter, listen to him. I have not shown this to Kakasaheb. If his view is
different from mine, I will include it in this letter.
Kakasaheb has not yet gone through what you have written about the
Ramayana. I will let you know his opinion after he has done so. Go on doing
what you have been doing by yourself.
What you say about prayer is quite right. All our undertakings are in the
experimental stage. None among us is omniscient. All of us are blind, but
some of us who have more knowledge than the others, are trying to find
remedies for the blindness and to employ them. That being so, how can it be
otherwise than that our prayer should be imperfect? If Narandas has the time
to do so, I have suggested to him to introduce whatever reforms are possible.
The prayer ultimately is a matter of faith. We have to bring ourselves to take
sufficient interest in prayer to keep up that faith. After all, if you go in the
mornings and join the prayer group in that spirit, it will be sufficient prayer
for you, no matter in what language the prayer is offered. The practice of
collective silent prayer also is prevalent in the world. Devout men and women
among the Roman Catholics can sit for hours together, absorbed in silent
prayer. Our aim is somehow to find peace of mind. You need to cultivate the
habit of reading with proper attention whatever you read. It can be cultivated
by practice. Even in this, however, if thinking too much confuses your mind,
then give up the effort to think. Do not be overeager in this matter either.
1 That is, the civil disobedience movement which was then in progress
124
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
125
We have clung to the practice of prayer all these years with a pure motive.
We are therefore sure to discover the right key some day. Till then, be content
with the fact that the people have begun coming. For some things, time is
the only remedy. The more we think about it, the worse the thing gets but if
we wait in patience, we will discover the remedy. This is not likely to give
much satisfaction to one like you. But just now I cannot think of anything
more satisfying than this. It is therefore best to endure what cannot be cured.
I understand what you say about the spinning-wheel. Insist that all the
girls who are carrying on the experiment, clean their spinning-wheels properly.
Banish from your mind the thought that the girls will never do or cannot do
this work.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32998
