346. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
AGRA,
September 14, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I could not dictate a reply to your letter yesterday, for I had
to leave at 3 o'clock to go to a village 25 miles away.
Disputes like the one over the exhibition will arise frequently.
As you bear them in patience, you will become seasoned. Do not
lose heart and, so long as you have not lost heart, do not give up
the captainship. When you lose self-confidence, do not hesitate
to give it up.
Always bear in mind the distinction between the mind's im-
perfection or unsteadiness and its impurity. Against the latter,
you should even force yourself to employ non-co-operation; the
former, however, will remain with us for ever. Even the greatest
sages have not been able to overcome them; who are we, then?
Bhai Madhavlal has written about this case. Since he has requested
a personal reply, I have sealed the cover and enclosed it with
this. But I hope that he will show the letter to all. Even if he
does not, I have nothing to write to you about. You should go
on working patiently as circumstances require. There is God
above to protect us and to shape the result; why then should we
worry?
I have written to Karsandas about Surajbehn. You should
also write to me from time to time and convey to me the impres-
sion which you form. I have sent to him your earlier letter and also
Gangabehn's. It is our duty as friends to inform Karsandas about
the result of our test of Surajbehn.
Have you carried out the measures which I had suggested for
cleaning up the goshala? Is there any change in the quality of
the water after the cleaning of the well? Do they now make the
bread of the right quality?
Krishnadas arrived yesterday. I have sent a wire today
saying that Chhotelal should be sent here. When he arrives, I
will send both to Almora. It seems advisable for the present to put
both of them in Uttamchand's place. The difficulty from that side
will then disappear. I do not see much change on Krishnadas's
face, and he tells me that Chhotelal's health is not at all good.
Mahadevprasad had written some criticism about the goshala;
it is with Surendra. We should think over it. Introduce immediate-
ly as many reforms as possible.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5434; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 127-
