423. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
August 31, 1934
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ,
Your letter of 25th August astonished me, for you have now
taken up a position in connection with the work of the Harijan
Sevak Sangh which is contrary to what you had taken up some
time ago and in your correspondence and conversations with me.
It may be that experience has altered your view. If such is the
case, I have nothing to say except that you have based your
criticism on insufficient data.
You know that I have repeatedly expressed my opinion that
Harijan Sevak Sangh is an organization of penitents. Therefore it
cannot be predominantly manned by Harijans. It has got to do
the repentance in the manner that the penitent savarnas may con-
sider to be the most suitable. If it does not appeal to the
Harijans, it would be no doubt unfortunate. Then the penitents
must try again. But they have got to learn the art of repentance
from bitter experience.
As I have said to you personally so often, and you seemed
also to agree, the better and more effective method of influencing
the policy of Harijan Sevak Sanghs would be for local Hari-
jans to form representative Advisory Boards to study sympatheti-
cally the activities of the local Sanghs, and then advise them,
criticize them and make concrete suggestions. If such Advisory
Boards are formed everywhere, the work done by the Harijan
Boards will be naturally much more effective than it is today.
But even as it is, the Boards have nothing to be ashamed of If
you will follow the columns of Harijan from week to week, you
will surely be astonished at the way the money all over India
is being distributed among Harijans. It can be shown from
records that many institutions managed by Harijans are being
substantially supported from funds collected by Harijan Boards.
You will find also, if you study the figures, that the extent of
distribution of funds directly among Harijans and Harijan insti-
tutions is progressively increasing. Extraordinary precautions are
being taken to ensure the impartial distribution of funds.
You are altogether wrong in thinking that accounts of distri-
butions are not published. Reports by provincial branches are
published from time to time.
They are available for inspection
by the public and you can test the accuracy of my statement by
turning over the columns of Harijan and even by application to
local offices for copies of their reports. I am asking Thakkar Bapa
to let me have a consolidated account for publication in Harijan,
and you will be yourself astonished at the amounts spent for
Harijan institutions and students all over India.
As to temple-entry, you will find that practically nothing
has been spent either on opening of temples or on the building of
new temples, and throughout the nine months' tour, the reports
of my speeches in the columns of Harijan will show you con-
clusively that the temple-entry question occupies the least part of
them. The Harijan Sevak Sanghs have concentrated on some of
the very things that you mention. If they have not tackled all
the items, it is not for want of will but for want of capacity to
overtake all the items at once.
Your attack upon the Maharashtra Harijan Board comes with
ill grace. An out-and-out supporter of the Harijan cause, namely,
Mr. Devdhar, is the President of the Provincial Board. He began
this long before the Harijan Board came into existence, and
probably before the birth of many of us. So far as I am aware,
he has never been accused of lukewarmness over this reform. If
you have any specific complaints against the local Board, don't
you think that your first duty is to send those complaints to the
local Board, and if you do not get relief or satisfaction, to take
your appeal to the Central Board? And then if you find that
your complaint has gone unheeded, you will be justified in expos-
ing the respective Boards in the public. As it is, you have nothing
but a vague allegation against the Maharashtra Board which, in
my opinion, has deserved a better treatment.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI P. N. RAJBHOJ
207 GHORPADE PETH, POONA 2
From a photostat: G.N. 786; also Harijan, 7-9-1934
