332. LETTER TO DR. B. S. MOONJE
NANDI HILLS,
May 14, 1927
DEAR DR. MOONJE,
I was looking forward to a copy of your address. I have
now received the same with your covering letter for both of which
I thank you.
Acharya Gidwani wrote to me preparing me for the receipt
of your address. I had not read it but he told me that you had
imputed to me a view of untouchability which I have never held
or expressed. And, when he told me so, I wrote to him saying
that if you had done any such thing, it would not surprise me as
your philosophy admitted of any means for beating an opponent
with. I have now read your address and I see that it confirms
Acharya Gidwani's opinion. I suppose it is unnecessary to tell you
that the view you ascribe to me is not mine. For, it is concei-
vable to me that you did not know my repeated declarations that
I do not regard untouchability as is now practised as a part of
Hindu religion, and that if I could persuade myself that it was,
I should disown Hinduism. But this very palpable misrepresentation
of my view does not affect our friendship. For, mistaken though I
regard your philosophy to be, love of the country is good enough
bond between you and me. Some day of course I expect to con-
vert you [ to] my view that it is a good policy even to treat an
opponent fairly and justly. And my conversion of you will be
my contribution to the shuddhi movement.
Of course you want to know my opinion about your address.
I congratulate you upon your frankness and fearlessness; but the
substance of your address makes no appeal to me. Your address
is a powerful and eloquent plea on behalf of Islam not as its best
exponents know it, but as you know it, and if I do not know
better my own Hinduism, I do not know what I should do. You
have also put yourself to immense pain in demonstrating that un-
touchability is an integral part of Hinduism, a view which I re-
pudiate and have always repudiated in toto. Happily for me,
my Hinduism does not bind me to every verse because it is writ-
ten in Sanskrit, because it is supposed to be a part of some of our
scriptures. If your portraiture of events is true and if your view
of Hinduism is also true, the outlook is only gloomy both for
Hinduism and for the country. But let me tell you with all
deference that in spite of your literal knowledge of the Shastras,
yours is a distorted view of Hinduism. I claim in all humility to
have lived Hinduism all my life. But I can't convert you by argu-
ment. And I know you will sweep me off my feet with a mere
gesture if I endeavour to convert you by means of lathi blows.
I shall therefore be content with what I know to be the Hindu
way and wait patiently for my opportunity.
Yours sincerely,
DR. B. S. MOONJE
NAGPUR
From a photostat: S.N. 14613
