485. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 31, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I cannot think what fresh epithet of praise I should give you
this time. Tell me what epithet will please you, and I will give
you that.
I have not yet received the books required for Parachure
Shastri. I hope I shall get them soon.
I do not think we can say that the arrival of those two
women means that educated women have started joining the
Ashram. There are certainly a few stray cases of such women
turning up. The Ashram has not attracted any of them to stay
on, unless we regard you as an educated woman as also one
who has stayed on. Your case, then, will be an exception. Who
will believe that one swallow makes a summer?
I am sorry about Rambhau. I do not mind your having
dismissed him from the class. Keep a watchful eye on him and
bring him to the right path if you can. I understand your diffi-
culty regarding Dhiru. If you can cultivate sufficient broad-
mindedness and courage, you should talk about him to Joshi and
Ramabehn and discover some way of winning him over to the
right path. We ourselves plant thorns in our path and then
1 Chhaganlal Joshi
450
complain about being pricked by them. We shall probably never
reach our goal if we try to do so with our own strength but,
if we march with God's strength, we shall see light even in dark-
ness. If you retort that you do not have such love in you, my
advice is of no value. If, again, you argue that though I believe
that I am full of love I have not been able to win over many,
and ask me what right I have to advise you, and thus close the
door of your heart against me, I would be helpless. I admit my
imperfection. Why should you take that as an example? You
should follow the advice I give you from my experience. We
should not take the weaknesses of co-workers as our guide but
should try to be free from them and embrace only their virtues.
Moreover, unlike you I do not accept defeat but hope, with
God's grace, to melt the stoniest heart and, therefore, continually
strive to perfect myself.
If you have been reading out newspapers in the kitchen and
jesting with people, I would certainly not approve of that. There
should be perfect silence in the kitchen. Why should you read
out anything there? Moreover, Narandas's attention is bound
to be occupied with the things around him. I do not approve
of your reading out anything in such an atmosphere. In the
kitchen, even if you read you should do so seriously. Do, there-
fore, make this change. Consider what example you would be
setting to the children if you make jokes in the kitchen and try
to make people laugh. If all of them start doing what you do,
the kitchen would become a "bear's garden" and discipline would
vanish. Can the "smart" brain of the "smart little girl" under-
stand all this, or has she lost her "smartness" in the Ashram?
This is enough for this time.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10301. Also C.W. 5754. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
