57. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
September 21, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I wish to add one more to your already numerous burdens.
You will find with this the opinion of the Civil Surgeon here
about Sumitra's condition. In view of it, I am immediately sending
her there with her grandmother today. They will stay in Mani
Bhuvan, but you may keep them with you if you wish.
Get
Sumitra examined and treated by an eye-specialist. She has
trachoma and also astigmatism. Both the conditions require treat-
ment. Mani may accompany her wherever it may be necessary to
take her.
My statement is being widely criticized. Please do create an
atmosphere favourable to my leaving the Congress. Nobody is
likely to be interested in the programme of spinning and weaving
khadi, as you have rightly pointed out in your statement.
I sent you yesterday a copy of my reply to Vamanrao.
Aney came and saw me yesterday. He spent full two hours with
me. You must have read our joint statement . There was a wire
from Nekiram informing me that Malaviyaji was coming on
the 26th. It was received while Aney was here. I have replied
to say that Malaviyaji should not be put to the trouble of
coming here, and that it would be enough if the two parties
realized that whichever was likely to be defeated should with-
draw. I should certainly like Chintamani and Kunzru s to get
elected. They are very useful persons. I don't know, though,
how that can be assured. How can we know what the condi-
tions in the U.P. are? Outside the U.P., I don't think they
will succeed anywhere. He says that their candidates will wm
in Bengal. He is also hopeful about Phukan and about a suc-
cessful tour of Utkal. Most probably they will not put up any
candidate against Asaf Ali. He told me that there was complete
rot in the affairs of Bengal.
That the Congress office should
be raided in broad daylight and Congress papers should be
carried away was the limit. The raiders, however, did not find
the faked receipts for which they had planned the raid. It is
said that among them were some well-known Congress volun-
teers. Kaka's fever has not yet left him completely.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 134-
