400. LETTER TO SATYAGRAHA COMMITTEE, BOMBAY
[Before May 5, 1930]
Friends from Bombay have been to me asking me to lead a
raiding party from there instead of from Karadi, assuming of
course that a raid is to be decided upon. I should be proud and
consider it a privilege to lead it provided that certain prelimi-
nary conditions are fulfilled. I observe that there is a great deal of
misunderstanding about this contemplated raid. It has arisen
because of the use of the word "raid". Now all my speeches in
Gujarat are invariably delivered in Gujarati. The word "raid"
therefore is not the one I had used. I admit, however, that it is
a legitimate translation of the original. But my audience knew
the original word "dhad" used to alliterate with "dhar" in
"Dharasana", was used playfully. Fortunately or unfortunately
even for a non-violent war military expressions have got to be used.
But even as nobody is deceived by the use of such military ex-
pressions, no one need be perturbed over the use of the word
"raid" when it is to be civil, non-violent or satyagrahi. The use
of that potent adjective alters the whole colour of the transaction.
But however innocent the raid, if it ever comes into being, may
be, it will be fraught with consequences perhaps far more serious
than those flowing from a violent raid. Those, therefore, who
would join the contemplated raid have to satisfy some test, and
since the battle is meant not merely for the removal of the salt
tax but for establishing Purna Swaraj, the conditions have to be
in keeping with the objective. They are three: 1. Observance of
complete discipline. 2. Complete abstention from drink under a
permanent pledge. 3. Wearing of hand-spun khaddar also under
a permanent pledge and actual spinning on the takli for one hour
per day except when spinning is made impossible through want of
time or capacity. If Bombay produces a hundred thousand such men
I should lead them without the slightest hesitation. I know that the
citizens of Bombay will not laugh at my conditions nor will they
consider them impossible of fulfilment. The only difficulty they
might feel will be about the takli. Surely if a hundred thousand
men in Bombay have the will takli spinning is child's play. Sus-
tained work from day to day may be a task for easy-going citi-
zens of Bombay but Freedom's battle has never been won by easy-
398
going people. No one need be irritated against me for maintain-
ing these conditions because they are not in any sense obligatory;
they are meant to be a consideration in a voluntary contract. It is
open to the citizens of Bombay to reject my terms and do as they
please. Rejection then of terms will not make them less Con-
gressmen than they are today.
The Bombay Chronicle, 5-5-1930
