48. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[SABARMATI JAIL,]
Thursday Night [March 16, 1922]
CHI. JAMNALAL 3 ,
As I proceed in my quest for Truth, it grows upon me that
Truth comprehends everything. I often feel that ahimsa is in
Truth, not vice versa. What is perceived by a pure heart at a parti-
cular moment is Truth to it for that moment. By clinging to it,
one can attain pure Truth. And I do not imagine that this will
lead us into any moral dilemma. But often enough, it is difficult
to decide what is ahimsa. Even the use of disinfectants is himsa.
Still we have to live a life of ahimsa in the midst of a world
full of himsa, and we can do so only if we cling to Truth. That is
why I can derive ahimsa from truth. Out of Truth emerge love
and tenderness. A votary of Truth, one who would scrupulously
cling to Truth, must be utterly humble. His humility should increase
with his observance of Truth. I see the truth of this every moment
of my life. I have now a more vivid sense of Truth and of my
own littleness than I had a year ago.
The wonderful implication of the great truth Brahma satyam
jaganmithya grows on me from day to day. We should therefore
be always patient. This will purge us of harshness and make us
more tolerant. Our lapses will then appear as mountains and
those of others as small as mole-hills. The body exists because of our
ego. The utter extinction of the body is moksha. He who has
achieved such extinction of the ego becomes the very image of
Truth; he may well be called the Brahman. Hence it is that a
loving name of God is Dasanudasa.
Wife, children, friends, possessions—all should be held subject
to that Truth. We can be satyagrahis only if we are ready to
sacrifice each one of these in our search for Truth. It is with a
view to making the observance of this Truth comparatively easy
that I have thrown myself into this movement and do not hesitate
to sacrifice men like you in it. Its outward form is Indian swaraj.
Its real [inner] form is the swaraj of particular individuals. This
swaraj is being delayed because we have not found even one
satyagrahi of that pure type. This, however, need not dismay us.
It should spur us on to greater effort.
You have, indeed, made yourself my fifth son. But I am
striving to be a worthy father to you. It is no ordinary responsibility
which a man who adopts a son undertakes. May God help me,
and may I be worthy of the responsibility in this very life.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: G.N. 2843
