8. LETTER TO THE TRAFFIC SUPERINTENDENT, AJMER
As AT THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 18, 1924
TO
THE TRAFFIC SUPERINTENDENT
AJMER
SIR,
I travelled 2nd class on Saturday last the 16th instant from
Ahmedabad to Delhi. I had three third class attendants with
me, of whom one, by permission of the Deputy Station Master,
Ahmedabad, and under medical certificate, remained with me
in the compartment. Two years ago before I was imprisoned
I used to travel similarly on your as well as other Indian
lines. Objection was once raised by a G.I.P. Ticket Examiner.
Till then I did not carry a medical certificate, as my delicate
health I showed on my person. But on the G.I.P. Traffic
Superintendent drawing my attention to the rule under which at-
tendants with lower class tickets were allowed to travel with
higher class invalid, I began to carry a medical certificate. This
time too, therefore, I produced to the Station authorities at
Ahmedabad a medical certificate copy of which is enclosed here-
with.
On alighting at Delhi Station on the 17th instant, the Ticket
Collector, having been advised that an attendant with a third class
ticket had travelled with me demanded excess fare and penalty.
One of my attendants explained to the Deputy Superintendent
the circumstances under which he travelled second class with me,
offered to produce the medical certificate and to read him the
rule (copy of which he had taken from the Coaching Tariff,
Part I, para 69) permitting passengers to carry an attendant
with a lower class ticket. I am told he would not even look at
these, and the Station Superintendent, who was sought to be ap-
proached through the Deputy Superintendent, would not even
see my attendant. I regard these acts as highly impolite. The
attendant in order to avoid any dispute paid Rs. 23 under pro-
test. I enclose receipt therefor, and now beg to apply for refund
of same for the reasons above mentioned.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosures: 1. Medical Certificate
2. Excess fare ticket No. A 90257
From a photostat: S.N. 10120
