131. LETTER TO T. K. SRINIVASAN
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
November 28, 1928
MY DEAR SRINIVASAN,
I have your letter. I do not propose to deal with it in the
pages of Young India for I am sure no one else is likely to draw
the deduction that you and your sister seem to have drawn from
my writings. The whole of the case for a humanitarian ending of
a creature's life is based upon the assumption that whether belong-
ing to the human species or a lower order if they had conscious-
ness such a creature would not wish to live as I had assumed
the calf would not in the circumstances in which it was placed
and that there was no other service possible. In your sister's case
you and many others are at her beck and call and you all consi-
der it, and that rightly, a privilege to render what service you can
and relieve her pain be it ever so little. Her momentary wish to
have her life put an end to was purely philanthropic out of regard
for the convenience of her nurses. She was wrong in her reason-
ing. What she considered was an inconvenience to her nurses was
a privilege, or should be, in the latter's estimation. And if she de-
sired death, the nurses could not comply with her desire, for that
compliance would be tantamount to shirking of an obvious duty.
The question of karma does not arise at all in either case. This
has been repeatedly explained in the pages of Young India. If we
were to bring in the law of karma in such matters, we would
put an end to all effort. The working of the law of karma is
an incessant, ever-going process; whereas you and your sister evi-
dently assumed that certain actions were set in motion and that
the motion in that straight direction continued uninterrupted
without the operation of any further actions coming into play.
The fact indeed is that every activity in nature is constantly
interfering with the law of karma. Such interference is inhe-
rent in the law. For the law is not a dead, rigid, inert thing, but it
is an ever-living, ever-growing mighty force.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. T. K. SRINIVASAN
SAKTI NILAYAM, PALAIYUR, Via MUTHUPET
From a photostat: S.N. 13307
