294. LETTER TO N. P. COWIE
[BOMBAY,]
May 25, 1919
DEAR MR. COWIE,
One Mr. Manilal Jadavji Vyas of Kathiawar and Dr. Popatlal,
also of Kathiawar, who were resident in Karachi have, I under-
stand, received orders under Act 3 of 1864 to leave British India,
being classed as "foreigners" under that Act. In virtue of these
orders the parties left Sind and are now in Kathiawar. I venture
to consider that this act of the local authority in Karachi was
high-handed in treating subjects of native States as foreigners for
the purpose of summarily deporting them from Karachi. My
submission, however, receives legal justification from a perusal of
the amendment of Section 1 of Act 3 of 1864. It appears to me
that the Sind authorities were not cognisant of the recent amend-
ment of that Act. I observe that in 1914 that was thus amended:
In Section 1 of the Foreigners Act, 1864, for the words "not being either
a natural born subject of Her Majesty within the meaning of Statute 3 and
4 William IV, Chapter 85, Section 81, or a Native of British India", the
following words shall be substituted namely:
"(a) who is not a natural-born British subject as defined in sub-sections
(1) and (2) of Section I of the British Nationality & Status of Aliens
Act, 1914, or
(b) who has not been granted a certificate of naturalization as a British
subject under any law for the time being in force in British India ;
Provided that any British subject who, under any law for the time being
in force in British India, ceases to be a British subject, shall thereupon be
deemed to be a foreigner."
The operative part of Section 1 of the British Nationality and
Aliens Act referred to in the above amendment reads as follows:
(1) The following persons shall be deemed to be natural-born British
subjects, namely,
(a)
any person born within H. M.'s dominions and allegiance;
(b) provided that the child of a British subject, whether that child
was born before or after the passing of the Act, shall be deemed
to have been born within H. M.'s allegiance if born in a place
where by treaty, capitulation, grant, usage, sufferance or other
lawful means, H. M. exercises jurisdiction over British sub-
jects.
It is quite clear that both these Native States subjects could not
be treated as foreigners but being born in British Dominions or
allegiance are natural-born British subjects. Alike therefore on
grounds of equity and justice, I venture to submit that these
deportees and such other deportees, if any, are entitled to return
to their places of business and residence in Sind. I trust therefore
that H. E. will be pleased to order cancellation of the orders above
mentioned.
From a photostat: S.N. 6624
