310. LETTER TO GANGARAM
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE STATE),
May 8, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I got your letter too late to enable me to write to you so as
to reach you. It was impossible for me to travel to Bombay
because medical orders are peremptory-as peremptory as your own
-and seeing that the medical orders were prior in point of time,
they had to be obeyed.
I have really begun now to despair of your ever teaching
me. You promised to turn my Ashram ground into a paradise
if I sent you a map and all the details of past successes and
failures. Well, I have given you all the information, I sent you
my best man and the Ashram ground still awaits the magic touch.
All the information about the poverty of the masses that you can
give me can never be first hand because all you can tell me is
stories of witnesses. You have not tasted the sweets of poverty.
And, what is a millionaire, a successful engineer and a business
man to teach one who knows the sweet, as well as the bitter, of
poverty and who has come in direct touch with the masses about
the latter's poverty? Thirdly-but I must not say anything about
the third thing at the present moment.
Your connecting my bad health with a breach of promise
which I never made to you or to anybody is in keeping with your
lavishness in promising a poor man like me all kinds of El Dorado.
I am not aware of having made you any promise that I shall never
take part in politics and what is more, I have not taken part in
politics as yet. But I do promise that if favourable opportunity
occurs, I should not hesitate to plunge into them. For the pre-
sent I am content to sit at the wheel and sing the praises of God
in that He gives me strength enough to perform that little bit of
service to the masses of India in whose exploitation you are tak-
ing such a prominent part be it ever so unconsciously.
I do not expect any reply to this letter whilst you are in the
West. When you do come to India I shall be glad to receive a
further instalment of your promises with the certain knowledge that
you will continue to break them as heretofore and like the wolf
that swore at the lamb turn against me and accuse me of breaking
promises never made by me. I shall take all such rebuke in good
grace as in spite of your arrogation of universal knowledge, I have
great regard for the qualities of your heart.
Yours sincerely,
SIR GANGARAM, KT., C.I.E., M.V.C.
CARE SIR PURUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 12577
