193. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Wednesday [December 5, 1928]
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I would advise you to show to Narandas
all the letters I write to you. This will make your path easy and
will help him too. I have written to him advising him that he
should not keep aloof.
If Santokbehn wishes to leave for Rajkot, let her do so. You
may certainly see her and try to dissuade her. I shall be happy
if she likes the Ashram atmosphere and decides to stay on. But
I would not like her staying in such a condition of mind that I
would have to strive every day to keep her pleased and contented.
It is natural and desirable that one's relations should become
one's co-workers in national work. The difficulty comes only
when the motive is of self-interest. Once we are convinced that
we are pursuing no personal interest, we can invite all our relations
to join us; if they do join, it will be only to offer themselves as
oblations in a sacrifice.
Rama's co-workers were his relations, and so were Yudhish-
thira's. The co-workers of Prophet Mahomed, too, were his
relations. Jesus's co-workers included a brother of his. Lord
Salisbury had surrounded himself with relations. When he was
criticized for that, his reply was: "If not my relations, whom else
shall I sacrifice? In whom, if not in them, should I put my
trust? If I had more relations who were worthy of the honour,
I would sacrifice them too. For me, this is a sacrifice and not
a means of amassing wealth."
Balfour was a relation of Lord Salisbury's. We find in-
numerable instances of a contrary nature, too, in which relations
are fixed up in places to help them serve themselves. The upshot
of this is that to one who is prompted by unselfish motives, rela-
tions and non-relations are the same. When one is prompted by
selfish motives, what difference does it make if the co-workers are
not relations? Even so, all of us, as you say in your letter, should
be careful. I am convinced that my experiment has not cost me
anything. You may also believe this to be true about our equals.
In our country, equals cannot easily work together, because the
spirit of self-sacrifice has not yet been fully developed.
I have not understood exactly your question about the go-
shala. You will have to explain it further before I understand it.
We should let Lahoriram stay with us as long as he is
not confined to bed and goes his way. It will be another matter
if he cannot control his palate. If we are convinced that he is
a good man, we cannot send away a person who has joined us.
The case would have been different if we had not admitted him
when he first came.
It should be enough if we keep ourselves ready to lay down
our lives when robbers raid the Ashram. God will preserve our
honour. The best thing would be that one of our men should go
and work among the robbers.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised the letter after writing it. The envelope
arrived yesterday in a torn condition. It should have been tied
up with a string.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 16-
