56. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 21, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. I should say 'letters' rather.
I got your statement. You have fought well. Try and see
if you can fight in Lakhtar now. If you can find anybody there
who knows the Lakhtar ruler, use his good offices. Parikshitlal
must have written to you about this.
I can understand that you cannot become a permanent
secretary till you have come to like the place. Time and cir-
cumstances keep doing their work. We are ruled by them. That
is why we sing "Thy will be done."
Till a permanent advisory board can be appointed, let things
go on as at present.
If you keep up the practice of consulting
people in matters on which they are qualified to advise, you will
be able to form from among them the kind of board you
require.
1 Where Harijans were forbidden the use of the public reservoir
The message which I have sent to workers in Gujarat is
meant for all. Whether at present there are only two or three
or 20 or 30 workers who can work in that manner doesn't
worry me. I have only presented the ideal. We cannot revive
the Vidyapith in the same form. Circumstances have changed
and we have gone through new experiences. In the causes for
despair which you have described, I see rays of hope. What
one or two persons are doing today will be taken up tomorrow
by ten or twenty and by two hundred or three hundred the
day after. If, however, the experiment is not sound or if no worker
of the right type has gone to any village, let it fail. If the experi-
ment itself is unsound, it ought to fail or it will seem to have
failed for want of the right type of expert workers. Some of us
will try to make ourselves such workers. So long as we believe
that India lives in her villages and not in her cities, we must go
to the villages sooner or later. If so, why not today?
Neither Kaka nor Narahari has left the Vidyapith. If you
say that Narahari has not gone to work in a village, that
would be partly true. Anybody who lives among Harijans will
be living in his mind in a village. If that is not so, he wouldn't
be able to render true service to Harijans. Where do the five
or seven crores of Harijans live? You, I, Narahari and all others
should have our hearts where they live.
Kaka, too, has not left. Because he has ceased to be a
trustee, does that mean that he has left the institution? Why
shouldn't we say, rather, that his connection with the institu-
tion has become closer? He himself thinks so. If you still do not
understand, ask me again without the slightest hesitation. Kaka
must be in Ahmedabad at present, and Vallabhbhai in Bombay.
Swami, Kishorelal and the rest are here.
Just now Devdas too
is here.
I intend to take one more step. I am not discussing it here.
I will ask Kishorelal to write to you today about it if he can.
Please do not feel disheartened. The examples of Bal and
others show that we have to purify and strengthen our faith.
Those who desert the cause obey their own nature. We need not
lament what they do. I hope Rama1, Vimu and Dhiru are
quite well. Where do you all stay?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5525
