276. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[CAPE TOWN,
About February 26, 1914]
You have sinned, without knowing it, in charging me
with cruelty. How could I have grown cruel in fifteen days? I have
given no such impression to others. Nothing of the sort happened
in Phoenix. I have grown very tender to Ba, as she has observed.
If I turned cruel to you, what little goodness I claim would be no
more than a show and I would think that my life had been wasted.
But I shall no doubt appear cruel to you at present. . .
The veil of ignorance which prevented me from seeing the same
veil over you has vanished, leaving only pure love. This love
appears cruel to you for the time being, for, like a physician, I must
make you swallow bitter draughts. . . . I have grown im-
patient to help you. . to become perfect. Impatience is my
weakness. To the extent that I am impatient, I am but a fond
lover. I have fondness enough in me yet to make me attached to
you for being my son. When that has gone, even the cruelty that
you think you see in me you will see no more. Meanwhile, please
bear with me.
And now for the contradictions in your letter. For three days
you did not [as you say] go out to see Cape Town because of my
harsh words. And yet, when leaving, you expressed a desire to
do so, though I was in a rage. The harsh words had been there, even
on Sunday. Believing that I was cruel, how could you hope to
learn anything by living with me ? You showed yourself very keen
on visiting Table Mountain. When I told you then that you
would see much more, what did you find in that to take offence?
Well, what has happened has happened. It is your duty not
to take notice of my faults. A son should have devotion enough
to his father not to notice his shortcomings but to think only of
his virtues. I should like to see this trustfulness in you. I don't
want to make an ascetic of you. I want to see your charac-
ter pure, to see in you truthfulness, chastity, straightforwardness,
tenderness, self-confidence, humility and goodness. I want to see
you indifferent to the common pleasures of the world. I doubt,
however, if you have these at present. I am not asking you to
start doing immediately everything I do. But I want you to un-
derstand my deepest feelings and so attain true success in your
life.
Send this letter to Chi. Jamnadas.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Jivannu Parodh
