261. LETTER TO LORD HARRIS
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 27, 1906
MY LORD,
Mr. Ally and I have arrived, as perhaps Your Lordship is aware,
as a Deputation on behalf of the British Indian community in the Trans-
vaal.
We have waited on Lord Elgin and Mr. Morley who have given
sympathetic answers with reference to our mission but we also feel that
any representations that they may make in our behalf require to be
considerably strengthened. Moreover, the support that we have received
from all parties has been exceptionally warm. We are most anxious
to make as much use as possible of it in our future struggle. We have
further been instructed by the British Indians in South Africa to form
a committee, so that the work now being done may be continued.
We enclose herewith copy of the constitution.
We have approached the Right Hon'ble Lord Reay with a
view to his acceptance of the Presidentship of the Committee and we
believe that, if you could see your way to lend the weight of your
influence to the Committee by accepting a Vice-Presidentship, he will
accept the Presidentship and Your Lordship will lay the Indian com-
munity in South Africa under deep obligation to you.
We beg to enclose herewith an invitation card to a complimentary
breakfast we are giving on Thursday next at 10.30 a.m. If Your Lord-
ship could honour the occasion by your presence at the breakfast, we
would feel deeply grateful. Lord Reay has kindly consented to come
a little after the breakfast to attend a short conference that will take
place thereafter to discuss the constitution of the Committee.
We remain,
Your Lordship's humble and obedient servants,
[Enclosure]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4647
1 Though the letter does not mention the addressee, a reference in the
following item makes it clear that it was sent to Lord Harris. The noting on the office
copy shows that it was also sent to Lord Sandhurst, Sir James Fergusson and Lord
Wenlock.
