147. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
WARDHA,
Magsar Sud 11, 1983, December 13, 1926
Today also I am thinking of you after my breakfast. It is
exactly 6.50, your time for prayers. You may miss everything
else but not this. It means co-operation among ourselves, and bet-
ween ourselves and God. It is a real purifying bath. As the body
becomes dirty if we do not bathe, so also the pure soul appears
impure unless the heart is washed with the water of prayer. Do
not, therefore, miss prayers any time.
At 4 o'clock in the
morning, there is an opportunity for co-operation among all.
Not all the women, however, are able to attend the prayer.
But the 7 o'clock prayer is an occasion of co-operation
among women. It should be possible for all of them to attend
it. Co-operation among Ashram women is very essential.
The two American ladies who had stayed with you for a day
came here. They left yesterday after staying here for three days.
They are mother and daughter. The daughter is unmarried and
is twenty-five years of age. She teaches one of the higher classes in
a college of five hundred girls. Her Principal has sent her on
tour to study how moral education is given in different parts of
the world. Her mother accompanies her as her guardian. The two
go everywhere in the world fearlessly. How I wish that we had
such fearlessness, and this young woman's devotion to service!
Mirabehn's life should set all of you thinking. You must be
receiving letters in Hindi from her. From her letters to me I see
that she has won over the hearts of the Gurukul girls with her
simplicity and affectionate nature. She has made herself one with
the girls, and has been teaching them carding and spinning very
well. She does not waste a single moment. I expect such devo-
tion, sacrifice and purity from you. Is it too much to hope that
you should become experts in your work, live a pure life and take
yourselves to all parts of the country? Every moment I realize the
need for women workers. We find many self-sacrificing men. But
do we see anywhere self-sacrificing women coming out for public
work? Woman is an embodiment of self-sacrifice. But at present
her self-sacrifice is confined to the family. Why should she not
make for the nation even greater sacrifices than what she does
for her family? Any woman who dedicates herself to dharma will
ultimately make such sacrifice for the whole world. But one's coun-
try represents the first stage. And when the interest of one's coun-
try is not in conflict with the interests of the world, service in the
cause of one's country takes one towards moksha.
My request to you this week is that all of you should think
seriously of this.
I address this letter to Tarabehn since Manibehn may
not be there. But I should like you to appoint a leader from
among yourselves.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3632
