127. LETTER TO SWAMI ANAND
July 1, 1932
BHAI ANANDANAND 1 ,
You made me wait for a long time. Sardar asked me several
times why your letter was still not received. We knew that it
was not received. But what can you do? Even if the reason
is known, one does hope for a thing which one ardently desires.
You will receive this letter or it will come back to me. Many
of those who have come in contact with me had similar experi-
ence about separation as you have got, though I am near you.
You are to draw as much satisfaction therefrom as you can.
Kallenbach had laid down a fine standard. His experience was
that when he first came in contact with me, he met me daily and
took as much of my time as he could; when we came in very
close contact and began to live together he had hardly time to
talk with me though we lived, ate and slept together. While
returning home from office, there were always some people talking
with us. So, that became a regular matter of quarrel between
us. He applied the rule of three and came to the conclusion that
it was his experience that the more one came into contact with me,
the more he remained away from me. I supported his statement
and added, "You have come so near me because you have under-
stood me. Hence you have no right to take my time now nor
have I the right to spare time for you, leaving aside those who
have yet to know me." And on this understanding our affairs
went on. Is it not that there is some truth underlying such ex-
perience, viz., that in the case of associates who are closely united
with one another there remains nothing to make inquiries
about? If they do so they may be said to fail to that extent in
their general duty. And if this is true, associates like you who
are near, though living at a distance, have no reason to feel
sorrowful about. 1 I did know that your weight had gone
down, but I had no fears about your health. The Magan spin-
ning-wheel is not a modified or improved form of the Gandiva
wheel. It is a distinct, useful and excellent discovery made by
Prabhudas . Its wheel can be worked by foot instead of by hand,
and so both the hands being free, two spindles can be worked
simultaneously. Hence he who becomes an expert in working it
can without doubt spin one and a half times, if not double, of
what he can do on a one-spindle wheel. I did want to work the
wheel to satisfy Prabhudas. In the mean time the doctors here
prohibited me from drawing the yarn or working the wheel with
the left hand. So, there was a twofold reason for me to work
the Prabhudas wheel. As Maganlal encouraged the making of
that wheel and contributed largely to the scientific side of it, it
has been named Magan Rentio. I am spinning on it at present.
The speed has reached about 140 rounds. It will still go up.
From the above remarks, I hope you have understood that I
have been spinning only on one spindle because, giving complete
rest to the left hand, I draw the thread with the right.
The yarn is of 19 counts. There is nothing to fear about the
hand. When it is used in doing a particular kind of work, the
elbow is aching and doctors persistently believe that the com-
plaint is not due to any internal cause, but it is due to an ex-
ternal cause, viz., due to the drawing of threads daily. So, they
are of the opinion that by giving rest to the muscles the com-
plaint will subside by itself. Despite this, that part is treated by
[ultra-]violet rays. Hence there is no cause for anxiety. My
weight has failed to go up to 112 lb. It has not exceeded 106½ lb.
I have been taking milk for the last ten days under pressure from
the Superintendent. I am yet unable to say that I have bene-
fited by it. My present weight is 104 lb. Sardar is doing well.
His weight may be said to be the same as it was when he came
(here). It can be said that the nose complaint is under slight
control. The weight of Mahadev is also good. His health is
excellent. Mahadev had been spinning 840 yards of yarn of
No. 45 to 50 up to the day before yesterday. He spent about
five hours daily on it. As he also felt the effects of exertion, he
spins half the amount of yarn for the last two days and is do-
ing carding work, of course, in addition. I spin 200 yards of
yarn. I study Urdu, astronomy and books on currency and
write the history of the Ashram when I get time. Mahadev is
reading on stray subjects. He has, of course, in addition, to
write for me. Now the spinning having been reduced, he may,
perhaps, begin to write something. Sardar produces wealth from
dust, in other words, he has been making envelopes from waste-
paper of badami and other colours. If I were to give you a
description of the papers, you will laugh a lot. To whomsoever
we have to write a letter, we make use of these envelopes. As
we do not differentiate between Government money and ours,
we save every cowry where possible. The making of envelopes
is undoubtedly an addition to the wealth of India or that of the
world, however small it may be. Keeping in mind that every-
thing that is used as Government property is our property, we make
use of it. Sardar is spending time also in reading and has
thought of acquiring a working knowledge of Sanskrit. He has
also called for the Sanskrit Pathamala by Satavlekar and intends
side by side to be well versed in Hindi too. This is the account
of our work. Our family consists of a cat and her two kittens.
Though their names are not entered in the history ticket, they
share a little of milk, etc.
I have completed reading Rolland's books on Ramakrishna
and Vivekananda. I always had reverence for Ramakrishna. I
had read little about him. But as I had heard several things
about him from his devotees, that feeling had sprung up. I can-
not say that Rolland's books have added to it. In fact both the
books of Rolland are meant for Westerners. I will not say that
we can derive nothing from these books. But I for one have
derived very little benefit. The things which had influenced me
are also to be found in Rolland's books. The additional matter
which it contains has not added to the impression. It did not
appear to me that Vivekananda was as much a devotee as Rama-
krishna. Vivekananda's love was great. He was full of feeling
and used to be carried away by it. It was like the golden cover-
ing for his knowledge. The distinction which he made between
religion and politics was not correct. But it is no use criticizing
such a great man and once we let loose ourselves we can criti-
cize anyone whom we wish to.
Our duty lies in learning
anything we can from [the lives of] such persons. As Tulsidas's
couplet has produced a deep impression on my life, I do not
like to criticize. But as I know that you will wish to know if
I have to offer anything by way of criticism, I have written this
much. I have no doubt that Vivekananda rendered great service.
We have clearly seen that he gave his life for what he considered
to be the truth. When I went to see the Belur Math in 1901,
I desired to see Vivekananda also. But the Swami of the Math
informed me that he was ill and resided in the city and no one
could see him. I was then disappointed. My devotion had
saved me from many difficulties. At that time there was not a
single notable person whom I did not run up to see with feel-
ings of respect and I used to go to most of the places on foot
on the long roads in Calcutta. Devotion inspired all this. I
had no desire to save money though this is also in my nature.
Respects from all three of us to Abdulla Sheth, Jabir Ali,
Soman, Gokulbhai, Vishwanath, and all others. I hope you will
admit now that I have written at greater length than you might
have wished.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 265- and Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. 11, pp. 133-41
