156. LETTER TO SHAUKAT ALI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
November 30, 1928
DEAR BROTHER,
I have your letter. I had your speech at Cawnpore read to
me. I do not see substantial difference between the Associated
Press report and the report you have sent me. All the terrible
threats and still more terrible exaggerations that are in the Eng-
lish report are to be found in the Urdu report. The slavery of the
Hindus, the digging out of eyes, the challenge, the unequivocal
indictment against the Hindus are all there in their nakedness. If
you can spare the time, I would like you to read the cutting that I
sent you, or if you have destroyed it, get another copy, and you
will see almost every sentence of English report in the report
you have sent me. And tell me if you will still call the speaker
as per English report "a cad and a very crude performer", and, if
you will do so, I would like you to tell me why and show me the
difference between the English report and the Urdu in my posses-
sion.
No, the speaker at Cawnpore is not the Maulana with whom
I have been so long familiar and with whom I have passed so
many happy days as with a blood-brother and bosom friend.
The Maulana of Cawnpore is an utter stranger to me. The
Maulana I have known vowed that he was so bound to the Hindu
for his help during the Khilafat agitation that he would put up with
him, even if he ravished his sister, that so far as he and the Mus-
salmans under his influence were concerned, he was out to suffer
at the hands of the Hindus who had done so well. Well, I do not
ask him to suffer to the extent that he promised; but I do plead
with him on bended knees to revise his Cawnpore speech, admit
that he was out of sorts and bravely apologize to his Hindu bro-
ther for wounding his feelings as the Cawnpore speech undoubted-
ly does. If the Hindu has been a slave of old, you are co-sharer in
his slavery by ties of blood, by acceptance of indissoluble part-
nership. You chose in 1920 to be co-sharer with the Hindu in his
virtues as well as his vices for eternity, in his strength as well as
his weakness.
I would go all the way with you in accusing the Hindu of
his many misdeeds; but I am unable to hold with you that he has
been ever the aggressor, ever the tyrant and his Mussalman bro-
ther always the injured victim. If I had at all felt like that, you
would have found me proclaiming it from the house-top. But I
am not going into a controversy with you. I simply want to tell
you that, in my opinion, all your incitement is wrong, your judg-
ment is one-sided and that the Mussalman is at least equally guilty
with the Hindu, if not on the whole more so. Assuming that you
will impute honesty of motive and statement to me, I would ask
you to make room for doubt as to the correctness of your judg-
ment. In your Cawnpore speech you are too terribly dogmatic
and emphatic. The assumption of infallibility is unworthy of you.
I ask you to disown it for friendship's sake.
One personal thing, I must correct. The Khilafat Committee
did pay for a time for my expenses at your instance, not on my
request, and certainly not for the reason that you state, for the
simple reason that I have never travelled at Congress expense on
any single occasion, even when I have done exclusively Congress
work. My travelling expenses have always been borne by friends.
And when I accepted your offer, I had Rs. 25,000 placed at my
disposal by a common friend, whom you know, purely for my
travelling as he was most anxious that I should never stint my-
self about these, nor draw upon any public funds for them. I had
given you this information, but I agreed with you that it would
be more graceful if I let you pay my travelling expenses. But in
the manner in which you now put the matter, I feel inclined to
offer to return the whole of these expenses with interest if you
will accept them without being insulted or offended. I think that
Mahadev will have somewhere a record of these expenses.
Let me also correct another grave error. The Tilak Swaraj
Fund is a matter of audited record. Every pie received is account-
ed for in the printed accounts which have been before the public
now for years. You will perhaps be painfully surprised to discover
that let alone 20 lacs there are not even two lacs received from
Mussalmans for the Tilak Swaraj Fund. I do not make a grie-
vance of this, but I want you to hold truth as a sacred thing.
And if you want me to produce the handsome figures of Hindus
who have paid to the Khilafat coffers I shall gladly do so and
perhaps it would be another surprise for you. I wish you could
recall those stirring days of our joint peregrination from shop to
shop where Hindus vied with one another to pay even to the
Khilafat Fund as to the Tilak Swaraj Fund. Do you want me to
furnish you with a sample list? If I am erring, I would like you
to correct me not by a counter assertion but by figures. But if you
have none, I want you to tender an apology not to me, not to the
public, but to God for having been betrayed into a hasty but pain-
ful error.
I had the report of your version of the Cowasji Jehangir Hall
meeting read to me. The conduct of the audience was disgraceful
beyond words. I have always held this imitation of the West as
a degraded and degrading thing unworthy of us. This wretched
imitation may yet prove our undoing. You were entitled to a
respectful hearing. Above all at a condolence meeting such con-
duct was criminal. In spite of what I consider to be a temporary
aberration on your part the meeting should have remembered
your many and brilliant services to the Motherland. But here my
agreement with you ends. I refuse to endorse the deduction that
you have drawn in favour of your theory of universal condemna-
tion of Hindus. A purely Mussalman audience has been known
before now to behave no better. The conduct of the meeting in
question was symptomatic not of Hindu mentality but of the pre-
sent mentality of city Indians. You and I, Mussalmans and Hin-
dus, have to club together to eradicate this growing evil from our
midst and not to fling mud against one another. Just as you
remained unmoved in the meeting so should you have remained
unmoved when you reached home and found yourself surround-
ed by friends. You should have laughed at the incident as I
have so often generously seen you laugh at such incidents and for-
give contrary to my wish what you have called the pardonable
indiscretions of exuberant youths. Have you not said so often,
let them do so, they have been too long under slavery?
I have done. Personally if you are still your old self, I have
no anxiety to see our correspondence in print. But if you think
that there is nothing left for you but war to the knife, by all
means publish the correspondence. But if you are still the old
gentle brother that I have known you to be, then read this letter
again and again if the first reading does not satisfy you. Read it
with Mahomed Ali. I am in no hurry. Then lay aside all other
work and both of you come down to Wardha, you with a determi-
nation still to hold me in your pocket. You will find me easy
enough to carry. I am fast losing weight. But if after mature
joint deliberation you cannot take any such heroic step, then pub-
lish this correspondence and spare me the painful necessity of
having to make some statement to the public. And believe that,
whether you feel my presence in your pocket or not, I am there.
My unchangeable creed is non-violence and universal brother-
hood. Therefore I repeat what I have said from a thousand plat-
forms that mine is a unilateral partnership and therefore my
partnership with you and the other Mussalmans is indissoluble.
Though they may disown me a million times, I shall still be theirs
when occasion demands it. May God help so that I am not
found wanting.
I appreciate your decision about All-India Spinners' Associa-
tion. I won't misunderstand it. Your decision is right and your
resignation will be accepted. But I would expect you to come back
to the Association when you feel that spinning is part of your
duty not only as a nationalist but also as a Mussalman, that you
owe it to the millions of your countrymen not merely because you
are an Indian but equally because you are a Mussalman, that is,
if my reading of Islam is correct.
Yours sincerely,
MAULANA SHAUKAT ALI
THE CENTRAL KHILAFAT COMMISSION
SULTAN MANSIONS, DONGRI, BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 13744
