373. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
[NADIAD,]
July 29, 1918
In the summer, living in a village appears grand indeed, but it
is doubtful whether one would enjoy it in the monsoon. Personally,
I think it would be very difficult for me to go to any place I
like during the rainy season. My dislike of dirt is increasing, not
diminishing. I feel suffocated if the lavatory is the least bit un-
clean. Here, I go to an open space to answer the call of nature,
carrying a hoe with me. I dig up before passing stools and, when
I have finished, I leave the place after covering it with plenty of
earth. I have realized that, because of our failure to observe this
rule, innumerable diseases are spread, millions of flies bred. Those
who are not particularly sensitive to lack of cleanliness are, I find,
happy enough in a village. Last evening, two bhajan parties came
to see me. Their musical instruments must be worth some 5 or
10 rupees. These included drums, cymbals, kartals and one single-
stringed tamboor. With these, they produced music which was all
sweetness. All the songs were about Shri Krishna, how he provided
Draupadi with an unending sari, ate the dish of greens with Vidur,
humbled Duryodhana's pride and so on. All this is put in a lan-
guage so sweet that it cannot but spread round the spirit of love
and devotion. Why all this devotion to Krishna? As far as I
can see, it must be because of his heroism and his unfailing soli-
citude for others. It is because he, with his infinite strength, helped
the little Pandava kingdom to victory, destroyed the wicked Kaura-
vas and freed the people from suffering, that he came to be sung
of in songs and gained a place among the immortals. He cared
nothing for the favour of one so mighty as Duryodhana. He was
not tempted by his wealth, but relished Sudama's rice with gusto,
such was his simplicity. It is a miracle the poet has wrought in
the story of Krishna. There is no doubt that a man of such wisdom
did exist. I wish you could read the whole Mahabharata in Sanskrit.
You will then get a joy that I have missed. My subject was the
grandeur of village life but I strayed into the story of Krishna. It
was last night's music which made me think of it. I found that
music even better than ours. It was natural and sweet. It was
not very loud. The drum and the other instruments played low.
The moon was full. We all sat under a tree. Everyone was in
country clothes. The people spread out carpets and sat on them.
They were all farmers. After having laboured all day, they were
having innocent pleasure, drinking draughts of sweetness from the
music of God's name. I said to one of them : "Friend, you are
enjoying yourselves thoroughly." He replied: "Well, what else
should we do? We prefer to pass our time in bhajans and kirtans
rather than just gossip." These people, being Baraiya by caste,
would ordinarily be looked upon as uncivilized, but they were
not so in the least. They may be called uneducated but, in truth,
they were nothing of the sort. I felt that, if the educated classes
drew these people closer to themselves and poured new zest into
them, one could put them to any task one chose. Their wisdom is
boundless. One should only know how to utilize it. We are
like the bad carpenter who finds fault with his tools. Well, I have
written quite a long letter to you. Pass it on to Manilal after read-
ing it. I do not know when I shall write another like this again.
It is morning time, I have some leisure and my brain is brimful of
ideas; I have emptied it a little before you. If you, too, can taste
from this a measure of the happiness which was mine, I would
have, in a real sense, given you a portion of your inheritance. We
claim our share from the Government; on the same principle, if I
share with you what I possess, I shall be free of my debt.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
