11. LETTER TO COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES SECRETARY
SATYAGRAHASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
October 31, 1917
THE SECRETARY TO
THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES
DELHI
SIR,
I enclose herewith copy of a letter 1 recently addressed by me
to the Press on the hardships of 3rd class railway passengers.
The hardships are of two kinds : those which are due to the
neglect of the passengers themselves and those that can only be
remedied by the Railway Companies. They may again be divided
into those that can be dealt with without any great extra cost
and those that can be dealt with only on a large outlay of money.
I recognize that the hardships falling under the last category
cannot be effectively dealt with whilst the War is going on. They
are due to insufficiency of accommodation. On this I venture to
suggest that some check can certainly be exercised in the issue of
tickets, and guards or other officials should be instructed to regulate
the traffic. As it is, the strongest find their own seats without any
supervision or control by the officials and the weaker ones often
find themselves left out. Officials should not only be instructed
to regulate the traffic, but they should also be required to examine
the state of the compartments from time to time and see that no
passengers appropriate space to the discomfort of other passengers.
In so far as the passengers are themselves responsible for the
evils I have described, notices should be pasted on the walls of
the carriages and put up at the stations giving detailed instruc-
tions regarding the use of closets, etc. Bye-laws prohibiting dirty
or offensive practices may be cautiously enforced. A book of in-
structions in the different vernaculars may be issued together with
long-journey tickets and otherwise given gratis on demand. Co-
operation of volunteers should be invited from the general public
in the prosecution of this educative work.
As to the other grievances :
Station inspectors or the other officials should be directed to
have the carriages and closets swept and cleaned at every junction
or principal station.
Station closets ought to be kept scrupulously clean, earth and
disinfectants should be used every time closets are used. This
presupposes constant employment of Bhangis at every station. In
my humble opinion, the importance of the matter demands such
employment. It may be a wise thing to set apart special privies
which any passenger may use on payment of a nominal fee. At
present there is no privacy provided in the station latrines. I
think that at a very small cost this can be provided.
There should be bathing facilities at all principal stations.
I understand that only licensed vendors are permitted to sell
refreshments at the stations. A written tariff should be provided
and cleanliness of refreshments and vendors should be ensured
before the granting of licences. Third-class refreshment rooms
should not be allowed to be in the dirty state in which they are
at present, but should be kept scrupulously clean.
Untold difficulties are put in the way of the passengers getting
their tickets on application. Often they are issued only a short time
before the departure of trains. The result is bribery, a fight among
passengers for the purchase of tickets and disappointment to many.
Waiting rooms at the principal stations need complete over-
hauling. There ought to be regulations for the observance of
passengers. Benches should be provided in large numbers. They
should be cleaned several times during the day. Rooms should
be provided for the use of the fair sex.
In my humble opinion, all the evils except the provision of
extra carriages can be dealt with at a very small additional cost
to the railway administrations. What is needed is sympathy and
due recognition of the rights of third-class passengers who provide
the largest part of the income from passenger traffic.
Though the grievances here adverted to are old, they are
pressing enough to demand immediate attention. I hope that your
department will take up the matter at an early date. My services
are at its disposal to be utilized in any manner it may deem fit.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6393; also
N. A. I.: Railway Department Records: March 1918: 552-T-17: 1-24
