120. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 5, 1933]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I wanted to but could not write to you yesterday. I under-
stand what you say regarding Chhaganlal's criticism. Though
you have replied as I desired you to do, I see that some of his
remarks have hurt you. They were in the nature of allegations
and were prompted by anger. But how can I advise you or
anybody else? What right have I to do so? Yesterday, while
talking to a friend like Rajaji whom I love so much, I became
impatient and lost my temper with him and with Shankerlal. I
see now that the matter was of little importance, and that it was
I who was foolish. What they said or advised was prompted by
their love for me. They had no other thought but my own good.
If I lose my temper with them, how can my words of advice to
you, when you get angry at Chhaganlal's thoughtless allegations,
have any effect on you? It was seen yesterday that the serpent
of anger is alive in me and is aroused whenever it is provoked.
That is why you have not been able to see the anger in your words
which I pointed out. Your faith that it must be there since I say
so does credit to your love for me, but it also proves that I do
not deserve it. I will not lose heart. I will strive to deserve the
love of my co-workers. The forthcoming yajna is a part of such
striving. I see every moment that this yajna is absolutely necessary
for my own purification. I cannot forget that the imperfection of the
Ashram is a faithful reflection of my own imperfection. If I do
not know how to take the Ashram forward, there is no meaning
in my living on. To leave the Ashram or to close it down would be
nothing but cowardice. I must learn the wisdom how to take the
Ashram forward. I cherish the hope that I shall acquire that
strength by the proposed yajna. If I succeed in this aim, I may
hope to succeed in the other things. If I fail in this, I cannot
hope to succeed in anything else. That will be the meaning of this
yajna. I should like you to make your full contribution to it.
You need not get ready just now for a fast, but should only culti-
vate the fitness to undertake one when the time comes. I think
you are doing that. Wherever you see your shortcoming, attack
it and get rid of it. Do not worry about me. A daily report
about what happens there will give me great peace of mind. Such
reports will be my food during the days of the fast.
I think Duncan and Sharma have something in their minds
which they wish to discuss. Have a talk with them.
Margarete Spiegel may leave for Ahmedabad on Monday. She
is a good woman, but not very intelligent. She is very obstinate.
She has very little khadi with her. Give her what she needs.
She will have to think what dress to wear. At present she wears a
san. If she is not eager to start wearing khadi immediately, you
also should not insist that she should do so. Personally I like
N.'s dress. I myself had suggested it to her. She knows sewing
very well. If she can take interest in it, she can do much useful
work in that field.
Margarete does not like that dress. For the present, let her
borrow a thick sari from one of the women there and try it. Such
sari will not require a skirt. If there is an underwear with it
like the one I use, it will be enough. Or she may wear, like
Mirabehn, a skirt, blouse and a thick scarf as upper garment.
Mirabehn is very economical indeed in using khadi. A skirt is
certainly not a complete dress. Anybody who wears it should
also use an undergarment. You will now be able to guide
Margarete.
She had some money with her, which I have taken away. I
have taken away one chain, too. I have handed over both to
Harijan Shastri. If she comes, she will travel by the same train
by which N. travelled. If Ramji wants to leave the Ashram,
let him go. If he remains, he must behave properly. Don't press
Kusum at all in regard to her hair. Getting it cut will be for
her good only if she does that willingly.
I trust Shanti is well now.
BAPU
[PS.]
Parashuram arrived yesterday. There is no sense in what he
talks. I have been discussing things with him. If there is any-
thing to write about, I will do so.
I am sending a wire today regarding Sharma. Keep me
informed about how N. behaves.
What do you propose to do about the teaching of Hindi?
There ought to be some provision for it in the Ashram. N. will
have to be taught Hindi.
Letters for Jamnabehn, Dr. Sharma, N. (2) and Shanti are
enclosed.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C. W. 8371. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
