345. LETTER TO MANILAL B. DESAI
SRIRAMPUR,
December 26, 1946
CHI. MANILAL,
I got your letter and the supplement. I cannot recollect
the letter which you mention, and am not bothering to search
for it. Strictly speaking, the suggestion about cows does not fall
within the scope of the Trust. You can establish contact with
the Goseva Sangh. If you try to do that work, you will not
be able to do the work you have undertaken. In attempting
an ambitious plan, you may fail in both the tasks like the sadhu
who lost both this world and the next. Or you may undertake
the work in consultation with somebody who knows it. The
idea of making the Arogyabhavan self-supporting is not a bad
one. But if you engage two persons for that work, no work
will be done and your plan for starting cultivation will have to
be abandoned. The difficulty about money can be met. It is
not necessary to employ some persons specially for that purpose.
As soon as I know the final decision, I shall be able to find
the money. You will of course need a well. Get one sunk. I
think you mean a deep well to be sunk at a cost of Rs. 4,000.
I am inclined towards a well of that type. Or, we can have
the type of water-works constructed by the military and can
draw the water in the same way as they do. I think we can
get enough water from the water-works built by them. We can-
not have a buffalo in the goshala. I have no doubt on this
point. If we do not insist on having cows only, you may rest
assured that they will die out. And the cow will always be
followed by the buffalo. Animal husbandry experts have final-
ly come to this conclusion. I cannot judge about buying the
plot belonging to Patangiya. All that I can say is that you may
do what you think best. I think this answers all your questions.
It is, therefore, not necessary for you to travel all this distance.
I am dictating this letter after waking up at three in the
morning. I don't have the courage, therefore, to try to write
to Dr. Bhagwat, Dhirubhai and others, as it is nearing four
o'clock now and I have to start preparing for the prayer.
I understand about Dhulia. If Maganbhai cannot stay there
regularly and take active interest in the work of the Trust
for a few months in the year at least, there will be no point
in making him one of the Trustees. I think I have written
to you about this in a previous letter. I will [not], therefore,
[write more in this].
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 2736. Courtesy: Manilal B. Desai
