182. LETTER TO W. H. PITT
ALWAI,
March 18, 1925
DEAR MR. PITT 2 ,
With reference to the conversations we have had as to the
possibility and desirability of removing the barriers at Vykom and
the picket which prevent satyagrahi volunteers from crossing the
boundary-line on the roads leading to the temple, the position
as I understand is this. It is common cause between Government
and the reformers that the embargo upon the so-called untouch-
ables making use of the roads around the temple should be removed.
In your opinion the cause I have at heart will succeed earlier if
I advise the satyagrahis to respect the boundary line pending final
decision without the barricades and the picket. You tell me that
the orthodox opinion gathers strength from the presence of the
barricades and the picket, because the orthodox people wrongly
infer that the intention in putting up the barricades and keeping
the pickets is to help them to maintain their position. I have
gathered from our conversations that it would be possible for you
to have the existing orders withdrawn under which you are acting,
1 The news of Kalyanji's release from Sabarmati Jail appeared in Nava-
if I undertake to respect the boundary-line in the manner suggested
by you. Whilst I hesitate to believe that the action proposed by
you, if taken by the satyagrahis, will soften the hearts of the
orthodox people and weaken their position, I fully appreciate the
motive that lies behind your suggestion. I am, therefore, prepared
to advise, by way of trial, adoption of the suggestion made by you.
After all, what the satyagrahis want is to create an active and
overwhelming public opinion in their behalf. Their object
is not to irritate orthodoxy but to win it over to their side. Their
object moreover is in no way to embarrass the Government in the
prosecution of the campaign but, so far as it is possible, to enlist
its sympathy and support on their side. I am therefore prepared
to act upon your suggestion immediately on learning from you
that the prohibitory order referred to herein is withdrawn. The
effect of this would be that a very small number, not larger than at
present, will continue to march up to the boundary-line by way of
pleading their cause and stand or spin as they are now doing in
front of the lines. They will not cross it on any account what-
soever whilst their agreement lasts and I expect that if it ever
becomes necessary to challenge in a court of law the so-called
right or custom under which the so-called untouchables are pro-
hibited from making use of the roads round the temple the pro-
secution would be under the ordinary criminal law of Travancore.
But I am hoping, with the assistance of the Travancore Government,
to formulate public opinion so that it becomes irresistible and that
without recourse to law on either side the common right of using
public or semi-public roads is not denied to any class of people
by reason of their birth. I have already discussed with you the
three proposals made by me, namely, referendum by taking the
vote of the savarna Hindus in select areas; arbitration; or interpre-
tation and examination of the authority of texts from Hindu
Shastras supposed to be available to the orthodox in support of
their contention as to the use of roads round certain temples. It
must be a very simple matter to adopt one or all of the suggestions.
In closing this letter I would place on record my sincere
thanks for the perfect arrangement made by you during the whole
of my sojourn in Travancore.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 13267
