115. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
[SABARMATI,]
February 13, 1918
MY DEAR WEST,
I hope you have received all my letters. I have your two
letters to acknowledge. I do not really know what to say. I have
read Ritch's and Debeer's letters. From their standpoint they are
right. For me, you would better serve the work by being a
good agriculturist. Manilal's advice from Johannesburg does not
appeal to me. He ought to be in Phoenix to manage the Gujarati
portion. But, as I have said, you are the final arbiter and you
should do what you think is best. So far as I am concerned the
property is as much yours as mine, and so is the cause. Having
said so much about Phoenix, I would like to speak to you about
my activities here. The very fact that I write so little to you
shows how busy I must be here. I think everybody wonders at my
output of work. And nothing is of my seeking. I have taken up
activities as they have come to me. In Bihar, besides watching
the legislative activity, I am opening and managing schools. The
teachers are as a rule married people. And both husband and
wife work. We teach the village children, give the men lessons in
hygiene and sanitation and see the village women, persuade them
to break through the purdah and send their girls to our schools.
And we give medical relief free of charge. Diseases are known
and so are remedies. We, therefore, do not hesitate to entrust
the work to untrained men and women provided they are reliable.
For instance, Mrs. Gandhi is working at one such school and she
freely distributes medicine. We have, perhaps, by this time relieved
3,000 malaria patients. We clean village wells and village roads
and thus enlist villagers' active co-operation. Three such schools
have been opened and they train over 250 boys and girls under
12 years. The teachers are volunteers.
Then there is the work in Gujarat. It consists in carrying out
the programme set forth in the Godhra and Broach addresses.
At the present moment I am trying to deal with imminent passive
resistance. The activities in Gujarat are multifarious. Lastly, I
am endeavouring to lead the movement for the release of the Ali
Brothers. I am working on a programme for dealing with cow pro-
tection, sanitation, national system of education, hand weaving
and acceptance of Hindi as the lingua franca of India. Of course,
the Ashram and the national school continue.
In all this it is my good fortune to be well assisted. This
activity involves a great deal of travelling.
The Ashram is beautifully situated on the banks of the
Sabarmati river. We daily bathe in it. All the children can swim
now. The school is under an able Principal who was a distinguish-
ed professor of the Gujarat College. The Ashram, of course, is
under Maganlal's management. I do not know what is in store
for the Ashram or the school. They are at the present moment
popular institutions.
In all these activities I often wish for the co-operation of fellow-
workers there. But I know it cannot be. But, believe me, there
is not a moment I do not think of one or the other of you. Many
of your exploits serve as apt illustrations for me. I am building on
the experience gained there.
Please tell Mrs. West that she should not consider for one
moment that I have forgotten her or granny. Nor have I forgotten
the assurances given by me. New ties and new acquaintances
cannot make me forget old ones.
This letter is not for publication. I do not wish to talk pub-
licly of my activities.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai.
Also from a photostat of a portion of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W.
4426. Courtesy: A. H. West
