5. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA MANDIR,
December 16, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
I have your letter. Even if I agree to see you I am afraid
the permission will not be granted. Therefore for the time being,
we must be content with letters alone. By speculation I did not
mean that no forward transactions should be entered into. Specu-
lation means gambling. With the expectation that market prices
will go up I buy 1,000 bales of cotton. I do not need any cotton,
I do not even store it in any warehouse. Only a book transaction
is made. Now I await a rise in price. I sell the cotton when it rises;
this I consider gambling. The nation or, rather, the world has
lost a great deal through such transactions.
This was what I
meant in my letter. Yes, I expect much more than this, but, at pre-
sent, you will not be up to that. Without at all depending upon
future market prices, to sell the commodities at a little more than
the cost price is what I consider unsullied trade. Today it might
be difficult to conduct such business, but ultimately, it might bear
fruit. You might remember this is what I visualize for khadi. But
I know this is a tall order. I shall be very happy and content if
you brothers can give up speculation. However, do only what is
intelligently acceptable and within your power. I would not at
all wish that you should act upon the suggestion simply because it
happens to be mine and that, too, sent from jail. Faith should not
have a place where reasoning is applicable.
Jayaprakash informs me that, although you are not recruit-
ing any new people just now, he will be absorbed somewhere be-
cause of my recommendation . I certainly hold that Jayaprakash is
a worthy young man but I do not wish that a post be created
where none exists today.
I was a little worried to read of Malaviyaji's fever in the news-
papers. I am relieved now. I hope he will emerge from the jail in
good health. I am glad about your health too. I am again ex-
perimenting with a milkless diet. This time constipation was res-
ponsible for it. Now I am taking chapatis prepared from millet for
the prisoners, vegetables, three tolas of almonds and dates. I am trying
to give up dates. Constipation has disappeared. I shall revert to
milk if I lose strength. It is nearly a month since I gave up milk.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6191. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
