29. LETTER TO PANCHANAN TARKARATNA
March 9, 1933
DEAR PANDITJI,
I was amazed to receive your undated letter.
So far as your son's visit is concerned, he was to come to me
not as one of the Shastri disputants but as one desirous of answer-
ing my questions, enlightening me and to this end seeing me
from day to day for 10 days or longer if necessary, and he was
to come to me as your representative even as you had come with-
out imposing any conditions on me.
It surprises me that now you should describe his coming to
me as one of the disputants in the nature of fulfilment of your
promise.
Secondly, from the very commencement of the discussions,
untouchability as it is practised today was the subject-matter of
discussion and I have a letter written by Pandits on the very
date that they came to the effect that that was the common ground
between them and me. You, your son or anybody can see the ori-
ginal document in my possession. But the Pandits had imposed
another condition which they thought I would never accept, but
in order not to miss the discussion with them when they had
come as far as the jail gate, I waived my objection and accepted
their condition retaining the words "as at present practised".
Still they would not come. I cannot help saying that this was
unreasonable, discourteous and unworthy of learned men. Of
all the painful episodes that I have had the misfortune to face
in my contact with Shastris, this was the most painful.
Of the other parts of your letter I desire to say nothing be-
yond this that I am unable to endorse your interpretation of the
Shastras as being repugnant to common sense, universal morals
and contrary to the interpretation of the Shastras by Pandits hav-
ing no less learning and authority than the opposite school and
in the presence of such a conflict of interpretation you will not
blame me if I accept that which is more consistent with my moral
sense.
As to your proposed fast, whilst I should deplore it if you
ever came to undertake it, such fasts are an everyday occurrence
in Hinduism and have always to be welcomed when they come
from the purity of one's heart and without anger or malice.
You would not write as you have done about the two Bills
now pending before the Legislature if you had carefully studied
the contents and application of these Bills. In my opinion they
constitute no interference with anyone's religion or conscience.
One Bill takes untouchability out of the domain of civil law which
is what you and I and everybody else should desire, and the other
ensures the free exercise of conscience by all, whereas today the
conscience of a growing number of people is constrained.
Yours sincerely,
PANDIT PANCHANAN TARKARATNA
CALCUTTA
From a microfilm : S.N. 20509 a
