428. LETTER TO SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
September 2, 1934
DEAR SAHEBJI, MAHARAJ,
It was indeed an agreeable surprise to me to hear from you.
But I am afraid that I must not accept your congratulations. I
have no talent for reproducing Dayalbagh in the different pro-
vinces of India. My reference was to the loan of the excellent
men you have sent to Karachi, who are conducting in a metho-
dical manner the Industrial Institute founded by the Mohatta Bro-
thers. Yours is a huge enterprise. I know my limitations. My
experience may be extensive in some directions; but I do claim
very little experience in the direction in which you have built up
Dayalbagh. Nor have I unlimited resources.
However, I do
expect, when I am ready, to fall back upon you for trained men,
to assist the Harijan Sevak Sangh in establishing industrial
homes for Harijans.
Necessarily therefore they have got to be
unambitious.
I am glad you have put up a tannery. Will your expert give
me a brief article describing the method of tanning so that an
intelligent reader may be able to make his own experiments in
tanning? Does your tanning include the treatment of carcasses,
flaying them and separating the skin from the bone and the flesh?
And if it is, what is being done with the bones, blood, the flesh,
the entrails, etc.? For me, tanning has a most important bearing
upon the tremendous question of cattle preservation, consistently
with the Hindu belief in the sanctity of the cow. And do you
take any leather, or do you confine yourself only to leather of dead
cattle as distinguished from slaughtered?
Do I infer from your kind offer to include Dayalbagh in the
list of Harijan colonies, that the Harijan Sevak Sangh may send
Harijan boys to be trained there in the several departments? And
if the Sangh may, on what terms?
Mirabehn will be delighted, as I am, to learn that you have
succeeded in producing iridium-tipped gold nibs which are ele-
ven-twelfth swadeshi. I shall inform Mirabehn of the good news
you have given.
I thank you for your kind inquiry about my health. I am
making as good progress as can be expected after the fast.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
SHRI ANAND SARUP, DAYALBAGH, AGRA
From a photostat: G.N. 2159
