186. LETTER TO "THE TIMES"
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,
November 16, 1906]
[THE EDITOR
THE TIMES
LONDON
SIR,]
Perhaps it is necessary for me to say a word about the "petition"
from certain Indians regarding the British Indian Deputation from the
Transvaal which was the subject matter of question and answer in
Parliament as reported in your issue of yesterday's date. It is said therein
that I do not possess any mandate, that I am a professional agitator and
that my advocacy of the Indian cause has resulted in harm being done
to the Indians.
The appointment of my colleague and myself was made unanimously
at a public meeting. We hold a document to that effect. The mass meeting
at Johannesburg which was convened by me as Secretary to the British
Indian Association approved of the principle of the Delegation. The first
signatory to this "petition" was present at the meeting and spoke strongly
in support of all the principal resolutions. He, moreover, offered himself
as one of the delegates but was not accepted. The "petition" is signed
by two Indians. It is necessary to distinguish the "petition" from a paper
purporting to have been signed by 437 Indians and repudiating our
mandate. As to this, the following cable was received by the Delegates from
Johannesburg on the 10th instant: "Have affidavits Godfrey obtained
signatures blank paper false pretences using name bias (code word for
the British Indian Association, Transvaal) signatures now withdrawn
cabling (Lord) Elgin papers publish full report conference." The forego-
ing cable was evidently sent on the telegraphic report of the interview
sent by the Press correspondents.
The incident does not mean that the two signatories of the "petition"
approve of the Asiatic Ordinance. On the contrary, in their opinion
evidently I am the mischievous cause of the legislation which they detest
as much as the other Indians. Their attitude resolves itself into personal
objection to me and not into one of approval of the Ordinance.
As I have been allowed by the Colonial Office to see the "petition"—
I know that the expression "professional agitator" means a paid agitator—
I may then state that the thirteen years' service rendered by me to my
countrymen has been a labour of love and [a matter of the] keenest
pleasure to me.
Opinions may differ as to the usefulness or otherwise of my services.
The late Sir John Robinson considered that they were not useless. Mr.
William Hosken and others in the Transvaal also encourage me in the
work I am trying to do, namely, to cement the relations between the
European and the British Indian subjects in South Africa by removing
all cause for misunderstanding.
The only reason for tendering this explanation is that the sacred
mission which I have come here to discharge may not be prejudiced in
the eyes of the public by leaving unchallenged the allegation in question.
[I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 15-12-1906
Also typewritten draft: S.N. 4577
