265. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 21, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I was not in a position to reply immediately to your excellent
letter. When the right hand demands rest, it becomes impossible
to cope with the work.
All my questions are not such as can be asked in a letter.
I must of course have asked you such questions. Questions which
occur to me at any moment belong only to that moment.
My aim in taking you to Borsad was that you might be able
to do such work more easily in future, and to show you that I
had taken a share in anti-plague work also.
I have already written in Harijan and explained the connec-
tion between our sin and the earthquake. Read that article.
Nobody was angered in Bihar. On the contrary, everybody real-
ized that it was the result of our sin. All this follows from the
principle of oneness.
I have written an article in Harijan about snakes, etc. Read
it. If you are not reading the articles which I have been writing
recently in Harijan, I would advise you to read them carefully.
I hope you get copies of it.
I wouldn't see any sin in ending the life of the husband who
was lingering in pain and to whom no relief could
given
even by careful nursing. If, however, the husband is conscious,
his wishes should be ascertained. If he wishes to live despite the
pain, he should be allowed to live.
The owners becoming trustees means their handing over to
the poor, that is, to the State or any other public welfare insti-
tution, all income in excess of a certain percentage.
If everybody handed over all their possessions to the State,
the spirit of enterprise would disappear and everybody would be-
come an automaton.
My relations with the rich will continue. I don't look upon
the rich as wicked and upon the poor as angels. Both in the East
and the West there are a great many rich who earn money with
philanthropic motives. They deserve to be honoured. I know
numbers of poor people whose company should be shunned. In the
swaraj of my dream, the tiger and the goat should be able to
drink water together from the same pool. What will it matter if
this remains for ever a dream? If I didn't know what I wanted,
what would I strive for?
It is certainly true that I cannot understand people correctly,
but do those who claim to understand them really do so? I, there-
fore, do not regret my ignorance. Since I cannot know human beings,
I trust them.
Is it necessary for you to answer every time somebody asks
you a question about me? Why don't you say, 'I cannot answer
your question. I like the man's work and his ideas. Does one
always give reasons for what one likes? You should, therefore,
address your questions to the man himself'? If you replied thus,
you would be saved from a great deal of unpleasant argument. How-
ever, you may certainly impart to others what you have learnt
from me and fully digested. But then what one has digested
doesn't remain somebody else's but becomes one's own. One en-
tertains no doubt about what is one's own and is always ready
with answers to any questions about it.
Let this suffice for today.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10374. Also C.W. 6813. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
