423. LETTER TO MAUD POLAK
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 13, 1911
MY DEAR MAUD,
A long cable was sent to you on Saturday. I hope that you
thoroughly understood it. The cable was not sent without a great deal
of hesitation. The Bill having been published, I am rather sanguine of
the necessary amendments being made. Yet, in order that it might not
become law immediately after it is read a third time in Parliament, I
sent the cable, so that you could consult Lord Ampthill and Sir Mun-
cherjee, and at least warn the Imperial Government. Similar cables
have been sent to Bombay and Madras.
1 Vide "Telegram to Members of Parliament ", p. 453.
2 Alexander, T. L. Schreiner, and W. P. Schreiner
3 Vide "Transvaal Petition to Union Assembly", pp. 448-.
4 and 5 Vide "Cable to Natesan, Gokhale and S.A.B.I. Committee", p. 455.
I suppose you know the procedure with reference to a Bill. It is for-
mally read a first time; a full debate takes place on the second reading,
and, unless there is opposition to the principle of the Bill, the second
reading is carried. Then it is read in Committee, at which stage amend-
ments are made. Then comes the third reading. After that it goes to
the Senate, and, if the Senate approves of it, it is submitted to the Gov-
ernor-General for the Royal Assent. If the Bill does not contain a reser-
vatory clause, it becomes the law of the land immediately. The reser-
vatory clause is inserted when there is any racial differentiation. As
there is none in this Bill, there is no reservatory clause at all. It may,
therefore, come into force immediately, unless the Governor-General
is advised by the Imperial Government not to give his sanction without
first submitting the Bill to them. The last recourse left open to objectors
is to secure a veto, even though the Bill may come into operation, because
a clause in the Royal instructions provides that any Bill, although it
may have the force of law, may be vetoed within two years of its promul-
gation by the King-in-Council.
I expect that the Bill will have been passed through the Lower
House by the time this letter reaches you, but it may not have gone to
the Senate, or at least it may not have received the Governor-General's
sanction. You will have further cables as to the progress of the Bill. I
am anxious to make the following position quite clear to you. Passive
Resistance has been continued for securing repeal of Act 2 of 1907, and
to secure legal equality as to the immigration of highly-educated Asia-
tics. In the cablegram, however, you have been told that, if the Bill
does not protect minors and the wives of lawful residents, it may not
end passive resistance. It might be said that this is a new point raised by
us. I hope, however, that any such misconception you will be able to
remove. Wives and minor children are under the existing legislation
fully protected—you will notice that from Mr. Gregorowski's opinion
—but the new Bill seeks to deprive us of that right, and passive resisters
can hardly be expected to bargain away the rights of parents, specially
such inherent rights as those of taking their wives and children with them,
against a grant of legal equality. I do not think that there will be any
difficulty about getting the necessary amendment carried here, but,
supposing that the difficulty does arise and General Smuts again talks
of new points being raised by me, you will know how to deal with it.
It is General Smuts who is raising a new point, if he is raising it at all.
I give him the credit of not raising any contentious issues, by supposing
that the matter has only been overlooked by his draughtsmen, and that
he will rectify the difficulty at the Committee stage. As to the Cape
and Natal, whether the position there is ameliorated or not, the present
passive resistance will stop, if the Bill is amended, so far as the Transvaal
is concerned, in the manner suggested by me. You will carefully go
through the Petition to the House of Parliament here, and all the other
documents. I am asking Mr. Ritch to write to you from Cape Town,
so that the information I am giving you will be brought up to date by
Mr. Ritch.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5281
