79. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 30, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. Has the trunk of books which I brought
with me arrived there? Does anybody live in the Vidyapith?
Does anyone take care of the books or is everything falling into
ruin? Many of the monthlies too are worth preserving. It is
desirable that there should be one whole-time person to look after
the books assisted by two others. If this is not possible, we should
not have allowed the library to grow so large. It is the duty of the
Vidyapith to make this arrangement. It is not our job. It is
because this was not our work that we started the Vidyapith,
otherwise we would have turned the Ashram itself into a Vidyapith.
The work does not lie within the Ashram's sphere of activities at
all. Its work is primarily internal, and the Vidyapith's is pri-
marily external, and so it ought to be. The aims of both are
the same but their activities are different. In the Ashram, there-
fore, we should keep only such books as we require for our pur-
pose. Other books that we may need, we should borrow from the
Vidyapith. All this, however, when we settle down again to our
normal activities. Just now everything is being swept away by a
flood, and that is all to the good. When the flood has subsided,
don't we have a wide expanse of water, clear as crystal?
I remember the Nag Panchami festival, and I adhere to the
reply which I gave on that occasion. Haven't I compared the
breaking of heads to the explosion of crackers? Anyone who
knows the nature of the atman will believe that to be literally so. If
the atman never perishes, what does it matter that the houses it
inhabits perish or that the garments which it puts on wear out
and decay? Moreover, the atman is eternally perfect and so it
can never lack a house to inhabit. If we but know the truth, it
needs none. But all this is true only with reference to oneself.
So long, therefore, as our own heads are being broken, we should
think that crackers are exploding. Don't ask me how the atman
can make a distinction between one's own and another's. So long
as the body endures, we must assume this distinction in all our
actions. As we die to ourselves, the distinction between one's
own and another's loses its force for us, but so long as we go on
killing others, the distinction becomes stronger. As the children
gradually understand this truth, they too, like the young men in
the Ashram, will become wise. But that requires patience on
our part. In this connection, read my letter to the children.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10270. Also C.W. 6718. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
