303. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
ANAND BHUWAN, RAJKOT,
May [23]1/24, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I thank you for your letter of 15th instant.
Without wishing to enter into any controversy, I would like
to say about Talcher that the whole of the evidence supplied by
Shri Harekrushna Mahtab and enforced by Miss Agatha Harrison
and others goes to show that, so far as the known facts go,
there was the clearest possible belief that Major Hennessy was
acting with authority. But whatever the fact may be, I hope that
the poor ryots would not have to suffer long.
But the main purpose of this is to tell you formally what
you must have seen from my public statement that I was
obliged, for conscience's sake, to renounce the Gwyer Award. It
took me some time to detect that I had erred in asking Mr.
Gibson to send you the wire of 4th March. And having detect-
ed the error, I took further time to summon courage enough
to throwaway the obvious advantages of the Award and all it
meant. But at last I saw that even though I was acting for the
public, I must discard a gain which from a moral point of
view had appeared to me to be unlawful. Fast I have held too
sacred a weapon to be used lightly. I betrayed unworthy weak-
ness—a sure sign of violence—when instead of allowing the fast
to run its course I invoked your assistance. From that moment
it ceased to be a spiritual act. I would see nothing wrong in
seeking your assistance if I was fighting along purely constitu-
tional lines. Indeed the rich experiences I have gained during
my travail show that if the Paramount Power is to do its legal
duty it is bound to take a much more active part than it has
hitherto taken about the rights of the ryots in the States. But
this is by the way. My object just now is to apologize to you
for all the trouble I caused you by my weakness. And may I
ask you also to convey my apology to Sir Maurice Gwyer for
the labours that he had to go through for delivering his Award?
I know that the correct procedure for me was to let you have
my recantation before the world knew anything about it. But
I was having daily talks with Durbar Shri Virawala through
Mahadev Desai. Every hour's delay added to my agony. I was
dying to put myself right with him. I could accept nothing
until I had disengaged myself from what I have stigmatized as
a double game. And then too there has been delay in sending
you this apology as my dealing with the aftermath of the recanta-
tion with my weak body left me little time for composing this
letter. I wanted some leisure for it. I stole it partly last night
and the rest this morning.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
