31. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 18, 1928
MY DEAR C. R.,
Herewith Kelappan's letter. I have asked him to discuss his
scheme with you. Whatever you think is feasible should be done.
You will not hesitate to sanction anything for fear of funds being
exhausted. All I am anxious about is that whatever work is done is
substantial and honest.
I hope you are now not worrying about my health. I have
not yet taken any vow about the milk and I am not going to do
anything unless I find the experiment to be absolutely successful.
1 The letter, dated February 9, from S.D. Nadkarni is not reproduced here.
The correspondent had taken exception to the expression "blot on Hinduism"
with reference to untouchability in a resolution on reorganization of the
Gujarat Vidyapith. He had suggested that it could be changed to "blot on
humanity" or deleted altogether.
And not only I am carefully watching myself, but so also are
the Ahmedabad doctors. It is open to them to veto the experiment
at any time they like and I have promised to stop it. But I want
you, instead of thinking of somehow dodging and making me to
take milk, find out doctors or physicians who will help me to
arrive at a proper, purely vegetarian diet which will be more than
a substitute for milk. I am sure it is perfectly possible. Do please
therefore think over my suggestion.
Have you heard from Singapore friends at all? If we are to
go, I should like to start during the first week of April, because
the hot weather commences in right earnest in April in Ahmeda-
bad and it would be better to avoid it. And then there is the talk
of a visit to Burma from Singapore. I should like to negotiate it
and, if that also is to be done, there is very little time left. And
then there are two invitations from Europe to go there during
July and August. I am inclined to accept them. The idea is
cooking in my brain. One is from the World's Youth Peace Move-
ment. It seems to be an important movement managed by a good
organization. You may also consider the propriety or otherwise
of accepting these invitations.
Lakshmi must not have a relapse.
From a photostat: S.N. 13063
