394. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 24, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
Since Kaka has resigned his place on the Board of Trustees
of the Vidyapith, all of us have come to the decision that you
should be the Chairman of the Board. We have already appoin-
ted you to the post. I did not remember what my legal posi-
tion was in the Vidyapith, so I enquired about it and was told
that I had none, but that, morally speaking, they regarded me
as its Chancellor and all the teachers had agreed among them-
selves that I should be permitted to intervene in its affairs
whenever I wished to do so. But this is no way of running
an organization.
You are the only person who can be the
legal chairman. I am satisfied with whatever moral position I
have and have neither the desire nor the strength to shoulder
greater responsibility than that.
1 Vide also the following item.
2 Vide also the preceding item.
Another decision which they have arrived at on my advice
and subject to your approval is that Narahari should take over
management of the Harijan Ashram and that as many teach-
ers from the Vidyapith as he may need should be made availa-
ble to him. The expenditure over Narahari and other teach-
ers from the Vidyapith who may be assigned to the Ashram
should be met from the Vidyapith funds as long as they last. I
am of the view that this burden should not be put on the
Harijan Sevak Sangh for the present, in view of the policy of the
Sangh that it should pay caste Hindus from its funds in as
few cases as possible. The ideal is that 95 per cent of the receipts
should go directly into the pockets of Harijans. If we wish
to realize it, we should set an example with our own workers.
The third decision we have taken-and this also subject to your
approval-is that the remaining teachers should, if they agree,
spread out in villages for rural reconstruction work and for service
in villages, and start work according to the scheme or plan which
I have put forward. Narahari will explain it to you. If you do not
approve of any item in it, exclude it unhesitatingly. Kakasaheb,
Kishorelalbhai, Maganbhai, Soman and Narahari were present
when these decisions were taken and they have agreed with
them. About Narahari, I have discussed the idea with Thakkar
Bapa also. The Harijan Ashram cannot be run on the best lines
unless it gets the services of a person like him. I am sure that, if
we run it well, we shall advance the cause of Harijans consi-
derably. Only then will the gift of the Satyagraha Ashram have
been justified. Though I know, therefore, that we can take many
other services from Narahari, I think this is the best use we can
make of him at present, and he himself is interested in this
work and is fully confident of being able to make a success of
it. Please, therefore, let Narahari be sacrificed for the Harijan
Ashram.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 122-
