247. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Saturday [March 29, 1924]
CHI. JAMNALAL,
It was good that you gave up the idea of going to Kanpur.
Is there any complaint still, besides weakness?
You know about the institution at Chinchwad. It is facing a
good deal of opposition and is always short of funds. I think it is
necessary to help the workers. I am considering how this can be
done. In all, they need Rs. 15,000. If they get this help, they
will want no more and they are prepared to take a vow that they
will not ask for more. If you feel with me that they deserve this
help and if you are in a position to give it, then I should like you
to do so.
Rajagopalachari is again suffering from asthma. I think the
climate of Nasik would suit him. If you can accommodate him,
write to him at his Salem address and ask him to stay with you
for some time. He is already under the treatment of the Poona
vaidya, and the latter will be able to examine him. I have indeed
written to him suggesting that it would be better if he went to
stay at Nasik while you are there.
You must have learnt that the Poona vaidya has started treat-
ment of Vallabhbhai's Manibehn, Maganlal's Radha and Prof.
Kripalani's [sister] Kikibehn. This was done at the suggestion of
Devdas.
Let me know what your experience of this vaidya is.
Malaviyaji left for Kashi yesterday. We had some discussion
about the Hindu-Muslim problem. Hakimji had also been here.
With him also I discussed the same subject. Motilalji who has been
here will stay on. He has been discussing the issue of Council-
entry.
I have been thinking about all these things.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand : G.N. 2845
1 The discussions with Madan Mohan Malaviya, Hakim Ajmal Khan and
Motilal Nehru referred to in the letter took place during the last week of March
1924 at Juhu. The last Saturday of the month fell on March 29.
2 Svavalamban Pathshala, a national school then run by Shri Kanitkar
at Chinchwad, a village near Poona
