167. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
July 6, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
I have both your letters. Whenever there is doubt about the
grammar of a Hindi word, is not consulting a dictionary
the right course? One who knows Sanskrit will commit fewer
mistakes in using his words. But a word used in Sanskrit in
a particular sense would not, as a rule, be used in the same
sense in Hindi. We should therefore regard the dictionary as
160
an authority. And where the help of the dictionary is not avail-
able, we should regard one who knows Sanskrit as an authority.
I looked up the word nirutsaha [wanting in enthusiasm] in the
Hindi dictionary which is with me, and there also it is termed
an adjective. Hence one who knows Sanskrit and the dictionary
both agree about it. I write all this merely out of love of language.
I expect a higher knowledge of the language from those who
know a particular language. I also expect them to use it cor-
rectly. Hence I asked about the word nirutsaha in my last letter.
I have always thought your knowledge of Hindi to be sound and
I expect you to be more and more vigilant about it day by day.
Someone must dedicate his life in the service of Hindi. Politics is
always on our neck. But this cannot be nor should it be an
exclusive field. We might have willingly or unwillingly plunged
into it, but as soon as its activities calm down, we should return
to our pursuit. Also not all of us need plunge into politics at all
times. Hence we should select, according to our capacity and
inclination, any of the many permanent and constructive activi-
ties. You certainly have a liking for Hindi. Now I would like
you to think of dedicating your life for the spread of Hindi
after adding to your knowledge of Hindi as much as you can. I
do not mean to say that you should make this resolve soon. For
the present you may carry on what you are doing. Most of your
time is already taken up by Hindi. Whether you should stick to
Hindi till the end of your life will become clear by itself in course
of time. Just now I have simply sown the seed.
Now about the Ramayana. What you write on this subject is
true. I do not regard the Ramayanas such as by Radhasoami3, etc.,
to be refined works. The Ramayana of Tulsidas is a work of great
refinement. We only have to create interest in it. We can surely
bring out an abridged Ramayana in Tulsidas's own language. I had
made an attempt with regard to the 'Balakanda'. Most probably
there is a copy in the Ashram. Twenty years have passed since
then. If I were to take up the task again, perhaps I would
choose entirely different quatrains and couplets from it. Prabhudas
has also made an attempt in this direction. As you are engaged in
teaching, it will be useful if you did something in this direction.
Also you ought not to have much difficulty. Mahadev tells me
1 Vide pp. 87-.
2 The following two sentences are from Bombay Secret Abstracts.
3 Presumably Radheshyam Kathavachak, author of a popular Hindi Rama-
ayna
4 Vide Vol. IX, pp. 97-.
50-11
that two or three such attempts have already been made in the
U.P. But that need not deter you. There is no harm if a fourth
is added to them. People of different temperaments, keeping in
mind children or people of a different class, would make different
sections. I will not insist if you do not get time during the eve-
ning prayer. The Hindi classes are always there. Try to create
interest in the Ramayana whenever possible. Also if some wish
to study the Ramayana out of devotion, and if you can spare time,
you may arrange for such a class once or twice a week. But
I do not at all insist on it. I am only expressing my desire.
You alone can say how and to what extent it can be carried out.
You must be perturbed, as I write all this. I think your
work is going on well. Comparatively you were never more at
ease than now and I do not at all wish to disturb you or make
your mind unsteady by putting before you new ideas or schemes.
These thoughts came to my mind on reading your letter and so I
have placed them before you. Accept out of them whatever
you can fully understand, digest and put them into execution, and
forget the rest. Even if you discarded the whole lot, I would not
be shocked. 1 I have only one mighty desire for you that you may
feel yourself entirely at ease and may not be embarrassed at all.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9643. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra.
Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40)(3), Pt. 11, pp. 213-
