192. LETTER TO A. F. FREEMANTLE
[Before February 23, 1921]
DEAR SIR,
I have just received your letter of the 12th instant. You will
please excuse me if I do not reply to your letter in detail.
You have hardly done justice to yourself in criticizing a letter 1
you have never seen, whose translation you have only partly read.
If you had read the letter, you would have seen that I did not
mention my services to demonstrate my sufferings, much less to
show that they were selfless. I mentioned them merely to show
how consistently loyal I was to the British connection even in the
midst of adverse conditions. My services were not selfless, because
I believed that I would by those services be assisting my coun-
try's progress towards freedom. Your mention of British bra-
very and selflessness is therefore irrelevant. British bravery and
capacity for suffering are beyond question. The claim to national
selflessness, you will permit me to deny in toto. I did not believe
then, the world does not believe today, that the late War was one
for justice or was selfless. You wanted to crush the Germans, and
for the moment you have succeeded. I do not believe that the
Germans are the fiends the English Press has made them out to
be, nor do I believe that the world would have come to an end
if they had won.
You think that I am on an eminence. I assure you that I
am unaware of that. I am however on the top of a volcano which
I am trying to turn into hard incombustible rock. It may erupt
any moment before I have succeeded. That unfortunately has al-
ways been a possible fate for a reformer.
My idealism worries you. If you had taken pains to read
my writings, you would have known that it is intensely practical.
You have rightly guessed that I am at bottom a co-operator.
How would I be otherwise having been that for nearly thirty
years? I am certainly waiting for the first opportunity to co-operate,
but believe me my co-operation will not be tendered until Eng-
lishmen have realized the necessity of settling the Khilafat terms
in accordance with the Muslim sentiment, until they have repented
of the calculated torture of the Punjab, and until they have ceased
to consider themselves as our patrons and rulers. India will gladly
have Englishmen as friends, fellow-workers and equal partners
in India, but if they desire to exploit the country for their own
gain, they must do so, if they can, without our co-operation.
You have seen fit to accuse me of deviation from truth. Here
again your amazing ignorance is to blame. You were rightly in-
formed that I believed the statement about the Kachagarhi inci-
dent, made to me upon oath by persons whom I had no reason
for doubting. I published over my signature a denial as soon as
I received it. I refer you to the file of Young India. Lastly may I
ask you to try to study and understand the movement of non-co-
operation? You will find that it is not anti-English in spirit. It
is a religious movement, it is a purifying movement. It is a
movement intended to resist injustice, untruth, terrorism and
to establish swaraj in India. You will admit that it is better to re-
place mutual distrust and fear by trust and fearlessness.
This movement is an attempt to end that unhappy state. And
I seek your co-operation in the effort.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 23-2-1921
