193. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
DUNDEE GAOL,
Tuesday [November 11, 1913]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have got nine months and if I get six months each at the
other two places, that will make 21 months; I shall be most lucky
in that case. That I could get into gaol without having to disguise
myself was so much the less bother. Today, for the first time
after the commencement of the strike, I have some leisure.
You must certainly have received some news of Jamnadas. Lest
the Government cast its eye on the money in my name, I have
written to Mr. Kallenbach to get it transferred to your name
and West's. This arrangement is also to be followed in respect of
the sums Mr. Gokhale may send hereafter. You must watch what
cheques are issued. Miss Schlesin or whoever else is outside will
give you the account. Omar Sheth and Cachalia Sheth should
have supervision over the money. Expenses will be heavy only
for the duration of the strike. If people remain firm even in my
absence, the £3[tax] , at any rate, will go.
It looks as though your responsibilities had increased and I
was enjoying myself. Going to gaol has become holidaying for us.
Even so, I felt I should not hold back any longer from going
to gaol. The case today was full of technical loopholes. But how
could I take advantage of them? That would have been moha. I
remained firm, for fear that it would be sheer conceit on my part
to believe that I could work better by staying outside. James
Godfrey was keen on appearing on my behalf and so I allowed
him. He said that he would send the whole report. They will take
me to Volksrust from Dundee on Thursday for the case there.
If you wish to write to me, send the letter to Badat; it will pro-
bably reach me.
Right from today the doctor has ordered fruits, etc., for my
diet. I shall have no difficulty, therefore. If I can write down
an account of the march, I shall send it on. It was a wonderful
experience. And so I took a pledge yesterday that I would live
on one meal a day till a repeal of the tax was promised. Four
months have passed even according to the English calendar. The
pledge this time will permit my taking lemon or orange squash.
I can write no more.
MAGANLAL K. GANDHI
PHOENIX, NATAL
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: G. N. 2538
