420. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
April 22, 1932
CHI. MANI,
We were eagerly waiting for a letter from someone there, as
people wait for the rains, when we received one or two. . . . See
me here on your way when you are released.
If it is Monday,
stay on till the next day, Tuesday. Between 12 noon or 11.30 a.m.
and 1 p.m. is the most convenient time when you can see me. If
you come during this period, you will be able to see at least two
of us . . . . All three of us are all right. . . .
I see that you have really tried to improve your hand-
writing. The result shows that anybody can improve his hand-
writing if he tries. This is true about everything.
To learn the Gita by heart also means that we should under-
stand the meaning of every verse and pronounce the words cor-
rectly. Who teaches you the Gita? Perhaps you will tell me this
only when we meet. But if there is time and if the jail autho-
rities let you do so, write your last letter before you are released.
As regards your health, we will issue a certificate only after seeing
you . . . .
Yashoda and the boy visited us once. The boy climbed on to
a chair and was so thoroughly pleased with himself that he left his
new pair of shoes here. Fortunately for him or for Dahyabhai, some
one of us noticed it and immediately sent it to him. Yashoda's
health is none too good. Indeed she has not been well for many
years. Dahyabhai comes every week and can see both of us.
Jivatram is still out of prison and working. Devdas is in
Gorakhpur [prison]. I have just had a letter from him. He is
alone there but quite happy. He reads a good deal. Lakshmi is
no longer 'poor Lakshmi'! She is still nursing Papa but the
latter is nearly restored to health. Rajaji is fine. He keeps good
health. His companions also keep fairly good health. Indu has
not yet come to see me. I do not know where she is at present.
Most probably she is in Poona. Kamala is in Prayagji. Kamala-
pati seems to have some relief from his pleurisy, but still has slight
fever.
I will write to someone in Ahmedabad about the spinning-
wheel. But we can spare a good one even from here, if you want
one. . . .
. . . I wrote my first letter to Ba only today, but I do get
letters written by her. She and other women prisoners are all right.
Mithubehn continues to conduct her class.
If your glasses are broken, you can get them changed even
while in prison. But this is perhaps unnecessary now as the
date of your release is approaching.
Your letter was received here today and immediately given
to me. The reply also is being written on the same day. I hope
that it will be posted tomorrow. When you will get it depends
on your luck and mine.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 81-
