126. LETTER TO F. G. PRATT
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 16, 1918
DEAR MR. PRATT,
After the most mature deliberation, I have come to the con-
clusion that I dare not leave Gujarat without satisfying myself
personally as to the truth or otherwise of the statements made
about the failure of crops in a large part of Kaira. I have,
therefore, decided not to leave Gujarat for the time being, and
I am proceeding by the one o'clock train today to Nadiad with
a party of co-workers. I must confess that convincing proof has
not been produced before you to warrant suspension on the
scale asked for, but so far as I am aware both Messrs. Parekh
and Company and Deodhar and Company believe that though
they have not been able to stand the fire of cross-examination,
the truth is on their side. Only they have not succeeded in pro-
ducing convincing proof. I think it is the experience of most of
us that there are some facts we know, though we cannot prove
them. That has been the position of these friends.
On the strength of the failure of evidence hitherto produced,
His Excellency has thrown on my shoulders the responsibility of
removing the impression, which people are labouring under, as
to the failure of crops in Kaira. But obviously I cannot do so
as at present equipped. Whilst it is true that the evidence
hitherto produced as to failure of crops to such an extent as
to warrant suspension under the revenue rules, has not been
conclusive, it is not possible for me, without conducting a
personal investigation, to declare that the popular belief in such
failure is wrong. This investigation is a duty I owe to the
people of Kaira, to the Gujarat Sabha, of which I have the
privilege of being the President, and, if I may say so, to the
Government.
I have entered somewhat into details because I am anxious,
if I can do so, to assure you that I have absolutely no desire to
encourage or produce a useless agitation and that I am proceed-
ing to Kaira purely and simply in search of truth. You have
agreed that if the people are right they are entitled to relief. You
very properly declined to grant it unless reports of your officials
could be successfully challenged. And I, on my part, would be
shirking a plain duty in spite of the persistent statements made
by responsible people to the contrary, if I did not satisfy myself
as to their truth or otherwise.
You will most materially help in allaying the ferment in Kaira,
if you could possibly be generous enough to postpone collection
pending the result of my self-imposed mission.
And if you think that I may be afforded the usual facilities
may I ask you to advise the Collector to help me with information
that may be legitimately granted to a public worker. I wish
also to add that if you desire that any representative of yours
should be present while I am inquiring, I have no objection
whatsoever. I trust you will excuse the length of the commu-
nication.
In reply to the invitation to attend the Durbar on the 26th
instant I was obliged to send a reply in the negative in view of
my then impending departure for Delhi. But in the circumstances
now altered, I hope to be able to attend and pay my respects.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10630. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
