109. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
Shravan Sud 7 [August 1, 1911]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
It appears from your letter that you are upset again. I see
no reason why you should be.
Chi. Jamnadas can, if he so desires, appear for the Cape
Matric or the London Matric, though I do not know what he will
gain thereby. The time he will spend in studying for the exami-
nation, things which are to be later forgotten, will be as good as
wasted. The point to be considered is what Jamnadas ultimately
wants to do. Do you intend to fix him up in Phoenix or have you
brought him here just for the sake of his health? Whatever may
have been your intention, you have acted wisely in bringing him
over. . . .2 used to find out and develop the general abilities of
their pupils. Modern education seems to me to be a thorough
fraud. I sighed when I read the prospectus of Davar's School3;
such is the state of my mind at present.
I am aware that the debt to Revashankerbhai is increasing.
I am wondering how to repay it. It is for me to think about
the debt you have incurred. It will benefit us both if you do
not take upon yourself the burden unnecessarily. Make up your
mind not to incur any debt hereafter. Please let me know how
much you will need to draw every month, including the sum that
you must send to Khushalbhai and leaving the debt incurred by
you out of account. I think the Phoenix constitution [needs to be]
amended. Please think it over and write to me frankly. Do not
mind if I express my views in strong terms. In my present state
of mind I can hardly express my ideas in gentle words or through
hints. Just fancy how a pauper will dance for joy if he comes
upon the philosophers' stone. Such . . .4 is not possible all at once.
I read Indian Idylls (Edwin Arnold's) to the boys. It has
excellent translations of narrative poems from the Mahabharata.
Amongst them I read "The Enchanted Lake" and found it to
be superb. What is its Sanskrit title? Please let me know if you
or anyone else there knows it. I have been thinking that we should
have a free translation made into Gujarati verse by Ambaram
and publish it. All the Pandavas go to a lake in the hope of
finding water. But in their impatience they drink from the lake
without answering questions [put to them] by the Yaksha, the
guardian spirit of the lake, and fall down unconscious. Yudhish-
thira goes last and drinks water after giving the answers. All his
answers relate to [the nature of] obligation, but they are very
ingenious. Perhaps you know the dialogue.
It will be a good thing if you start writing in English gradu-
ally. If you understand Letters of John Chinaman fully, you may
translate it. I shan't have the time for it. I re-read the book
recently. It is invaluable.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C.W. 5092. Courtesy: Chhaganlal
Gandhi
