72. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
February 4, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
You were good enough to tell me yesterday that the Inspector-
General had replied to my letter of the 20th December last to the
effect that you had full discretion regarding interviews by relatives
and friends with me in terms of the prison regulations governing
such interviews.
This reply has come upon me as a surprise and is at variance
with the information given me by my wife, who, together with
Mrs. Vasumati Dhimatram, was permitted to see me on the 27th
ultimo.
My wife told me that she had to wait for over twenty days
before receiving reply to her application for interview. On hearing
1 Kasturba Gandhi visited Gandhiji in jail on January 27, 1923.
2 A brief report in Young India, 1-2-1923, has this here: " . . . he replied
that no one who knew him could imagine that he would ever suffer from
melancholia, and expressed surprise that such rumours could find any credence."
rumours of my illness she came to Poona in the hope of being
admitted to see me. Consequently, early last week, accompanied
by Mrs. Vasumati Dhimatram, Mr. Maganlal Gandhi, Radha-
his daughter about fourteen years old, and Prabhudas, a lad about
eighteen years old, Mr. Chhaganlal Gandhi's son, who had come
in the place of his father who was ailing and who was one of the
applicants, my wife applied at the prison gate for admission. You
told the party that you could not admit them as you had no
authority to grant permission and that you were awaiting reply
from the Government to whom the original application was sent by
you. On Mr. Maganlal Gandhi's pressing, you undertook to tele-
phone to the Inspector-General who, too, it seems could not grant
the proposed interview and my wife and party had to go away
disappointed.
On the 27th ultimo, my wife told me you telephoned to her
saying that you had heard from the Government that she and
three others who were named in her original application could
see me. This therefore excluded youngsters Radha and Prabhudas.
If you had the discretion retained to you, the whole of the
circumstances narrated above need revision. I feel sure that I
have not misunderstood my wife.
Moreover, if your discretion had been retained, Radha and
Prabhudas could not have been excluded.
I shall therefore be obliged if you will enlighten me on the
discrepancy between the Government reply and my wife's version,
and inform me further:
(1) On what grounds Pandit Motilal Nehru, and Hakim
Ajmal Khan and Mr. Maganlal Gandhi were excluded last year.
(2) Who will and who will not be allowed to see me in
future.
(3) Whether, at these interviews, I may receive information
on non-political matters and activities initiated and now being
conducted by my various representatives.
Though I will not permit myself to believe that any humilia-
tion was intended, I venture to think that the treatment received
by them was in fact humiliating. I should not like a repetition of
the unfortunate occurrence.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
From a photostat: S.N. 8018; also Young India, 6-3-1924
