271. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 30, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Today I take this up after prayer and after writing impor-
tant letters to the Ashram about the ailing persons of whom three
are having the fasting cure under Purushottam's supervision. So
you are not to grumble if I give this only half an hour.
Your letter came in yesterday, i.e., record good time after
your transfer.
You are hard on poor babies! ! You forget that you were
one and I expect thankful for having survived the baby stage!
Celibacy for those who can appreciate it and live up to it is a
very fine thing. But it must be allowed that it is a supernatural
state for embodied beings. They live in pain and will to the end
of time. It is therefore perhaps improper to be impatient with the
married state and its results. After all we owe Gautam Buddha,
Jesus, Zoroaster, Mohammed, Rama, Krishna, St. Francis and
numberless such men and women to the married state. We cannot
afford to be self-righteous. We cannot fathom the mystery of God.
We need therefore to be charitable at every step. We ourselves
stand in need of charity every moment. Married state is the only
deliverance for millions from a life of lust and misery. It is well
that Verrier and Mary have been able to give up the idea of mar-
riage but I was not going to judge them if they had married. They
are both striving to do the best that is possible for them. They
are brave and true souls. No one is expected to do more than the
best. To live up to one's dharma (i.e., the best in one) is better
than trying (vainly), to live up to another's dharma (i.e., his best).
A sweeper who lives up to his state is superior to the Brahmin
who is merely playing at his state. Is all this clear, I wonder? I
did not want to deliver this sermon to you. But your references to
Verrier and the poor dead twins jarred and I thought I would warn
you. Do not brood over this. These are momentary things in
you. Your bottom is sound and fully weather-proof. It is good
that you pour out your innermost thoughts to me without staying
to think how I would take them. I want to know you just as you
are. And here goes the 5.30 bugle. I must not stay with you longer
today. The rest you will have from Ba's letter.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6268. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9734
