778. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
WARDHA,
June 9, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,
I received your letter just now at 10 p. m. There has been
a misunderstanding. While you are in Patna the expenses will
be negligible. My impression was that you ate at the camp.
Your going to Bombay has already been arranged. As to your
programme after you are relieved of the Delhi work, I had
asked you but you refused to ay anything. Prabhavati also was
not in a position to tell me clearly. I want to make a villager
of you. But today you do not have the necessary strength.
Since you want me to have the onus of deciding the matter I
shall fix Rs. 20 or Rs. 25 per month to be paid to you. Many
co-workers are paid less. I shall allow the same sum for
Prabhavati. I would want Prabhavati to live at Wardha. The
three of us had agreed on this. If now you feel differently
Prabhavati will have no objection if you can let me know what
she will be doing in Bihar or anywhere else. It is also not
clear to me whether you wish to have her with you or just
anywhere in Bihar. All this is very delicate. I do not wish to
interfere in any way. When both of you need my advice I like
it because I feel that I can share your life. But I would like
it more if you could each conduct your life according to the
wishes of the other. Only yesterday I was ready to send Prabha-
vati to you. But she does not wish to go in this way. Madan-
mohan says you will be going to Madras on the 17th. Prabha
says: "What would be the use of my going? Jayaprakash cannot
even spare a minute to talk to me." I do not like all this. I
want something definite from both sides. I shall be reaching
Bombay on the 24th. I suggest that you come there. Talk to
Prabha and let me know your joint decision.
I have talked at length with Masani on communism. I have
read your syllabus. I do not like the manifesto that has been
issued. I have pointed out its blemishes to Masani. I shall also
speak to him when I can spare the time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
