77. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
January 30, 1932
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,
I have your letter.
It is probable that the gas trouble is caused by milk. Try
the following. Take curds instead of milk, but not more than
half a seer at a time. Add ten grains of soda bicarb to the
curds. You may take one and a half seers of curds during the
whole day. You can then take one and a half seers of dates. But
they also should not exceed half a seer at a time. As the dates are
likely to have been soiled, you should wash them before eating.
There is no harm in mixing them with the curds after washing
and taking out their stones. Remember that dates will need time
to get softened in curds. In addition, take also the raw vegetables
I mentioned earlier, but very little of them. You will certainly
feel thirsty between meals. You may then take water with soda
bicarb and lemon-juice added to it. This will stop the gas and
the body will feel light. Dates never cause gas. Probably it is
caused by milk. If the curds cause constipation, take milk once
instead of curds. If the milk is fresh and cold, you may soak
dates In it also and eat them. They will get soft only if you let
them soak for some time. If you eat them soon after putting
them in cold milk, you will not find them soft. Dates cannot help
you to become fat, but the milk might. One cannot live on
dates alone for many days, if one wants to do physical labour.
In the letter to Madhavji I mentioned one seer of dates, and this
letter is an amendment of that since here I have suggested one
and a half seers of curds or milk in place of three seers of milk.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
It is not necessary that you must take the things in the
quantities I have mentioned. If you find either of them excessive,
you may reduce it. Remember that seer here means 40 tolas.
Ask me about anything that is still not clear to you. Why
should you refer to Madhavji always as Shriyut and not as
Madhavji.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6819
