158. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
RAJKOT,
April 10, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,
Your letter of 6th instant has been redirected here.
I suggested a meeting of the foes to have it out among them-
selves without any reservation. But so much has happened since
that I do not know if it is worth while. They will only swear at
one another and bitterness will become more bitter. The gulf
is too wide, suspicions too deep. I see no way of closing the
ranks. The only way seems to me to recognize the differences
and let each group work in its own manner.
I feel myself utterly incompetent to bring the warring ele-
ments together for joint work. I should hope that they can
work out their policies with becoming dignity. If they do so it
will be well with the country.
Pandit Pant's resolution I cannot interpret. The more I study
it the more I dislike it. The framers meant well. But it does
not answer the present difficulty. You should, therefore, give it
your own interpretation and act accordingly, without the slightest
hesitation.
I cannot, will not, impose a Cabinet on you. You must
not have one imposed on you, nor can I guarantee approval
by A. I. C. C. of your Cabinet and policy. It would amount to
suppression. Let the members exercise their own judgment. If
you do not get the vote, lead the opposition till you have
converted the majority.
Do you know that I have stopped civil disobedience
wherever I have influence? Travancore and Jaipur are glaring
examples. Even Rajkot I had stopped before I came here. I
repeat that I breathe violence in the air. I see no atmosphere
for non-violent action. Is not the lesson of Ramdurg enough
for you? In my opinion it has done immense injury to the cause.
It was, so far as I can see, premeditated.
Congressmen are
responsible for it as they were in Ranpur. Do you not see that
we two honestly see the same thing differently and even draw
opposite conclusions? How can we meet on the political platform?
Let us agree to differ there and let us meet on the social, moral
and municipal platform. I cannot add the economic, for we
have discovered our differences on that platform also.
My conviction is that working along our lines, in our own
way, we shall serve the country better than by the different
groups seeking to work a common policy and common programme
forged out of irreconcilable elements.
I sent you wires from Delhi about my utter inability to go
to Dhanbad. Rajkot I dare not neglect.
I am well. Ba is down with malignant malaria. This is
the fifth day. I brought her with me when she had already
commenced it.
I wish you will conserve your health by taking decisive
action, leaving the result to God. Your reference to your father
is touching. I had the pleasure of meeting him.
I forget one thing. Nobody put me up against you. What
I told you in Segaon was based on my own personal observations.
You are wrong if you think that you have a single personal
enemy among the Old Guard.
Love.
BAPU
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939
