85. LETTER TO RAZMIA
[SINHGADH,]
March 27, 1920
MY DEAR RAZMIA,
I have already written to Dr. Ansari about the Khilafat ques-
tion. But I feel that I should write to you also.
My talk with
Hasrat Mohani has left me much disturbed. According to him
nobody believes in non-co-operation. But it has been taken up
merely to conciliate me. Now in a matter so important as this
there should be no question of conciliation and I would not have
anything simply for my conciliation. Moreover non-co-operation
to be successful has got to be taken up most enthusiastically by
all, and no great cause has ever prospered if it has been handled
without faith in it. I would therefore like you to discuss this
with Hakimji and let me know on his own behalf as also yours as
to what is the real situation. There is no doubt in my mind that
if this difficult Khilafat question is to be settled satisfactorily the
Mussulmans of India will not only have to know their own mind
but they must be prepared for sacrifices beyond measure. If there
is no spirit of sacrifice at least they should get rid of a man like
myself. I can secure no diplomatic triumph. I can only guide
1 Although this letter was written on Gandhiji's personal letter-paper
bearing his Sabarmati address, it must, in fact, have been written from Sinh-
gadh where he had arrived on March 26.
2 Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari (1880-1936); nationalist Muslim leader;
President, Indian Muslim League, 1920; President, Indian National Congress,
1927-
3 A leader of the Khilafat movement, who insisted on the boycott of Bri-
tish goods and was Gandhiji's chief opponent at the All-India Khilafat Conference
held on November 24, 1919
4 Hakim Ajmal Khan (1865-1927); eminent Muslim physician and poli-
tician who took a leading part in the Khilafat movement; President, Indian
National Congress, 1921-
along the difficult, narrow and thorny path of self-sacrifice allied
to absolute truth. Where these are absent I should feel like a
square man [sic] in a round hole. I suggested to Hasrat Mohani
that the principal leaders who want to do active service should
meet me in Bombay between the 6th and the 13th April, and we
could have a quiet chat, not for once only but often during the
Satyagraha Week.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 4590
