424. LETTER TO PURSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
SABARMATI,
February 2, 1930
DEAR SIR PURSHOTTAMDAS,
There was no need for an apology for writing to me in English.
My own impression is that the depreciation is largely manipulat-
ed and the letter from the India Office is intended to frighten us.
At the same time when the effect of the Congress resolution comes
to be really felt, I know that all the gilt-edged securities are bound
to suffer heavy depreciation unless the British Government under-
writes all losses and is in a position to do so. I know that during
the South African War even all the Republican notes, which 24
hours before the declaration of war were fully worth their face
value, became scraps of paper and I understand that such was
the case in France and Germany during the late War. It would not
surprise me, if we have to go through the same purgatory. The
meaning to me of the resolution is that the poor people who have
invested their little savings in these securities should not suffer and
that the British Government should be made to take over such
liabilities as are held by the tribunal referred to in the resolu-
tion to be unjust or unjustifiable.
Lastly, you will agree with me that the interpretation of the
resolution as also the momentary depreciation are not of so much
importance as what action India is going to take in the near
future. We are so many and our case is so overwhelmingly just
1 The addressee had written: "The repudiation of debts as approved of
by the Indian National Congress at their Lahore session by their Resolution
No. 10 has had considerable effect on the securities market both in England
and in India as you are perhaps already aware. In the course of this week
there has been published a letter addressed by the India Office to an investor
in London, and I mention this to show what anxiety this Resolution of the
Congress has created in the minds of investors in London. . . . My principal motive
in addressing this letter to you is to draw your attention to the serious deprecia-
tion of Indian sterling securities in London since December last. . . . There is
no doubt that an enormous amount of loss is being encountered by the present
holders of Indian Government paper, either rupee or sterling, and it cannot
be to the advantage of any school of politicians to make the innocent ones suffer.
. . ."
Vide also pp. 358 & 450-.
446
that, if the other parties instead of belittling the Congress resolution
and the Congress efforts were to endorse them, even if by reason
of their weakness, they cannot make common cause with the
Congress, we should come to our own without much disturbance
of the present life in the cities. A radical reshaping of the life in
the cities which is today related to the false and artificial standard
that is set up by the British administrators and that is out of all
keeping with the life of the millions is in any case necessary, if
the terrible burden of taxation upon the poor is to be removed.
I hope you are not among those who believe that by a mere
change of the constitution the starving ryots will find themselves
in a position to pay a larger revenue than they are paying today
or even to pay comfortably what they are paying now. In my
opinion the only meaning of swaraj to these people will be an
appreciable reduction in the taxes that they are paying directly
and indirectly and fixity of tenure. This cannot happen until we,
who are partners with the British administrators in the game of
the exploitation of the masses, are prepared to change the angle
of our vision even as we expect the former to do.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Purshottamdas Thakurdas Papers, File No. 96, 1930. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
