573. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P. S.,
NOAKHALI,
January 9, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
As you are aware I am on the move from day to day and this
is the third day. I have had varied experience on the first two days
which is worth noticing. On the first day at Mashimpur at the evening
prayer there was Ramdhun as usual. The Muslim part of the audience
stayed there during the Ramdhun and then some of them withdrew
at half-past five without saying why they were going. I observed that
it was not time for evening namaz because the sun was still shining.
So I asked one of my co-workers to enquire why they had gone. They
quickly replied that they did so because Ramdhun was recited at the
meeting. I, therefore, spoke about the withdrawal a report of which
you must have seen in the papers.
Yesterday was a pleasing contract. I was accommodated at
Fatehpur by Maulvi Ibrahim Sahib in his madressa. He and his fellow-
Muslims were very kind and very attentive. The Muslims attended the
prayer meeting in large numbers. I had enquired beforehand whether
they had any objection to the Ramdhun and they said they had none.
But they would like us to have no tabla or accompaniment because
the meeting would be held practically in front of the mosque. I at once
saw the point and without a murmur told my companion, who was in
charge of the tour, not to have any such accompaniment. The Muslim
part of the audience sat out the whole meeting and Maulana Ibrahim
Sahib took part in it and spoke affectionately about the programme.
Today however, at Dashpara, I observed that at first a poor Muslim
had consented to have me on his farm. But later on he recanted and
said he would not like to run the risk of the resentment of fellow-
Muslims. And so I am on a plot of ground owned by a Hindu. The
population in this village is overwhelmingly Muslim, there being 350
Muslim families to sixteen Hindu families.
I do not mention this by way of complaint. I had expected varied
experience both pleasant and unpleasant. I bring this to your notice
1 A fragment of this letter has already been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVI,
p. 330 under the date-line January 8, 1947.
2 Of a village-to-village walking tour; ibid., pp. 318-.
3 ibid. pp. 323-.
338
in order that, if you felt like it, you might use your influence in the
direction you must consider right as a man not as the Chief Minister.
You will readily do so if you realise that I am engaged on purely a
mission of peace and as an equal friend of both the parties.
I enclose herewith a copy of a statement made by Dr. Varadarajan
Pillai. It seems to be an extraordinary thing if it is true. I have asked
Prof. Nirmal Kumar Bose, whom of course you know and who is with
me, to write to the Magistrate. But I felt that I should bring this matter
to your notice.
There are other things that have come under my observation. But
I am anxious not to tax your energy more than necessary. For the
time being therefore I forbear.
One thing more I had forgotten to mention earlier. In this village
(Dashpara) Muslims told some Hindu friends that all my attempts at
bringing about real friendship between the two communities must fail
so long as I go about fully protected by armed police or military, by
whatever name these guards may be called. The fright of the military
keeps them from coming to me and asking all sorts of questions for
the resolutions of their doubts. I do see some force in their argument.
There will be none if either community was really brave. Unfortunately
both lack this very necessary human quality. I would, therefore, like
you to reconsider the position and if you feel convinced, to withdraw
this escort. I do not need it. I even feel embarrassed and it certainly
interferes with my sadhana. If you think that a firm and unequivocal
written absolution from me will solve your difficulty I would be quite
prepared to consider any draft that you may send me for signature.
Failing that I suggest your making a declaration that on a satisfactory
assurance being given to you by the Muslims in the area through which
I may pass regarding my safety you will withdraw the escort. If this
happens it will be a dignified procedure. I will certainly appreciate it
and it will produce a good effect all round. I hinted at some such thing
at the prayer meeting this evening.
Yours sincerely.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
