375. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
CAMP AGRA,
September 17, 1929
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter about the doings of Congressmen there.
What you say is too true. I am simply sitting still. I enclose
Dr. Hardikar's letter. What he says about the size of the flag is, I
think, quite true. Can you prepare these flags to the standard
size required by Dr. Hardikar and supply all the stores? I would like
you to consult Jerajani in this matter. He has also been making
experiments in flag making. He has been fairly successful. The
colours must undoubtedly be fast. Jerajani has used hand-spun
woollen stuff for making good flags. We might have both woollen
and cotton varieties but you know best.
Herewith is Niranjan Babu's letter. In so far as his narrative
means the slightest reflection upon you it is a bad narrative. There
is nothing wilful in it but it shows how cautious a man has to be
especially in talking to one who is nervous under a shock deli-
vered to him. I have sent Niranjan Babu a prescription for future
use which you will see from the copy of the letter herewith en-
closed. I have had nothing yet from Krishnadas nor from his
Guruji to whom I had to write about the incident owing to a
letter received from him. He sent me a long telegram apologiz-
ing for Krishnadas but of course it is not the apology I need.
I want an absolute clearance. Hemprabhadevi is absolutely
silent nowadays. I wonder if her silence is also due to the recent
disturbances. Have you regained your weight and are you quite
well now? One thing seems to me to be clear from the dietetic
literature that has come under my notice, namely, that polished
rice is unfit for consumption and a grain which requires so much
delicate handling as rice need hardly be taken when other cereals
are at hand. Wheat, milk or curds, uncooked green vegetables and
fruits seem to be just now a workable proposition. That the plant
world does hold an absolute substitute for milk I have no
doubt but the secret is still to be found. American friends as also
English friends have suggested the Soya Bean milk. I am trying
to secure the Soya Bean.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
Ends. Letter of Sjt. Niranjan Patnaik and reply
SJT. SATIS CHANDRA DAs GUPTA
KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR
NEAR CALCUTTA
From a photostat: G.N. 1609
