606. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
NEW DELHI,
October 16, 1946
CHI. PREMA,
Two letters of yours are lying in front of me. I started
writing a reply as soon as I received the second one, but laid
it aside when the people for whose sake I am here came in. I
am, therefore, writing the reply today.
I will say nothing about Nuremberg. In barbarity there are
no comparisons. Whether it is here or there, it is all "here".
It is not correct to say that I have abandoned constructive
work to come here, nor that I have yielded to the temptation of
politics. In fact life cannot be divided into compartments. The
organs of the body are called by different names, but the body
is one. The same is true about life. But since you think that
it is an error on my part, you should believe it to be so. One
day you will realize your error and see the unity of my life,
or reform me. I have never laboured under the delusion that
what I believe is true. Yes, what I believe is true for myself,
otherwise I would cease to be a satyagrahi. The same rule
applies to all.
And now your particular question. I should like the girls
to remain unmarried, but they cannot be forced to do so. We
must, therefore, help those who wish to get married.
It was, and is, Acharya Bhagawat's duty to plead with you
and other co-workers and carry them with him in whatever he
did. He made a mistake in doing what he did without consult-
ing you. You also should not tolerate his improper conduct
through your desire for gaining something from him. But you
did that. In this matter, too, the final decision must be yours.
For occasions do arise when one has to swallow such bitter
draughts. I have merely explained a general principle to you.
Please understand that I have no time to write more than
this.
If Sushila, who is here, has understood the situation better,
she will write to you. I am observing silence. It is doing me
good. I was afraid that I might break down. More when we
meet.
I was not happy that the meeting of the Agents did not
take place.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10449. Also C. W. 6888.
Courtesy: Prema Kantak
