548. LETTER TO KANCHAN M. SHAH
N[EW] D[ELHI],
Silence Day, October 7, 1946
CHI. KANCHAN,
I got both your letters. I do not at all like your having
fallen ill. Now that your yearning has been satisfied, you should
get well soon at least for the sake of the baby that will be born.
You will do so not by overeating but by eating moderately,
taking sun-baths, living in the open air, drinking clean water,
taking fruit juice, eating steamed or boiled vegetables and avoid-
ing sweets and spicy foods. If you take friction-baths and hip-
baths, you will get well soon.
Why need you feel ashamed of being pregnant? That is
what you were yearning for. Why need one feel ashamed of
428
what one yearns for and of what happens to everybody? You
must now overcome your sexual urge for three years at least. And
that for the sake of the child.
Yes, Munnalal has reason to be ashamed of himself, for it
was his ambition to observe brahmacharya though he had no ca-
pacity for it at all. I had cautioned him sufficiently. But what
could even he do? Could he have helped following whither nature
led him? If he humbly admits his weaknesses, they will disappear.
I advise you to have the confinement in Vyara itself. If
you wish, you may go to Sevagram for it. But there are diffi-
culties in that. To ensure easy delivery, Munnalal should be told
to stay away from you. Moreover, he should now earn enough
for a living. Nobody need hesitate to ask for his market-price.
I told Munnalal that, even if you two satisfied your passion,
you could continue to do my work. If, therefore, he is ready
to take up a regular job, I am prepared to give him one and
pay him for it. Whatever may have happened from my point
of view, Munnalal has committed no sin. He should, therefore,
humbly admit what has happened without feeling guilty about it
and take up whatever work is available. He should earn a modest
living and do whatever other service is possible in the time he
can spare from his duties as a householder. He should do no-
thing that will heighten sexual craving; he should try to control
it. The birth of a baby is a reminder. You may show this letter
to everybody without feeling the least embarrassment. Neither
of you has committed a sin. If any party is guilty, generally it
is the man. For the present I am here.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 8253. Also C. W. 6977. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
