291. LETTER TO WILLIAM WEDDERBURN
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 12, 1906
SIR WILLIAM WEDDERBURN
PALACE CHAMBERS
LONDON
SIR,
The position in the Transvaal of British Indians is getting day by
day more insecure and harassing. I need only recapitulate what is hap-
pening and appeal for active work.
Whilst it is true that the Home Government will be slow to inter-
fere with the Crown Colony of the Transvaal, I take it there must be
a limit to this policy of non-intervention. There is a Peace Preservation
Ordinance in the Transvaal under which the immigration of British
Indians is restricted in a most high-handed manner.
(a) The Ordinance was intended to preserve the peace [and], therefore,
to keep out rebels and others who were ill disposed towards the British
Government, but it is today being, in fact, solely used to restrict Bri-
tish Indian immigration.
(b) The British Indian Association has accepted the position that
non-refugee British Indians who do not possess educational attainments
may be kept out.
(c) As a matter of fact, even refugees who were in the Colony before
the war and who had paid £3 as a price for permission to reside in the
Colony are now being prevented from entering, except under most
difficult circumstances.
(d) Such men have to wait in the coast towns for months before
the permit officer would issue them a permit.
(e) A most vexing examination is carried on and then they are called
upon to put their thumb-impressions and to undergo other unnecessary
severities before they get a permit to enter the country.
(f) Their wives, too, are often required to produce documents before
they are allowed to enter the Transvaal.
(g) Their children over eleven years are totally prevented from
accompanying them.
(h) Children under twelve of such refugees are made to take out
permits before they can come. Just recently, a boy under six years
was torn away from his father and detained at Volksrust because he did
not hold a separate permit, in spite of the fact that the registration certi-
ficate of the father mentioned that he had two boys.
(i) Only three months ago, boys under sixteen, if they had their
parents, or if their parents were dead and they were with their guardians
in the Transvaal domiciled, were free to enter the Transvaal. Now, as
mentioned above, all of a sudden a new regulation has been sprung
upon the Indian community and boys who are under twelve only are
allowed to enter. The result is that many boys under sixteen who
have arrived in South Africa after considerable expense have, instead of
joining their parents who are domiciled in the Transvaal, to return to
India.
(j) About three months ago, temporary permits for Indians, who
wished to pass through the Transvaal on their way to other parts of
South Africa or intended to do some business, were granted fairly freely;
now such permits are issued after the greatest scrutiny. Mr. Suliman
Manga, the son of a well-known Indian merchant of Delagoa Bay, who
is studying at present in England for the Bar, recently returned from
England to pay a visit to his relatives in Delagoa Bay. He landed at Dur-
ban, applied for a permit to enable him to pass through the Transvaal
on his way to Delagoa Bay and the permit was refused. His case was
considered as if he was a British Indian. He went to Delagoa Bay,
therefore, by sea. There he attempted again through the Transvaal
Government to receive a temporary permit as he intended to see Pre-
toria and Johannesburg but his application was refused. He, therefore,
thought that he, having been born in Portuguese India, should approach
the Portuguese Government. He did so and a permit was immediately
issued to him. It comes, therefore, to this that a British Indian, no matter
what his status may be, cannot even pass through the Transvaal and
have safe conduct, but if an Indian belongs to a foreign power, he gets
a permit for the asking.
(k) From the above, it follows that Indians of attainments are un-
able to get a permit to settle in the Transvaal, that is to say, the Peace
Preservation Ordinance is so administered that, whereas before war any
Indian was free to enter the Transvaal, now an Indian who can enter
by reason of his being able to pass the educational test of the self-governing
Colony of the Cape or Natal is debarred from entering the Crown Colony
of the Transvaal. Here, there is no question of the British Government
having inherited pre-war legislation, but it is a question of deliberate[ly]
pressing into service an ordinance passed just after martial law and
which ordinance had no connection with British Indians.
1 Vide also "The Transvaal Permit Ordinance", pp. 278-.
Under Law 3 of 1885, the British Indian heirs of the late Mr. Aboo-
baker Amod, one of the Indian pioneer settlers of South Africa, have been
prevented from having the property left to them registered in their names.
Such is the working of the law regarding ownership of and by Indians.
It should be noticed that Natives of the Transvaal, as is quite proper,
are free to own landed property anywhere they choose. The Cape
Coloured people are also free to hold immovable property in the
Transvaal. The ban is placed only upon Asiatics.
Before war, Indians were not debarred from making use of any train
service in the Transvaal. Now the Railway Board has issued notices
to the station masters not to issue tickets to British Indians and Coloured
people for an express train service between Pretoria and Johannesburg,
thus causing serious inconvenience to Indian businessmen. It is highly
probable that relief will be ultimately granted, but this notice shows
which way the tendency of the Government lies.
In Johannesburg, as in Pretoria, British Indians and Coloured people
are unable to make use of the municipal tram cars.
In Natal, the position is briefly as follows: The Dealers' Licenses
Act causes the greatest amount of mischief. A Mr. Dada Osman, a
British Indian merchant of very long standing, had his store in Vryheid
before war when it was part of the Transvaal, [and] he traded there
unfettered. When Vryheid was incorporated with Natal, the anti-
Asiatic laws were also taken over, so that in Vryheid there is Law 3
of 1885 in force as also the Natal Dealers' Licenses Act. Acting there-
under, Mr. Dada Osman's licence has been taken away from him
and his Vryheid business has been totally ruined. Another case of
equally severe hardship has happened in the Ladysmith district. There,
one Cassim Mahomed has been trading on a farm for some time. Last
year, his servant committed a breach of Sunday Trading Law. He sold
a piece of soap and sugar to traps who were sent by an adjoining store-
keeper. The owner himself, it was proved, was absent. This year,
because of this offence, his licence has not been renewed. The Appellate
Board upheld the decision of the Licensing Officer, saying he acted on
the principle they had laid down in a case about a white man. This,
however, is not true. The white man in question was known to have
allowed his sub-tenants to traffic in liquor sold to Natives and was con-
victed of selling opium on his premises. No contravention of law was
made in comparison with the studied breach of regulations of the above
description by the white man and the technical breach of Sunday Trad-
ing Law [sic].
The third case is that of Mr. Hoondamal, to whom a transfer of
his licence from one place to another in Durban was refused. These
three are only illustrations showing what has been done under the Dea-
lers' Licenses Act in scores of cases. Mr. Chamberlain made representa-
tions to the Natal Government in connection with the hardship under
the law. The result was that the Natal Government issued instructions
that the law was not to be rigorously enforced, otherwise it would be altered.
It is not possible to give cases of greater hardship than those quoted
above. All that is claimed by British Indians is that the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court over the decisions of the Licensing Officers and the
Licensing Boards, which consist mainly of traders, should be restored.
Under the Immigration Restriction Act, rules have been now framed
whereby a fee of £1 is imposed for the issue of a domicile certificate to
each domiciled Indian who is entitled to it as a matter of right. A similar
fee is imposed for visitors' passes, that is, for Indians who want to pay
a visit to Natal as also for embarkation passes, that is, for authority for
Indians to pass through Natal to catch a steamer for India. This is an
indirect method of taxation and causes very much inconvenience and
loss to poor Indians.
I venture to think that these matters should be placed continually
before the Colonial and Indian Secretaries by the Indian Parliamentary
Committee.
I beg to remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original typescript signed by Gandhiji. Courtesy: Servants of India Society
