274. LETTER TO MOHANLAL PANDYA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Asadha Vad 10, August 3, 1926
BHAISHRI MOHANLAL,
We have no other yardstick with which to judge the state of
national awakening except the quantity of khadi produced, the
number of Antyajas educated and the number of Hindus and
Muslims who live in mutual amity. The figures for each province
should be added up and the sum will indicate the position there.
If we are sincerely working for these three causes, it does not
matter that the bureaucracy seems at present to become more
arrogant. Though the people may seem to have become dispirited
those who are working to strengthen the three movements I have
mentioned may rest fully confident that all will end well. There
are of course other fields of work too, such as municipalities, local
boards, public meetings, councils, etc. Let those who prefer to
work in them do so. Why should we envy them? Who pre-
vents anyone from taking up such work? Why should we be
angry with them? Everyone works according to his own lights.
If we, on our part, go on silently with our work and make
progress in it, the atmosphere will be cleansed by and by. The
swarajist horse is still prancing about all over the place, and we get
trampled upon now and then. When it finally allows itself to be
tied to its tether, we shall be more at ease. We should certainly
hold khadi exhibitions and conduct similar activities. We should
have faith that we shall gradually succeed in them. Shri Lakshmidas
has dedicated himself in all sincerity to the cause of khadi and is
working in the field according to his lights and to the best of his
ability. Let the fruit of his effort be what it may. If, instead of
thinking about the whole of Gujarat or of India, each of us pays
attention to his own small sphere of work and attains perfection in
it, work in the other spheres is bound to show equal perfection.
And now about national schools. If you are a practical
man, am I less of one? The suggestion which I have made is
also practical. If the pupils always lord it over us, the parents
send their children as a matter of favour to us and plainly refuse
to pay their fees, if the entire expenditure is met from voluntary
contributions so that in effect a farce is kept up. Rather than all
this, is it not more practical that we should free ourselves from
slavery to the pupils, decline to accept parents' favour, abandon
the make-believe and spend the time in teaching a smaller number
who are keen on learning? Let the teachers go round for madhukari
and the rest may be engaged in other productive activities. The
example of the man bitten by a snake will not apply here. In
that example, there is every hope of space being available. In
our case, on the other hand, there is hardly anything of the genuine
national spirit. Why should we deceive ourselves?
The real point in all these arguments is this-how much faith
do we have in our ideas?
SHRI MOHANLAL K. PANDYA
KHADI KARYALAYA
MAHUDHA
Via NADIAD
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12235
