373. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
October 10, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I had got your letter. You may have thought it too long,
but I did not feel so, especially as it gave me the news that the
'beggar' had started on his begging mission. Tell him that
I had got his letter. Since he has relieved me of my worry, I
intend this letter for him too. My body has almost recovered
its normal strength. My diet includes milk, oranges, mosambis,
grapes or pomegranates, and gourd and tomatoes among vegetables.
Sometimes I drop milk for a day or two. I walk twice a day,
for a total of an hour and a half. I write a great many letters.
I spin, as I used to do before the fast, not less than 200 rounds
daily, of more than 45 counts. This should reassure everyone.
I suffered much physically during the fast but the mind was
completely at peace. If the fast had had to be prolonged, I
would not have felt any strain on the mind. But it was for God,
at whose prompting I had undertaken the fast, to prolong it or
make it short. Ba is still permitted to stay with me for the whole
day. But that will probably stop now. Devdas can come and see
me for some time. However he does not come every day. Sardar
and Mahadev continue to be with me. Your health can be considered
all right. If you have lost some weight, that is to the good. But you
should not lose any more now. Vinoba's company has undoub-
tedly benefited you in that it has strengthened your faith in God.
He has a beautiful way with him indeed. It is also good that
you have had Gulzarilal's company. It is good, too, that you have
come to have faith in nature-cure methods and simple food.
These two save us from many diseases. Your daily programme is
excellent. You should be happy that you are a 'C' class pri-
soner. Personally, I have always disliked being in 'A' or 'B'
class. Even in 'C' class one can secure the facilities necessary to
preserve one's health. Has Gulzarilal become sufficiently strong
now? Is Madhavji all right? Sardar had acquired great speed
in his study of Sanskrit, but owing to the fast it has slowed
down a little. He is now preparing to resume the former speed.
So far our daily routine has been quite satisfactory. We eat
and sleep, read newspapers, pace up and down for a walk, read
221
and study what we wish to and spin. Carding is Mahadev's
monopoly. But he has suspended that work for some time,
for a fairly good stock of slivers has accumulated. Moreover,
Chhakkaddas also has been sending fine slivers. I get letters from
Wardha regularly. Give regards from us all to everyone there.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Panchama Putrane Bapuna Ashirvad, pp. 74-
