79. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 15, 1928
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got the letters from both of you. I get no time these days
and so dictate most of the letters between three and four in the
morning. This I find convenient. I have to give much of my
time to the problems of the common kitchen. I do that because
the experiment seems to me an extremely important one and it is
essential that I pay attention to it. At present about a hundred
persons take their meals in it. Despite this large number, there
is no noise at meal-time and complete peace is preserved. One
cannot be sure, though, how long this will last. We have shifted
the kitchen and merged it with the one in the Hostel, and the
room formerly used for the purpose is now occupied by women.
If you were here at present, you would thus see the Ashram
changed in many ways. Chi. Chhaganlal has handed over about
Rs. 10,000 which he had accumulated and now observes the vow
of non-possession quite strictly. He had the fullest co-operation of
Chi. Kashi in this act of self-sacrifice. That family has now joined
37-
the common kitchen. Mahadev had Rs. 4,000 with him, and he
has handed over that amount. The separate kitchens which
still remain will have closed down by the next Kartik Sud 1.
There are only a few of them.
Harilal came and stayed here for one day. Ramdas and Rasik
are still at Bardoli. The Gita recitation is kept up every day.
The eighteen chapters are finished in fourteen days.
I was prompted by love in writing what I did about the
Rustomji case in the "Autobiography". I have omitted other
names but given this one; my aim in giving certain names is that
they should be remembered as long as the "Autobiography" is
recognized as an important work. I follow what you say about
Miss Schlesin . But, then, isn't she half crazy? She has written
a sort of wild letter even to me. Ask me again if you do not
follow my point.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4741
