512. LETTER TO R. G. CASEY
KHADI PRATISHTHAN,
SODEPUR,
January 8, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
Herewith the note I promised last night to send to you.
1. Mahishadal—Tamluk sub-division, Midnapore District.
On the application of one Shridhar Chandra Goswami on
27th June, 1944, the presiding officer ordered the return of arti-
cles seized. These articles have not yet been returned nor com-
pensation offered, if the articles are missing (according to my
information). Original papers sent herewith. (Enclosure 1)
2. Contai sub-division.
Water that has become saline there and probably in the
other sub-divisions also should be drained out and renovated so
as to be drinkable.
I enclose herewith the original letter from the Friends'
Service Unit showing how urgent this work is. (Enclosure 2)
3. Abhoy Ashram, Comilla.
I attach hereto a paper marked 'Enclosure 3'. It discloses
a curious state of affairs, as I understand it. I know personally
that the Ashram activities were wholly beneficial and constructive.
Schools based on social reform were run, catering for mostly
Muslim children of spinning families who span yarn for wages;
a depot was established for the storing of yarn, cotton and khadi;
a hospital was conducted under the able supervision of Shri
Suresh Bannerji. (Enclosure 3)
4. Other Khadi Centres.
Other khadi centres affected are shortly referred to in en-
closure No. 4.
5. Sales Tax Act.
As to Sales Tax Act, I observe that the Act was passed
on 1st July 1941. Handloom cloth was excluded from the opera-
tion of the Act, but it was amended on March 30th 1944, and
the tax was raised from one to two pice per rupee. On 25th
June 1945, it was raised to three pice per rupee by the Gov-
ernor's Ordinance. Handloom cloth was made taxable though
originally omitted, but it is not clear when. Dhoti, sari and lungi
worth Rs. 10, Rs. 15, and Rs. 18 respectively are excluded from
the operation of the Act.
My point is that khadi, i.e., hand-spun and hand-woven,
or hand-spun yarn should be excluded from all taxes. Logi-
cally, hand-woven cloth also, though woven from mill yarn,
should be excluded for the tax hits the handloom weaver.
Therefore, the exclusion of dhoti, sari and lungi is of no help.
The revenue derived from khadi is altogether negligible. The
revenue derived from hand-woven cloth is fair because hand-
woven cloth is large enough in quantity to yield some income
to the treasury, but at the poor weaver's expense.
In taxing
khadi, however, thousands of poor hand-spinners are so hard hit
that the tax becomes so deterrent as to be punitive. I am quite
certain that such was never the intention of the framers of the
Act. The oversight has only to be brought to the notice of the
Government to be remedied. I may also mention that all the
khadi depots of the All-India Spinners' Association are benevolent
concerns. The conductors are servants of the A. I. S. A. which
according to the recent judgment of the Privy Council, has
been held to be a benevolent institution, not liable to income
tax.
Incidentally, I may mention that whilst fresh milk is excluded
from the operation of the Act, all other forms of milk such as
boiled milk, pasteurized milk, dahi, etc., are taxable under the
Act. The clause baffles me. The original Act is called Bengal
Act of 1941.
6. Feni.
Feni is within the Japanese bombed area. Therefore, 98
villages were evacuated by the Government. Assurance is said to
have been given that six months after the cessation of hostilities
the villages would be returned to the villagers. Nevertheless, 28
villages appear to be still in Government possession. At the time
of evacuation, removal of merchandise was strictly prohibited.
This is a case demanding close inquiry.
I enclose herewith an account furnished to me, marked
'Enclosure 5'.
I have hurriedly drawn up this letter. The chief aim is to
involve as little reading as possible for you. If, however, any
further papers are required I shall be prepared to furnish them on
my return from Assam, I hope on the 14th. As I told you last
evening I cannot myself vouch for the accuracy of the facts
given. They have been given to me by co-workers as being
accurate. But if that is not so I stand open to correction. If,
however, they are found to be accurate I suggest that they call
for immediate inquiry. I have taken care to refer only to those
things which can be remedied without much difficulty or expense
and yet they are the things which will give relief to the neediest.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosure : 5
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 116-
