395. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
ON THE TRAIN TO PATNA,
May 8, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
It strikes me that I should summarize what I said and
wanted to say and left unfinished for want of time, at our last
Sunday's meeting.
I
Whatever may be said to the contrary, it would be a blun-
der of the first magnitude for the British to be a party in any
way whatsoever to the division of India. If it has to come,
let it come after the British withdrawal, as a result of under-
standing between the parties or of an armed conflict which
according to Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah is taboo. Protection of mi-
norities can be guaranteed by establishing a court of arbitra-
tion in the event of difference of opinion among contending
parties.
2. Meantime the Interim Government should be composed
either of Congressmen or those whose names the Congress
chooses or of Muslim League men or those whom the League
chooses. The dual control of today, lacking team work and
team spirit, is harmful for the country. The parties exhaust
themselves in the effort to retain their seat and to placate you.
Want of team spirit demoralizes the Government and imperils
the integrity of the services so essential for good and efficient
government.
3. Referendum at this stage in the Frontier (or any Pro-
vince for that matter) is a dangerous thing in itself. You have
to deal with the material that faces you. In any case nothing
should or can be done over Dr. Khan Saheb's head as Premier.
Note that this paragraph is relevant only if division is at all
to be countenanced.
4. I feel sure that partition of the Punjab and Bengal
is wrong in every case and a needless irritant for the League.
This as well as all innovation can come after the British with-
drawal, not before, except always for mutual agreement. Whilst
the British power is functioning in India, it must be held
principally responsible for the preservation of peace in the
country. That machine seems to be cracking under the exist-
ing strain which is caused by the raising of various hopes that
cannot or must not be fulfilled. These have no place during
the remaining thirteen months. This period can be most profi-
tably shortened if the minds of all were focussed on the sole
task of withdrawal. You and you alone can do it to the ex-
clusion of all other activity so far as the British occupation is
concerned.
5. Your task as undisputed master of naval warfare,
great as it was, was nothing compared to what you are called
to do now. The single-mindedness and clarity that gave you
success are much more required in this work.
6. If you are not to leave a legacy of chaos behind, you
have to make your choice and leave the Government of the
whole of India including the States to one party. The Con-
stituent Assembly has to provide for the governance even of
that part of India which is not represented by the Muslim
League or some States.
7. Non-partition of the Punjab and Bengal does not mean
that the minorities in these Provinces are to be neglected. In
both the Provinces they are large and powerful enough to
arrest and demand attention. If the popular Governments
cannot placate them, the Governors should during the inter-
regnum actively interfere.
8. The intransmissibility of paramountcy is a vicious
doctrine, if it means that they can become sovereign and a
menace for independent India. All the power wherever exercised
by the British in India must automatically descend to the
successor. Thus the people of the States become as much part
of independent India as the people of British India. The
present Princes are puppets created or tolerated for the up-
keep and prestige of the British Power. The unchecked powers
exercised by them over their people is probably the worst
blot on the British Crown. The Princes under the new regime
can exercise only such powers as trustees can and as can be
given to them by the Constituent Assembly. It follows that
they cannot maintain private armies or arms factories. Such
ability and statecraft as they possess must be at the disposal of
the Republic and must be used for the good of their people
and the people as a whole. I have merely stated what should
be done with the States. It is not for me to show in this letter
how this can be done.
9. Similarly difficult but not so baffling is the question
of the Civil Service. Its members should be taught from
now to accommodate themselves to the new regime. They
may not be partisans taking sides. The slightest trace of com-
munalism among them should be severely dealt with. The
English element in it should know that they owe loyalty to the
new regime rather than to the old and therefore to Great Bri-
tain. The habit of regarding themselves as rulers and therefore
superiors must give place to the spirit of true service of the
people.
ADVICE TO STATION MASTER
437
II
10. I had a very pleasant two hours and three quarters
with Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah on Tuesday last. We talked about
the joint statement on non-violence. He was agreeably emphatic
over his belief in non-violence. He has reiterated it in the Press
statement which was drafted by him.
11. We did talk about Pakistan cum partition. I told him
that my opposition to Pakistan persisted as before and suggested
that in view of his declaration of faith in non-violence he should
try to convert his opponents by reasoning with them and not by
show of force. He was, however, quite firm that the question
of Pakistan was not open to discussion. Logically, for a believer
in non-violence, nothing, not even the existence of God could
be outside its scope.
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur saw the first eight paragraphs, the
purport of which she was to give to Pandit Nehru with whom
I was to send you this letter. But, I could not finish it in New
Delhi. I finished it on the train.
I hope you and Her Excellency are enjoying your hard-
earned rest.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
SIMLA
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 247-50
