369. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
[NADIAD,]
July 29, 1918
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I must indulge myself again. I begin to perceive a deep
meaning behind the Japanese reluctance to listen to the message
of a Prophet from a defeated nation. War will be always with us.
There seems to be no possibility of the whole human nature be-
coming transformed. Moksha and ahimsa [are] for individuals to
attain. Full practice of ahimsa is inconsistent with possession of
wealth, land or rearing of children. There is real ahimsa in defend-
ing my wife and children even at the risk of striking down the
wrongdoer. It is perfect ahimsa not to strike him but intervene
to receive his blows. India did neither on the field of Plassey. We
were a cowardly mob warring against one another, hungering for
the Company's silver and selling our souls for a mess of pottage.
And so have we remained more or less—more rather then less—up to
today. There was no ahimsa in their miserable performance, not-
withstanding examples of personal bravery and later corrections of
the exaggerated accounts of those days. Yes the Japanese reluc-
tance was right. I do not know sufficiently what the fathers of old
did. They suffered, I expect, not out of their weakness, but out
of their strength. The rishis of old stipulated that their religious
practices were to be protected by the Kshatriyas. Rama protected
Vishwamitra from the rakshasas disturbing his meditations. He
could later on dispense with this protection. I find great difficulties
in recruiting but do you know that not one man has yet objected
because he would not kill. They object because they fear to die.
This unnatural fear of death is ruining the nation. For the moment,
I am simply thinking of the Hindus. Total disregard of death
in a Mahomedan lad is a wonderful possession.
I have not written a coherent letter today but I have given
you indications of my mental struggle.
Do you know that Sorabji is dead. He died in Johannesburg.
A life full of promise has come to an abrupt end. The ways of
God are inscrutable.
With deep love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
