6. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE TRAIN,
[June 21, 1909]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I address my first letter from the train to you as I expect most
from you and as you are uppermost in my thoughts. When heart speaks
to heart, speech is superfluous. Yet I cannot help saying this much : I
do not understand your extraordinary love. I hope I deserve it all. Our
mutual attachment is the strongest possible testimony of our having lived
before in bodies other than the present ones.
1 Supplied by the addressee along with the information that Gandhiji left
Johannesburg for London on this date.
May I ask you to count your pennies. If you would hold your possessions
in trust for humanity, that is God, you must mind how you use every
penny.
In all your dealings with Call, you will I know remember that he
owes his present happier position to you. It is therefore your duty so
far as possible not to separate from him.
The new responsibility imposed by me on you or undertaken by
you is none too great for your large heart. It is your heart which has
to come into play and not the intellect merely. There need therefore
be no fear.
Lead kindly light
amid the encircling gloom,
Lead thou me on.
The night is dark and I am
far from home,
Lead thou me on.
I do not wish to see the distant scene,
one step enough for me, etc.
Putting that limitation on ourselves we may march on from scene
to scene without anxiety and without bewilderment.
I sent back the strap through Call as I found the other in the bag
received from Volksrust.
There need be no hurry about buying stands. But if you think that
you should buy any you may have chosen, pray let not my difficulties
stand in the way.
Remember me to the Buffer House and Mr. Kennedy and Miss
Hastings, Or. Nanji
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
31 FIRST AVENUE
DURBAN
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 The reference is to the addressee's appointment as Secretary of the British
Indian Association ; vide p. 14.
2 A hymn by Cardinal Newman
3 The identity of 'Buffer House' is not known.
4 An Indian medical practitioner of Durban; often treated the sick in the
Phoenix Settlement
