329. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 26, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
I am quite perturbed by your letter. Of course, the pertur-
bance is now gradually diminishing. My interpretation of your
letter is that you want to say no but have no courage to say
no. So you are planning to write a long letter. Why should I
place such a burden on you? I certainly do not want to force
you. Moreover, where is the question of coercion in such mat-
ters?
Hence I take your letter to mean that you are unable to
agree to my proposal. Mother has expressed to me, in a few
words, her distress. It is an unbearable thought that I should
1 Narayan Moreshwar Khare
2 Wife of N. M. Khare
SV: III. 14
be instrumental in bringing about your ruin and now Sushila's
ruin. It is comforting that whether happy or unhappy, Sushila
remains engrossed in her studies and in the hospital work.
Hence, if my impression is correct that you are unable to accept
Sharada's hand, then it is also your view that my duty is to
give up Sushila's services. Do not misunderstand me. I cannot
think of anything else. My heart cries when I look at Sushila.
How can I bear to see her life being ruined at my hands?
If your life can be rebuilt Sushila's life will be rebuilt too. In
that case, am I not solely responsible for her? She too would want
to live with us. Mother would be satisfied. But I see darkness
all round if your life is not rebuilt. But what can you do about
it? Nothing can be achieved by unnatural means. No good
can come of it. You will understand the reason for my haste.
This would mean that Sushila should be free here. I should
take possession of my own body. Till Mahadev is ready, you
should look after my physical needs and his work in the Fron-
tier [Province] and elsewhere. This much is not beyond your
capacity. Once Mahadev is all right, whatever is to be done
will be done. There is talk going on about Swami and Chandra-
shankar. In my view that is not at all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
