176. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
Monday [March 21, 1927]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
I have your letter.
When I get the money it will help the charkha movement.
I am very glad that pujya Malaviyaji is being progressively drawn
to the charkha. I shall want large amounts for the charkha work.
With his help I can raise larger funds.
Bhaiji and Rameshwarji have decided to donate money for
the construction of reservoirs of water for the Antyajas; it will be
spent as directed by them.
I did not know Parasram collected scraps of paper. I have
warned him against this fault. He will write to you. He had no
wrong motive. He is a simpleton but I can get work out of him.
He wishes to live with pujya Malaviyaji and Rabindranath for
some days. I have asked him to try on his own to get himself
admitted to their service.
In my opinion the following rules of conduct must be observed
to safeguard one's health while staying in Europe:
1. We should not take food to which we are not used.
2. In Europe they eat six or seven times a day, but we
must not eat more than thrice. Do not get addicted to taking
chocolate or other such things between meals.
3. They eat even at 1 o'clock at night. But we must eat
nothing after 8 in the evening. When visiting people and places
we are, it is believed, expected to take tea, etc. This is not true.
4. One should go walking at least six miles daily. One
should walk both in the morning and in the evening.
5. It is not right to wear too many clothes, secret being
that one must not feel cold. Walking shakes off cold.
6. It is not at all necessary to put on European dress.
7. One should try to get acquainted with the poor people
of Europe; walking helps such acquaintance. When there is time
at your disposal, it is better to walk.
8. Do not persuade yourself for a moment that since you
have gone to Europe you have got to do something. Attempt
only what clean and spontaneous efforts can accomplish.
9. Your stay in Europe will, I feel, result in at least one
good thing. You can certainly build up your body.
10. May God save you from mental debauchery; very few
Indians escape it. While their way of living is natural to them,
it only helps to intoxicate us.
11. The practice of reading the Gita and the Ramayana must
in no case be given up. If you have not been doing it already,
the sooner you begin the better.
I am sure you did not expect advice in such minute detail.
This I am giving because I have great faith in the goodness of
yourself and your brothers. Few rich people possess your good-
ness and humility. I seek an intense growth in these qualities and
I want to put them to use in the service of the nation. I have
no faith in the principle of shatham prati shathyam. Therefore,
wherever I see purity, truth and non-violence, etc., even in the
smallest degree, I start collecting the treasure with the care of a
miser, and it makes me happy.
You can ask for any further advice.
23-24 Bombay
27- April 4 Belgaum
25-26 Kolhapur
5-12 Madras
Yours,
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Please acknowledge receipt.
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6146. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
