138. LETTER TO D. C. BOSE
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 13, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I am ashamed that your letter of 30th June last year has re-
mained undealt with by me throughout all this time. You how-
ever had acknowledgments from time to time. I am not disposed
to blame my assistants in connection with the delay. Some of it
was unavoidable and some could have been avoided but for the
letter having been mislaid. I however understand that my reply
will not yet be too late.
I should be inclined to agree with the advice received by you
from an English friend and quoted at the end of your letter. If
there was really no better way, there was certainly nothing wrong
in your having written to me. For, part of my public work consists
in sharing, where I cannot solve, difficulties such as you have
mentioned. I can appreciate all you say about the good quali-
ties of Englishmen and even add to what you have said in your
letter. But in spite of the ample food I have received during the
past seven years for reflection1, my opinion of the system not only
remains unaltered [but] has received further confirmation. And
the Excise Department is among the blackest spots in the system. I
could not therefore be reconciled to your being in it if I can in
any way help you to be out of it. Your letter attracts me to you.
I would like to have you in some of the departments of national
service which I am more or less controlling. And if you can get
some privilege leave, I would like you to overtake me wherever
I may be so that I can see you face to face and discuss all the
questions you have raised in your letter. I am in Mysore up to
the 15th of August and my headquarters will be Bangalore till
that time. I expect to be away from time to time from Bangalore,
but within the Mysore State and therefore not more than a few
hours' journey from Bangalore where the keeper of the house I
am staying will direct you.
Meanwhile, I can answer one of your questions straightaway.
If you have the real call from within you will be not only right
but it will be your duty to resist all the pressure that can be
brought to bear upon you for marriage. If you can control your
carnal appetites, I have no doubt that the obligations which you
feel you have towards the members of your family impose the res-
traint upon you.
If you intend to come and see me, please bear in mind that
whilst it will be possible, all other conditions being satisfied, to
find enough for the support of your family, you will have to be
free to be posted wherever duty calls you and even to move
about from place to place, and if you do not know Hindi, you
will be expected to learn it.
Yours sincerely,
D. C. BOSE, ESQ.
55, CORNWALLIS STREET
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 12601
