486. LETTER TO SATCOWRIPATI RAY
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 12, 1927
DEAR SATCOWRI BABU,
I have your long and full letter. Please do not apologize.
If I cannot render concrete service, I can at least give you the
consolation of a friend whose whole heart is with you in your
trouble. I shall treasure the detailed information you have given
me for future use if chance throws itself my way. But I shall be
unable to raise for you the sum you need to tide over your
difficulty. Meanwhile I would advise you strongly to concen-
trate your attention upon building up your practice. I see no
way out of it just at present. I know it is bad; but we do not
always get things that we like or that are good. Practice evidently
is just now your swadharma1, and therefore the best for you. But
will you not make up your mind that no matter how much
practice you get, you will no longer spend on marriages? Whether
it will come in my life or not, the time is coming when men
like you will have again to give up practice, give up hearth and
home and plunge into the struggle for liberty. Let this practice
therefore be a trust for you. But you and your family should
live as the poorest of our people, and therefore you should bring
up your daughters now to grow up without thinking of marriage,
and when they are to be married, they are to be married without
any expense whatsoever. Do you know that during the past two
years, I have been helping to marry several couples without the
expense of even Rs. 10 you might say. Two of these were my
relations, one my son, another my grand-daughter. The others
were daughters or sons of friends and co-workers, all having lived
before like you and me. In order to hearten you, I must men-
tion them. Vallabhbhai was a barrister with a first-class prac-
tice. His son was married the other day at the Ashram with
nothing but the simple religious ceremony. No dinner was given
and not one single piece of ornament was given to the bride.
The other case was that of Dastane, the erstwhile leading lawyer
of Bhusaval. His daughter was given to a co-worker. She had
no ornament except a few yards of yarn of my own spinning
round her neck. Dastane had a few friends who imposed them-
selves on him when he gave his daughter in marriage, and
who had to be fed for one or two days. I do not think that
they were more than 10, if that number. He had many more
friends. But he had warned them against attending. Naturally
he had sent no invitations. I could give other similar instances.
In our struggle for freedom these social reforms have really become
extremely necessary.
I evidently did not make myself sufficiently understood about
making a living from khadi. I did not suggest that you should
set up your own khadi business at present. What I suggested
was that you might come into the khadi service, become a
technical expert and so indispensable to that service. But that
service could not give you more than Rs. 100 or 125 at the outside
per month. It must remain a poor service. And what I meant
about the members of the family was that all young men and
women might do something or other in connection with khadi
so that all would feel that they were contributing to the family
till. Several workers are trying to remodel their life in accordance
with this pattern. But I say that this may be too much for you,
and if it is too much, that is no reflection upon you. After all
mental adjustments cannot take place at will, and mental adjust-
ments take practical shape only after they have saturated our
being and become part of it. I have therefore thrown out the
suggestions. Let them work their way in your mental laboratory.
And whilst you are following out your practice, I would like
you to study, even if it is as a matter of recreation, the technique
of khadi by passing a few days in the Khadi Pratishthan, Sodepur,
and a few days in Abhoy Ashram, Comilla. Visit their branches,
study how things go on there. And if you get a little bit of
leisure, go to the Satyagraha Ashram, Sabarmati, study the history
of each family living there, see what the women are doing along-
side of men, cross-examine them and find out whether they are
really happy with their altered condition. Then see Rajagopala-
chari's Ashram, see what Gangadharrao is doing in Karnataka in
his own estate. And when you have done this, you will have
some notion of what I mean. It is really difficult to express all
that you have in you in words. Language is a limitation, and a
terrible limitation of one's thoughts, and therefore a very poor
vehicle for expressing them.
Lastly, if at all you feel like it, do come down to Bangalore
where I am yet to rest up to the end of the month and pass a
few days with me.
I note what you say about Subhas Bose. I am following him
as closely as I can through the papers. If you see him, please
tell him that I often think of him. I did send him a telegram
immediately on his release. I am anxious to know whether he
got it. I don't want any reply from him. I simply mention this
as you have been good enough to volunteer news about him which
I appreciate.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12587
