3. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
Personal
January 19, 1943
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I received your kind letter of 13th instant yesterday at 2.30
p.m. I had almost despaired of ever hearing from you. Please
excuse my impatience.
Your letter gladdens me to find that I have not lost caste
with you.
My letter of 31st December was a growl against you. Yours
is a counter-growl. It means that you maintain that you were
right in arresting me and you were sorry for the omissions of
which, in your opinion, I was guilty.
The inference yon draw from my letter is, I am afraid, not
correct. I have re-read my letter in the light of your interpreta-
tion, but have failed to find your meaning in it. I wanted to
fast and should still want to, if nothing comes out of our corres-
pondence and I have to be a helpless witness to what is going
on in the country, including the privations of the millions owing
to the universal scarcity stalking the land.
If I do not accept your interpretation of my letter, you
want me to make a positive suggestion. This I might be able
to do, only if you put me among the members of the Working
Committee of the Congress.
If I could be convinced of my error or worse, of which you
are evidently, I should need to consult nobody, so far as my
own action is concerned, to make a full and open confession and
make ample amends. But I have not any conviction of error.
I wonder if you saw my letter to the Secretary to the Govern-
ment of India of 21st September, 1942. I adhere to what I
have said in it and in my letter to you of 14th August, 1942.
Of course, I deplore the happenings which have taken place
since 9th August last. But have I not laid the whole blame
for them at the door of the Government of India? Moreover I
could not express any opinion on events which I cannot in-
fluence or control, and of which I have but a one-sided account.
You are bound prima facie to accept the accuracy of reports that
may be placed before you by your departmental heads. But you
will not expect me to do so. Such reports have before now
often proved fallible. It was for that reason that, in my letter
of 31st December, I pleaded with you to convince me of the
correctness of the information on which your conviction was
based. You will perhaps appreciate my fundamental difficulty
in making the statement you have expected me to make.
This, however, I can say from the house-top, that I am as
confirmed a believer in non-violence as I have ever been. You
may not know that any violence on the part of Congress work-
ers I have condemned openly and unequivocally. I have even
done public penance more than once. I must not weary you
with examples. The point I wish to make is that on every such
occasion I was a free man.
This time the retracing, as I have submitted, lies with the
Government. You will forgive me for expressing an opinion
challenging yours. I am certain that nothing but good would
have resulted, if you had stayed your hand and granted me the
interview, which I had announced on the night of the 8th
August, I was to seek. But that was not to be.
Here may I remind you that the Government of India have
before now owned their mistakes as, for instance, in the Punjab
when the late Gen. Dyer was condemned, in the United Prov-
inces when a corner of a mosque in Kanpur was restored,
and in Bengal when the partition was annulled ? All these
things were done in spite of great and previous mob violence.
To sum up—
1. If you want me to act singly, convince me that I was
wrong, and I will make ample amends.
2. If you want me to make any proposal on behalf of the
Congress, you should put me among the Congress Working
Committee members. I do plead with you to make up your
mind to end the impasse.
If I am obscure or have not answered your letter fully,
please point out the omissions, and I shall make an attempt
to give you satisfaction.
I have no mental reservation.
I find that my letters to you are sent through the Govern-
ment of Bombay. This procedure must involve some loss of
time. As time is of the essence in this matter, perhaps you
will issue instructions that my letters to you may be sent directly
by the Superintendent of this Camp.
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 21-2; also Correspondence
with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 6-
