203. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
SIMLA,
July 21, 1931
In accordance with my promise made at the Viceregal Lodge
this evening I reduce to writing my request for an impartial tri-
bunal to decide upon matters of interpretation of the Settlement
between the Government and the Congress that might be sub-
mitted to it from time to time whether on behalf of the Govern-
ment or the Congress. The following are the matters that require
immediate adjudication unless there is agreement between the
Government and the Congress as to the interpretation:
(1) Whether picketing includes picketing of liquor-shop
auction sales?
(2) Whether it is competent for provincial Governments to
prescribe the distance at which picketing can be done
so as to render it impossible for picketers to be within
sight of the shop picketed?
(3) Whether it is competent for a Government to limit
the number of picketers so as to make it impossible to
picket all the entrances of a particular shop?
(4) Whether it is competent for a Government to defeat
peaceful picketing by permitting sale of liquor by the
picketed shopkeeper at places other than licensed and
during odd hours?
(5) Interpretation of clauses 13 and 14 in the application
of particular cases which provincial Governments have
regarded as not coming under those clauses and the
Congress has held otherwise.
(6) Interpretation of the word 'return' in clause 16(a).
(7) Whether a return of guns forfeited after cancellation of
licenses for participation in civil disobedience is covered
by the Settlement?
(8) Whether restoration of certain property seized under
Ordinance IX and of Watan lands in Karnatak is
covered by the Settlement and if it is, is it competent
for a Government to impose any conditions upon such
restoration?
(9) The meaning of the word 'permanent' in Clause 19.
(10) Whether it is competent for the Education Department
to impose conditions upon students who took part in
the civil disobedience campaign before admitting them
or in virtue of perpetual rustication imposed during
the civil disobedience campaign to debar the admission
of students under the ban?
(11) Whether it is competent for a Government to punish
a person or corporation, by reason of his or its having
taken part in the civil disobedience campaign, e.g.,
forfeiture of pension, or grants and the like to munici-
palities?
These are not to be treated as the only matters to be sub-
mitted to the tribunal. It is possible that unforeseen cases may
arise in future which may be claimed to come under the Settle-
ment. The procedure to be adopted would be that written state-
ments would be submitted both on behalf of the Government and
the Congress and the points would be argued by counsel on behalf
of the Government as on behalf of the Congress. The decision of
the tribunal would be binding on both the parties.
As I told you in the course of our conversation whilst I say
nothing at the present moment as to a tribunal for the examination
of questions of facts in the event of differences between the Govern-
ment and the Congress I have not waived the demand. Occasions
may arise when the differences may be so vital as to make it
obligatory on any party to press for a tribunal for the examination
of such cases also. I should, however, hope that we might be
able to settle all points of difference without reference to any
tribunal.
Home Department, Political File No. 33/XVII/31-Poll/1931. Courtesy:
National Archives of India
1 For the addressee's reply, vide Appendix V.
