274. LETTER TO PYARELAL
June 2, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
Your letter was received late. You had written 'Shegaon',
which is not this Segaon. The letter went to some other She-
gaon. If you write 'Wardha', I shall receive the letters regu-
larly and intact. The postal service is bad here.
You must have read my letter to Sushila which I wrote
yesterday. You will see that I have gone further ahead.
Now what have I got to draw out of Sushila? The whole
misunderstanding arose because of my misguided imagination
and poor Sushila had to pass through an ordeal. I am not
now feeling sorry about it. Whatever I did had been prompted
by my love. But according to my definition I proved to be a
father with sensual tendencies. How can such a father do justice
even to his own children? He would see his morbidities in
others. Where do you figure in this? According to my analysis,
this entire tragic episode is the result of my mistaken thinking.
Now my eyes have been opened and so things must calm down.
Does my diagnosis now sound complete ? The credit for every-
thing goes to Sushila's firmness.
I have now understood about Sushila. Now why should I
worry? Did my worry have behind it the fear that Sushila
might be harbouring a scorpion? Sushila having shown her crys-
tal purity, why should I worry about her? She will shine
wherever she settles.
I am enclosing a copy of the I note have addressed to co-
workers. I hope it will make everything clear. Give this to
Devdas to read.
What should I say about you? My conclusion is clear. If I
have to lose you, the blame will be entirely on me. I realize
that in some matters I am slow-witted. I shall not go into a
fresh analysis of myself. If I lose you, I shall know myself as
I really am. If I can have you back with me in the natural
course, I shall feel reassured that I was not an absolutely
undeserving co-worker and father. I have written to Sushila
that if my meritorious acts do not save me, hers will certainly
save her. During this period of turmoil I have without a doubt
obtained a jewel in the person of Sushila. By saying this, I am
not undeservedly praising her. I am describing her as I see her
at present. Your letter of today confirms that thought.
Sushila writes that I should get my blood-pressure taken
twice a day and get my urine also examined twice a day.
That will be possible when you come here and attend to it.
I am myself not too keen about it. All that Sushila wants
you can carry out. But definitely not right now. Only after you
have settled everything there and settled Sushila well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the
Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
