149. LETTER TO PYARELAL
Diwali, 8.30 p.m. [November 11, 1940]
CHI. PYARELAL,
I am able to reply to your letter only now. About the man-
1
From the contents. In 1940, Gandhiji left Wardha for Calcutta on
February 15 on a month-long tour and had been writing to the addressee, dissuading
her from accompanying him on his tour; vide Supplementary Vol. III, p. 297.
From the contents it appears that this letter belongs to 1940, in which
year Diwali fell on this date.
111
112
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
woman question I shall only say this. I had talked of the ideal I had
indicated that I would prefer. But any decision can be given only
after considering all the attendant circumstances. Risk is no doubt
involved in a man taking service from a woman. Hence the principle
I mentioned can be followed in practice only to a very limited extent.
Applying it in my own case, I certainly cannot take service from just
anyone. I too have to be on my guard. Considering all this, I have
come to the conclusion that if I must take service from a woman, it
should only be from Sushila. Till such time as she is not here, I should
take whatever service I can have from you. It is altogether another
matter what should be done if Sushila finally does not come.
Under no circumstances can I have A.S. do the massage, etc.
For it would not do any good neither to her or to me. I cannot bear
the thought that I am like God to her. I do not possess those
attributes. You should take it that I merely suffer her. So you must
dissuade her. I certainly can dissuade her myself but I should not like
to shoulder the responsibility.
It is true that I rarely sleep facing you. The reason is this; I
have let her get into a certain habit. I cannot suddenly break away.
Here it is not a question of a person being of the same sex or the
opposite sex but of a person as person. It would have been the same
if I had allowed a man to get into the habit. There is one thing about
her though. She is not able to cling to me. I had the desire but with
some difficulty I have freed myself from it.
As for you, I could sleep with you all the time and still it would
not be enough for you. To satisfy that desire of yours I would have
to give up sleeping. I could do even that. But I have not found it
necessary. That is why I have been putting up with it as far as
possible. I have told you that I find it difficult to sleep with somebody
in bodily contact with me. I would put up with that only if you came
to sleep early and left after a little physical contact. But I would not
be very eager for it because when I am really asleep, I cannot do
even that. I would like you to be satisfied with whatever physical
contact you have while serving me. To give you that satisfaction I
would be willing not to take service from any other person and have
yours. I would not test you. I would regard it sinful to do so. For
testing you I would not sleep with you even for a moment. My faith
is backed by knowledge. I had to ask you about the Koran, and the
LETTER TO MAGAN AND MANJULA MEHTA
113
knowledge that I gained thereby was sufficient for me. I have no
doubt about it at all.
Now I think I have replied to most of the points. In short
(1) I only want to take from you whatever service you can give.
(2) When Sushila comes, you may discontinue your services for her
sake, but I would have no objection if you continued. I would like it
as much as I do service from Sushila. A. S. means a lot to me. But
because of her mistaken belief I only put up with such service as she
gives. I would be happy if she left me today. I would be happy if she
gave up serving me today. That is my sincere attempt. It is the
opposite in your case. I would like to accept as much service from
you as you would give. I have taken that service. I have known its
worth.
(3) Hence, you have got to free me soon from massage by A.S.
I forgot to mention one thing. I do not like it the least bit that
you lie on a mat all through the night. I know I could have pampered
you. I purposely hardened my heart. It is your duty to sleep on a
proper bed covering yourself. It is wrong and sinful not to do so. It
is certainly upsetting for me. So, it is not right that, even if
unwittingly, you are testing me by sleeping on a mat.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
