532. LETTER TO FULCHAND B. SHAH
April 20, 1933
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
At last I got a letter from you after waiting for one for a
long time. All of us were wondering why there was no letter
and were, therefore, very much pleased when we got it.
I cannot understand what happened to my letter. My atti-
tude in the matter is that we should write what we wish to, and
not worry whether or not the letter reaches the addressee.
Our life goes on from day to day.
We often think about your enlarged family there, but feel
sure that, since you are quite a few veterans there, things are going
on without friction. If an accident occurs to a railway train,
a good many people will die. If, on the other hand, anything
happens to an old-fashioned cart, at the most the riders feel a
jerk. They do a few repairs to the cart and jump on to it again.
Before the age of the railway, the pace of things was slow. But
we rarely find this from reading history. But we do hear about
the increase in accidents and lunatic asylums. However, sanatanist
friends argue that I have no right at all to talk about these things,
since, though I write against trains, doctors, etc., I am eager
enough to travel by train whenever I get an opportunity and a
bicycle runs down to Dr. Kanuga's dispensary the moment I have
an inflammation in one of the eyes. This is quite true. But poor
sanatanists, do they know that during the last fifteen months I
have not stepped into a train even once nor sent anybody bicycling
to Dr. Kanuga?
Tell Surendra that to get cough and low fever is against the
rules of the Ashram. How did he get them? He should write
to me in detail or someone else should, whose turn it may be
to write. Darbari may not have used many of his turns; if so,
let him use one of them for writing to me. I hope Surendra gets
regulation food for a sick prisoner. I suppose Vithal knows that
his father and sisters have returned to the Ashram.
I have one golden suggestion for safeguarding health. Any-
body who finds that a certain item of food does not agree with
him should leave it. Nobody dies for remaining hungry, whereas
it can be proved that 999 people out of a thousand fall ill through
465
54-30
over-eating or eating wrong things. I can say much else, but it
will serve no purpose.
If you or any other friends wish to discuss with me any ques-
tions in connection with the movement against untouchability,
you will be permitted to see me. Of course you should not ask
for such permission if you have nothing to discuss with me about
that subject.
And now the replies to the questions asked by Mohanlal,
the school-teacher from Bavla:
1. By abhyasa the Gita means regular reading of something
which is worth pondering over, though one may not feel interested
in it. Such regular study enables one to maintain the current of
one's thoughts in the right direction. The Lord has coupled
vairagya with abhyasa. But the two things are practically the
same. Fixing one's mind in abhyasa necessarily means withdraw-
ing it from other things, and that is vairagya.
2. Prasad may be described as serene contentment. We feel
contented when we get the things of the world which we desire,
but such contentment is useless and springs from the satisfaction of
the senses. Since the goods of the world are short-lived, the content-
ment which they bring is also short-lived. The goods of spiritual
life are eternal possessions, and so the contentment produced by
them is also abiding. It is an experience beyond the grasp of
the senses, an experience of the mind and the heart. One can,
therefore, feel true contentment only when one becomes indi-
fferent to the happiness of the senses. This is the contentment that
the Gita talks about.
Regards from us all to everybody there. I got Raojibhai's
letter. I will reply to him by and by.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9651. Courtesy: Chandrakant F. Shah
