125. LETTER TO F. G. PRATT
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 15, 1918
DEAR MR. PRATT,
We were not able on Wednesday last to resume discussion of
my complaint about unbecoming language used in Gujarati
circulars. I enclose copy of a public notice dated the 14th
January over the Collector's signature. I have underlined what
I have ventured to term undignified and offensive. The underlined
portion insults both the Secretaries and those who have accepted
their advice. As I told you I do not think that the Collector
had intended to use expressions which in the Gujarati language
could not be used about respectable men.
You will find herewith enclosed a copy of a circular over
the Mamlatdar's signature. I venture to suggest that the language
of this circular is open to grave objection.
1 For an edited version of this letter vide Vol. XIV, pp. 187-.
2 Of the Gujarat Sabha, viz., G. V. Mavalankar and Krishnalal Desai
126
As to the anti-dairy activity, I enclose herewith the circular
which is being printed specially for distribution. You will notice
that it covers the whole ground. There is a slight misunder-
standing in your letter. I have not confined my attention to the
milk supply to the infants of the sellers only, but my attention
extends to the public at large.
In my opinion milk supplied to the dairies is so much milk
taken away from the infants' mouths. Could you give me some
details as to the coercion alleged to have been used by some people
against milk-sellers intending to deal with the dairies? If I knew
the villages and perhaps the names of the offenders I would try
to reach them.
As for the forfeiture notices I would venture to say this. To
confiscate land worth several thousand rupees' assessment is, in
my opinion, a punishment out of all proportion to the default
and can therefore only be termed vindictive. I observe that more
such notices have been issued. I hope they will be withdrawn.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10629. Courtesy : Chhaganlal Gandhi
