257. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
July 23, 1934
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter today.
Your analysis is correct. I don't feel disappointed when I
find that somebody has not fulfilled my expectation, for I don't
see anybody's fault in such failure. I don't blame even myself.
I gave according to the best of my lights, and you all received as
you could. When all are imperfect, nothing else can happen.
At the age of about thirty, I happened to read, "Through hundreds
of thousands of disappointments, endures imperishable hope". I
had pondered long over this line, memorized it and used to sing
it to myself. The ghazal was a source of great consolation to me.
Now I don't even need its support. How can I spare time even
to keep count of the number of disappointments?
The illusory appearance of silver in a mother-of-pearl or of water
in the sun's rays, although unreal at all times, cannot be avoided. 2
If you or I feel that Bal is doing wrong, what is that to poor
Bal?
I hope you understand the meaning of these lines. If you
don't, ask Devdas. The doha is by Tulsidas. It has had a profound
effect on my mind.
Man cannot but cling to an illusion so long
as it seems truth to him.
That is why the world has been de-
scribed as an illusion and a snare, as maya.
I will be content if
you always do your best.
I haven't written to Mr. Cousins, as
I couldn't get time to do that. But since Rajaji has now written
to me positively, I am waiting till we meet in Benares.
If you feel a strong wish to come to Wardha, you may do so.
Otherwise, after paying the intended visit to relations, go to the South.
I have not abandoned Harilal, nor given up hope about him.
I am serving him by not yielding to him. The saying means "to
follow his wishes". I am extremely doubtful about the rightness
of the course which has now been adopted.
He has always lived
thus up to now.
He used to be brave, but friends have deprived
him of his capacity for self-reliance.
And now he has thought of
[business in] patent medicines.
But as all of you have approved
of this solution, I need not criticize it. What seems right to one,
that is one's dharma. Keep writing to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7287. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi
