298. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
MUSSOORIE,
May 30, 1946
CHI. AMTUL SALAAM,
I have your letter written from Indore before you left for
Bombay. As long as you rely on anybody except God, there will
be nothing but darkness around you. We have not heard of
the blind leading the blind. It is an error and ignorant attach-
ment to say that a particular person guides one. That all of us
let ourselves be guided, up to a point, by somebody is one thing
and to rely upon one person in all matters is another. I see this
every moment, and more clearly in your case. My test has no
meaning at all. I do not test anybody, nor do I wish to do so.
Really speaking I do not know how to test anybody. You can,
therefore, stay in Bombay. Kafi Khan can guide you best and
you can guide him. After all you are brother and sister and
there would be nothing unusual in your guiding each other. Nor
is there anything unusual in your trying to help Rashid Khan's
widow. If your advice is not accepted in all matters, you should
not feel offended. However, how can I fully know the position
in your family and its affairs? I am sure, therefore, that
you should do what seems best to you. What I have said above
concerns the members of the same family. But you have looked
upon the Ashram as your family. You may draw from it what-
ever consolation you can. You need not ask me even for that.
You know all the members of that family. You may, therefore,
take from each, whatever service you can easily get from him or
her. You need not ask me to help you in that matter. You
may go to the Ashram whenever you wish to and leave it when-
ever you feel inclined to do so. When you go to the Ashram,
observe its rules during the time you remain there. After leav-
ing it you may follow whichever you can. The others do the
same. There is no benefit in carrying with oneself wherever
one goes what one finds a burden.
In Borkamata you have created your own family. I did
not know about it. Whether to go there or not also rests with
you. If I have forbidden you, I withdraw my prohibition. If
anything happens there or somebody does not respect your wishes,
do not seek my help. I do not even know everybody there.
You have by now written a good many letters. Since you
had lost a dear brother, I felt that I should share your sorrow
and, therefore, wrote to you despite pressure of other work. You
should not take improper advantage of that now. If you need
to write to me on some special business, that would be a differ-
ent matter. Make your way in life truthfully and with ease
and do everything with God alone as witness. Give up your
attachment to me. To rely on one human being in all one's
affairs is nothing but attachment.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I got Hosa's letter just now. . . .¹
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 520
