196. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Silence Day, Magshar Sud 1, 1986 [December 2, 1929]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I did not wish to suggest that one should not write long
letters even on one's birthday. Your letter is all right. I do
send you my blessings. The pain is deep. But Ramanama is
not meant for a boil, which can be cured with poultice. Rama-
nama is meant for making a bridge across the sea, for making
paper boats sail, for turning stone into water and water into
stone. So, you cling to it with faith and devotion. Do not
worry if you can see no results on the surface. You will triumph
in the end. Your letter is torn. I do not remember the ques-
tions. You find your own answers or ask again. The paper
should be such that it does not get torn. I do remember one
question. While uttering Ramanama, I do not concentrate on
any idol. I do not worship Rama as an idol. Have you not
seen that we worship the name? Tulsidas has said that the
name of Rama is greater than Rama himself. In other words,
the indescribable element which is beyond physical existence is
greater than what resides in the body. Utter the name of God
and do charitable deeds. The significance is not of Rama the
king but of the name of Rama. Have you not seen my defini-
tion of God? Usually I had been saying and writing that God
is Truth. In the new manual I have deliberately improved
upon that definition and I now say Truth is God. I am here
thinking of that Truth which transcends even God. It is not
only at prayer time that I have this realization. I may say it
is in me while eating and drinking, evacuating, reading, writing
this, writing other things, delivering speeches-it is there every
moment. In spite of that, there is no limit to my imperfections,
because the realization is only awareness; it has not permeated
my being. That may not even happen during this life. How-
ever, why should I worry about it? It is within my power to
make an effort. The result is in the hands of Satyanarayana.
This does not give you the complete answer. No matter
what lustful thoughts come, it is sufficient if you do not succumb
to them and are not defeated. You just sing and dance to the
glory of the Lord. Do not feel distressed that lustful thoughts
assail you but fight against them. The great quality of a
Kshatriya is not victory but not flinching from battle. This is
enough. Chhaganlal and Kashi have just arrived. They will be
staying at least for two days. Do not worry about them.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised the letter. I shall be going to Wardha
on the 6th. Tell Devdas not to deprive me of letters.
[From Gujarati]
Ashram Bhajanono Swadhyaya, p. 253
