399. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
MAHISHADAL,
SODEPUR (24 PARGANAS),
December 28, 1945
CHI. KAKA,
I can only dictate the reply to your letter. Just now I have
to be content with what I can dictate or write after the morning
prayer. I therefore do not think it necessary to stretch out the
hand from under the quilt to write to you.
I can think of only one thing regarding you, and that is,
you should go on doing what I tell you—though you may make
any suggestion you like. This is exactly what you say in your
letter too. Even if your interpretation is the only correct one,
I would say that it would be safer not to exercise the right
which has been granted to you but to consult the committee.
At any rate you will lose nothing thereby, nor is such procedure
likely to result in any delay, especially when you can consult
them by correspondence.
Let us forget the affair of the Vidyapith library, for I never
think about it. And, in any case, what is the use of recalling it?
286
I see no need for you to resign from activities in Gujarat.
The whole thing seems to be your imagination. Moreover,
Amritlal takes interest in them. It was you who made him
what he is. Without your support his interest would dry up.
He is a straightforward and hard-working man. From among
your discoveries, I consider him as the one who has proved
his worth. So you can leave only after convincing him fully.
You have as good as left, since Amritlal will never do anything
against your wishes.
Thirdly, though you had intended Prof. Banhatti for B. B.
Mandir and told him so, there will be no harm if you take him
away for the Adhyapan Mandir. The latter needs his services
for work which is already in progress, whereas nothing is definite
yet about B. B. Mandir's work.
I did not like your falling ill. I see no need to work at such
speed and expense of energy. Do what you can without over-
taxing yourself. I can understand your desire that nothing should
be overlooked through lethargy, but I am not at all ready to
grant the necessity of working with speed. I remember in this
connection the couplet: "To be impatient is to be confused and
to be patient is to be self-possessed." It is for you to know who
the author is.
I experience supreme peace here even in the midst of meet-
ings attended by thousands. This is a new sight altogether. I
even believe that this is the result of the work we have been
able to do in Sodepur. Moreover, the people no longer ask for
speeches from me, but want prayer meetings. On one side we
have this, on the other, I read in newspapers the reports of the
goondaism that is going on. Who can say what the outcome of
all this will be, or what God will do? Is it not enough that we
should cheerfully shoulder the burden of the small tasks that fall
to our lot?
Let this suffice for today.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10987
