32. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
KUMARIKA, TRAVANCORE,
January 22, 1934
BA,
We are in Kumarika today. I got your letter.
You have
visited this place once in Urmila Devi's company.
This is the
farthest end of India. The Himalayas represent her head. We
may, therefore, call this place Mother India's feet, which are daily
washed by the sea.
Since nobody lives here, perfect silence
reigns. I bathed in the sea, and so did Om, Kisan and Chandra-
shankar. There is no danger of cold here. Devdas and Lakshmi
will most probably have gone to Delhi now.
They went and met
Rajaji. There has been no change in my diet and I keep very
good health. I have secured a typist from Madras. He has been
loaned to me by Anna . He is good. As Thakkar Bapa has come
now, Malkani has gone to Delhi. I have just received a letter
from Ramdas and one from Nimu. At present they all seem to
be well. Ramdas takes care of Sumitra's eyes. He has not yet
recovered his peace of mind, but I think he will do so. There
is no cause for anxiety.
I understand about Dahibehn's health.
Let us all remember that the mind has a powerful effect on the
body. In jail one is a prey to too many thoughts, which one
should learn to control. If one can preserve one's equanimity in
all conditions, one can be happy. Shanta should by now have
grown very wise. Tell her I want her to live for eighty years
more and do service.
I hope Lalita also is quite happy. Do
not hesitate to request Premlilabehn for any article of food you
may require in the interest of your health. Kanti is better now
and keeps cheerful. He has lost some weight, though. I will
write to Jamnabehn. I have at present no news of Madhavdas
There was a letter from him some days ago. Now that you have
specially inquired about him, I will write to him in your name.
I have received a letter from Manilal and one from Sushila.
There is nothing special in them.
Both keep good health.
Manilal is perfectly calm now. Surendra is still in Wardha. He is
helping Jamnalalji there. All the women prisoners are expected
to be released today. I have written a few words to each of
them. And now the discourse.
The Bhagavad Gita says that the Lord's bhakta should cultivate
solitude. This requires to be carefully grasped. We came into
the world alone and shall leave it alone; why, then, should we
yearn for anybody's companionship during the uncertain interval
between birth and death? However, though we come alone we
also see that we are not altogether alone. We have the company
of our parents. Were it not for that, we would not be able to
live even for a moment. When we grow up, we generally get
married. That also gives us similar company. Then we get the
company of friends too. For spiritual progress also we require
company to some extent. Why, then, does the Gita advise culti-
vating solitude? Let us try to understand this point. Think of
any companions and you will see that the bond is a sign of our
dependence. Father, mother, husband, wife, friend, everybody
makes us dependent on him or her to some extent. But one who is
a bhakta of the Lord is full of compassion. He is dependent on
God alone. He is the only true friend and, besides, He is our
charioteer too . . . . What else can he want who has His com-
pany? Mother Gita, therefore, advises us to seek solitude. This
does not mean that we should shun the company of fellow beings.
It only means that we should not desire it. We should not lose
heart when we do not have it and, on the other hand, even in
the midst of crores of people, should feel mental solitude and
nearness to God. I hope you remember the bhajan: "Friends of
the body are selfish, one and all; they will refuse to accompany
one at the end." One who cultivates solitude will never be un-
happy anywhere, for he sees only Vishnu in all places. Prah-
lad, the bhakta, saw Vishnu even in a red-hot pillar. With some
effort, everybody can cultivate such love of solitude.
All of you
have got, unsought, an opportunity to do so. Try and culti-
vate it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 9-11
