66. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 15, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,
Here are some of my thoughts. We should not run the
school from a rich man's viewpoint, but have as teachers only
those whose motto is service. They should be satisfied with a
maximum salary of Rs. 15 a month and devote their whole
time to it. To start with, there should be one teacher for just
one pupil of whatever age. The teacher should prepare his own
textbook and impart knowledge through the use of the eyes and
the ears and teach the pupil to use his hands for wielding im-
plements to make things. He should himself do what he teach-
es. It would be better to have such a school in some village.
As for you, you have to make the beginning at the place where
you are. You can start with yourself. Accept pupils from middle-
class families if they agree to your terms. They must pay fees,
but one should not depend on this income while undertaking
the work. You may start the experiment only if you accept
the idea whole-heartedly. You should swallow only what you
can digest.
If you understand this, this is what you should do for the
present. Put the thoughts before your associates.
It is our
dharma to run the existing school if it pays its way but those
parents who can should pay the full fees.
I have put all these ideas before Nanabhai. He likes them
but he is himself so deeply involved that the changes suggested
by me are beyond his power. The help I used to get for
Dakshinamurti has now stopped.
You may ask me time and again whatever you want to.
Kanu is my responsibility. He will be under my supervision
whether at Segaon or at Maganwadi. He has my permission
to live at Segaon. Hence if he continues to stay at Maganwadi,
it will have been his own decision. Now that Kanti has gone
to stay with Kaka to attend on him, Mahadev will be left
alone. If, on that account, Kanu is required to be with Maha-
dev, that too will be left to his choice.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not been giving anything to Kanu.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II.
Also C.W. 8495.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
