240. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
January 8, 1937
BHAISHRI PURUSHOTTAM
You may continue to write in English by all means, but
permit me to write in Gujarati. Teach your assistant to read
my handwriting. I don't want you to waste your time in doing
so. Just as you are conscious of the value of my time, I am
conscious of that of yours. I also know that my handwriting
is not easy to read.
How can I disregard your request? But you know that I
don't accept any responsibility in a casual manner. I agree to
be the president of a meeting only when I have control over
its proceedings and have faith in it. Perhaps you do not know
how much I contributed to the formation of the Association
and to carrying on through it the agitation against the indenture
system. Probably Natarajan is acquainted with the history of
it. Vaze was not there at that time.
I am aware of the great injustice about to be done to the
Zanzibar Indians. But that injustice cannot be prevented by
one meeting or by my presiding over it. Before that I myself
should do something. I should enter into correspondence with
the Government, study the Binder Report, see a representative of
Zanzibar if there is any here. Our people there are divided
just as they are here and are selfish and lethargic. If we cannot
get them to do any work, then also we will not succeed. How
can all this be done? Where am I to find the necessary time?
"Better one's own duty, bereft of merit, than another's well-per-
formed; better death in the discharge of one's duty, another's
duty is fraught with danger." For me at present the work
about overseas Indians is another's duty. Why do you involve
me in it? Nothing will be achieved by my becoming the presi-
dent. Please don't dismiss my argument as advanced by an
impractical man. If you find it convincing I ask you to spare
me if you can. Then I shall not be guilty of disregarding your
request.
If, however, you cannot swallow my argument, send me
the Binder Report and explain to me whatever you feel it is
necessary to explain. If there is anybody who knows all the
facts send him to explain them to me. If you can spare the
time and wish to come, you may do so. I have to leave this
place for Travancore on the 10th evening. You will get this to-
morrow, that is, Saturday. If you or your representative can
come the same day, I can give one hour in the evening.
Perhaps even on Sunday I may be able to give one hour. It
depends on Sir Govindrao how much time I can spare on Sunday.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Sir Purushottamdas Thakurdas Papers.
Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
