526. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 26, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
It would be better if the thing was done before I left for
Bombay. But do not sacrifice your sleep for that.
I was glad that the problem about Sushilabehn had been
solved. My success holds no lesson for anybody, but it may give
one hope. There may be many reasons for my success. Accord-
ing to me, the chief reason is my ahimsa. From your point of
view it is true that your training has not fitted you for manag-
ing a kitchen. When you learn non-attachment you will not
say that. We are fit enough for any duty that comes to us un-
sought. The secret is that we do not run after any task; the
task comes to us unsought. If you look upon a servant as your
own brother or sister, you will never fail. Yesterday the ked-
geree was not well cooked. Manu refused to eat it and so I
examined it with my fingers. Finding that it was insufficiently
cooked I made her a sign that she need not eat it. If I had
insisted, she would have consumed it and suffered from stomach-
ache in consequence. If everybody had eaten it that would have
been no evidence that it was well cooked.
I explained to Kalukhan himself about Magandeep. I under-
stand about Aundh. I think nothing remains now.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Instead of engraving people's names on the utensils, they
should be numbered. This is the practice in jails, as also in
institutions. Instead of purchasing additional utensils, find some
way out. In the last resort, we can always have [leaf cups].
If you can have inexpensive earthen ones you may have them.
Everybody may make for himself spoons of wood. We can
teach them. It is quite easy to learn. Think what the poor
would do and find some way. Discuss the matter with the
permanent residents. Mohan Singh will probably suggest
something. Moreover, now I shall be leaving, so you will have
no difficulty during that time. Think over the matter before I
return. You can certainly make wooden ones. We used to do
that in S. A. The wood and the knife were supplied by the
jail authorities.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5863. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
