98. LETTER TO A COLLEGE STUDENT
January 17, 1933
It is not correct to say that I am a champion of mixed marria-
ges. It can be said that I do not oppose such marriages. There
is a difference between the two statements. The statement that I
am a champion of mixed marriages or even that I am not opposed
to them is likely to give rise to some misunderstanding in so far
as your idea of a mixed marriage is different from mine. Today
we hardly come across any true Brahmins or true Shudras.
Therefore what you do not regard as a mixed marriage is likely
to be one and what, if I accepted the popular parlance, would
be a mixed marriage may not actually be such. For instance, if
a so-called Shudra girl possessing the qualities of a Brahmin
girl marries a real Brahmin I would not call it a mixed marriage,
whereas you would regard it as such. On the other hand, if a
so-called Brahmin boy with the qualities of a Shudra marries a
so-called Shudra girl with Brahmin-like qualities it would be a
mixed marriage in my view. You would also regard it as one.
Both of us will, however, do it for different reasons.
You should understand from this that I never reject a scienti-
fic truth that has been established. But you should also note that
in [the realm of] science what has come to be accepted as truth
today is not unlikely to be proved as untruth tomorrow. Sciences
founded on deduction are always bound to suffer this basic imper-
fection. We cannot therefore regard it as an absolute truth. I
think I understand and also believe in varnashramadharma. But
you and I seem to understand the purport of varnashramadharma
in different ways.
In spite of saying all this I ought to caution you that if
you propose to consider the question of untouchability in a scienti-
fic way you should understand that interdining and mixed mar-
riage have nothing to do with the question, and you should act
1 For discussion, vide Appendix III.
accordingly. As for me today I am living, but tomorrow I may
not be there, but this problem is certainly going to be there even
after me. At the moment I am not at all canvassing for interdining
and mixed marriage. We shall see about it when I start advocat-
ing them. It is neither scientific nor moral to condemn, because
of faults you find in me, the noble work that I happen to be
doing.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 61
