189. LETTER TO LORD ISMAY
BHANGI COLONY, NEW DELHI,
April 5, 1947
DEAR LORD ISMAY,
Pandit Nehru gave me what you have described as an
outline of a scheme. What I read is merely a copy of the points
I hurriedly dictated, whereas, as I understood from H. E. the
Viceroy, you were to prepare a draft agreement after the line
of the points I had dictated. Of course you were at liberty to
amend them, add to them and omit what you wished to omit.
I had a chat with Pandit Nehru twice during the day, the
second time when he handed a copy of the outline at 5 p. m.
The seventh point should read thus: "Within the frame-
work hereof Mr. Jinnah will be perfectly free to present for
acceptance a scheme of Pakistan even before the transfer of power,
provided, however, that he is successful in his appeal to reason
and not to the force of arms which he abjures for all time for
this purpose. Thus, there will be no compulsion in this matter
over a province or a part thereof."
What I could not recall yesterday I now recall.
The eighth will read as follows: "In the Assembly the Con-
gress has a decisive majority. But the Congress shall never use
that majority against the League policy simply because of its
identification with the League but will give its hearty support
to every measure brought forward by the League Government,
provided that it is in the interest of the whole of India. Whether
it is in such interest or not shall be decided by Lord Mount-
batten as man and not in his representative capacity."
I have finished dictating this at 8.45 p. m. I am anxious
that it reaches you tonight. Therefore, I have only made mani-
fest correction and addition. The outline is by no means complete.
When a draft agreement is prepared, many other points which
should occur to any draftsman will have to be covered.
I must add that Pandit Nehru has at least one vital objection
to the outline. But I will not tax you with its mention here. If the
outline appears workable to H. E. I would like to wait on him
once more and discuss Pandit Nehru's objections. Before putting
it before Q A. Jinnah I would like to show it to a few friends.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 237-
