272. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised
SEGAON,
October 11, 1937
MY DEAR REBEL,
It has been impossible to write to you during the week days
in spite of your gentle complaint. I must not use the right hand
and the left works laboriously.
And I have no time for prac-
tice. Every minute must be used to best advantage. If you
insist on my tearing your letters as soon as I have read them,
you must not expect me to remember your questions for whole
seven days and then answer them on Sundays.
Of course I took note of what you wrote about Bhulabhai
and what is more, I wrote to him about the matter, though
of course without naming the source of information.
I have
not heard from him as yet. The reply is overdue. I had heard
of the thing before but I could not act upon rumours. Your
information was definite.
I am glad Nabibux has returned. My love to him. You
must bring him when you come.
Your cheque has gone to Delhi. You may expect a formal
receipt from them. Not to make mistakes in simple account-
keeping does not make one an accountant. Even illiterate Nabi-
bux gives an accurate account of everything he spends.
You
may take unction to your soul in that you are as good as he is
in taking down contemporaneous expenses and receipts. Faithful
clerk! ! !
It is a mystery how Sir J's letter was not in your cover.
Mira is making a search. Remember she is not a clerk, nor
an idiot. Idiots are good at remembering things. Mira can draw
mountains and cloud effects. So she disdains to remember tri-
fles like putting things in their places where they should be. But
this is poor consolation for you and me. I was most anxious
for you to see that very good letter. He is following it up faith-
fully. I hope it will be traced.
I return you the enclosed duly signed "Bapu" in Hindi.
Is that right?
Vijaya was wanted by her parents and I had to send her
away. She was most disconsolate and could not restrain her
tears. I miss her because she was a most handy girl, always
willing, always ready. She wants to return.
A. S. is still in Bombay helping her brothers to settle their
differences. She may return any day. Lilavati is almost in
harness. Sushila, P[yarelal]'s sister, came in on Saturday bring-
ing fever with her. So she is in Maganwadi. Pyarelal is nurs-
ing her. Shriman is down with typhus. I do not know what
will happen to the Conference now. It may have to be drop-
ped. He is a rare gem.
On 25th I leave for Calcutta; address care Congress. I ex-
pect to be back on 2nd November at the latest and shall await
Khan Saheb's summons. He expects to have me with him during
1st week of November.
Love.
ROBBER
From the original: C.W. 3818. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6974
