97. LETTER TO J. B. PETIT
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 5, 1927
DEAR MR. PETIT,
The enclosed is a copy repeated at Bangalore of a cable receiv-
ed from Andrews at Sabarmati. It speaks for itself. It will be a
great calamity if Mr. Sastri's health breaks down, or if he has to
undergo financial worries. Personally, I think that the Govern-
ment of India will not be able to meet the special requirements
in the present case. It would be wrong to set an awkward prece-
dent, and yet, if Mr. Sastri's mission is to succeed, he must have
ample funds enabling him to move from place to place and find
decent accommodation. Future agents won't need triple accom-
modation. But Mr. Sastri has to break new ground and he has
therefore to exploit not merely his official position for reducing
the discordant elements to harmony but he has got to exploit his
own special gifts to that end. His more solid work therefore will
be extra-official. In order to be able to do this, he must have
funds. South Africa like India is a place of distances. Between
Cape Town and Durban it is nearly 1,400 miles by rail, and in
each place he must have accommodation of his own. If he went
to hotels, he would be inaccessible to the majority of the Indians
who are poor.
I do not think we can state all these things in the press and
make a public appeal for funds. The only legitimate thing there-
fore to do is for the Imperial Citizenship Association to place at
Mr. Sastri's disposal a fairly large sum. No time should be lost.
I have not a shadow of a doubt that such an expense would be
a fair charge upon the funds of the I.C.A.
I suggest that Rs. 25,000/- may be at once transferred to him
to be used as he may think necessary for his own personal conve-
nience. He can be trusted to use the amount judiciously and to
refund what he may not need.
For the sake of speedy despatch, I am sending a copy of this
letter to the members of the Committee whom I know and who
I think will be interested in the subject-matter.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
J. [B.] PETIT, ESQ.
IMPERIAL CITIZENSHIP ASSOCIATION
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 12365
