243. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI GANDHI
WARDHA,
October 20, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL AND KASHI,
I received your postcard. You must have received my telegram sent after
the wedding ceremony was over. I can see from your postcard that you have
been worrying. Kashi's wish was fully respected. Lakshmibehn sang the
women's prayer with the utmost devotion, beginning with the shloka
'Shantakaram'. After the ceremony was over, she also sang the bhajan
'Vaishnava Jana'. In Amba, Prabhudas has got exactly the kind of girl suitable
for him. She seems to me to have a transparently sincere nature. Brave of
course she is. She has twice been to jail and has been yearning for a long
time to live in the Ashram. She does not seem to love overmuch any kind of
pleasure. She wore no bangles at all at the time of the wedding ceremony.
After the ceremony was over, Janakibehn put glass bangles on her wrists.
Very likely she will break even these in a short while. Probably you do not
know that in the North it is usually customary to wear bangles or put the
auspicious red mark on the forehead. It is customary for the bride, after a
particular ceremony is over, to wear the garments offered by the father-in-
law's family. I had three saris ready with me. One was got woven by
lanakibehn, the other was sent by Santok and the third by Gomati. The sari
sent by the last was woven from yarn spun by Kishorelal and Gomati
themselves. Gomati happened to have it with her by chance and so sent it to
me and insisted that I should give that very sari to Amba to wear. I too
liked the idea. But was Amba the kind of girl to accept it? She said : "How
would I be the better for it. What I am wearing is good enough. Please let it
1 From the Ashram Bhajanavali
2 A verse in Sanskrit
3 A devotional song
LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
185
be". I found all this so pleasing and natural that I did not at all insist on
her accepting the sari. She then wore, during the wedding ceremony, the
sari sent by her parents. She had some fever during the ceremony. She had
been forbidden to take anything except fruit on the wedding-day. The fever
came down in the evening. She passed the whole of yesterday on fruit and
milk only. She is now able to move about and is quite happy. For the present,
she will stay here. A sari was made for Ba from yarn spun by me. It was not
washed nor dyed. I gave Amba that sari also. A piece of rejo or kokali
khadi with fine needlework on it given by Ba and Mithubehn for Jakir has
also been given to Amba. Amba has thus come into possession of a fairly
good number of articles. For the present, both wish to stay here. Afterwards,
they will come to you for your blessings. My previous letter was not written
to rebuke you. It was written to make your dharma clear to you and to
strengthen your faith.
Blessings for the New year.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33070
