70. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Wednesday and Thursday [December 15116, 1926]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your two letters. I hope you do not have the misgivings you
expressed in your earlier letter. You have never given me a cause to discard
you as a useless person. And I do not consider any person as useless. So
how could I think of you in those terms?
I took upon myself the responsibility of work in Vijapur and other places
not because I was disappointed with the work but in order to take over from
you the unbearably heavy burden of work. Your body which was once as
strong as a lion's has now become a skeleton. I could not bear that. Whatever
faults I found in you, I looked upon them as your illness. Under heavy pressure
of work, a man develops a kind of intolerance. I saw that in you and even
drew your attention to it. In due course, you will be rid of it provided I help
you. With the knowledge of my situation, I can visualize yours. I am indeed
burdened with work. How can I know what others around me suffer on account
of it but I do realize it and therefore remain quiet most often. Discard the
feeling that you have hurt me. I am not hurt at all.
I have already sent the plan of Kaka's house. I vaguely remember that I
had given Bhansali's [plan] to Chhaganlal. It is certainly not here. In case it
is not traced, tell Bhansali to make it again. But you should get that plan
there. Ask someone to enquire from Chhaganlal. Get the final plan done by
Tyabji's man. Chhaganlal knows what measures I had suggested for the sake
of economy in the plan of Valjibhai's house. He would have arrived by now.
Find out from him.
Entrust the work to Vikram, Parsibhai, etc.
I understand about Kevalram. Tell him whatever you feel like. He has
faults no doubt but I believe he is a good man. He cannot but be influenced
by the generosity we show to him.
It is the best thing for Giriraj, Shankaran, etc., to do combined cooking.
One possibility is that you take food with them, or, you all may have a
combined kitchen. There is only one kitchen at present and it is better to
maintain it in such a way that all the guests can eat there. Do not stretch the
issue till it snaps but put up with it if you can. Try to find out what can be
1 From the reference in the postscript to celebration of Prayer Day for South
Africa on the 19th; December 19, 1926 was observed as a day of prayer wishing
success to the Round Table Conference in South Africa to solve the problems of Indian
settlers. Vide Vol. XXXII, pp. 76,430 and 480. The Wednesday-Thursday prior to this
date fell on 15th and 16th December 1926 respectively.
58
LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
59
done and do what you feel is proper. One remembers the master's advice
only till one crosses the gate.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
19th is the prayer day for South Africa. In consultation with Kakasaheb,
do what ought to be done there on that day. For Khadi work in Panch
Talavadi, send a hundi of Rs. 600/- to Balwantrai and debit it in the account
of Ka[thiwad] Ra[jya] Pa[rishad]. That money is for buying cotton.
Ramachandra is going there. A new agreement has been signed with him
according to the enclosed documents. The previous one has been cancelled
because the new patent has to be obtained and there were other difficulties
too. Now we do not have to take risk for a long time. Arrange to get the lift
manufactured soon in the factory there. If you want to train some of the
workers who are already there, do that. I want to give some work to Pragji.
I feel that now you should engage Pragji for this work and get everything
done through him. At present, he should be given a salary of Rs. 75/- per
month. Take from him this and any other work you want him to do. If you
approve of my suggestion, write to Pragji yourself. I would like it better if he
stays alone for the time being. I enclose herewith a letter for him. That will
help you. If you do not want any new suggestions from me, send the enclosed
letter and call him there.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PPS.]
Take Pasubhai's advice regarding the lift. He is capable of suggesting
modifications. He has told me that he has studied about lifts.
Account for the expenses on the lift as follows :
Cost price + 25 + office expenses + expenses incurred on operation.
Amreli office will buy cotton worth Rs. 3,000/-. Accept hundi for that.
I wanted to read this again but could not.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32912
1 Vide also Vol. XXXII, p. 480.
