188. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
Here is the estimate for the proposed English edition of
Harijan Sevak. As you can see, it is a very moderate sum. There
will still be some overhead charges on clerical assistance, and
whatever remuneration that might have to be paid to Shastri who
has agreed to edit the paper.
I propose to bring out, to start with, 10,000 copies. Then
if there is not that demand, we might slow down. My policy, as
you know, is that I shall not handle the paper except to make it
self-supporting. If it does not become self-supporting, I should
1 Vijayalakshmi Pandit
140
conclude that there is inefficient management or editing, or that
there is no public demand for such a paper. In anyone of these
cases, if the defect cannot be mended, the paper must be ended. I
should give the paper a trial for three months, within which time
it must become self-supporting.
I would therefore like you, after consultation with Thakkar
Bapa and such others as you need to consult, to telegraph your
sanction of the expenditure, such as it may be, up to the final
limit to be fixed by you. I suggest an addition of Rs. 200 per
month at the outside to the figures as per estimate, excluding the
postal and telegraphic charges. I should be able to give you more
definite figures after I have seen Shastri. If you can pass the bud-
get, should I proceed with the paper whether you have brought
out the Hindi edition or not? I understand that there is not like-
ly to be any difficulty at this end about bringing out the paper.
I have your telegram from Gwalior about the Government
decision on the untouchability Bills. I hope you received my
reply. I hope, too, that you have read my very exhaustive state-
ment to the Press. I do not need, therefore, to add anything to the
Press statement, for I have nothing more to add.
I am sending you a copy of my letter to Hariji about the
Society receiving or seeking financial assistance from the Govern-
ment. Here again I do not need to add to it. It speaks for itself.
I hope you are better. I would like you to treat your health as
much of a business concern as any other, and thus not a thing to
be neglected or wasted.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 20096. Also C.W. 7923. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
