209. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
December 9, 1932
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your letter of 12th November only today. If it was
an airmail letter it should have been received about the 22nd of
November. Your letter therefore seems to have gone through the
whole circuit of examination before being delivered to me. I shall
enquire. I am surprised that there should be any question arising
as to whether I could do untouchability work more effectively as
a free man than as a prisoner. I should think that it is a self-
evident proposition that I could do more effective work as a free
man. At the same time I can fully appreciate the Government
standpoint. So long as they feel that civil disobedience must be
put down at any cost and that their plan might be frustrated or
checked if I was left free to carry on civil disobedience propa-
ganda, they are bound to keep me under detention unless I would
give them an assurance, be it even verbal, that I would not carry
on civil disobedience propaganda. For my part, however much
I may wish to confine myself wholly to untouchability work, I
cannot without a full knowledge of the circumstances outside give
any undertaking as to my future action. After all civil disobe-
dience under given circumstances is as much an article of faith
with me as removal of untouchability. I can therefore never say
beforehand what will occupy my attention exclusively or for the
most part at a given moment and since a civil resister bargains
for the punishment he receives for his resistance, he must not fret
over it. Therefore and to that extent I am content with my lot.
I hope this tells you clearly how I stand.
I hope you got there no alarming report about my little fast
over Appasaheb Patwardhan. I need not, give you the details
about the event for you must have seen them in the papers. All
I need say is that except for a little weakness there is no ill effect
left of the fast. I hope too that you are finding no difficulty in
understanding and appreciating the temple-entry question and the
contemplated fast.
I hope that you are keeping your health in spite of the stress.
Dr. Ansari is wonderful. If he is there give him our love
and tell him that our prayers always ascend to heaven for his
complete recovery.
If what you say about the communal decision turns out to be
true, it is a silver lining to the dark cloud.
Love from us all.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 977; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Depart-
ment, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (3), Pt. III, p. 423
