81. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
April 26, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
Last Monday week, my youngest son Devdas Gandhi who was
permitted to see me told me that he had applied for permission
on behalf of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Mr. Mahadeo Desai and
himself, but he alone received the permission to see me. You have
kindly informed me of the reply of the Government to my letter
to you of 23rd February last. Putting the two together, I am in
a position to understand somewhat the Government attitude re-
garding those who may wish to see me. In order to avoid dis-
appointment, as much as possible, I told my son that, for a while
at any rate, I shall try to apply for the necessary permission instead
of friends having to apply from outside. Consistently, therefore,
with the said reply of the Government, I beg to apply for per-
mission to any five of the following who may be free to see me
together with Lakshmi Dudabhai Gandhi, a young suppressed-
classes girl, seven years old, who has been brought up and adop-
ted by me. The other names are:
(1) Mr. Chhaganlal Gandhi, a cousin of mine who was to
have seen me last January but could not owing to illness.
(2) Mr. Jamnadas Gandhi No. (1)'s brother.
(3) Mr. Narandas Gandhi, No. (1)'s brother.
(3A) Ramdas Gandhi, my son.
(4) Radha Maganlal Gandhi, No. (1)'s brother's daughter,
a girl 14 years old.
(4A) Rukhi M. Gandhi, No. (4)'s younger sister.
(5) Moti Lakshmidas, a girl about 15 years old.
(6) Laxmi Lakshmidas, No. [5's sister]-a girl 13 years old.
(7) Amina Bawazeer, a girl 15 years old.
(8) Krishnadas Chhaganlal Gandhi, No. (1)'s son, about 12
years old.
(9) Mrs. Gandhi.
All these are living with me at the Satyagraha Ashram.
Those who are relatives and those, Nos. 5, 6 and 7, who are not.
I am giving more than five names in order to insure the
coming of five along with Laxmi. I respectfully ask for an early
reply as I am anxious to meet Mr. Chhaganlal Gandhi, his wife
and the girl Moti who are ailing for some time.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
From a photostat: S.N. 8027
