347. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
[After February 25, 1935]
I have just finished reading your precious letter. My heart
was weeping as I was reading it. Do you know this Tamil prov-
erb—"Thikkatravanukku theivamay thunai"? It means God is the
help of the helpless. He will help you and comfort you. You
must not lose faith in His mercy and His healing power.
You should have written to me much earlier than you have
done. But better late than never.
You should tell Menon all that the children feel. What is
done is done. God had a purpose behind this marriage. You
are neither spent nor bent.
Your way is clear. You should take the children to Denmark
or England if your expenses can be easily found. If you cannot
stand that climate, you should return to India leaving the children
to the care of those who would take them.
If this is not possible, you should live on a hill where you
can be all the year round and bring them up as Indians in Indian
surroundings. I think they are too good to resist this. To bring
them up in India in a European school is fatal for their moral
growth.
Of course I should love to have you and the children by my
side. But they won't stand the climate and probably the surround-
ings also. Do not hesitate to write to me as often as you need.
I am well enough to attend to your letters.
I tried to secure something good for Menon but failed, i.e.,
I could not secure the salary he would need. But if he is freed
of the care of the children and even you, he can take up an ill-
paid post but one in which he will have ample experience.
Whatever the ultimate issue, you must not be anxious about
anything. Remember that God takes the burden of all our cares
on His broad shoulders if we will but let Him. This is as true
as it is true that I am writing to you. Only His way is not our
way, His shoulders are not like ours. But there is all the beauty
in doing His will.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat. Courtesy: National Archives of India
