243. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
March 28, 1933
MY DEAR VERRIER,
Although I have often found that truth however ugly it might
look in reality did good, I believe that A. came nearer to you
both. The fact is that even if one party is pure the others tend to
become so. But when the others are striving in the same direc-
tion the success of one almost ensures the success of the others.
I did not tell her that you were being unconsciously self-decei-
ved. She says she did not wish to convey any such meaning to
you. I had no proof that you were being self-deceived. What I
did say was that all of us were likely to be self-deceived but that
you were incapable of conscious falsehood and that therefore you
would confess your promise at once if you had ever made it.
There is no doubt that she loves you both and she wants to
work with you. She is doing some Harijan work now. I have
told her that it [is] impossible at present but if all goes well, there
is no reason why she should not be able to work with you later.
And now about Mary. To me it seems quite necessary that
you should separate for the time being and test yourselves. Mary
or you may go to Almora or to Sabarmati or Wardha or any other
place you may think fit and do there some Harijan work of a tem-
porary character. If you have shed exclusive love altogether you
should feel happy as well in association as in separation and just
now there should be positive joy in separation. I have found
this indispensable in all such cases and there have been several.
You should think it over and give immediate effect to the proposal
if you find substance in it.
And now for your health.
It is now 3.45 a.m. and I must leave you in God's care. His
care is the only true care. A human being's is good enough only
in so far as it anticipates His. You will therefore accept of my
suggestions only that which finds an echo in your heart. Every
moment makes me humbler and conscious of the sublime fact that
man's true effort consists only in knowing the will of God who is
Truth.
You carry the love of everyone of the company.
With deepest love,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20727
