239. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SRIRAMPUR, NOAKHALI DISTRICT,
December 4, 1946
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter dated November 18 reached me only yesterday.
You know I am in a more inaccessible place than you are in. 1
The distance is not too great but there is no cart road even.
When the overflow canal water dries up, as it will in about
ten days, all but walking to and fro will be out of place. The
post is taken by runners as it was in Kathiawar only a few years
ago and is in some places even now.
Don't worry about me. Put your faith and trust in God.
I am in His safe keeping. He will make or mar me. For Him
it will be all making, never marring.
Newspapers do not come here regularly. When they come,
they come behind time and what does come is local newspapers.
Therefore, one does not know what appears in the Press. My
prescription is "Don't believe what appears in the Press", and
remember that no news is good news. Do you know that A. J.
Balfour when he was Prime Minister used to boast that he never
read newspapers and lost nothing.
Then I suppose you know that all my companions are dis-
tributed in different villages. Pyarelal sees me often but he is
not with me. He is in a village by himself assisted by a Ben-
gali interpreter. I have Parasuram with me and therefore am
able to dictate. The original idea was that I should take and
want no assistance except a Bengali interpreter. Parasuram
always helped Pyarelal but here he could not be placed by him-
self in a village. He was naturally anxious to be with me di-
rectly but he could not when I had all other assistance and
was doing another class of work. Now that he is here, in addi-
tion to looking after me personally, he does my shorthand work,
which enables me to go through what I had not expected or
bargained for. And the Bengali assistant is a Professor who
has for years made a deep study of my writings. Therefore, I
have got most desirable assistance, but that assistance cannot cope
with newspapers. Hence my outside work has been reduced to
a minimum.
The work here is new, very pleasant, equally taxing. My
ahimsa is on its trial. More of this another time. This is only to
relieve you of all anxiety on my behalf. I am now taking or
trying to take the usual diet but it may take some time after
the twenty-one days' denial to get used to it. I am progressing
towards normal strength as quickly as I can. I dare not be in
a hurry.
Now I see you resumed the thread you left on Novem-
ber 18, on 22. Your problems are extraordinary but they are
all of your own making. Therefore you can, as you must, re-
duce them to a manageable degree. You will not find the men
or the man by searching. He or they will come to you if God
wants you to do the type of work for which you want the man.
I will, therefore say, wait on Him and do what you can with-
out vexing the soul. Krishnachandra, I think, will not come.
He is now content to be under Vinoba and gives him full satis-
faction and, so far as I know, is himself satisfied. He has not
written to me for over a month. I know no other person whom
I can send to you, nor do I think will Ghanshyamdasji be able
to give you any guidance. He can only give you money but
that is not what you need or should need. The Ashram is
purely your own original idea. If the present site is not suitable
for you, you should make what use you can of it. Personally,
I would say, give up the idea of Ashram life except for your
own person. Then you won't feel cramped and you can ex-
pand as high or as broad as the universe. You know that as
ashram I disbanded Sabarmati and it became a Harijan institu-
tion. The original was Satyagraha Ashram. That is gone for
ever. Do not therefore ever think of handing over to anybody
else the Ashram of your conception. Have in the present place
married men or bachelors or whoever serves efficiently the activ-
ities you may take up. Otherwise, you will break down in
health in spite of the most ideal weather you can have. Re-
member that in all I have said in the foregoing I have made
the fullest allowance for your conception of the Ashram and
because I have done so I have advised you to restrict the
Ashram ideal to yourself, taking as your co-workers as many
capable persons as you can get so long as their presence or
manners do not jar on you or interfere with your own growth.
I hope I have carried to you the whole of my meaning. If
so, I have done.
This I have dictated before going out for my walk, i. e., as
soon after 7.30 in the morning as possible. I have been working
since 4 o'clock Standard Time— o'clock Local Time. This
includes the usual prayer time. The prayer is conducted by
Parasuram.
Blessings from
BAPU 2
From the original : C. W. 6520. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9915
