5. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
April 19, 1941
DEAR LALA DUNICHANDJI,
I arrived here on the 16th evening but was only able to put your
questions before Gandhiji yesterday.
1. In regard to M.L.A.s who in spite of reminders do not court im-
prisonment the question had better wait for an answer in view of Mian Ifti-
khar-ud-din's pending early release.
2. The same applies to A.I.C.C. members whose date has already been
extended to the 30th instant.
3. Gandhiji is agreeable to having the spinning and weaving of certi-
fied khadi test done by the A.I.S.A. appointees. He is, however, in agreement
with you that those who cannot afford to or for some equally legitimate
reason are unable to present themselves before the appointed examiners and
who can get the necessary certificate of bona fides from the President or Secre-
tary of District Congress Committees may be exempted from the A.I.S.A. test.
4. In regard to members of local bodies resigning, the matter had
better wait till Mian Iftikhar-ud-din's release.
5. The same as regards Congressmen of all grades who refuse to offer
civil disobedience.
6. Members of the Provincial Congress Committees are included among
the number that is to offer civil disobedience.
7. Members of Working Committees of all grades are to offer civil
disobedience.
8. Gandhiji fears that no undertaking of loyalty to the movement will
be worth anything with those who are determined to deceive.
Your list of 212 satyagrahis has come. I note that the names have
been accepted by the local President or Secretary and you told me that you
had seen to it that these officers are reliable persons. In any event we would
like to have the answers to the questionnaire from each person from the local
officers. And what about a test for them? How soon can the A.I.S.A.
arrange for the latter?
There have been some complaints regarding the revisions undertaken
by the Amicus curiae Bar Association Committee in Lahore. Gandhiji's opinion
is that the idea of such a committee in itself is all right. But it should be
allowed to function on its own without any interest, instigation or interference
in its work on the part of the satyagrahis.
You should issue strict injunc-
tions to the latter in this regard.
I am afraid my programme must have tired you as it did me. I trust
you are rested by now and well.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
AMRIT KAUR
[PS.]
Since writing the above your covering letter of the 15th instant has
come in.
LALA DUNICHANDJI OF LAHORE, BAR-AT-LAW
C/O PRESIDENT, PUNJAB CONGRESS COMMITTEE
MOZANG ROAD
LAHORE
From a copy: C.W. 997. Courtesy: Jagannath
