471. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,
June 13, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
You must have seen from the papers that Khan Abdul
Ghaffar Khan has been with me for some time. During the few
moments that I could spare for him from day to day, I carried
on my conversations with him and he has left on me the impression
that he is a truthful and out and out believer in non-violence. He
has no connection with the Amanullah movement. His work is
solely concentrated upon the Khudai Khidmatgar movement. This
movement consists in enlisting men for service. The following pledge
is administered to them: "I shall be truthful, I shall be chaste, I
shall be non-violent and not quarrel with my neighbours. I shall
not covet my neighbours' property. I shall be prepared to suffer
even unto death for the freedom of the country." Those who take
the pledge and enlist themselves as Khudai Khidmatgars are ex-
pected to attend a weekly roll call in their respective villages. He
is most emphatic in his declaration that there has been on the
part of himself and his followers no breach of the Settlement and he
says that he has everywhere preached to the people the necessity
for carrying out its terms in so far as they are applicable to the
people. But he says there are several breaches of the Settlement on
the part of the officials and he relates the following:
(a) Many civil disobedience prisoners are not yet discharged
in the Frontier Province including the Agency areas.
(b) He says that the people are being molested on the slight-
est pretext. The soldiers as they pass the villagers' houses cry
"Islam Murdabad", "Gandhi Murdabad", "Ghaffar Khan
Murdabad", and he adds that he has prohibited among his fol-
lowers all objectionable cries.
Khan Saheb admits that he did not visit the Commissioner
and he says he refrained because he saw no change in the atti-
tude of local officials and if he went, he was afraid of his being
misrepresented. He is quite prepared to see you or His Excellency
the Viceroy provided I accompany him. I do feel that you should
make his acquaintance, and if you think it worth while I shall
gladly visit Simla solely for the purpose of introducing him to
373
you. I think that the Settlement presumes mutual trust and it
will therefore perhaps be wise on the part of the Government to
know Khan Saheb personally and then test his assurances. Pend-
ing reply to this letter I have detained Khan Saheb. As he has
been long enough with me and as I do not want to detain him
longer than is absolutely necessary, I would ask you please to send
me a telegraphic reply. I should add that Khan Saheb is most
insistent on my visiting the Frontier Province and seeing things
for myself, making the acquaintance of the numerous Khudai
Khidmatgars and studying his activity. I do feel that there should
be no objection now to my visiting the Frontier Province.
Yours sincerely,
H. W. EMERSON, ESQ.
SIMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
