590. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM,
November 4, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have received your two letters. I understand what you
say about the fast. But the thing is not in my hands at all.
I shall do as God bids me. You do understand this language.
I shall inform you as soon as I decide to go on fast. Then
alone you should mention it to your superior. You have prepared
her in any case. I am glad to know that you are indispensable
there. Let that be your position always and everywhere.
You should not feel unhappy . You should be cheerful even if
the fast has to be undertaken. That too will be the doing of
God, don't you think so? Sitting here I can see your misery.
Ramachandran has written to Mahadev that he and
Soundaram have decided to marry, and that too at Sevagram
if I permit. I have sent a telegram to say that they may gladly
come. Ramachandran has also written that after the marriage,
he too will court arrest and Soundaram will stay here. She will
be here for some time, perhaps even a year. In that case,
you will find the person you are looking for. You are surely
coming here after your examination if I am alive till then.
My heart cannot believe anything else. I wish you could be
present at the wedding. But I do not want to satisfy that
desire. Your work lies there for the present.
Kanchan seems to be recovering. Punjab Rao's letter is
enclosed. Only what you believe about Punjab Rao is correct.
I cannot understand the problem better than you. But if he
is a burden to you, send him back. He should not become
burdensome to you.
Have I written to you that Lilavati's brother is having
typhoid? He is getting along well. Sharada has lost a lot of
weight. Nothing helps her increase her weight. Mahodaya
has taken her to David today.
Tomorrow is the Working Committee [meeting]. Sardar has
already arrived. He came yesterday.
I was too enthusiastic when I wrote to you about Pyarelal.
I see that he is having ups and downs. All of a sudden he
goes into a tantrum. He misunderstands me. I do not know
what it is. Maybe I do not have the language to convince
him. Still, there is nothing for you to worry about. I will
handle him and I hope that ultimately everything will turn out
well. He is eating well. There can be no objection to your
writing him a letter on the occasion of Bhai Duj. You may
write any number of such letters you want.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers.
Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
