555. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
May 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. I have not telegraphed to you because
your letter do[es] not lend itself to a brief telegram. From your
letter I gather that this proposed visit of mine is causing you a great
deal of trouble and worry. Please do not worry over this thing.
Do not in any way consider that because you have been the vehicle
for conveying the invitation to me you must make it a certainty.
You and I must look at this thing with complete detachment and
undertake the mission only if the hand of God appears to be in it
in the clearest manner possible. If then there is any question of
forcing the pace you may retrace your step and dismiss the invita-
tion from your mind as if it had never been sent.
You mention the finance. That must be a consideration for
the Central Council, not for you and me unless you are supposed
to find the wherewithal. I would have gladly begged the neces-
sary funds from a friend if it was thought necessary. But I hold
it to be wrong on principle, for those who invite me should bear
the cost.
Again, as far as I am concerned I could go with just as much
comfort in 3rd class as I would in 1st class. Given cleanliness and
sufficient privacy and protection against bad weather, I would
prefer deck to saloon passage. On my return from South Africa
I took a 3rd class ticket from Cape Town to London and was none
the worse for it. There was no deck passage available. But in the
present case I suppose nothing but the saloon is to be thought of
as a matter of show. But if the Central Committee undertook to
carry me as a 3rd class passenger I should not regard it as an
insult in any shape or form but the whole thing must be done by
the Central Council or by those who are responsible for the invita-
tion without any interference or prompting on my part.
So far as goat's milk is concerned I would not think of you
or any of my companions being responsible for milking or keep-
ing goats. It must be left to the steamship company. The mana-
gers must make what arrangements they choose. It is no easy
matter for passengers to control such things on steamer. What
would one do when there is a storm or if the goats die. Such
things are always best left to the steamship owners. They know
how to manage them.
My companions would be two-Mahadev Desai and Dev-
das Gandhi, my youngest son. At first I had intended to take
only one but I feel that in the present state of my physical
condition and public engagements which I must carry out whether
I am stationary or not these two assistants are necessary. I should
consider it a privilege to have you also as a helper but I am afraid
you could not take the place of either Mahadev Desai or Devdas.
What class they should travel is not a matter of any moment but
if they are to travel by a class lower to mine there must be an
arrangement with steamship owners so as to enable me to have
access to them all the time I want them for my assistance. Need-
less to say both are vegetarians.
I suppose you remember what I stated in my first letter to
you that passports and everything else will have to be managed by
the inviting party.
I now conclude as I began and repeat that all things consi-
dered it would be better for you to drop the idea of my visit to
Finland.
M. K.
From a photostat: S.N. 11346
