89. LETTER TO DR. KULKARNI
[MOTIHARI,]
January 24, 1918
DEAR DR. KULKARNI,
When I posted my last letter to you, I had read the litera-
ture [sent by] you, but for me it was not convincing enough to
turn me from my experiment. What you say is either true or
untrue. If salt is the panacea for all evils, no effort should be spared
to double or even to quadruple its consumption. What I require
is statistics showing successful treatment of plague, etc., by the saline
method. Having read a great deal against the use of salt in books
on vegetarianism, I wanted to make the experiment on myself.
Nearly 7 years ago Mrs. Gandhi was suffering from copious hae-
morrhage. I was treating her with Kuhne baths and a strict dietary.
When I was almost in despair, I thought of the reasoning applied
against salt by Mrs. Wallace and against pulses by Dr. Haig. Salt,
Dr. Wallace has argued, is an irritant and a stimulant. Being
inorganic it passes out without being assimilated, but in its passage
making a great deal of mischief. It unduly excites the salivary
glands, irritates the stomach and thus induces men to eat more
than they need, and taxing the organs unduly, it impoverishes the
blood. Both Mrs. Gandhi and I were, like most people, lovers of
salt and ate large quantities of it. I argued to myself that probably
the introduction of salt in the system was responsible for the
continuation of her illness. I need not enter into the reasoning
applied by me to the pulses. I was myself at this time ordinarily
hale and hearty. Certainly no change on the score of health was
called for. But discovering that I could not wean Mrs. Gandhi
from the use of salt and pulses without doing so myself, I left them
off and so did she. There was no other change made in the treat-
ment. Within a week's time she was free from haemorrhage and she
who was, at the time of change, a skeleton quickly put on flesh. I
have ever since remained without salt. The condiment has such
a hold upon her that she could not resist the temptation when there
was no necessity for it. So when she had completely recovered, she
took to salt eating. She does have haemorrhages now and then, and
leaving off salt and taking friction baths enables her to recover
quickly. During the seven years of my experiments, I have treated
asthmatics and patients suffering from other lung diseases with a
saltless diet, and they have almost invariably responded. As for
myself, I have not suffered from serious illnesses any more than
those with whom I come in daily contact. This saltless diet has,
I believe, materially assisted me in my brahmacharya vow. With
these experiences before me, your persistent advocacy of salt has
come upon me with somewhat of a shock. There is one great change
in me which I have been noticing and which I have discussed
with medical friends without getting any light from them. If I
receive a wound, it heals more quickly than before. I experience
no feeling of excessive fatigue after long walks. But I seem to
have become a green stick. The skin has become too tender and
delicate. A knife would tear it, much more quickly than anybody
else's. Although I invariably walk barefoot, the soles of my feet
refuse to become tough and hard, as would anybody else's. My
gums have become flabby and the few teeth I have left are more
ornamental than useful. Is it possible that this delicateness is a
result of a saltless diet? Of course, there are so many other changes
that I have made in my life that it is difficult to single out salt for
my condemnation. If I had not noticed this deterioration in me—
if it is a deterioration—I should have, owing to the many other
advantages I have experienced, very actively advocated a saltless
diet. If I received some enlightened assistance from you, I would
like, if it be for a temporary period, to go back to salt and watch
its results upon my system. I was already conferring with Dr. Dev
upon the advisability of interrupting my experiment when your
letter came. Hence my last letter to you. If you have an accu-
rate knowledge about the matter and if you are an enthusiast
with a scientific mind which would refuse to swerve even by a
hair's breadth from the path of truth even in a fit of enthusiasm,
I would like to utilize your services both for plague research and for
finding out the real value of salt as an article of human con-
sumption. I shall try to secure the books you have mentioned.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
