272. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
March 30, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter of 23rd instant. I understand what you
mean. Of course I saw the sentences that followed your descrip-
tion of Bengal untouchability as a greater curse. There was no
logical sequence between that description and what you stated.
By describing it as a greater curse you prepared the reader for the
greater depths of degradation but not the extent in point of num-
bers. And then, I suppose you are not aware of the fact that if
the Bengal description of untouchability was applied to Madras,
then the untouchables would be perhaps 90% of the Hindu popu-
lation, for every non-Brahmin is practically an untouchable to a
Brahmin in the Bengal sense of untouchability. There are only two
divisions in the south, Brahmins and non-Brahmins. Are you aware
that if a non-Brahmin looked at the food of a Brahmin, that food
becomes polluted? Hence my insistence upon stepping into the
opponent's shoes and examining his argument from his own
standpoint. I think that there is decidedly a meaning in the
Bengal argument that untouchability in Bengal is of the mildest
type and that real untouchability is confined to the Bhangis, Meh-
tars and the like, who are, after all, imported. That we have to
deal with every aspect of untouchability is quite true, but we shall
only be able to deal with it when we are exquisitely balanced in
our statements and that balance can only come if we will give
even an exaggerated importance to the arguments of the oppo-
nents. Ahimsa is a most exacting dame and it sits with the most
sensitive scales noticing even an atom's weight of himsa or want
of charity. We are on the safest ground. We therefore need not
be in a hurry to give them battle. It will be time enough when
they reach our border. Whatever case they have, they are weaken-
ing by going about it the wrong way, but there we cannot help
them. They will have to see the error themselves.
I wonder if I have made my argument quite clear. If I have
not, you must hammer away at it till I see your point or you see
mine.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20756
