128. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Bhadarva Vad 1 [September 9, 1911]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter of Sud 134. If I pay Anandlal and you the
money you have spent on the construction of your house, I must
pay Cordes also. But that will create no end of problems. I
[think] it necessary that we approach all that we have to do
in this manner. The money you all owe me on account of the
houses, I intend to forgo. That some owe more and others less,
need not cause any heart-burning. As for the debt you have in-
curred, I think it would be best to consider it separately. We
shall consider the matter further when the Trust Deed is signed
and we come to a final decision. I intend going there before the
Deed is signed, but I think it hardly possible within the next two
or three months. It should be possible, I believe, next year.
Meanwhile, you may ask me whatever you want to in this matter.
I feel I understand the meaning of poverty better each day.
It should be clearer still if I were reduced to utter helplessness. I
never intended to say that the philosophy of Shri Krishna and
Vyas was dry. I only cited the example of Jaikrishna Vyas,
brother of Prabhuram Vaidya. If you have kept my letter, please
go through it again. You may then understand this better. I
don't know if any word was left out, causing a serious misunderstand-
ing of the meaning. Jaikrishna Vyas has written very well on
Vedanta. I have read some of his writings. I used to go to him
occasionally. I thought of him when I wrote about poverty. I
had already read the story of Sudama. I was imbued, and still
am, with the ambition to share honours with him and Narasinh
Mehta for poverty. That is how I came to write that Jaikrishna
Vyas's was dry philosophy and Sudamaji's the right one and worthy
of emulation. I used to observe that the former carried the key
of his safe on his person, tied at the waist. I knew that he had
collected quite a bit of money. All this seemed to contradict
what he says in his book Panchikaran.
I look upon Shri Krishna as the Supreme God, the Shri Krishna,
that is, who was the charioteer of Arjuna, the friend of Sudama
and the Ranachhod of Narasinh Mehta. I did not even dream
of criticizing Him. In so far as my letter gave you the impression
that I did, I have sinned. I shudder to think how I came to
write even a single syllable on the subject. I have been agitated
ever since I received your letter today (Saturday). The katha over,
I have sat down to write and my very first letter is this one to
you. I think it is a wretched life I live because I do not devote
the time—I can neither spare nor get it—to reading over letters
after writing them. Whatever verb you may use, I am equally
guilty. Things are bound to continue thus so long as the mind
is unsteady.
The reproaches to which Sudamaji's wife treated him, I re-
gard as poetic flourishes. However, even if his wife uttered those
very words, the thing does not seem surprising or incongruous.
A wife would speak in this manner. Sudamaji would want to suffer
to the uttermost while his wife would have none of it. Since they
had a friend like Krishna, why not seek his help? This at any rate
is certain: Sudamaji was extremely poor and content to remain so.
He was, likewise, an advanced bhakta Narasinh Mehta rose to the
presence of Shri Krishna but he never desired to be delivered from
his poverty.
The saltless diet is in great favour here nowadays. I bring
bananas with me whenever I go to Johannesburg. And apples
likewise. We have bought a small tin of olive oil.
In the
morning, the boys take dilute tinned milk, bread (bati) and ghee.
At noon, whenever fruit is available, they get banana, pieces of
apple with olive oil and the juice of sour lemons from the Farm,
and bread. The broken rice we had, has been cleaned and ground;
we make khir from it. At times the khir is made from sago and
at others, with rice. Sometimes there is only rice with ghee,
stewed apricots, these having been dried last year, and milk. In
the evening, there is coffee (made from wheat) or milk, and roti
with ghee. Marmalade has been made from oranges, and that
also is served. Once a week, the boys have rice and dal. Medh
and Pragji have been on saltless diet for a few days. And Ba, of
course, all the time, though she ate a little of the beans cooked for
the boys last Sunday and was in consequence quite ill for two days.
God alone knows whether the illness was brought on by the beans
and salt or was due to some other cause. I blame it of course on
the former. If Ratanshi's wife were to adopt a saltless diet, all
of us, except the Kaffirs, should get credit for living without salt
for six days [in the week]. But I observe that salt is the very
breath of Rambhabai.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5659. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
