77. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
TRIVANDRUM,
October 10, 1927
You need not despair. I know that you are awake and strug-
gling. From my own experience I know that it is extremely diffi-
cult to remain unaffected by desire towards one's wife and, there-
fore, feel sympathy for you. You two will not, however, succeed
in overcoming lustful desire towards each other till you give up
being together alone, begin to sleep in different rooms and, if
necessary, live completely away from each other for some time.
You have not told me how far your wife co-operates with you.
If you have her co-operation, your way is easy; otherwise, it is
difficult. You must succeed in this struggle. And be sure that as
your heart grows softer you will have increasing control over your
desire. To submit to desire requires hardness of heart. He whose
heart is filled exclusively by compassion for others has no mo-
ment free to give to lustful thought. That is why I have often
said that a pure brahmachari will never yield to anger. The
instances to the contrary which we come across in the Shastras are
of men who had no experience of real brahmacharya and observed it
only in its physical aspect. If you reflect more deeply, you, too,
will realize the truth of this statement.
All who feel concerned about my fast should give up their
fear. Surely, I have not undertaken the fast because of Devdas.
Their fear is the result of excessive attachment to me and of
ignorance. I never undertake a fast led away by the impulse of
the moment. When I do fast, it is for my own purification and
peace of mind. A fast, instead of being regarded as a cause for
concern, should be welcomed as a warning. A person who is
sincere in his striving does not fear the watchfulness of his parents
or friends, but welcomes it rather. People should look at my
fasts in that light. I admit that the weapon of fast is often
abused. For a votary of truth, however, fasts undertaken after
due deliberation are extremely useful. I have no doubt about this
in my mind. Do we not know that the best things are liable to
the worst abuse? Can people with a bad reputation deceive others
as much as people looked upon as good have often done?
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
