328. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
October 29, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
At last Mr. Doke's books are ready. I enclose herewith a list of
complimentary copies sent to the newspapers in India. If there are any
newspapers left out which, in your opinion, should get complimentary
copies, please take them from the parcel that will be received by Natesan,
not, I fear, by the mail that takes this letter but by the following
mail. I have had great difficulty in getting the copies. Ritch and I have
come to the conclusion that, apart from the newspapers, no public men
should receive complimentary copies. None have therefore been sent,
but if you think that any should be sent on your side, you should consult
Dr. Mehta and then distribute. Dr. Mehta has bought 25 copies for such
distribution. You may either get some of these or, in order that the
same person may not get two copies, after having learnt from him the
names of those who may receive his copies, you will be able to get them
from Natesan. I take it you have come to some arrangement with
Natesan so that we may receive cash without delay. 85 complimentary
copies have been distributed here. Of these 81 are to newspapermen.
Will you please arrange for cuttings containing the reviews to be sent to
Mr. Doke.
I have your two cablegrams, one informing me of the various
meetings in the Madras Presidency and of your proposed departure for
Rangoon. It is wonderful how Madras has come to the fore on this
question. The people there seem to be so practical. They either do a
thing thoroughly or do not do it at all. I am glad you will be seeing
Dr. Mehta almost immediately on his arrival. I hope that each of you
will be pleased with the other.
There is no reply yet from Crewe at the time of dictating this
(Thursday evening). Your last letter (I mean the long one, which you
evidently dictated) was very interesting and the whole of your family
have read it. Of Sally and Maud and other members of your family we
shall talk when we meet. Although Maud has left me, we meet almost
everyday, and so also with Sally. For some time, I have become em-
boldened, and have been taking fruit luncheon at the hotel in the sitting-
room just as we used to in Johannesburg, and Sally joins us. Twice a
week Millie also joins us. Simmonds, of course, is there, and Myron
J. Phel very often. He insists on bringing his own contribution. Ritch
also drops in. The rest you may picture to yourself. On Sunday last, I
presided at the Dussera Festival Dinner. It was given practically by
the extremist Committee. Nearly seventy Indians came. I accepted the
proposal unhesitatingly so that I might speak to those who might as-
semble there on the uselessness of violence for securing reforms. This
I did. My terms were that no controversial politics were to be touched
upon, and these were fully carried out. I drew the moral that I wished
to point out from the Ramayana. The Dussera Festival is a celebration
of the victory of Rama over Ravana, i.e., of Truth over falsehood. I
give you this information to enable you to see how I have been utilizing
my time here. I have endeavoured to come in contact with as many
Indians as I could. The programme still remains the same. I hope to
leave on the 13th November, unless Lord Crewe unduly delays his reply,
or unless something very urgent happens here necessitating our presence.
The proposal about an Indian visit has been entirely abandoned. I am
addressing a meeting of the Indian Social Union on Saturday. There is
another meeting of Indian students on Tuesday, and a third, on Sun-
day week, of the Indian Majlis at Cambridge.
Mrs. Ritch undergoes a somewhat dangerous operation on Satur-
day. The invitation to send a message to the Congress is rather an awk-
ward thing. However, I shall try to write out something. Probably, you
will have a copy of my letter with this.
I see that you have been collecting well in Madras. It is necessary to
enquire how the moneys collected are disbursed. Who keeps charge of
these moneys? As the struggle is to be a prolonged one, we are bound to
support the families of those who might be in gaol. The question has
arisen already, so that, if these funds or part of them can be sent for the
support of the families, it will be highly satisfactory. A gentleman . . .
to have subscriptions from others also of the same nature. I hope that
there will be no difficulty on your side. Are any men specially appointed
to look after the men who are deported? If there are, have you any
names? All this information should be published and letters from those
who are so helped may also be sent.
After you have finished your tours, so far as I can say at present,
you will be staying there until the struggle has ended. If so, I think it
will be highly desirable for you to take Hindi or Gujarati lessons. As
1 Vide "London", pp. 498-.
2 Indian Union Society, vide "Speech at New Reform Club", p. 510 and "Letter
to H. S. L. Polak", p. 512.
3 Vide "Speech at Meeting of Indians", p. 511.
4 No report of the speech made on this occasion is available.
5 Vide "Letter to G. A. Natesan", pp. 506-.
6 One line is cut off here.
you will be doing steady Committee work, there may be no difficulty
in your having some time.
I have your cablegram saying you strongly advise me to come to
India. I have another cablegram from Johannesburg saying that, if the
work was finished here, we should return to the Transvaal. I therefore
think that it is highly necessary that I should go to the Transvaal. I
feel that I have over-stayed my time here. You should therefore do the
best you can under the circumstances. I know there are obvious advant-
ages in our paying a visit to India, but perhaps it is as well that we should
not do so just now.
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5151
