439. LETTER TO SHARADABEHN KOTAK
June 4, 1927
What you write about the problem of thieves is quite right.
My putting the question to you did not mean that I expected
you to be able to find the solution immediately. It was intended
to make all the women think. Men must do their duty of protect-
ing women. But after all men's bodies are, like those of women,
as brittle as glass bangles, though perhaps the male bangles are
harder and can bear stronger blows. What women should do when
those bangles are broken, is a question which they themselves
should consider. There is the same atman in woman as in man.
It is not affected by differences of caste, sex or country. The wide-
awake atman in a heroic woman can be a thousand times more
powerful than the slumbering atman in a wicked man. Hence, in
the competition for displaying spiritual consciousness and strength
of soul, all people-the maimed and the crippled, the strong and
the weak, men and women, the old and the young and children-
can participate on equal terms if they wish. Even a dense dark
night obstructs only our natural eyes, but if we have developed
divine eyes, what can a dense dark night or a long-handled sickle
or a large baton do to us? And if, on such a dark night a giant
of a man carrying a terrible weapon comes and stands before one
of us-the others having either gone to sleep or been killed or run
away-if at that time we do not remember the name of Rama, then
our having chanted it morning and evening will have been in vain.
It is in the hope that it may come to us at such a dreadful time and
help us that we unfailingly repeat Ramanama morning and evening
even though we may feel lazy, or be tired or sleepy. It is possible
that after long practice, that name will come to our lips spontane-
ously every time we need it, will even be engraved in our hearts.
The women of the Raniparaj community are certainly more
fearless than we. They will go anywhere during night time. They
do not depend on being protected by men. It is, however, true
that they have other fears, but my statement is only about fear of
thieves and the like. It is not true to say that the Raniparaj women
do not care about their chastity. It is not proper either, to be-
lieve that only those who care for their chastity are afraid. The
fear which afflicts us in the Ashram has nothing to do with out-
rage of modesty. If we take count of cases of rape in the world,
we shall discover that such incidents are very rare. A woman's
virtue is violated through both the man and the woman acting
voluntarily, and if a woman is self-controlled and pure in mind,
violation of her virtue is impossible. This is true in two senses.
One is that the Shastras proclaim, and it must be believed, that
the body of one whose mind is pure in every way is protected
by the mind itself, just as Sita's mind protected her body. As you
know, Ravana could not outrage Sita's modesty, and the reason was
not that he did not possess brute strength, but that he knew that if
he tried to assault her his body would be burnt to ashes that very
moment; and so he tried to win her consent through all manner
of means, deceptions and threats, but they were of no avail in the
face of Sita's strength of mind. And the second meaning is that,
if a woman's mind is pure, her virtue is not violated and she is
not stained by sin, even though she may have been raped. Neither
will the world reproach her, nor will there be anything against
her from the point of view of dharma. A pure woman, there-
fore, should never be afraid of her modesty being violated. On
the contrary, she may remain confident that, if her mind is stead-
fast, her body will always remain inviolate. Forest-dwellers every-
where are less often overcome by evil desires than city-dwellers.
They have not even the time to fall a prey to such thoughts. I do
not mean to say that they all remain pure through their own
voluntary effort. It is easy for them to live pure lives as it is easy
for us to be vegetarians. Wherever there is immorality in the forests,
both the man and the woman fall through their own free will.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary: Courtesy: Narayan Desai
