25. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
June 9, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
I got your two letters pinned together. I find that the short
letter with paragraph headings is a summary of the first one
and that it would be enough to read that alone. But it appears
that you have also sent the original letter so that I may know
more details if I wish.
You should certainly not strain your will to use the limb
which pains, that is, use it disregarding the pain. If you feel that
because of such self-restraint the pain is gradually decreasing,
you may conclude nothing else is necessary. If the pain does not
decrease gradually even though you take care not to use that
limb, there is no option but to take complete rest.
There can be no one rule for all as to the time required for
a meal. If somebody's meal consists only of milk, it would take
him only five to seven minutes to sip it. If somebody else's meal
consists only of one pomegranate and he has no teeth but has to
eat the seeds instead of extracting the juice and drinking it, he
may even take an hour to do so. Hence the following should be
the rule: A meal should take up as much time as is required for
chewing it properly, taking into consideration the type and quantity
of the food. Ordinarily, twenty to thirty minutes should be re-
garded enough for those who have good teeth and who eat rotlis1,
dal, rice and vegetables. I have no faith in the common belief
about sleeping with the head in a certain direction. I have never
followed that rule.
It is my belief that the peepul tree is considered sacred be-
cause it is very big, covers a large area with shade and can be
grown almost everywhere.
I understand what you say about the Hindi translation of my
letters, etc. I shall be satisfied if everybody else is satisfied in this
matter.
I used to keep cloves and sugar crystals in my mouth merely
to prevent my voice getting hoarse. They were discontinued
when I stopped making so many speeches and to such large audi-
ences and I never resumed the practice afterwards.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7501. Also C.W. 4978. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
