315. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 2, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
The clock has just struck three and, after cleansing the teeth,
I have sat down to write this letter.
You seem to feel a little defeated. That will not do. You
must have observed that I tell everybody in my letters that they
should do nothing mechanically unless they are convinced about
it. One should accept a thing either with one's heart or with
one's reason. One can accept a thing with the heart only if one
has faith. But in either case one feels satisfied and happy. When
reason does not understand a thing nor does the heart accept
it, one feels discontented and slowly loses strength and energy.
Though such a person works day and night without rest, his work
is not well done and he becomes weaker and weaker and falls ill.
This does not happen when one does work in which one has
faith. 'What can I do? I know that all this is not right, but I have
to do it out of respect for my elders.' This is not faith, but false
civility. According to our definition of truth, it is also a form of
untruth. This is the feeling which your letter [of the 31st] gives.
Don't do anything because Narahari or I ask you to do it. Do a
thing only if you are convinced that it is right. You are complete-
ly free to reject all suggestions of Narahari, for the final responsi-
bility is yours. Many of Narahari's suggestions appeal to me, that
is, they seem good on paper. If you feel that some of them are al-
ready being acted upon or that some others don't deserve to be
accepted, you ought to take no action about them. You should
try to explain your point of view gently to Narahari, and, if he does
not see it, you should be patient and have faith that he will see it
in the end or that you will see your error. Meanwhile, you should
not let estrangement grow between him and you and neither of
you should suspect the other of deliberate hostility. In some mat-
ters everything depends on one's method of work. You should
understand Narahari's point of view. He is particular only about
two things. He is open-hearted, hard-working and sensible. He
has no control over his temper and is incapable of understanding
certain things. But he doesn't worry about those things either.
He is good at heart and harbours no resentment. One should be
281
patient with such a person. You should, therefore, try to under-
stand his suggestions patiently and reason with him. Do not get
upset or lose your peace of mind.
Read the letter which I have written to Parachure Shastri.
I have written in it about his diet. He should now start working.
I sent a wire to Jivraj at once yesterday. I will write to him
today. We should bear all things. Just now I am probing the
depths of mental leprosy. This case of physical leprosy, therefore,
does not affect me much.
Umedram wants to learn music. Make the necessary arrange-
ments for that and then arrange the rest of his programme of work.
Invite Marybehn to come again.
Personally I don't feel at all that Kusum is improving. Did
you forward to Talwalkar my letter to him? I myself have no
faith in his method of treating consumption.
I would prefer
Sharma's treatment if he agrees to come. Now Purushottam is
our Sharma. I don't want to load him with much work till he
is sure of his health. It is desirable that he should undertake
more responsibility only after his experiment on himself has suc-
ceeded. Otherwise his health would break down. We will make
no change before I get Talwalkar's reply. Nor should we upset
Kusum. Talwalkar is a gentleman. He is also an experienced
physician. Many patients put complete faith in him and remain
under his treatment till the end. Quite a few of them die, but some
recover too. It is the same with other physicians. If, therefore,
we lose somebody by trusting to Talwalkar completely, we will not
blame him. I have only expressed my own lack of faith in his
method of treatment. I have faith only in nature-cure. When a
case requires an operation, we certainly require a surgeon, but that
happens in very few cases. If you have thought further about
Kusum's case and have any suggestions to make, write to me. Get
from Talwalkar his reply to my letter as early as possible.
Don't burden Purushottam with responsibility for more than
four patients at a time.
does not seem likely to come in the near future.
All
the same, I have discussed the subject further in my letter to . . .3
which you should read.
I will not write more now.
BAPU
[Ps.]
As for those who worship Me, thinking on Me alone and nothing else,
ever attached to Me, I bear the burden of getting them what they need.
If . . .'s letters have been read by the people concerned
there, please return them to . . .3. Send to him my letter to . . .
also. Read all the accompanying letters before handing them over.
There are eleven in all including this.
Umedram, Jivraj, Amina, Purushottam, Mary, Parachure
Shastri, Kusum, Narahari, Lakshmidas, Prema.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8347. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
