390. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 30/November 4, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet today. The piece of leather which you sent
for the sandals was not good enough for repairing the soles. It is
hardly a month since the repair was done but the soles have again
worn out. The hard leather required for soles and heels is made
from hide of a particular part of the body, generally of a buffalo.
If you get such a piece, send it to me.
In the alternative, you
may send another pair of the same number as, or of a number
higher than, the one you sent for Kakasaheb.
I think I wrote to you that you need not send the pair of
scales. If I did not, please understand from this that I don't need
it. Trivedi came and gave me one.
I know your attitude. So long as Mahadev is outside, you will
not take upon yourself the burden of making a final decision, and
you are right in that. I had a long letter from Keshu. He seems to
have been deeply hurt. He has bitterly complained against you,
but his letter has had no effect on me. You should, however, take
him into confidence and ask him to tell you all that he feels. I know
that he is impulsive by nature. But he is a sincere youth and
very eager to do service. He is, however, impatient to increase
his knowledge and do original work. I may be wrong in my
judgment about him. You should, however, call him and hear
all that he has to say. Afterwards write to me and give me the im-
pression you form. I know that he spends money rather freely. But
I have observed that, in spite of that, he is simple in habits. He
adheres to his charge against . . .1 and it is a serious one.
We need have no fears about Kanta and Sumangal. They are
close relations. They are first cousins and have grown up together.
Despite this, I, too, had a suspicion and expressed it to them. But
I felt that they were innocent. Sumangal was Kanta's teacher once
and she has great faith in him. And, moreover, if we suspect bro-
thers and sisters, where would we end? We have adopted an
attitude of full trust in the women. If we burn our fingers as a
result of that, we will endure our misfortune. Unless we are pre-
pared to take some risks, we shall fail to do our duty towards women.
The Hindu man is under a heavy debt to the Hindu woman.
October 31, 1930
The clock struck nine when I wrote the last sentence and I
laid down the pen. We have resolved not to work after nine, as
far as possible.
I got your letter about Amidas. I am satisfied now. His firm-
ness will be rewarded. I felt that it was my duty to tell him
what I knew. If you want me to decide about Chitalia, I suggest
that you should send him Rs. 1,500. I think my speech referred
to the past but made no reference to the future. He cannot claim
any money on the basis of that speech. But I do not have suffi-
cient data to come to a decision on the point. I trust Karsandas
and, since he has asked for the sum, I think it is our duty to pay
it. In future, however, he may draw what he needs with Jamna-
lalji's or Kishorelal's consent; that seems all right to me. Copy
out this part of the letter and send it to Karsandas when you remit
the money to him. He should give his opinion whether or not he
agrees with me.
November 1, 1930
Along with this you will find letters to Prabhavati and Jaya-
prakash and one to Ghanshyamdas about them. Put all the three
in the same envelope and dispatch them immediately. The couple
is passing through extremely difficult circumstances just now owing
to the death of Jayaprakash's mother. Do the persons in the
Ashram who spin weigh the quantity of waste yarn? If they do not,
they should start weighing it every day. If anyone has been doing
this, let me know the quantity of yarn he or she wastes. What is
the highest average speed per hour attained by anyone in spin-
ning? A person may, after careful preparation, attain excellent
speed on one occasion; but that does not give the same value as
the average speed maintained by someone who has kept a record
for a year. In calculating this, the time spent in replacing a broken
belt or in cleaning a belt should also be taken into account.
Don't you agree that the figures given by a person would be cor-
rect only if he has included in them the time spent thus?
Tuesday morning, November 4, 1930
We have discussed the Ashram observances, their necessity
and the meaning of yajna. I propose now to discuss the meaning
of the book, as I have understood it, on which we meditate daily
and from which we recite some portion every day so as to com-
plete all the chapters in a week, the book which we have accept-
ed as our spiritual lighthouse. A letter which I had once receiv-
ed had suggested this to me, but Govindji's letter received last
week made me decide to take up the subject. He says that he tries
to read the Anasaktiyoga but finds it very difficult to understand.
Though I have tried to explain the meaning of the verses in a
language which everyone can understand, a literal rendering is
bound to present difficulties to the reader. If the subject itself is
difficult, how much can simplicity of language help? I, therefore,
intend here to present the subject itself in a manner easy to fol-
low. A book which we want to consult in every activity of our life
and with whose help we try to solve all our spiritual problems—if we
try again and again to understand the meaning of this book from all
possible points of view and meditate over it constantly, we shall ulti-
mately come to be filled with its spirit. In all my spiritual diffi-
culties I run to mother Gita and to this day she has never failed
to comfort me. It is, therefore, not impossible that others who
seek similar comfort from her may, if they know what new light
I get from it every day, receive further help or see some alto-
gether new meaning in the work.
I propose today to give the substance of Chapter XII which
deals with bhakti. Whenever there is a wedding in the Ashram,
we ask the couple to learn by heart and ponder over this Chapter
as one of the five sacrifices they have to offer. Knowledge and
action in the absence of devotion are dry as dust and are likely to
make us confirmed bondslaves. Let us therefore commence this
study of the Gita with a heart full of devotion.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 62 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
