206. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
April 10, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter of the 7th. You may certainly reduce the
expenditure in the Mandir wherever you think proper. You need
not force yourself to close any department. It should be enough
if we follow it as a fixed policy that we will not run any depart-
ment by borrowing money. When friends stop their aid, the de-
partments will automatically close down. We need not get
1 From the postmark
frightened because the evil among us has been exposed; we should
only remain vigilant. I feel lighter after writing the article in
Navajivan. I don't think it possible just now to reduce the scope
of our activities.
Maybe incidents like the one about M. or
about C. will happen again. Even at that time, we will not
lose courage. It is enough if you remain vigilant to see that such
incidents do not occur again. There should be a voucher for
every pie spent. Is it not our good fortune that C. has not
acted shamelessly and run away with the money? He has returned
more than he had stolen. M. had not abandoned all shame. He
may even lead a pure life now. About S. we can say nothing.
Everything will be all right if we take no interest in [others'] sins.
We cannot trouble Vinoba or Kakasaheb in this matter. All
that you can do is to insist on my presence. I am trying from
right now to arrange the programme so that I may spend July,
and probably August too, there. Do not lose heart. Go on
doing courageously what you can.
If Jayakaran leaves against your wishes, let him. Don't give
him any help if you do not think it proper to do so.
I had a letter from Ratilal and Champa. I send it with this
for you to read. Read my reply to it and pass it on to them.
Carry out what I have stated in my letter. If you can please
them by offering a little more, do so. You can spend up to
Rs. 200 a month. If, however, we give as much every month,
they will save nothing for travelling expenses, etc.
Yogendrababu may stay there as long as he desires; permit
him to leave whenever he wishes to do so. The main object is
to teach his wife to live a little freely. She will easily learn that
in the Ashram.
Has the money received from Burma been handed over to
Shanker lal ?
I trust you are taking proper care of your health. Consume
as much milk and ghee as may be necessary.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5400
