278. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
PATNA,
March 12, 1934
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,
It is only today that I am able to answer your letter. To me,
at this juncture, your letter is like a lake of fresh water to a
traveller in a desert. I thank you both. Your decision is per-
fectly correct.
If you are forbidden to go to a hill-station, why
don't you go to Hajira? I, of course, have never been there. But
all those who have been there have praised it very much. Is
Sinhagad also considered a hill-station?
Take treatment for
whatever disease there may appear to be in the intestines or any
other part of the body, but do it in a spirit of detachment. Think-
ing constantly about a disease only aggravates it. Dhyayato vishayan-
punsah, etc., applies in this case too.
Sarojinidevi tells me that you have started visiting astrologers.
Even if there be truth in their predictions, they ought to be
shunned.
She told me about the new party also. If a party of
Congressmen is formed with a definite programme, I would cer-
tainly welcome it. Even if it makes some honest mistakes I would
tolerate it. The members will learn from mistakes. If, however,
they refuse to learn, the party will only be a burden.
At present I desire two things from you. First, consider your-
self as a trustee and earn as much money as you reasonably
can. You should regard even such indulgences as you think
necessary for your happiness as a trust. Secondly, I should like
you to build up your body. For that purpose, you may try
nature cure methods if they appeal to you. Not far from where you
live are Mehta of Poona and Kuvalayananda of Lonavala . Both
the institutions have branches here.
Sarojinidevi told me about the Socialist Party also. I read
its manifesto. I did not like it. I think I should write about it. I
will do so when I get the time. Purushottam has asked my opinion.
If from the very start they think what the Government will do,
how will the Party be able to go ahead with its programme?
I can definitely say that I shall be here for one month at least.
I will await Lilavati's letter. She still does not seem to have
discovered the best way of using her abilities.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Will you make a list of Gujarati books specially suitable for
women and send it to me? Of course I do not want you to
give too much time to it.
From Gujarati: C.W. 7533. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
