281. LETTER TO THE "LEADER"
WHEN IS AN INDIAN NOT AN INDIAN?
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before April 7, 1906]
[TO
THE EDITOR
The Leader
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,]
Some time ago, you were pleased to offer to Mr. Nomura, a Japanese
subject, a public apology, because the Chief Secretary for Permits had
refused to grant to the gentleman a temporary permit. May I enlist
your sympathy on behalf of a British subject? Mr. Suliman Manga
I understood, was a British Indian. He is studying for the bar. He has
returned from England to pay a visit to his relatives in Delagoa Bay.
I was instructed to apply for a permit for Mr. Manga, enabling him to
pass through the Transvaal on his way to Delagoa Bay from Durban.
The Government declined to grant the permit, and have hitherto declined
to give reasons for their decision. I had the honour to represent Mr.
Nomura. His status was undoubtedly high; Mr. Manga's is, if possible,
higher. He is the son of a very well-known Indian merchant in Delagoa
Bay, and is himself a member of the Middle Temple. Yet, considered
as a British Indian, he could not pass through the Transvaal.
I have now discovered that I was mistaken in thinking that Mr.
Manga was a British Indian. On his reaching Delagoa Bay by sea, he
made another fruitless attempt to obtain a permit through the Govern-
ment, but they would not alter their decision. He was born in Portu-
guese India, and he, therefore, claimed the rights of a Portuguese sub-
ject. As such, he approached the Secretary to the Government at Delagoa
Bay, on whose intervention he has obtained a temporary permit to enter
the Transvaal. Mr. Manga, a Portuguese subject, has won; Mr. Manga,
a British subject, has been disgraced. Such is the reward that the British
Indian community gets at the hands of the Government for its extra-
ordinary patience and forbearance.
[Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 14-4-1906
1 This undated letter was published in the Leader of April 7 under the heading "Distinc-
tion without Difference".
2 Vide "The Transvaal Permit Ordinance", pp. 278- and "Letter to William Wedder-
burn", pp. 273-.
