182. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
After the morning prayer, January 16, 1931
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
You are fortunate to have Vallabhdas's company. Without being impatient,
do what you can with readily available means. Cultivate the attitude of
detachment even while doing such good work. It was a wise statement of
Raychandbhai based on his own experience that one should cultivate
equimindedness even in one's striving for moksha. To say that I have been
trying to invent a new model of spinning-wheel is an exaggeration, if not an
untruth. I know my limitations fully well. I have no skill at all for inventing
a new model of the spinning-wheel. What I am trying to do is to effect some
improvements in the Gandiva model. But even in that, there is some element
of imitation of the Jivanchakra model. Even so, the information you give me
will help me in effecting even the modest improvement I am trying to bring
about. I see some difficulty in adopting the 'V' shape pulley. The one I have,
has a shape between that of 'V' and 'U'. I have felt no necessity at all for a
ball bearing. I therefore like its design. The takli will be a child's play for
you if you wish to try the experiment. But you may forget about it. The one
object of your devoted effort is your spinning-wheel.
Rambhau's foot must have got all right. Do not tire of him. Be content
with what he does, keep reminding him of his duty and that too by mere
hints. What 'You' or 'I' cannot do , 'He' will do. Who is this 'He' ? 'He'
means 'Time' which has arisen to destroy the peoples. Their destruction
1 The reference is to verse 32, Chapter XI of the Bhagavad Gita.
139
140
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
includes destruction of their bad habits, too. Good habits even Time cannot
destroy, for they are sat. That which is sat, can never cease to exist. But let
us leave alone such learned talk. In Rambhau's case, forbearance is the only
remedy. These forces are operative in everyone's life-the tendencies acquired
in one's previous existence, the present environment and one's own effort.
The answer to your question why two persons of opposite characters are found
born in the same family, is that we do not know all the good and bad qualities
in the characters of Panditji and Lakshmibehn and their forbears, and therefore
do not have sufficient material to base our decision on. We should not even
wish to have such knowledge. We will have sufficient explanation if we accept
the law of karma.
You are unnecessarily making yourself unhappy regarding Chandradutta.
It is not incumbent on you to give up anything. If an ant aspires to kill an
elephant, it is a form of pride. You were impelled by your nature to do some
service to Chandradutta. He accepted from you what he could. You may write
to him if you can do so gently but at the same time intelligently. Otherwise
give up the thought of even writing to him. "What you have written to me is
not proper. If it is proper, God will make me see my error. It is not right for
you to do what an unhealthy man like me does. But since you no longer
have the loving faith in me, I cannot guide you. God will make somebody
else the instrument of guiding you. Meanwhile you do what you think proper.
God is looking after you and me. We are but perishable creatures." Write to
Chandradutta this or something to this effect and then stop thinking about
him. If you have not followed what I have written, ask me to explain. Devdas's
interpretation of the verse 'Tena Tyaktena Bhunjithah' can by analogy be
applied to this case. 'Renounce it and then enjoy it'. So, we can enjoy all
this that belongs to God, can we? From the point of view of grammar, the
meaning I have given to the verse will appeal to those whose knowledge is
imperfect. After all we are concerned with the spirit of the verse, and that is
observed by both readings of the verse.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32999
1 'That which is'; the reference is to verse 16, Chapter II of the Bhagavad Gita.
2 Part of the first verse of the Ishopanishad
