340. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
March 29, 1934
BA,
It is 3.30 in the morning, and Thursday.
I got your letter
only yesterday evening. We are in Muzaffarpur today. Panditji,
Swami and Kripalani are here. Madhavdas also is here. I shall
meet Bal at 11.
I am going to visit the place where Maganbhai,
Raojibhai, Soman and others are working. I will ask Raojibhai
to write to you.
I will try to give you all the news that you
want from me. But if anything is left out, ask me again. Prabha-
vati accompanies me these days wherever I go.
Kunvarji is in
Bombay.
Rami also has gone there.
Manu is better now.
Madhavdas also is better. Vasumati has gone to Wardha.
Chhaganlal and Rama have gone to Dwarka.
Chhaganlal fasted
for seven days just for self-purification. The fast ended on Monday.
He is all right. Dudhibehn and Junior Kusum are in Bhavnagar.
Kusum Desai has gone on a visit to Santiniketan. Her problem
is not yet wholly solved.
She is in search of suitable work. There
was a letter from Manilal and Sushila.
They are quite well.
Chandrashankar will be returning in four days now. In Ahmeda-
bad children get headaches, lose power of thinking, get fever and
die. It is on the decline now. The disease is caused by going to
cinemas, etc. Bad air is the chief cause. Yes, they have started
a hospital in the Vidyapith building. I do not know where Kanti
will go or stay after his release.
I am going to write to him.
Anandi and the other children are with Anasuyabehn and are
quite happy. Anandi had mild fever. She is better now. Lakshmi-
das also is better. He is in Patna. Parvati visited Pragji. The
latter is quite well. Devdas and Lakshmi are still in Delhi. Raja-
gopalachari will go there in a few days' time.
Manibehn seems
to be doing fairly well. I have had no letter from her. Nagini
has gone to America and Amala is quite happy at Sabarmati.
Janakibehn, Madalasa and others are in Wardha. Raojibhai's Vidya
is in Wardha. She has grown up and wishes to marry. They are
in search of a suitable young man for her.
Lakshmibehn Khare is
looking after the work at Wardha.
The number of girls has gone
up very much. It has exceeded fifty. Dwarkanathji also is there.
Brijkrishna is in Delhi. He is better now. Pyarelal is with me.
324
The lady who was helping me in England is with me just now.
It
has not been decided what to do about the person who has come
with her. It will be decided now. For the present she is here.
Padmaja is all right. Mrs. Naidu did come to see me at Hyderabad.
Panditji was not present on the Ramanavami day. The bhajan "Jaya
Rama Rama" was sung by Somanji. We shall be leaving Bihar on
the 10th to go to Assam.
I will spend ten days in Assam and
then return to Bihar. From there I will go to Orissa. I will
reach that province in May. Yesterday I met Rajendrababu's
wife and Vidyavati. I am not sending a discourse this time. It
is nearing prayer time now.
Blessings to you all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 21-
