334. LETTER TO CHINAI
NANDI DURG,
Vaishakha Sud 13 [May 14, 1927]
BHAISHRI CHINAI,
I have your letter. Even before this I got the news from
Bhai Kalyanji and Pragjibhai. Your letter however throws more
light. I congratulate you on the fortitude you displayed in re-
ceiving the blows without either returning them or running away.
I have no doubt that your action will bring benefit to you as
well as to the people. We should entertain no doubt about it just
because we cannot ourselves see its good results.
I shall now answer your questions. It cannot be stated cate-
gorically whether or not one may participate in the activities of the
Hindu [Maha]sabha. Those who are capable of having their own
ideals implemented may surely do it, or those who are in agree-
ment with the ideology of their local leaders will join them any-
way. I find nothing wrong with the Hindu [Maha]sabha's aims
and ideals. There can be nothing wrong in organizing a com-
munity. Abolition of untouchability is everyone's dharma.
Shuddhi is a very wide term. A part of what it connotes may
be acceptable to us, some of it may be rejected. I think their
manifesto gives no rigid definition of shuddhi. People therefore
have to make their own individual choice after considering the
activities carried on in their respective province or city. As a
matter of fact you have therefore to act as directed by your own
inner self in view of the local situation. There is no absolute
dharma that you must attend all the meetings convened by the
Mahasabha, nor are you bound by dharma to take active part in
any meeting which you happen to attend. Dharma consists in
undertaking an act only if it is likely to advance what one
regards as one's dharma. I would have no objection to taking part
in a procession launched by the Hindu [Maha]sabha if it is done
with a pure motive and not expressly with the intention to create
trouble. If we get news of a riot we should certainly exercise
our strength, such as it is, in bringing about peace. It is every-
one's dharma to make every pious effort to stop riots breaking
out. I employ the adjective "pious" with a purpose because in this
age of cowardice men are presumed to be observing their dharma
of peace by remaining indifferent merely with a view to saving
their own skin. Thus by pious efforts, I mean, no one is required
to check the riots at the cost of his dharma. If there is an attack
on my temple coming up and I just disappear or if I am advised
to run away, neither I nor the person who counsels flight can be
said to have been trying to stop the riot.
Social boycott can be justified in principle. I have however
never seen a clear reason for a social boycott of Muslims; nor is
a general social boycott possible, as far as I can see.
Please do write to me if you need further elucidation. I
hope your pain has subsided; that Raiji too must be all right
by now. One of your doubts remains to be cleared. There is
absolutely no reason to believe that the Government has a hand
in the functioning of the Hindu [Maha]sabha. The Govern-
ment, nonetheless, is wont to make use of every sabha or samiti
with a view to consolidating their own position, as it does with
the Hindu [Maha]sabha, the Muslim League and even the Con-
gress.
Let Bhai Kalyanji and Bhai Pragji too read this letter so
that I need not write to them separately.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2684
