132. LETTER TO SARLADEVI CHOWDHRANI
SINHGADH,
April 30, 1920
I posted a pencil letter just before leaving Poona for Sinhgadh.
The doctor [told me that I] was too pulled down to attempt walk-
ing up. I in my infatuity thought I could do it. So Mahadev,
Dipak and I began climbing up. But you will be sorry to learn
that I could not move up even half a furlong when I felt an un-
bearable strain on the left thigh and I had to give up the
attempt. I felt humiliated and deeply cut up to find myself so
much reduced in strength. But I must be cheerful even under
reverses. I shall try to be.
I have just got up with two dreams, one about you and other
about the Khilafat. To my great joy, you returned within two days.
I asked 'How so quickly?' You replied, 'Oh it was Panditji's
trick to have me by him. Jagdish's marriage is as far off as ever.
I have therefore returned.' I discovered that it was a dream.
I fell off again to sleep in disgust to find myself there before a
huge Mohammedan audience. One speaker who was speaking on
the use of Hindustani as the common medium included the dialect
spoken by the Bagdadis as Hindustani offshoot and therefore worthy
of study. The others in the audience protested against this travel-
ling outside India. Abdul Bari Saheb who was with me sided with
the man. But he was speechless under the angry protest of the
audience. Bari Saheb did not like this treatment of the man. I
was explaining the pros and cons to them. The conversation drifted
into the ways and means. I emphasized the necessity for adhering
to truth at all costs when there was confusion and I got up. I
commenced this [letter] immediately on getting up.
Dipak climbed up with Mahadev without any chair. He is
none the worse for it. He had milk on starting and cake on
reaching. He is now sleeping heavily. Prabhudas is looking much
better and more active. Balkrishna had come half way to re-
ceive us. Revashankerbhai is coming tomorrow. The ice doctor
too has just now turned up bringing two goats for me. I under-
stand that Tilak Maharaj is coming this evening. His party is
already in his bungalow.
Here are goats coming in with their agreeable music. If the
marriage is over or postponed I expect you to join the party and
enliven it with your music and your laughter.
I can go on writing. But I must stop not from fear of weary-
ing you but for the sake of taking up other work.
I am just reminded of L. Girdharilal's postcard asking for
your bracelet which you had subscribed to the Bagh fund. I
think it was sent to you yesterday. In any case I put you in mind
of it. I thought you had given the bracelet there and then.
You will not worry about my leg. The magnificent climate
of this place should see me through. About Dipak you will not
worry. We shall all look after him. Shankarlal took him out
for a drive round Colaba. He asked me whether he could take
him to the cinema. I said I would not take the responsibility.
I would send him some other time if you wished me to. I suggest-
ed instead a drive to Colaba or the Victoria Gardens. Hence the
drive. Both Mahadev and Dipak dined with Shankarlal. Was
I right about Dipak?
With love,
Yours,
LAW-GIVER
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
