273. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
WHILE NEARING ADEN,
December 19, 1931
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I have been getting from you occasionally, not letters exactly,
but little notes. As I myself did not write often, I cannot blame
you. However, there were strong reasons for my not being able
to write. In London, I could neither sleep nor have regular
meals. I used to carry my tiffin with me and ate wherever I
could. This time I seldom wrote to anybody and, as for writing for
Young India and Navajivan, I had to stop it altogether. You had
no excuse for not writing to me or writing only brief notes. But the
saying that habits die hard is true in your case. There is, however,
another saying which applies to people who are prepared to try
hard: "A mere string can make a dent in a black, strong, stone."
What, then, cannot one achieve with effort?
We entered the Red Sea today. There are nine of us. All of
us are deck passengers. Deck passengers get no amenities worth
the name. But we have everything we require and so need not
worry. I mention this merely to describe the conditions on the deck.
We shall reach Bombay on the 28th. Let us see what happens
when we arrive there. If the struggle starts again, you need not
think you have to come away immediately. First watch what
form the struggle takes and then come. Do not come until you
have been able to make proper arrangements for the work there.
Moreover, all of you keep good health there, and I would not be
happy if it suffered by your going to India. You should do what
you think is your duty, without regard to what I may wish. I say
this now because I cannot say whether I would get any time to
write to you afterwards. They may even arrest me as soon as I reach
Bombay.
It certainly was not expected that Shanti would be at peace
after he got the money. I am therefore not at all surprised to learn
that he has gone away. I wonder how you manage things now. Do
render all possible service to Sastriji who has gone there. Andrews
and Sarojinidevi are already there and you should attend on them
too.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4787
