73. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
February 26, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
SIR,
I have read the speech of the Hon'ble the Home Member
in the Assembly on the debate arising out of the ban on Shri-
mati Sarojini Devi. The speech has reference, among other things,
to the correspondence between Shrimati Mirabai and myself and
the Government's refusal to publish that correspondence. The
following is the relevant portion of the speech:
She (Shrimati Sarojini Devi) refers, and the point has been raised
in this debate, to a letter said to have been written 2 by Miss Slade
to Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Gandhi's reply3, and I have been asked why
no publicity was given to that letter. That letter was written and
answered long before the Congress leaders were placed in detention.
If Mr. Gandhi had wished to give publicity to that letter, he was
perfectly free to do it himself. But it was a confidential communication
addressed to him, and I do not see any reason why Government should
disclose a communication of that nature. I might say that it would not
help the Congress case, if it were disclosed.
Then it has been said that Mrs. Naidu wishes to defend the
Congress from the implication of being pro-Japanese. Government have
never at any time, either here or at home, charged the Congress with
being pro-Japanese. Well, the allusion to that in the booklet called
Congress Responsibility refers to a statement quoted from Pandit Nehru
himself.
I have not the time to quote it at length but if Hon'ble
Members will refer to the quotation given in the Congress Responsibility
pamphlet, they will easily find the passage in question.
Assuming that the report is correct, it makes strange reading.
Firstly, as to the non-publication by me of this correspondence
between Shrimati Mirabai and myself, surely the publication was
unnecessary until the charge of my being pro-Japanese was
spread abroad.
Secondly, why do the Government feel squeamish about
publishing "confidential" correspondence when both the corres-
pondents have specially invited publication?
Thirdly, I do not understand the reluctance of the Govern-
ment to publish the correspondence when, according to the
Hon'ble the Home Member, the correspondence will not serve
the Congress case.
Fourthly, the Government seem intentionally or unm-
tentionally to have suppressed the very relevant fact that Shri-
mati Mirabai wrote to Lord Linlithgow drawing attention to
the libellous propaganda in the London Press at the time, contain-
ing allegations that I was pro-Japanese, which allegations she
invited him to repudiate. Her letter to Lord Linlithgow en-
closed copies of the correspondence referred to and asked for its
publication. It was written on December 24, long before the
Government publication entitled Congress Responsibility which bears
the date February 13, 1943, appeared.
Fifthly, as to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru's alleged statement
before the Working Committee, I have already made it clear
in my reply to the Government pamphlet that it was wholly
wrong on their part to make use of the unauthorized notes of
the discussions at the Allahabad meeting of the Working Com-
mittee, after Pandit Nehru's emphatic repudiation published in
the daily Press.
It is difficult for me to understand the Hon'ble the Home
Member's speech and the Government's persistence in making
charges and innuendoes against Congress people whom they
have put in custody and thus effectively prevented from answer-
ing those charges. I hope, therefore, that the Government will
at the very least see their way to publish the correspondence
referred to, namely, Shrimati Mirabehn's letter to Lord Lin-
lithgow of the 24th December, 1942, together with the enclosures.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 116-
1 Vide pp. 176-.
2& Vide pp. 114- and 192-.
4 Sir Richard Tottenham, in his reply dated March 11, said: " . . . I
am directed to say, the Government do not think that any useful purpose
would be served by publishing the correspondence in question. So far as the
