228. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
BARDOLI,
July 25, 1931
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. I have already sent through Kaka a reply
to some of your points.
Even if Mithubehn resigns, work will go on wherever women
workers stay on. It will not, therefore, be necessary for Rama
and Mahalakshmi to leave Sisodara. They have certainly been doing
excellent work. I hope the night school there will not be closed.
Kaka must have acquainted you with the position about my
going to England. At present, the chances are 99 per cent against
and I per cent in favour.
I shall go to Borsad on Tuesday. Come and see me there.
Your judgment about Premabehn does not seem correct to
me. How many women workers do we have, who are, like her,
206
honest, hard-working and pure in heart? She has boundless love
for children. It is true that she has defects. But is there anyone
among us who has none?
There is a great saying of Jesus: "He that is pure among you,
let him cast the first stone at her." Ail those present hung their
heads in shame and none dared to cast a stone at the woman.
In old times it was a common custom to punish an immoral woman
by stoning her. One such woman was caught and the orthodox
people of that day got ready to stone her. Jesus admonished them
as above. Let us not act as they did.
We try to win over Premabehn and keep her in the Ashram
because of her virtues. In my eyes, her defects seem insignific-
ant, while her virtues are many. I came to know when I was in
jail about her habit of beating children. She knows that it is a
bad habit and I believe that she is even anxious to overcome it.
If any defects which people may see in her are reported to me,
I can write to her about them.
When I am there, I should certainly like to discuss with people
the general management of the Ashram, but I do not wish to
interfere with it just now. I am not living in the Ashram, either
physically or mentally, and therefore, think very little about it.
Whenever I happen to think about it, I feel that I have done
wrong. All of you should feel in the same manner.
If any of the volunteers who had joined the march go to live
in the Ashram, they should do so only in order to serve and
should remain content with whatever work is assigned to them.
This will serve two purposes. The workers will be able to streng-
then their self-control and when the bugle sounds again, they will
be able to come out instantly and join the struggle without throwing
the affairs of the Ashram into disorder.
You say that Premabehn is full of spite. Can you recollect
any instances of spiteful behaviour on her part?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5504
