319. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
December 12, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
Perhaps you will allow me the hospitality of your columns to draw
the attention of the public to the lesson of the thirty-eight prosecutions
of British Indians, seemingly under the Peace Preservation Ordinance
but really under the Asiatic Registration Act.
The lesson is that the proceedings of the Asiatic Office are all secret.
It required the arrest of Punia to learn that illegal instructions were
given to arrest Indian women though they may be wives accompanying
their husbands duly authorised to enter the Colony, unless the women
themselves held permits.
It required the prosecution of a lad of twelve to learn that secret
and illegal instructions were issued that innocent children should hold
separate permits.
It required the incarceration of Ram Sundar Pundit to learn
that the Asiatic Office was not governed by ordinary and known rules
for investigation into charges against Asiatics.
Lastly, it required the arrest of thirty-eight Indians and their
detention from two to four days to learn that the Asiatic Office had
suddenly, after five years' practice to the contrary, discovered that
permits issued under the Peace Preservation Ordinance did not cover
temporary withdrawal from and return to the Colony. Instructions
as to the new reading of the law were given secretly and without the
Indians having been previously informed. The public do not know
that these self-same men were actually examined by the Transvaal
Asiatic Officer posted at Durban and passed by him. Thirty-six of
these men were return passengers by the Sultan. The Asiatic Office
took, I am told, three days to examine these men.
And yet Mr. Lindsay, who as a lawyer ought to know better, glibly
talks of surreptitious entry without, I dare say, having taken the trouble
of ever even thinking that there might possibly be an Indian side to
the story.
Passive resisters depend upon creating public opinion, though
they are not turned from their conscientious purpose if they cannot create
it in their favour. It will not be denied that their suffering has at last
made some public men in this Colony think. May I ask them and
others who still continue to disregard the Indian standpoint whether
it is not the sacred duty of Indians to refuse to submit to an Act which
concentrates arbitrary powers in the hands of a single man who carries
on inquiries in secrecy, issues instructions under secrecy, and condemns
men without hearing them? Even Dinuzulu who is suspected of
rebellious designs, is not condemned on suspicion and without getting
a hearing, although Colonel McKenzie has received absolute powers
under the proclamation of Martial Law in Zululand. Why should
Indians be expected to labour uncomplainingly under the foul charge
of organised fraudulent entry and to submit to non-judicial investigation
under the Asiatic Act of their title to remain in the country? If their
repudiation of the charge were hollow, would they not rather that the
whole matter were hushed up than that, as they have repeatedly asked,
it should be inquired into openly and judiciously?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 21-12-1907
