439. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
March 17, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
I have your letters and telegrams. Today has been an eventful day.
I am much shaken by the news you have given me. As soon as I men-
tioned the information to Cartwright, he said:
That is Smuts. If one white man raises any objection to your people getting
any rights, he will try to please that white man, no matter even though
his doing so may cost an Empire.
Your second telegram about the supporters deprecating what appeared
to be hair-splitting perturbed me very much. I thought that we would
have to go through the laborious process of explaining to our supporters
the fact that we were asking for nothing new, and that opposition to the
colour bar as to the Free State was inevitable by reason of the Bill being
a Union Bill. But I now see that your telegram was based on a mis-
reading of Miss Schlesin's telegram. She thought that you would never
consider that we would ask for free entry into the Free State for educated
Indians who are at present resident in South Africa. If we did so as
part of the passive resistance campaign, it would be a distinct breach of
faith. But, if we did not resist the attempt to prohibit educated immi-
grants from entering the Free State, passive resisters would be set down
as cowards. We are fighting a colour bar and we must continue to fight
it, whether it is in a Transvaal law or in a Union law. I hope that you
will be able to persuade the supporters to take the same view. I have
not yet ascertained the feeling of all the passive resisters. Mr. Cachalia
and others are just now in the office and they seem to hold the same view
as I do. Personally, I would like an indefinite postponement of the Bill
and the desired alteration in the Transvaal Immigration Law. Then,
we need raise no question as to the Free State, there would arise no ques-
tion as to the Cape and Natal, and the whole thing would be quite satis-
factory. If General Smuts does not yield, I hope that the Cape friends
will also take up passive resistance, because the question then will be no
longer provincial. They are as much interested in resisting a colour
bar in a Union law as the Transvaal Indians, and, if they would take up
passive resistance, the whole thing could be finished in practically no
time. I am writing to Gool and others about funds. The dispatches
of Lords Crewe and Morley do credit to them, and they show that
great and useful work was done by the South Africa British Indian
Committee. The dispatches escape not a single argument or point.
Your epitome of what should be done by the Government to placate
Asiatics all over is admirable, and I hope that it was read by all the
Members of Parliament. Do you suggest a letter from here and Natal to
Alexander3? He will be, I see, a most valuable helper.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5312
