105. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
JOHANNESBURG,
August 8, 1907
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have heard from more sources than one that, in the opinion
of General Smuts, I am responsible for the agitation against the
Asiatic Law Amendment Act, and that my action is strongly dis-
approved of by him. If the imputation means that my countrymen
do not resent the Act at all but that I unnecessarily inflame them, I
venture to repudiate it altogether. On the other hand, if it means
that I have voiced their sentiments and that I have endeavoured, to
the best of my ability, to place before them accurately what the Law
means, I beg to accept the entire responsibility. I feel that, my
parents having given me a liberal education, and [I] having studied to
a certain extent modern history, I should be false to myself and my
country if I did less.
Relying upon past professional connection with Mr. De Villiers,
I sought a private interview with him, and requested his unofficial
intervention with a view to finding a solution of the difficulty. He
promised to see General Smuts and let me know. He did so. I was,
however, unable to see him personally again. He left a message with
his Secretary to the effect that I should approach General Smuts
directly, though there was little chance of relief being granted in the
direction suggested by me.
I believe that I am as anxious to serve the Government as I am
to serve my countrymen and I feel that the question is one of very
serious and Imperial importance. I, therefore, venture to enclose here-
with a hurriedly-drawn draft amendment to the Immigration Restric-
tion Bill. In my humble opinion, it meets the view of the Government
entirely, and it removes the stigma which, rightly or wrongly, my
countrymen think attaches to them by submission to the Asiatic Law
Amendment Act.
I have seen a cabled summary of General Smuts' reply to the
South Africa British Indian Committee. He has been pleased to re-
mark that co-operation with the leaders of the Indian community is
not possible, as they have taken up an attitude of defiance. With defe-
rence, I must say that there is hardly any defiance about the attitude,
but complete resignation to the will of the Almighty, in whose name
they have sworn not to surrender their manliness and self-respect,
which, in their opinion, are seriously attacked by the Registration Act.
I hope that the proposal submitted herewith will be received in
the spirit in which it is offered.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
[Enclosure]
PROPOSAL TO MEET DIFFICULTY REGARDING
ASIATIC REGISTRATION ACT
It is submitted that the Immigration Restriction Bill, which can
still be recalled and amended, can meet the whole difficulty, as follows:
1. In Section 1 of the Bill, to omit from "provided" to "Act".
2. The following addition to be made to Section 2: The term
"prohibited immigrant" shall not include and mean male Asiatics falling
under Clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) hereof, notwithstanding that they
cannot comply with the requirements of sub-section 1:
(a) Any Asiatic duly authorized to enter and reside in this
Colony by a permit issued under the Indemnity and Peace Preser-
vation Ordinance, 1902, or any amendment thereof, or issued
between the 1st day of September, 1900, and the date of the pass-
ing of the said Ordinance, unless such permit shall have been
fraudulently obtained, provided that any such permit expressed to
authorize any Asiatic to remain in this Colony for a limited time
only shall not be deemed to be a permit within the amendment
of this sub-section;
(b) Any Asiatic resident and actually in this Colony on the
31st day of May, 1902;
(c) Any Asiatic born in this Colony since the 31st day of
May, 1902, not being the child of any labourer introduced into this
Colony under the Labour Importation Ordinance, 1904;
(d) Any Asiatic who, before the 11th day of October, 1899,
paid the sum of £3 in terms of Law 3 of 1885 as amended in 1886.
Provided that such Asiatic shall before a date to be fixed
by the Colonial Secretary take out a domicile certificate as per
form prescribed by regulation, and provided further that chil-
dren up to the age of 16 years shall be exempt from the operation
of this Clause, after attaining which they shall be obliged to
take out certificates of domicile to enable them to claim the
exemption before mentioned.
3. The term "Asiatic" shall mean any such male person as des-
cribed in Article 1 of Law 3 of 1885, not being a person introduced
into the Colony under the Labour Importation Ordinance, 1904.
4. Sub-section (c) of Article 2 of Law 3 of 1885 as amended by
Volksraad resolution, Article 1419 of the 12th day of August, 1886,
Article 128 of the 10th [day of] May, 1890, and the Asiatic Law
Amendment Act are hereby repealed.
5. To add to sub-section 15: Also prescribing the form of certi-
ficates of domicile under sub-section and the manner of applying there-
for and the period within which Asiatic children under the age of 16
shall make application for certificates of domicile on completing 16 years.
Indian Opinion, 24-8-1907
