159. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
PUDUPALAYAM,
February 13, 1934
BA,
We are in Rajaji's Ashram today. Nearly 250 persons must
have dined here. The same number slept in the place last night.
Mathuradas was among them. Harijan Sastri and his wife also
have come along. Valjibhai is in the party. His health cannot
be described as good. I got your letter. You remember Ashar-
bhai of Tirupur, don't you? He and his wife Padmavati had got ill
after they were released from jail. They are somewhat better now.
There was a long letter from Bal today. He and Raojibhai are work-
ing together and looking after the store.
Soman and Parnerkar
are in Patna. Maganbhai looks after the journals. Bhansali is
living in a cave near Than. He has got his lips stitched up, but
an opening has been left through which a tube can be inserted.
He drinks through it flour mixed in water. He eats nothing else.
He wears a loin-cloth made of bark. I had a letter from Chhaganlal
Joshi. He is all right. These days he gets milk, etc., in his food
and so keeps good health. He reads a lot. There was a letter
from Pyarelal in which he has described his progress in the study
of the Gita. His health is fairly good. Gangabehn has left Wardha
and returned to Borivli. From there she will go to the Ashram.
There was a letter from Devdas. He is quite well. Amtussalaam is
lying in bed in front of me. She has been having fever, but is better
today. She will go to Sabarmati when she is all right. Krishna-
kumari is in Kashi and lying ill at her paternal uncle's. Velanbehn
is being looked after in her illness. I have written to Madhavdas.
There has been no reply. I will let you know when I get
one. I am sending copies of your letter to Ramdas, Devdas, etc.
Blessings to all sisters from
BAPU
[PS.]
I omit the discourse today. I hope you will not mind if I
do that sometimes? I have no time at all and, therefore, cannot
write it well. I will send you the slivers.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 13-
154
