409. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON THIRD CLASS
TRAVELLING ON INDIAN RAILWAYS
RANCHI,
September 25, 1917
TO
THE EDITOR
THE LEADER
SIR,
I have now been in India for over two years and a half after
my return from South Africa. Over one quarter of that time
I have passed on the Indian trains travelling 3rd class by choice.
I have travelled north as far as Lahore, down south up to Tran-
quebar, and from Karachi to Calcutta. Having resorted to third
class travelling among other reasons for the purpose of studying the
conditions under which this class of passengers travel, I have naturally
made as critical observations as I could. I have fairly covered the
majority of railway systems during this period. Now and then I
have entered into correspondence with the management of the
different railways about defects that have come under my notice.
1 A copy of this was sent by Gandhiji to the Secretary, Department of Com-
merce and Industries, Delhi, with a letter making practical suggestions for im-
provement; vide Vol. XIV, "Letter to Commerce and Industries Secretary",
31-10-1917.
But I think that the time has come when I should invite the Press
and the public to join in a crusade against a grievance which has
too long remained unredressed, though much of it is capable of
redress without great difficulty.
On the 12th instant I booked at Bombay for Madras by the
mail train and paid Rs. 13-. It was labelled to carry 22 passengers.
These could only have seating accommodation. There were no
bunks in this carriage whereon passengers could lie with any degree
of safety or comfort. There were two nights to be passed in this
train before reaching Madras. If not more than 22 passengers
found their way into my carriage before we reached Poona, it was
because the bolder ones kept the others at bay. With the exception
of two or three insistent passengers, all had to find their sleep,
being seated all the time. After reaching Raichur the pressure be-
came unbearable. The rush of passengers could not be stayed. The
fighters among us found the task almost beyond them. The guards
or other railway servants came in only to push in more passengers.
A defiant Memon merchant protested against this packing of
passengers like sardines. In vain did he say that this was his
fifth night on the train. The guard insulted him and referred him
to the management at the terminus. There were during this night
as many as 35 passengers in the carriage during the greater part of
it. Some lay on the floor in the midst of dirt and some had to
keep standing. A free fight was at one time avoided only by the
intervention of some of the older passengers who did not want to
add to the discomfort by an exhibition of temper.
On the way, passengers got for tea tannin-water with filthy
sugar and a whitish-looking liquid miscalled milk which gave this
water a muddy appearance. I can vouch for the appearance, but
I cite the testimony of the passengers as to the taste.
Not during the whole of the journey was the compartment
once swept or cleaned. The result was every time you walked on
the floor or rather cut your way through the passengers seated on
the floor, you waded through dirt.
The closet was also not cleaned during the journey and there
was no water in the water tank.
Refreshments sold to the passengers were dirty-looking, handed
by dirtier hands, coming out of filthy receptacles and weighed in
equally unattractive scales. These were previously sampled by
millions of flies. I asked some of the passengers who went in for
these dainties to give their opinion. Many of them used choice
expressions as to the quality but were satisfied to state that they
were helpless in the matter; they had to take things as they came.
On reaching the station, I found that the ghariwala would not
take me unless I paid the fare he wanted. I mildly protested and
told him I would pay him the authorized fare. I had to turn
passive resister before I could be taken. I simply told him he
would have to pull me out of the ghari or call the policeman.
The return journey was performed in no better manner. The
carriage was packed already and but for a friend's intervention, I
could not have been able to secure even a seat. My admission was
certainly beyond the authorized number. This compartment was
constructed to carry 9 passengers but it had constantly 12 in it.
At one place, an important railway servant swore at a protestant,
threatened to strike him and locked the door over the passengers
whom he had with difficulty squeezed in. To this compartment
there was a closet falsely so called. It was designed as a European
closet but could hardly be used as such. There was a pipe in it
but no water, and I say without fear of challenge that it was
pestilentially dirty.
The compartment itself was evil-looking. Dirt was lying thick
upon the wood work and I do not know that it had ever seen
soap or water.
The compartment had an exceptional assortment of passengers.
There were stalwart Punjabi Mahommedans, two refined Tamilians
and two Mahommedan merchants who joined us later. The
merchants related [about] the bribes they had to give to procure
comfort. One of the Punjabis had already travelled three nights
and was weary and fatigued. But he could not stretch himself.
He said he had sat the whole day at the Central Station, watching
passengers giving bribes to procure their tickets. Another said he
had himself to pay Rs. 5 before he could get his ticket and his
seat. These three men were bound for Ludhiana and had still
more nights of travel in store for them.
What I have described is not exceptional but normal. I have
got down at Raichur, Dhond, Sonepur, Chakardharpur, Purulia,
Asansol and other junction stations and been at the Mosafirkhana
attached to these stations. They are discreditable-looking places
where there is no order, no cleanliness but utter confusion and
horrible din and noise. Passengers have no benches or not enough
to sit on. They squat on dirty floors and eat dirty food. They are
permitted to throw the leavings of their food and spit where they
like, sit how they like, and smoke everywhere. The closets attached
to these places defy description. I have not the power to adequately
describe them without committing a breach of the laws of decent
speech. Disinfecting powder, ashes or disinfecting fluids are un-
known. The army of flies buzzing about them warns you against their
use. But a third class traveller is dumb and helpless. He does not
want to complain even though to go to these places may be to court
death. I know passengers who fast while they are travelling just in
order to lessen the misery of their life in the trains. At Sonepur flies
having failed, wasps have come forth to warn the public and the
authorities, but yet to no purpose. At the Imperial Capital a cer-
tain 3rd class booking office is a Black Hole fit only to be destroyed.
Is it any wonder that plague has become endemic in India?
Any other result is impossible where passengers always leave some
dirt where they go and take more on leaving.
On Indian trains alone passengers smoke with impunity in all
carriages irrespective of the presence of the fair sex and irrespective
of the protest of non-smokers. And this notwithstanding a bye-law
which prevents a passenger from smoking without the permission of
his fellows in a compartment which is not allotted to smokers.
The existence of the awful war cannot be allowed to stand
in the way of removal of this gigantic evil. War can be no warrant
for tolerating dirt and overcrowding. One could understand an
entire stoppage of passenger traffic in a crisis like this, but never
a continuation or accentuation of insanitation and conditions that
must undermine health and morality. Compare the lot of the 1st
class passengers with that of the 3rd class. In the Madras case, the
1st class fare is over five times as much as the 3rd class fare. Does
the third class passenger get one-fifth, even one-tenth, of the com-
forts of his first class fellow? It is but simple justice to claim that
some relative proportion be observed between the cost and comfort.
It is a known fact that the 3rd class traffic pays for the ever
increasing luxuries of 1st and 2nd class travelling. Surely a third
class passenger is entitled at least to the bare necessities of life.
In neglecting the 3rd class passengers, opportunity of giving a
splendid education to millions in orderliness, sanitation, decent
composite life, and cultivation of simple and clean tastes is being
lost. Instead of receiving an object lesson in these matters, 3rd class
passengers have their sense of decency and cleanliness blunted dur-
ing their travelling experience.
Among the many suggestions that can be made for dealing with
the evil here described, I would respectfully include this: Let the
people in high places, the Viceroy, the Commander-in-chief, the
Rajas, Maharajas, the Imperial Councillors and others, who gene-
rally travel in superior classes, without previous warning, go through
the experiences now and then of 3rd class travelling. We would
then soon see a remarkable change in the conditions of the 3rd class
travelling and the uncomplaining millions will get some return for
the fares they pay under the expectation of being carried from place
to place with the ordinary creature comforts.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K . GANDHI
The Leader, 4-10-1917
