534. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
May 29, 1936
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have your letter of 25th instant. So you are touring with
almost feverish speed. May you have the requisite strength.
Even a week at Khali will be a godsend.
I propose to make public use of your statement on khadi.
I have received so many inquiries. The distorted summary has
caused consternation among our people who have faith in khadi.
Your statement will ease the situation a bit.
Your explanation about the omission of a woman on the
W. C. does not give me satisfaction. If you had shown the slight-
est desire to have a woman on the Committee, there would have
been no difficulty whatsoever about any of the older ones standing
out. There was pressure if it may be so called only about Bhula-
bhai. And the first time his name was mentioned you had no
objection. There was no pressure about any other member. And
then you had this unfettered choice of omitting a socialist
name and taking a woman. But so far as I remember you
yourself had difficulty in choosing a substitute for Sarojini Devi
and you were anxious to omit her. You even went so far as to
say that you did not believe in the tradition or convention of al-
ways having a woman and a certain number of Mussalmans on the
cabinet. Therefore so far as the exclusion of [a] woman is con-
cerned, I think it was your own unfettered discretion. No other
member would have had the desire or the courage to break the
convention. I must also tell you that in certain Congress cir-
cles the whole blame is being thrown on me, for I am reported
to have excluded Mrs. Naidu and to have insisted on having no
woman—a thing for which as I said to you I had not even the
courage. I could not exclude even Mrs. N., not to mention a
woman.
As to the other members too, I have been under the impres-
sion that you chose the members because it was the right thing
to do for the cause. There was no question of behaya or haya-
dar when all were actuated by the noblest of motives, i.e., ser-
vice of the cause according to their lights. I may say that your
statement which your letter confirms has given much pain to
Rajen Babu, C. R. and Vallabhbhai. They feel—and I agree
with them—they have tried to act honourably and with per-
fect loyalty towards you as a colleague. Your statement makes
you out to be the injured party. I wish you could see this view-
point and correct the report if it is at all possible.
As to the third thing, I would love to have the thing cleared.
I cannot guess what you want to say. But that must wait till
we meet. I must not add to the strain you are already bearing.
About Dr. Ansari memorial, I have given Asaf Ali my clear
opinion that the memorial for the Doctor should await better
times politically as it has for Papa . Do you think otherwise?
The Kamala Memorial is making slow progress.
Herewith the Princess's letter containing a reference to Indu.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Bangalore City till 10th.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
