37. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
BOMBAY,
August 30, 1924
DEAR MOTILALJI,
Mrs. Naidu handed me yesterday, your letter to me. The
original must have reached Sabarmati by now. I made a full
surrender, i.e., as full as I am capable of making, in my two
letters to you . . . .
You will have me therefore almost on your terms. The
"almost" is necessary because there are some few things I hold
dearer than life and than all the ties of the world. But if you
will let me have something willingly and whole-heartedly, i.e.,
knowing that it is right to give, then I want this:
Our resolution should
1. reiterate the Congress belief in the principle and policy
of full non-co-operation including the boycott of legislative bodies;
2. but suspend them [boycotts] all save that of foreign
cloth up to the end of 1925;
3. should invite everybody to join the Congress;
4. should exclude the boycott of Empire goods;
5. and should confine Congress activity solely to the spread
of hand-spinning and hand-spun khaddar, Hindu-Muslim unity,
and for Hindus the removal of untouchability.
This means that Congress as such should have nothing to do
either with Councils or boycotts but they may form their own
organizations independently of the Congress to go on with Councils
and other activities not inconsistent with the Congress activity.
Therefore there can be no organization to prosecute the Council
or other boycotts suspended under the resolution. Support of the
existing national schools should continue and where possible new
ones may be opened but they may not have any connection with
the Government.
The four-anna franchise should be abolished and instead
each person becoming a member of a Congress organization should
be a khaddar-wearer, should contribute per month as a condition
of membership at least two thousand yards of yarn of his own
spinning, it being open to everyone to contribute the full quota for
the whole year at a time.
I see no other way of making the Congress organization a real
and living thing, nor can I see any hope for the poor of India
without the spinning-wheel and we shall never fire their imagination
unless we spin ourselves.
There are other alterations I should suggest in the Constitution
but they need not be mentioned now. They are meant purely for
effective and expeditious working. We should have a declaration
that the Working Committees should be regarded as executive bodies
and the A.I.C.C. a deliberative body and that should contain only
those who are committed to the full programme of the Congress.
But under my proposal you would be as eligible for election to the
Working Committee as 1. What I mean is that if the four boycotts
are suspended Council-entry or practice in a law-court should by
itself be no bar. As a matter of fact it may be inadvisable for a
busy lawyer or a busy Councillor to come into Working Committee
whose members would be expected to give their whole time and
attention to the three things of the Congress programme.
Under my plan again there should be no exception in favour
of Bengal. As a matter of fact Swarajists may organize them-
selves fully in every province without let or hindrance from the
Congress. But the Congress organization everywhere should have
only one programme. Thus Das may convert the Congress or-
ganization into a Swaraj organization and form himself and permit
others to form a Congress organization pledged only to the three
things. The idea is this: The Congress will neither help nor
hinder other organizations but the latter should all, if their
members are Congressmen, help the Congress programme. Con-
versely, Congressmen who believe in many other things not prohi-
bited by the Congress may join other organizations for their other
activities. . . .
Of the business part as far as I can see only the qualifications
of membership may prove an obstacle but I hope you will see
that if we all believe in khaddar even as an economic necessity,
the acceptance of my proposition is a necessity.
You will observe that I have written the letter as the thoughts
have come to me. I do not mind for my sake, as I wish, to live
upon your sufferance. No more of domestic wrangling for me.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 10140
