77. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
M. K. GANDHI
ATTORNEY
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P.O. Box 6522, JOHANNESBURG,
December 4, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,
I have your letter. I return the Aiyar correspondence for you to
file there. I do not want to keep it here. At the same time, I do not
wish to destroy it.
Your report on Eastern Vlei is very good. I certainly think that
we ought to take notice of the Henwood case. Even if the man was
a thief, it was nothing short of persecution; and, if you do not consider
the thing to be stale now, you should still publish it. When the man
has finished his sentence, he may be interviewed and more may be
published, but the case should be followed up. Indeed, it would be well
to post up somebody in order to meet him upon his discharge. So far
as I am aware, Magistrate's notes can certainly be seen as a matter
of right by interested parties.
I intended to write to Khan asking him to waive his fees about
Muthuswamy because the amount has to come out of passive resistance
funds, but I thought that I should ask you whether I should do so before
writing the letter. This I forgot to do. Shall I now write or do you
think that the amount should be paid without more ado?
With reference to the supplement, if the dog were in the centre,
I think that your remarks would have been justified. As it is, the dog
in the present instance was not sitting in the centre, but Mr. Hosken
was, and, if you had said 'Mr. Hosken is in the centre with Mrs. Ellis
to his right' and so on, it would have been all right. No one can be
held responsible - not even the photographer - for the arrangement
of those who sat for the group. I went there at the last moment, and,
so many important persons having come in, I hardly think that Mrs.
Vogl also could control the thing. Without giving the official designations,
the names could have been printed. But, of course, you could not
1 P. S. Aiyar, owner and editor of The African Chronicle published from Durban;
Honorary Secretary of the Anti-£ Tax League formed in September 1911
SV-VI : 7
97
reason this way, not having seen the Bazaar and not having been
intimately connected with the work. But I do say that you should have
seen the impropriety of introducing the chief members of the group
through me. 1
I consider you to be entirely capable of handling the £3 tax business,
but I am not just now in a position to feel the pulse of the community
there. Whether, therefore, they would rise to the occasion or not is
entirely for you to judge. You should, therefore, discuss the thing freely
with them, tell them that you would be prepared to stay for a month
in Durban and work the thing up, if they want you to do so. But,
of course, after having gone into it, it would not do for you to limit
yourself in any way. You will have either to do or die. You may stay
in Durban for a month - less or more. I personally cannot set any
limit to your work and say, 'All right, work for a month, and then
things may be left to take their course'. That could be done, if I were
managing the thing, but, in this instance, if the thing is to be done at
all, I want you to become the initiator and organizer. Your responsibility
will, therefore, be towards yourself and your God. If I felt like being
free to head the movement, I should plunge without a moment's
hesitation, but, just now, I am not in that condition at all. I shall certainly
criticize you freely, and watch the working, and give advice. More I
cannot do. So that you must count the cost before embarking on the
enterprise. You should also take care that you do not in any way clash
with what Aiyar is doing. I have now learnt something about Munroe.
I have distrusted the agitation from the commencement, that is, I have
not been able to consider it to be unselfish. Apart from this question,
if it is necessary for you to stay in Durban with the family for a month,
of course you should do it, looking to me for the deficit for that month's
expenses.
I should like to see the text of this address to Hosken. Was it
so long-winded as suggested by Aiyar ? You will do what you think
is proper regarding Jamni. Anandlal has commenced collections 2 . I share
the view you have expressed about him. If Manilal is not to come
during the month, you will have to get him to cheerfully reconcile himself
to the delay. The coming here is with him on the brain now, and I
do not wish to discourage him at all. I do not know what is going
to happen to him or to any of us in March. If you detain him there,
let him realize that he should put the exigencies of the work there
before his inclination and take pleasure in the thought. I shall go through
1 Vide also pp. 93-.
2 viz subscriptions for the Indian Famine Relief Fund ; vide also Vol. XI,
pp. 182, 190 and 197-.
the essay you have sent, and we shall certainly publish it if the ideas
are at all acceptable. You may nurse the lad, even while he is out
of Phoenix.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of
India
