240. LETTER TO J. CRERAR
BOMBAY,
April 29, 1919
DEAR MR. CRERAR1,
It is perhaps due to Government and to my co-workers in the
city that I should place before H. E. the very difficult situation
that has arisen out of Mr. Horniman's deportation and the suspen-
sion of the publication of The Bombay Chronicle by reason of the
censorship orders. In my humble opinion, Mr. Horniman's de-
portation is totally unjustifiable and the censorship orders quite
unnecessary after his deportation. Fuel has been added to the fire
by the order of forfeiture of security. And all this when civil dis-
obedience has been totally suspended! Herculean efforts are being
made by satyagrahis to help in every way they can to restore peace.
I might be permitted to say that but for the incessant labours of
the satyagrahis, excited demonstrations would certainly have taken
place in spite of the military precaution. Complaints ever in-
creasing in volume have been hourly coming to me against my
advice not to have any demonstrations regarding the deportation.
I do not know that the Satyagraha Sabha will be able altogether
to prevent some demonstration. I would therefore respectfully
suggest that a statement may be made reassuring the public that
the deportation orders will be withdrawn at an early date and that
censorship and forfeiture orders may be altogether recalled. I under-
stand that the Government are about to effect further arrests
in Bombay of noted satyagrahis. I hope that my information is
not true. From a public standpoint, any further arrests during the
suspension of civil disobedience will be a calamity. I believe that
all my efforts to restrain the pent-up fury of the people will be
vain, nor shall I be able to hold myself or the movement respon-
sible (morally or otherwise) for any untoward results that may
follow any such arrest.
Mrs. Naidu has received a communication from Sind inform-
ing her of the state of things there. The arrests that have been
made in Karachi seem to have produced a profound impression on
the public mind there.
In the interests of peace, I plead for forbearance during sus-
pension of civil disobedience.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6574
