494. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
September 8, 1941
CHI. BHAGWANJI,
I have your letter. I got Puratan's also. He is displeased
that you sent his five-year-old note without his consent. It is his
opinion now, i.e., after five years' experience, that Dada is a
spotless and simple-hearted man. Bhai Puratan believes that the
allegation against Dada is the result of a conspiracy by some
Harijans. I share his belief. These people have suffered so much
that they have lost their humanity. This is of course not true
of all of them. We must bear with all this. But while doing so we
should not be misled into entertaining suspicions against anybody.
I understand Narahari's criticism. It is a fact that you are
collecting evidence. In doing so you cannot but start whisper-
ings among the people. This would foul the atmosphere. And,
moreover, you are forgetting your sphere of work. This is bound
to interfere with your work. Why do you make yourself a watch-
man of anyone in the Ashram? It will be enough if others, you
and I, all become our own watchmen. Supervision is Narahari's
job. If anybody wants to complain let him do so to him.
You should plug your ears. I have a beautiful figure of three
monkeys, which I always keep in front of me. They are three
representations of the same monkey. His ears, mouth and eyes are
closed. The lesson the figure teaches is that one should not listen to
criticism of or see or speak of anybody's defects. The original of
this figure is found on a tall pillar in Japan, and was carved thou-
sands of years ago. We should engrave this lesson in our hearts.
I will hear what you have to say when you come here.
I am not inclined at present to send for anybody else. I would
send for others only if I myself am shaken even a little in my
mind. But if Narahari is positive in his view, I would not dis-
regard him and make any inquiry. You may, with Narahari's
consent, stay for 15 days or more. But you need not come or
stay specially for the sake of Nimu. She will get somebody to
accompany her.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 396. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya
304
