169. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[September 25, 1944]
MY DEAR C. R.,
If you are satisfied that my letter of yesterday is the last
word you should do the following:
1. You should ask Jinnah to see you. He told me he had
nothing against you, etc. If Bhulabhai has thoroughly understood
the position he too may see Jinnah. You may both offer to see
him together.
2. I attach great importance to the legal opinion on Jinnah's
interpretation of August Resolution.
3. Consider the following letter to Jinnah:
"MY DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
Yesterday's talk leads me to inflict this letter on you for
which please forgive me.
I see force in your argument that the para in my letter
of yesterday can be interpreted to touch the League sensitive-
ness. Please therefore read the following instead:
'Any member or group from among the Congress or the
League members will be free to resort to direct action including
C. R. in the course of the campaign of Independence.'
This is however a minor matter. In the context in which
the offending paragraph appears, its friendly intention is unmis-
takable.
The main purpose of this letter is to ask you to think fifty
times before you throwaway my offer. It is an earnest effort to
meet essential requirements of the Lahore Resolution. I would
like you, before you reject it, to let me address the League Council,
indeed even the open session of the League.
I ask you not to take responsibility on your shoulders of reject-
ing my offer. You are too technical when you dismiss my pro-
posal for arbitration or guidance on the ground that I have ap-
proached you as an individual and not in any representative capa-
city. Is it not enough that I have approached you in the spirit
of service in the cause of unity?
I repeat the suggestion I made you during our talk of yesterday
that counsel's opinion should be invited on your interpretation
of the August (1942) Resolution of the A. I. C. C.
Rajaji for whose integrity and legal ability you have high
regard, agrees with me that the August Resolution is in no way
inimical to the Muslims. You are wrong in saying that the Con-
gress is a Hindu or communal organization. Will you be inimical
to non-Muslims if the League fought single-handed for the Inde-
pendence of the whole of India whether considered as one India
or two or more?"
4. It may be good to call in Shiva Rao, if you have not
done so already.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2057
