235. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, TRANSVAAL
Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 25, 1903
TO
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I venture to bring to your notice the following translated
extract from a letter addressed to the British Indian Association
by the Indian residents of Heidelberg, and dated the 23rd
instant.
This morning, at 5.30, the police constables surrounded every
store, opened the doors and entered in and woke up all the people
sleeping in the rooms, and struck terror into the people by shouting
'Come out, come out.' They did not allow them to wash their hands
III-23
and faces, or to take tea or other tiffin. Many opened their shops at
6 o'clock, thinking that two or three might remain in the shops,
while the others accompanied the police. But the masters were taken
beforehand.
On the men declining to close the shops, the police
closed the doors themselves, drew the men out, handed the keys to
them, and marched them out.
Thus, every man was arrested as
if he was a criminal. The only difference was that we were not
handcuffed.
Thus were all the people brought to the Charge Office at 8
a.m. and kept under custody. Each man was separately taken into the
office room, asked to produce his permit or proof of his former domi-
cile, and new permits were issued to those who could establish their
claim. Then each was dismissed through the front door. Even these
were at first detained after the permits were issued, but when we
protested, they were allowed to go. Those that were thus freed were
not allowed to hold any conversation with those that were detained,
so the men who have been kept under custody since morning, hungry
and thirsty as they are, had not been discharged up to 12.30 p.m.
This letter is being written at 12.30 p.m. Still there are some mer-
chants under custody. The spectacle of respectable Indian storekeepers
being arrested early in the morning and marched through the streets
has become the topic of general conversation in the town.
Thus, the police rudely and without permission entered all the
rooms and did not quite mind our warning that some of the rooms
contained Zanana ladies. When asked by what order we were being
arrested, the reply was 'By order of the captain; we are going to
take every one except women and children, and if you do not come
willingly, we will force you.' The written order was asked for. They
declined.
Such is the account of the police proceedings in Heidelberg.
I may state that a similar occurrence happened in Johannesburg.
The matter was brought to Captain Fowle's notice, and it was
thought that the procedure would not be repeated. It was,
however, repeated in Potchefstroom. It was still allowed to slide
down. But it has now become impossible for my committee to
remain silent.
In the darkest days of our time under the old regime, we
were not subjected to such physical ill-treatment. The commu-
nity has, so far as my committee is aware, committed no crime,
and yet it has not only to face popular prejudice and its effects,
but has now to face ill-treatment from those who are expected
to protect us.
My committee humbly request an enquiry and an expression
of opinion from the Government as to the proceedings of the
police above referred to.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
The Rand Daily Mail, 28-4-1903
