17. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Monday [May 12, 1924]
A Full Stop
Learning Urdu and Spinning
A Plea for Punctuality
Living on Spinning and Weaving
Letter from Lalaji
From Sarojini, and a Tribute
Not Inconsistent
Treatment of Mr. Majli
Young India and Navajivan
Andrews' Notes (sent last week)
Jail Experiences
Empire Goods
Moplah Relief
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
Please correct the errors when reading.
I have your two letters. I am sending today material as
listed above. You have already received Andrews' Notes. I do
not propose to send anything more.
I do not know how the Note entitled Gay Bachi [The Cow
Saved] got lost. If it cannot be traced, I will write another. We
are very careful in this matter here, but we shall be more careful
henceforward.
Give the reports of Borsad Parishad and other conferences
in Navajivan and Young India yourself. Some local news of our
activities should also appear.
The translation of the article on Visnagar appearing in Swa-
raj is very faulty. Your translation of it also did not appeal to me.
There are even some misinterpretations. I have revised half of
it. I did not have time to revise the rest. Now, perhaps, we may
not print it at all. Sending it to other papers is out of the ques-
tion. Even if we print it, we can do so only in Young India. If I
get time to revise the remaining portion, we shall consider print-
ing it next week. I used the word siskarvu for "challenge". If you
find a better word, let me have it. Ritusam means rituvar [seasonal]
and murchhai means badai [vanity, boasting]. In an article about
Kathiawar, Kathiawari words came readily to the pen.
The name of the outlaw is not More, but Mowar. I even
met him once.
I had a telegram from Mrs. Joseph too. I wired back to her
saying that it was not necessary to send you, as the deputation
from that place was coming here. Besides, I only wished to ex-
plain general principles. There is no scope whatever for any mis-
understanding. I still think that they are spoiling their case in
Vaikom. We shall discuss this when they come.
Surely, you do know Valji's nature. If, by placating him, we
can get him to do some work in which he takes pleasure, that
will be all to the good. My effort is to erase his idiosyncrasies by
giving him scope for expression. Certainly, we are not going to do
this for others. Despite his many angularities, Valji has a
straightforwardness which I myself, certainly, value and put to
good use, and I want you also to do likewise.
Radha's health is quite good, but she is not regaining her
strength as speedily as I would wish. She is cheerful now. Kiki-
behn is brave, but, poor girl, she is suffering very much. The
fever does not leave her. She eats regularly. The air, it must be
said, is very fresh and pure. Doctors Dalal and Jivraj have exa-
mined her thoroughly, but we do not know what to do.
I have been feeling that Kanti Rasik and Manu should
not be brought here. If Ba suffers on this account, let her. "Bhakti,
or devotion to God, has to be paid for with the head; difficult
indeed is the way in front."-this is knowledge born of experience.
I have always thought that pure devotion is impossible unless
one hardens the heart.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 8785
