106. LETTER TO LILIAN EDGER
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 6, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
Krishnadas has handed your letter to me and the yarn sent
with it. The yarn is not at all bad. It can of course be more
even. I do not think that age is a bar. I know many as old
as you who have taken to spinning and who have become very
good spinners. No doubt it requires much patience in the begin-
ning.
You have asked me whether the small quantities that you
spin can be of any help to the poor. I say unhesitatingly, "Yes."
This does not mean that the yarn you may be sending will be
separately woven into khadi and sent to the poor. That is not
what we are doing with the yarn contribution we are receiving.
But what we are doing is to convert such yarn into khadi, and
utilize the proceeds of the sale of that khadi for providing spinning
and other ancillary work to the poor people. This is the very
best help that can be rendered to them.
I quite agree with you that it is difficult for individuals to
distribute their charity judiciously. The vast majority of street
beggars are mere professional idlers when they are not much
worse, and those who have money to spare do an ill-service to
these beggars and to the country by giving them money, food or
clothing. We have found by experience that we do no service
by distributing amongst poor people khadi prepared from yarn
contributions. The chief need is neither food nor clothing but
work which they can do in their cottages. But where it becomes
necessary to provide clothing side by side with work, we do not
hesitate to do so. But that happens only in rare cases. The
chief value, in my opinion, of any person spinning by way of
sacrifice lies in the work itself, and in the promotion of the work
atmosphere that is created in the country and in the promotion
of a tangible feeling for the poorest in the land.
Now for your questions:
1. It is wrong to draw the thread and the twist. The thread
must be drawn whilst the spindle is revolving rapidly round its
own centre. This movement ensures the proper twist. Drawing
of the yarn and the movement of the spindle go on simultaneously
so that there is no difficulty about continuously drawing the
thread with ease. And whilst the thread is being drawn the sliver
is held fairly tight between the fingers so that the twist does not
reach the thread up to the very end which is held between the
fingers.
2. Wax has to be used occasionally for the mal, that is the
chord that goes round the wheel and the spindle.
3. Oil has not to be used very often. The ordinary machine
oil [can] serve the purpose. But in the absence of that, a drop
of the ordinary cooking oil is quite serviceable. An occasional
drop on the axle where it touches the uprights and on the holders
which hold the spindle makes for smooth movement.
4. It will be better to wind off after an hour's spinning.
Those who can spin very rapidly unwind every 20 minutes. When
in unwinding the thread tangles, you know that the cone has not
been made tight. If your yarn is well-twisted, you can wind it
round the spindle each time fairly tight and the cone should
feel hard to the touch and not at all soft.
5. When the chord breaks and if you cannot twist a chord
out of your own yarn, you can use any bazaar twine of the dia-
meter of your chord.
Lastly, if you will become a good spinner and if you will
spin for sacrifice, it is really necessary for you to watch someone
who spins well. Wherever you may be whether in Kashi or Dar-
bhanga, there is no difficulty about your getting proper assistance.
Wishing you every success in your effort,
Yours sincerely,
MISS LILIAN EDGER
CARE OF POST MASTER
SRINAGAR (KASHMIR)
From a microfilm: S.N. 19785
