128. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 28, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I have gone through your letter from beginning to end. I have
made some arrangement for the newspapers. You want other
newspapers besides the Bombay papers. Even among the Bombay
papers you do not get the Chronicle on the same day. Many per-
sons want it, and it is not possible to refuse them. The same is
true about the Patrika. You will get both of them but late.
And if you get the Gujarati, Hindi and Marathi papers, you
ought not to insist on the English ones.
If I could have your whole letter shown to the persons con-
cerned it would have made my task easier. Since you have
forbidden it I have not shown it to anybody.
I do understand your problem, but I cannot offer you much
guidance unless I go deeper into the matter. What took place
before me today was a spectacle worth watching. Both of you
had lost your tempers. You were not aware of it, either of
you. Each could see the other party's error, but neither his own.
This is true of everyone of us and that includes me. I do not
ask you to go and live in the village. The atmosphere in Seva-
gram having become vitiated I do not wish that you should go
there. I myself am waiting and watching. I have already sug-
gested that it would be enough if someone from the Talimi Sangh
goes. He must be given the first place. He may do what he can.
If he does not, then we shall see. But I see that co-workers
have not been able to put up with your nature. They cannot
fully appreciate your worth. I, therefore, do wish that since you
both are now capable of observing brahmacharya even though living
together and alone with each other, you should select a village
within about four miles from here, settle down there and take
up some work. I will continue to guide you in whatever matters
you wish. So much for my wish. The decision will have to be
made by you two on your own, even if it should go against
my wish.
You can use turmeric and salt. I am not sure about pepper.
If anybody wishes to add it later, he may do so. What the
72
vaidya says is for ordinary men and women. In my view, a
brahmachari should shun all these things, including even salt and
turmeric. If absolutely necessary, he may take them as medicine
but not for the pleasure of the six flavours. But I do not
insist; I do not forbid them. My observation may even be
erroneous. I have lived for more than forty years without
condiments, and for nearly thirty without salt. It might have
been a mistake on my part.
What is the matter with Ramdas?
Let me know if I have left out anything.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5818. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
