163. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
April 26, 1910
SIR,
Some of the passive resisters recently discharged from Diepkloof
have brought to the notice of my Association complaints and infor-
mation which, in the interests of humanity, my Association feels bound
to place before you.
Mr. Sorabji, who has suffered imprisonment again and again, was
on the 26th October last, together with Mr. Medh sentenced to a fur-
ther term at Volksrust. Mr. Sorabji states that during this last im-
prisonment at Volksrust, he was roughly treated by a warder named
Nell. The previous time that he had gone to prison, he was, under
medical orders, specially put on light labour, and he was called upon
to carry no heavy weight. But, on the occasion in question, on the day
of sentence, before medical examination had taken place, Warder Nell
ordered Mr. Sorabji to water plants, in the doing of which he was
called upon to fill full with water two five-gallon buckets and to carry
them to some distance, a task which the Native prisoner with whom he
and the other Indians were made to work could do only with some
difficulty. Warder Nell knew Mr. Sorabji during his previous term
of imprisonment, and knew also that, under special medical instruc-
tions, he was put upon very light labour, and his task chiefly consisted
in store-work, keeping an account of clothing and distributing it.
Mr. Sorabji was working under another warder named Oberholster,
who did not mind Mr. Sorabji taking his own time and only half-
filling the buckets. At 2 o'clock that day, Warder Nell came and insis-
ted upon Mr. Sorabji filling the two buckets full. The latter protested
and said that the warder knew him and knew also that the Medical
Officer had last time put him upon light labour only. He also drew the
warder's attention to the fact that he was suffering from rupture and
dislocation of one of his arms and from acceleration of the heart. The
warder took no heed, and still insisted upon Mr. Sorabji carrying the
buckets and watering the plants. This he was obliged to do up to the
time he was able to see the Medical Officer, that is, for two days. Upon
his bringing the matter to the notice of the Medical Officer, instructions
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was signed by E. I. Aswat, Act-
ing Chairman of the British Indian Association.
2 Leading Natal Indian satyagrahi, vide "Notable Discharges", p. 237.
were at once given to the effect that he was not to be put upon any
heavy work and that he was not to be made to carry any weight.
Warder Nell, evidently wishing to be spiteful, brought a charge of
breach of discipline against Mr. Sorabji, and the latter was tried before
the Magistrate. The breach of discipline consisted in Mr. Sorabji's
having drawn attention to his condition, and his having, as was alleged
by the warder and denied by Mr. Sorabji, said to the former "Leave
me alone. You are causing trouble for nothing." Mr. Sorabji cross-
examined the warder, and related the whole of the incident to the
Magistrate, who, however, said that he was not trying the question of
the work that was entrusted to Mr. Sorabji, but that he was simply
trying the question of breach of discipline; and punished him with spare
diet. It is worthy perhaps of remark that, as the Medical Officer had
ordered only light labour for Mr. Sorabji, the latter was given by the
same warder the dirtiest work to do, namely, the cleaning of the water-
closet. Mr. Sorabji desires me to state that he had no objection, as a
passive resister, to doing the work, but my Association considers it to be
its duty to bring the matter to your notice.
On removal from Volksrust, Mr. Sorabji was accompanied by
Messrs Medh and Harilal Gandhi. The three were handcuffed together,
and marched from the gaol to the station, a distance of over a mile.
They were, in spite of the handcuffs, made to carry their own bundles,
which were fairly heavy, as they contained, in addition to their personal
clothing, books also, and they had to carry things belonging to the
warder in charge and one blanket each. They were marched from
Park Station to the Fort in the same manner.
With reference to the condition at Diepkloof, Messrs Sorabji and
Medh, who have been just discharged, confirm the statements made by
other discharged men as follows: The Medical Officer continues to be
entirely callous to the avoidable sufferings of the prisoners. Once,
Mr. Thambi Naidoo, who is still at Diepkloof, and who, my Associa-
tion considers, is one the bravest of men and certainly incapable of
lying, complained to the Medical Officer that the prisoners were
suffering from partial starvation; whereupon, he called Mr. Naidoo
a liar. Mr. Medh often complained that he was losing weight, and
that he should have the quantity of the food increased and the quality
improved, but the Medical Officer laughed at his complaint and turn-
ed a deaf ear. When Mr. Medh had lost over twenty-five pounds, he
complained to the Deputy-Governor, and it was only on the 1st April,
that is, during the last three weeks of his imprisonment, that the quan-
tity was increased. Most of the prisoners complain that they lose in
weight, but the change in diet is not ordered until the Medical Officer
considers that they have lost more weight than they need have. The
usual remark made by him is that no harm is done to the prisoners if
they lose somewhat in weight and throw off what he calls super-
fluous fat. The Medical Officer used often to remark to the prisoners
that they were getting fat on the Government rations. In the humble
opinion of my Association, under treatment such as this, the lot of
Indian passive resisters at Diepkloof is being made unnecessarily hard.
The fact that out of 72 Asiatic prisoners, 18 had to receive an increase
in diet shows that the present scale is perilously low both in quantity
and quality. The approach of the cold weather makes my Association
nervous as to the health of these prisoners, who, deprived of the ordinary
fat in their diet to which they are accustomed, will suffer very seriously.
The discharged men also complain that, whereas, last winter,
the articles of clothing included a stout shirt, this time it has not yet
been allowed, and the prisoners have already begun to suffer from the
absence of this article of clothing. My Association is not aware whether
this change has been made throughout, but, even if it has on grounds
of economy or otherwise, my Association hopes that Indian prisoners,
who belong to a much warmer country, will not be deprived of the
long-sleeved shirts to which they have always been used. My Associa-
tion understands that this complaint has been brought to the notice of
the Governor, as also of the Medical Officer, but they informed the priso-
ners that the change was made by the Government. The prisoners
complain also of the fewness of the blankets. Diepkloof Prison, which is
built with corrugated iron only and which is without any ceiling-board,
being on high ground, is very cold, and three blankets, which may be
sufficient in the stone-built prison at Volksrust, are undoubtedly not
enough cover for the British Indian prisoners at Diepkloof. My Associa-
tion ventures to draw your attention to the fact that, at Volksrust, all the
Indian prisoners were allowed, even during warm weather, besides three
blankets and matting, a bed-board and a pillow. The two latter arti-
cles are not given to the prisoners at Diepkloof. Messrs Sorabji and
Medh, who have had experience at Houtpoort and Volksrust, mention
that at both these places during winter time four blankets were supplied
to British Indian prisoners; and they add that, at Houtpoort, four blan-
kets were ordered by yourself, when you visited the gaol there and the
passive resisters complained.
One very painful incident, too, is reported by Messrs Sorabji and
Medh. There is an Indian prisoner at Diepkloof, who is over 60 years
old. He pleaded before the Medical Officer for a shirt and an extra
blanket, but that officer point-blank declined to grant relief.
My Association ventures to trust that the matters herein set forth
will receive your urgent and careful attention.
Indian Opinion, 30-4-1910
