259. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
BETTIAH,
May 6 [1917]
DEAR MTLLIE,
Your letter and wire were redirected here and came into my hands
today. Henceforth, please write at the above address. Simply Bettiah,
Champaran will do.
I am sorry to hear the news about Henry's illness. Somehow I
do not share your gloomy forebodings. He has marvellous recuperative
powers and I think he will quickly recover his original vigour. What
I do feel, however, is that both of you should join Ceilia at Ooty. Mama
too wrote saying that Ceilia was not keeping well. But I go further
1 From the post-mark. Gandhiji was in Bettiah on this day.
2 Gandhiji had begun his investigations into the agrarian conditions of the ryots
of Champaran; vide also Vol. XIII, pp. 573-.
3 A. B. Keith, a constitutional lawyer of England
4 From the contents
251
to say that even if she were well, she ought not alone to have charge
of a child, especially a child so wonderful as Leon. Ooty will do Henry
good and may do you also good. If the high altitude does not suit you
all, you should go to Bangalore. It has perhaps the finest climate in
India. Even Belgaum or Poona will be alright for you. But somehow
or other, I prefer Bangalore. Change to any such place will be the
best tonic for Henry. And he must live on the plainest foods - such
as we have at the Ashram. Everything simply boiled.
As for Waldo, I must differ from your views. It is because Waldo
is a trust that you may not play with him. I would not mind your being
vaccinated if you chose to be. But to add a weakness-causing operation
to an already weak constitution is to do infinite harm to it. It is not
obligatory on you to travel or to live in insanitary surroundings. By all
means take all reasonable precautions that the science of hygiene may
suggest. If the worst fear is realized and Waldo has smallpox, why
should you consider yourself guilty ? It is not a dangerous disease.
And natural smallpox if properly treated does not leave the patient
debilitated. But the purest lymph is not as pure as you may imagine.
By having him vaccinated, you will expose Waldo to an additional risk
to his health. Pock marks, if you are afraid of them, are really nothing.
By proper treatment, in course of time they disappear. Did you see
Bala and Naransamy ? They had confluent smallpox of the most virulent
type. The marks are growing or were growing fainter daily under the
treatment of anointing with oil and rubbing thereafter. Pray read my
plan for Waldo twice, then pray and then do as the voice within you
bids you.
Do please write to me frequently if you cannot write to me daily
about Henry's health. It is God's mercy that when every member of
the family is down, you are keeping well. I do hope you won't have
a nervous breakdown after Henry rises from his sick-bed which he
will soon do, I am sure.
My work is steadily progressing. I have come in touch with many
planters too and often meet the collector, etc. I cannot leave this place
for some months to come.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
[PS.]
Pray remember me to Dr. Sapru
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National Archives
of India
1 Tej Bahadur Sapru (1875-1949); lawyer and statesman
