434. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
THE AGA KHAN'S PALACE,
August 14, 1942
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
The Government of India were wrong in precipitating the
crisis. The Government resolution justifying this step is full of
distortions and misrepresentations. That you have the approval
of your Indian "colleagues" can have no significance, except
this, that in India you can always command such services.
That co-operation is an additional justification for the demand
of withdrawal irrespective of what people and parties may say.
The Government of India should have waited at least till
the time I inaugurated mass action. I had publicly stated that
I fully contemplated sending you a letter before taking concrete
action. It was to be an appeal to you for an impartial examin-
ation of the Congress case. As you know, the Congress has
readily filled in every omission that has been discovered in the
conception of its demand. So could I have dealt with every diffi-
culty if you had given me the opportunity. The precipitate
action of the Government leads one to think that they were
afraid that the extreme caution and gradualness with which
the Congress was moving towards direct action might make
world opinion veer round to the Congress, as it had already
begun doing, and expose the hollowness of the grounds for the
Government's rejection of the Congress demand. They should
surely have waited for an authentic report of my speeches on
Friday and on Saturday night after the passing of the resolu-
tion by the All-India Congress Committee. You would have
found in them that I would not hastily begin action. You
should have taken advantage of the interval foreshadowed in
them, and explored every possibility of satisfying the Congress
demand.
The resolution says:
The Government of India have waited patiently in the hope that
wiser counsels might prevail. They have been disappointed in that hope.
I suppose wiser counsels here means abandonment of its demand
by the Congress. Why should the abandonment of the demand
406
legitimate at all times be hoped for by a Government pledged to
guarantee independence to India? Is it a challenge that could
only be met by immediate repression instead of patient reason-
ing with the demanding party? I venture to suggest that it is
a long draft upon the credulity of mankind to say that the
acceptance of the demand "would plunge India into confu-
sion". Anyway the summary rejection of the demand has
plunged the nation and the Government into confusion. The
Congress was making every effort to identify India with the
Allied cause.
The Government resolution says:
The Governor-General-in-Council has been aware too for some
days past of dangerous preparations by the Congress Party for unlaw-
ful and in some cases violent activities, directed among other things to
interruption of communications and public utility services, the organi-
zation of strikes, tampering with the loyalty of Government servants,
and interference with defence measures including recruitment.
This is a gross distortion of the reality. Violence was never
contemplated at any stage. A definition of what could be includ-
ed in non-violent action has been interpreted in a sinister and
subtle manner, as if the Congress was preparing for violent action.
Everything was openly discussed among Congress circles, for no-
thing was to be done secretly. And why is it tampering with
your loyalty if I ask you to give up a job which is harming the
British people?
Instead of publishing behind the backs of principal Cong-
ressmen the misleading paragraph the Government, imme-
diately they came to know of the "preparations", should have
brought to book the parties concerned with the preparations.
That would have been the appropriate course. By their un-
supported allegations in the resolution they have laid themselves
open to the charge of unfair dealing.
The Congress movement was intended to evoke in the
people the measure of sacrifice sufficient to compel attention. It
was intended to demonstrate what measure of popular support
it had. Was it wise at this time of the day to seek to suppress
a popular movement avowedly non-violent?
The Government resolution further says:
The Congress is not India's mouthpiece. Yet in the interests of
securing their own dominance and in pursuit of their totalitarian policy
its leaders have consistently impeded the efforts made to bring India
to full nationhood.
It is a gross libel thus to accuse the oldest national organi-
zation of India. This language lies ill in the mouth of a Govern-
ment which has, as can be proved from published records, con-
sistently thwarted every national effort for attaining freedom and
sought to suppress the Congress by hook or by crook.
The Government of India have not condescended to consi-
der the Congress offer that if simultaneously with the declara-
tion of the independence of India, they could not trust the
Congress to form a stable provisional government, they should
ask the Muslim League to do so and that any national gov-
ernment formed by the League would be loyally accepted by
the Congress. Such an offer is hardly consistent with the charge
of totalitarianism against the Congress.
Let me examine the Government offer:
It is that as soon as hostilities cease, India shall devise for her-
self, with full freedom of decision and on a basis embracing all and
not only a single party, the form of government which she regards as
most suited to her conditions.
Has this offer any reality about it? All parties have not
agreed now. Will it be any more possible after the war? And if
the parties have to act before independence is in their hands?
Parties grow up like mushrooms, for without proving their repre-
sentative character, the Government will welcome them as they
have done in the past and if they, the parties, oppose the Congress
and its activities, though they may do lip homage to independence,
frustration is inherent in the Government offer. Hence the logical
cry of withdrawal first. Only after the end of the British power
and a fundamental change in the political status of India from
bondage to freedom, will the formation of a truly representative
government, whether provisional or permanent, be possible. The
living burial of the author of the demand has not resolved the
deadlock, it has aggravated it.
Then the resolution proceeds:
The suggestion put forward by the Congress Party that the mil-
lions of India uncertain as to the future are ready, despite the sad
lessons of so many martyr countries, to throw themselves into the arms
of the invaders, is one that the Government of India cannot accept as a
true representation of the feeling of the people of this great country.
I do not know about the millions, but I can give my own
evidence in support of the Congress statement. It is open to
the Government not to believe the Congress evidence. No
imperial power likes to be told that it is in peril. It is be-
cause the Congress is anxious for Great Britain to avoid the
fate that has overtaken other imperial powers that it asks her
to shed imperialism voluntarily by declaring India indepen-
dent. The Congress has not approached the movement with
any but the friendliest motives. Congress seeks to kill imperial-
ism as much for the sake of the British people and humanity
as for India. Notwithstanding assertions to the contrary, I main-
tain that the Congress has no interests of its own, apart from
that of the whole of India and the world.
The following passage from the peroration in the resolu-
tion is interesting:
But on them lies the task of defending India, of maintaining India's
capacity to wage war, of safeguarding India's interests, of holding the bal-
ance between the different sections of her people without fear or favour.
All I can say is that it is a mockery of truth after the ex-
perience of Malaya, Singapore and Burma. It is sad to find the
Government of India claiming to hold the "balance" between the
parties for which it is itself demonstrably responsible.
One thing more. The declared cause is common between
the Government of India and us. To put it in the most
concrete terms, it is the protection of the freedom of China
and Russia. The Government of India think that the freedom
of India is not necessary for winning the cause. I think exactly
the opposite. I have taken Jawaharlal Nehru as my measuring
rod. His personal contacts make him feel much more the misery
of the impending ruin of China and Russia than I can-and may
I say than even you can. In that misery he tried to forget his
old quarrel with imperialism. He dreads much more than I do
the success of Fascism and Nazism. I have argued with him
for days together. He fought against my position with a passion
which I have no words to describe. But the logic of facts
overwhelmed him. He yielded when he saw clearly that with-
out the freedom of India that of the other two was in great
jeopardy. Surely you are wrong in having imprisoned such a
powerful friend and ally. If notwithstanding the common cause,
the Government's answer to the Congress demand is hasty re-
pression, they will not wonder if I draw the inference that it
was not so much the Allied cause that weighed with the Brit-
ish Government, as the unexpressed determination to cling to
the possession of India as an indispensable part of the imperial
policy. This determination led to the rejection of the Congress
demand and precipitated repression. The present mutual slaugh-
ter on a scale never before known to history is suffocating
enough. But the slaughter of truth accompanying the butchery
and enforced by the falsity of which the resolution is reeking
adds strength to the Congress position.
It causes me deep pain to have to send you this long
letter. But however much I dislike your action, I remain the
same friend you have known me. I would still plead for re-
consideration of the Government of India's whole policy. Do not
disregard the pleading of one who claims to be a sincere friend
of the British people. Heaven guide you!
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transfer of Power, Vol. II, pp. 702-5; also Gandhiji's Correspondence
with the Government, 1942-44, pp. 12-
