402. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 5, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,
You were good enough this morning to tell me that accord-
ing to rules I had to pay for any rations I needed outside the
scale ordinarily provided for prisoners and that therefore I
should tell you what I considered to be my minimum wants. I
may say in the first instance that I do not desire to pay for any
extra food that I may need. I was admitted as a convict in 1922
and I was not called upon to pay for anything in the shape of food
or otherwise, but I recognize that Government may adopt a diffe-
rent policy this time, and if they do, that would be no cause for
complaint by me. I should be satisfied with whatever food was
provided so long as it did not interfere with the restrictions that I
have observed now for many years. The food that I need and has
been provided hitherto by the prison authorities is goat's milk,
fresh and dried fruit, fresh vegetables, and, whenever I have
needed it, bread.
You have asked me also to tell you what facilities I should
like in the shape of newspapers, etc. I do not know that I have
any choice in the matter. I must therefore leave it to the Govern-
ment to decide what they would allow. As to correspondence
and visits however, I have to write some business letters in con-
nection with the disbandment of the Ashram, the affairs of the
estate of the late Dr. P. J. Mehta and other social and religious
obligations and to have visits thereanent. I would like the Govern-
ment to extend to me the same facilities that they have given me
hitherto.
There are however two things which are vital needs, just as
much as food for the body. One of these is the conduct of the
anti-untouchability movement on which I have already addressed
the Government. The second is humanitarian contact with com-
panions who are fellow prisoners. This last was recognized even
during my first incarceration as a convict and has continued ever
since. I hope that the practice will be so continued during the
present incarceration.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3896; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Depart-
ment, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (14), Pt. V, pp. 87-
