189. LETTER TO MAURICE
RAJKOT,
March 31, 1902
DEAR MR. MAURICE,
I had your letters, two in Calcutta and a third redirected
from Calcutta to Rangoon. I was surprised to learn from your
last letter that even up to the date thereof you had not received
my reply to your first letter. I hope, however, that before you
embarked for South Africa, you had received it.
I do not know that I deserve the thanks you have thought
fit to express for anything that I may have done in Calcutta
to make your visit as comfortable as possible. It was nothing but
duty done, and I wish I could have done more.
After tremendous difficulty, I was able to move the Presi-
dent of the Chamber of Commerce, and as a result, a very
sympathetic reply from the Viceroy has been secured. But, of
course, sympathy alone would do very little. In order to call
forth action in accordance with it, great effort on the part of
the Indian public is necessary.
I wish you were with me during my voyage to Rangoon
as well as the 3rd class travelling in the North West. Your
letter had very nearly taken all the wish out of me, but I
thought I was bound to carry out the programme first sketched,
and so I did, I am glad to say, with the result that I feel all
the richer for the experience thus gained. I confess, I do not
share altogether your views about the dirty habits of the 3rd
class passengers. I do not know that you have travelled 3rd class
on the Continental railways as I have. I would far rather be
in a 3rd class compartment in India than in Europe; for, at
1 Cecil Rhodes, who died on March 22
times, the company of the 3rd class passengers on the Conti-
nental railways I found to be very disagreeable both from a
sanitary standpoint and otherwise. So Mr. Rhodes is dead. How-
ever much one may dislike his policy, it is impossible, now that
the man is gone, to withhold a tear; that he was a true friend
of the Empire it would be very difficult to gainsay. I hope
you have settled down once more in Cape Town and that you
and your family are keeping good health. Please let me hear
from you if you have not written already.
Yours truly,
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 3950
