38. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 10, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. There can be no cause at all for worrying
about Kanaiyo. What is necessary is to take care of him, to
guide him, to understand the thousands of fancies that catch his
mind, and to pacify him. Besides this, nothing more is necessary, for
his mind is not devious.
He is not secretive, doesn't wish to
conceal anything and has faith in those whom he regards as his
elders. It is, therefore, not at all difficult to guide him. One
thing, of course, is true. If he is not given work which he can do
and if nobody takes interest in him, he does feel lost. At present
I have heaps of work to do. There is so much typing to be
done that it leaves him exhausted and so many copies to be
made that his fingers get cramps. And this is apart from spin-
ning. I have also asked him to study Hindi and English, for
which he has an expert teacher in Pyarelal. He gets his fill
listening to the sweet music of Nanavati and, as he does so, tries
to pick up as much as he can. Moreover all sorts of people
visit me, from whom also he learns as much as he can. He is
therefore not likely to feel at any time that he is rusting without
work or that nobody takes interest in him.
Please, therefore,
have no worries on his account. Till he himself wishes to go
there, you or Jamna should not tempt him. There will be no
difficulty then.
Lilavati, through her own thoughtlessness, is laid down with
pain in the ribs. I am dictating this letter reclining against her body
as against a pillow. She is listening and tells me that she neither
desires nor has the courage to go to Rajkot or anywhere else.
Please, therefore, forget her altogether for the present. When she
herself wishes to go there, I shall not stop her. Narottam's
death is as much a matter for rejoicing as for grief. Such
death would bring glory to any youth, for those who enter the
jaws of death at such a tender age after having made holy resolu-
tions are bound to attain bliss. And even though dead, he lives
through his example. Read this to his father when you offer
my condolences to him, and also congratulate him on having had
such a son.
I have sent the article sent by you for Harijanbandhu after
some slight revision.
Read the letter to Chhaganlal and then pass it on to him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8535. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
