426. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[Prior to June 24, 1905]
[TO
THE EDITOR
The Star
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
I see that Mr. Loveday has again repeated his statement about the
influx of Indians into the Colony, in total disregard of the evidence that
he admits having seen after he first gave currency to those statements.
Mr. Loveday thinks that the Permit Department does not keep out British
Indians, and that non-refugees have been entering the Colony. In the
face of the report of the Chief Secretary for Permits, one can only come
to the conclusion that Mr. Loveday declines to believe the report. I can
only say that even the British Indian refugees find it extremely hard to
enter the Colony. I have before me a letter, addressed from the Permit
Office to a British Indian, who applied some seven months ago for a
permit asking him whether he still requires a permit. The poor refugee
1 This was reproduced in Indian Opinion under the caption "Refutation of Mr. Loveday's
Inaccuracies".
being friendless, after having waited months for making good his right
as a refugee to enter the Transvaal, has gone back to India, and the
letter has been sent to me by the gentleman whose address he gave. Nor
is this a solitary instance. Whereas Europeans, whether they are refugees
or not, obtain their permits for the asking, the Indian refugees, many of
whom have paid the sum of £3 as the price of being allowed to remain
in the country during the old regime, have to wait at least two months
before they are admitted, and then, too, each applicant has to go through
a number of formalities and a good deal of expense before he can enter
the Colony. He must call at the Permit Offices in the coast towns for
an application form. He has to get it filled in, for which, as a rule, he
pays a fee. On receipt by the Permit Office in Johannesburg, letters are
sent down to those whose names have been given as references. These
letters have to make affidavits on which a half-crown stamp has to be
affixed. If the evidence produced as to previous residence is considered
satisfactory, a notification is sent to the applicant authorising him to enter
the Colony. Nor is this all. He must then proceed to Johannesburg,
call at the Permit Office and submit himself for cross-examination, and if
he satisfies the examining officer, he receives a permanent authority to
stay in the Colony. I know cases in which many have been sent back
because they were not able to satisfy the examining officer that they were
refugees. If, therefore, anyone could possibly complain against the Permit
Department, it would be the British Indians; and they do not belong to
the criminal class mentioned by Mr. Hosken. Mr. Loveday has once again
brought up the statistics published by the Mayor of Pietersburg, and yet
the Mayor of Pietersburg has not taken up the challenge of the British
Indian Association, although it was he who provoked it. I venture to quote
from the letter addressed to you by the Chairman of the British Indian
Association on the 9th December.
I deny that there are at present 49 Indian traders in Pietersburg. There are
only 28 stores owned by Indians within the township, as distinguished from
the Location, and of these some are held by the same Indians. Within the
township before war, there were at least 23 Indian stores.
The names of all these store-keepers have been given in the same letter.
This statement has never been disproved, but Mr. Loveday says the Asiatic
Traders' Commission report that there was only one Indian trader in
Pietersburg without a licence before war. This is misleading. I have
before me the full report of the Asiatic Traders' Commission. In the
first place, it is an interim report. In the second place, the Commissioners
do not pretend to have ascertained the number of Indians who were trad-
ing without licences. All that the Commissioners have done is to mention
the respective claims placed before them, and they state that there was
only one British Indian claim from Pietersburg. They had in all only
233 claims presented to them. That surely does not exhaust the list of
Asiatic traders before war. The newspapers also published the information
that the British Indian claims were all withdrawn after the ruling that
the Commissioners gave as to their authority, and that the British Indians
ceased to participate in their deliberations. The Commissioners add that
their work was interrupted by the decision of the Supreme Court in the
now famous test case about the right of a British Indian to trade freely
in the Colony. Knowing, as he must have done, all these facts in con-
nection with the report, it is strange that a responsible politician like
Mr. Loveday should allow himself thus to mislead the public by making
a statement which cannot be proved. I admit that the Indian population
in the Location at Pretoria has increased. Probably, it has increased also
in Pietersburg and Potchefstroom. Will he also take note of the fact that
the Location in Johannesburg has been wiped out; that there are not at
present half the number of the British Indians who used to occupy the
old Location; and that, during the last three months, not less than 300
Indians have left Johannesburg? According to the statistics placed before
Mr. Conyngham Greene, there were in the Transvaal before the war
15,000 Indians. Not more than 12,000 permits have been issued to them
by the Permit Department, and as the number of Indians leaving the
Colony is greater than the number that is allowed to enter the Colony,
I venture to submit that there are at present in the Colony less than 12,000
Indians. Mr. Loveday adds that indentured Indians of Natal, who have
just become free, have gone to Potchefstroom and established themselves,
a fact which is resented by the Indians themselves in Potchefstroom. Will
the honourable gentleman condescend to give the names of the Indians
who have thus entered the Colony? He would certainly then be rendering
a great service to his constituents, the anti-Asiatic vigilants. Will he also
be pleased to give the names of the Indians who have stated that they
are being inundated by Indians from Natal, and if he cannot, will he
have the grace to withdraw the serious statements he has made?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 24-6-1905
