75. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
M. K. GANDHI
ATTORNEY
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P.O. Box 6522, JOHANNESBURG,
November 27, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,
An otherwise excellent number has been spoilt today by the letter-
press on the supplement. It looks altogether too bad to describe the
Mayor, Mayoress, etc., as being next to me. It looks very inappropriate,
and Mrs. Vogl, who was the centre of the show, ought undoubtedly
to have been mentioned. I don't know whether Miss Schlesin
wrote to you, but I told her she should ask you to insert all the
names. 1
With reference to the £3 tax, the first step to take is not to advise
the men to refuse to pay the tax, but for the Congress to send a petition
to the Prime Minister, signed by all the Indians in Natal - say 15,000
signatures. There should be a mass meeting held. The Congress should
then ask the Indians in the other Provinces to support. We must then
await the reply from the Prime Minister. Then there should be a petition
to Parliament next year, and, if Parliament rejects the petition, there
should be an appeal to the Imperial Government by the Congress aided
by the other Associations in South Africa. Finally the refusal to pay
the tax ! Then, undoubtedly, the Congress should undertake to feed
the wives and families of those who may be imprisoned. The men would
undoubtedly go to gaol, if there is a body of earnest workers. For
this purpose, either you will have to be in Durban continuously, or
someone else will. The thing cannot be taken up haphazard. If the
men were asked to go to gaol today, I do not think you would find
anybody taking up the suggestion, but if the preliminary steps as
described above, are taken, by the time a final reply is received the
men will have been thoroughly prepared to face the music. I know,
too, that the thing is quite capable of being done, but one man at least
must be prepared to devote the whole of his time to the matter.
If it were a question of deciding whose word was to be accepted,
I should any day prefer Thakar's to Virji's. However, I have written
to Virji, and there may be a letter waiting for me at the Farm.
Thinking over the teachers for Campbell's Estate, I think it might
be as well for you to tell Campbell that you would want three or four
months' notice to supply him with a teacher. He should also give you
the salary he is likely to offer. For Hindi we might spare a Gujarati
man from Phoenix. The experiment will be so valuable, that we might
lend the services of one reliable man and, for a good Tamil teacher,
we might have to import a good man from India.
I am glad you were present at the function to Hosken & Co., and
that you subsequently drove with Hosken. He is, you must have noticed,
a very frank and enthusiastic man. I hope he will visit you at Phoenix.
Who drew up the address to Hosken and the others ?
I consider Lutchman Panday's suggestion to be quite impracticable.
There are not sufficient workers to form an Association of the kind
1 Vide also pp. 97- 8 and Vol. XI, pp. 251 and 270.
2 Marshall Campbell, Chairman, Board of Directors, Natal Estates, Ltd.
he suggests, nor is the movement of Indians in the different Provinces
so unhampered as to allow of such an Association doing useful work.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National Archives
of India
