380. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
AGRA,
September 18, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Raojibhai's fever seems to have continued
for quite a long time, but it must have gone now. I wrote to
you about Narandas the day before yesterday.
Today all of us went and paid a visit to the institutions run
in Dayalbagh. We met their head, Sahebji Maharaj. No work
on raw hides is done in these institutions. They make footwear,
buying leather from elsewhere. I saw nothing in the goshala from
which we could learn. The expenditure on it is very high. The
institution maintains connection with the Government. It runs
a college, etc., and accepts grants from the Government for the
purpose. There is great cleanliness in the place. The buildings
are palatial, and the roads metalled. The institution has its own
guards. It employs water-pumps and has electric lights. I would
not regard this as an institution of the poor and for the poor.
It is certainly one which would do and bring credit to the rich.
It is extremely well managed. The residents have great love for
the Saheb Maharaj. Women enjoy freedom. Not only are there
no caste restrictions, but their observance is actually prohibited.
Marriages are deliberately arranged outside caste circles. The
marriage ceremony is absolutely simple. Women are always clad
in white. Except bangles and a small necklace, all other orna-
ments are banned. Even those which they wear are made in Dayal-
bagh, and it is a rule that they must be made in Dayalbagh.
The women's dress imitates the Parsi dress. They even tie a white
kerchief round the head. Attendance at morning and evening
prayers is compulsory, and the prayer lasts one hour in the
morning and two in the evening. Sahebji Maharaj is full of en-
thusiasm and takes interest in all activities. Everything is done
under his supervision. His aim in life is self-realization. The
satsangis are forbidden to take part in politics. I send with this
a copy of the pamphlet giving a description of the institution.
More about this when we meet.
There is a gentleman here named Pratapnarayan Vatal. He
has had experience in the tannery of the Rewa State. He has
promised to help us through correspondence in running our tan-
nery. If he immediately initiates correspondence and writes to
you, explain the position to Surendra and ask him to keep up the
correspondence. I was told that he has had twenty years' ex-
perience.
If I meet Premraj's guru in Farrukhabad I will try to get
acquainted with him.
Gopalrao's wound seems to have taken a rather long time to
heal. But he must have returned now.
You need not do anything now about [the delay in] the post.
I think the time it takes to arrive here is correct. I see that I
made a mistake in counting the number of days. For a letter
posted on the 13th can leave Ahmedabad earliest on the 14th.
It will reach Agra on the evening of the 15th and will be delivered
on the 16th. I got your letter of the 15th on the right day ac-
cording to their reckoning.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Chaman Kavi writes to me and tells me that you promised
to write to him daily about me but did not write and did not
even reply to his letter.
Narandas had merely asked my permission in his letter.
Harjivan will not let Chhotelal go away just now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5439; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 132-
