178. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
Wednesday [May 13, 1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Love is mute, it does not complain. Love is blind, it sees no fault.
Love is deaf, it hears no tales. Love ever gives never demands. Love
is constant, never varying whether in adversity or prosperity. Love is
never hurt. Love never tires. How has yours fared of late!
Manilal knows nothing of Manilal of Fiji. He is an infatuated lad.
Now that I know Jeki, I know that she is not a patch upon Manilal
of Fiji. The latter is an honest man. He has felt what an injured husband
would feel. Is it any wonder? He has bluntly given vent to his feelings.
Is it not honest? I could only keep Jeki away from her husband only
in the belief that she was infinitely superior to her husband. Now I
188
find that she is inferior. She is a liar, a wretched hypocrite, without
pity, without remorse, full of evil passions. Could I ever keep her from
her husband ? Why, she would soon be as bad as he is and take part
in all his enjoyments. Why should she not?
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
179. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
Sunday [May 17, 1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have not the energy to write to you myself, but it is better that
I dictate something rather than I should let you remain without any
letter at all. Manilal will give you a translation of my views on regular
walks to Pretoria. This fast has been a very rich but very bitter and
painful experience. I have suffered tortures and I am still suffering.
It has left me utterly exhausted. However, more I must say later. If
you have to go to India in charge of the party, of course I shall meet
you at Bombay because I shall precede you and you will certainly be
better able to cope with the party on boat than I can. When I go
to Cape Town, you will certainly accompany me. I may be in
Johannesburg during the week in order to be able to attend to many
matters.
Yours sincerely,
FOR UPPER HOUSE,
CHHAGANLAL
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 This letter was followed by a letter to the addressee from Chhaganlal Gandhi;
vide Appendix 11.
2 Vide Vol. XII, pp. 410-11.
