405. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
April 21, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE 1 ,
Major Bhandari has read to me the reply received from
Government to my letter of the 13th April addressed to Major
Martin regarding, among other things, an illustrative list I had
submitted of non-political associates who might visit me. In conti-
nuation of that correspondence I now submit as full a list of
names of non-political associates as I can think of. I have given
a brief description of the persons mentioned in the list. On the
contrary I have confined myself to those whom I may wish to
see in the near future. These are in no sense political people. I,
therefore, suggest that when I want to see others outside the list,
the Superintendent may be permitted to decide whether they
come within the prescribed limits or not. For I find that if each
case not mentioned in the list has to be submitted to Govern-
ment, the delay caused in receiving the reply is likely to defeat
the very object of my application.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[ENCLOSURE]
DESCRIPTIVE LIST OF NON-POLITICAL ASSOCIATES
1.
Indira Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru's daughter, 14 years
old and studying in Mr. Vakil's School in Poona.
2.
Jehangir Vakil and his wife, educationist, conducting a
model school in Poona where Indira Nehru is studying.
3.
Hemprabha Devi, wife of Babu Satischandra Das Gupta,
purely devoted to khadi work at Sodepur (Bengal).
4.
Raihana Tyabji, daughter of Mr. Abbas Tyabji, a per-
manent invalid.
5.
Hiralal Shah, merchant, residing in Bombay, given to
astronomical pursuits.
6.
Damodardas Kanji, private gentleman in Bombay, holding
intimate contact with the Ashram.
7.
Karamchand Chunilal, share-broker in Bombay.
8.
Hirewanti Mansukhlal, widow of the late Mr. Mansukhlal
Chunilal, a philanthropist.
9.
Nargis Captain, an invalid, widow of the late Mr. Captain
of the Indian Postal Service.
10. Ramabehn, student of Gujarat Vidyapith, daughter of Sheth
Ranchhodlal Amritlal of Ahmedabad.
11. Prabhashankar Parekh, private gentleman of Rajkot, father
of an Ashram girl.
12. Behram Khambhatta and Tehmina Khambhatta, an osteo-
logist of Bombay and his wife.
13. Manjukesha Mashruwala, niece of a member of the Ashram
and in charge of a charitable dispensary.
14. Sushilakumari, student, Medical College, Delhi, sister of Sjt.
Pyarelal of the Ashram.
15. Sushilakumari, school mistress, Girls' School, Rajkot.
16. Dinkar Mehta, an invalid student of the Vidyapith, under
treatment of Dr. Muthu.
17. Puratan Buch, an invalid student of the Vidyapith.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I, p. 187
