250. LETTER TO R. G. CASEY
KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR,
December 8, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,
I have just finished reading your broadcast to be delivered
today. It makes interesting and informative reading. If the
waters of the rivers can be captured and utilized by the people
of Bengal, instead of being wasted in the Bay, it would be
a great gain. But it is a long-term proposition. The millions,
meanwhile, must be taught to utilize every minute of the
working hours for their own benefit. If they learn this art
they will make good use of the captured waters. You have well
said :
The tens of millions of farmers of Bengal are idle more than half the
time. They constitute the biggest problem of unemployment in the world
and the biggest waste of potential human effort.
I have provided you with a complete answer which can
be worked out today with a very little outlay on the part of
the Government. Regard human labour more even than money
and you have an untapped and inexhaustible source of in-
come which ever increases with use. If I had been your advi-
ser, before the speech was printed I would have suggested the
insertion immediately after, "Let us examine the problem", of
a paragraph or two, showing the way of immediate utilization
of human effort. You could then have followed it up with your
entrancing scheme as a long-range proposition.
Is your peroration right? You say :
The answer to my mind lies not in our politics, our religion or our
individual ambition, but in the abiding factors of our environment, i. e.,
the land and water of Bengal.
This is a gross error of thought and consequent action,
handed down from generation to generation by the British offi-
cial element. Your gigantic project will come to nothing until
the whole mass of the people of Bengal is interested in the
Government of the province. Therefore, religion and even indi-
vidual ambition are intermixed. They are as much abiding
factors of our environment as the land and water of Bengal,
and they are equally shifting.
You asked me for my reaction to your thoughtful speech
and I have given it as it has come to me.
Very many thanks for your prompt action on my letter
of this morning on seed potatoes.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 812; also Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Govern-
ment, 1944-47, pp. 107-
