51. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Unrevised
Sunday night [On or after July 2, 1911]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letter describing your achievements, for such they are.
It pleases me all the more to notice that you can now combine
honeymoon, pilgrimage to your people and work and all this in a manner
agreeable to you and Millie. Your and Millie's desires have been mostly
fulfilled without your having to worry about them. You have sought
first the Kingdom of God (what you thought was your duty) and
everything else (the trip to London, meeting your people, etc.) has been
added unto you. May your work and your joint life flourish in the best
manner possible. I am giving fair notices 2 of your work in the Gujarati
columns of I.O. I am rather cautious about London. Where for public
good you think that a longer notice is necessary, please warn me in
time. I may neglect these things as my attention is now chiefly devoted
to the education of the boys on the Farm. I allow nothing to disturb
me during school hours at present. I only hope that nothing will happen
to disturb me. Pray for me. I go to Town only twice a week. Later
on it will be only once a week. I propose to draw up the Trust Deed
1 From the contents it is evident that the letter was written on or after July
2, 1911, which was a Sunday.
2 Vide Vol. XI, pp. 115 and 116.
3 ibid., p. 131.
4 ibid., p. 127. For its final version ibid., pp. 320-.
and when it is fixed up I shall make collections in S. A. for a large
school at Phoenix. The staff will be you, West, Chh., Maganlal 1 ,
Purushottamdas and myself. Miss West 2 will be the boarding
superintendent. If your procreating ambitions and your animal passions
are satisfied, I would certainly like Millie to take her share in the school
work. Harilal may come in later. Thakar may expand sufficiently to
come in also.
Medh is at present doing I.O. collections. I shall know tomorrow
what success he is having. Did I tell you that Medh had given to our
ideals 10 years under a double vow of Truth and brahmacharya. 3 That
reminds me to tell you that Pragji is a possible candidate for Phoenix,
subject to the above vows.
I had your cable. You must by this time have received Gregg's
opinion and Townships Act, etc.
With love to you all and kisses to the angels,
Yours,
BHAT
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
