187. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
TITHAL, BULSAR,
May 13, 1937
CHI. PREMA,
Only today I got your letter and I am replying to it im-
mediately. Your previous letter is still lying in my file. But
let me dispose of this. I will see about the other later.
Tell Sushila that, if all of you had come here, I could
have accommodated you but wouldn't have been able to give
you the privacy you had there.
Nor the cold of that place,
if your description of it is correct. Here we do feel the heat.
I don't know if injustice has been done to Nariman. Why
should it be assumed that the leader of Bombay should become
the leader of the whole Presidency? And can anybody misguide
or coerce all the representatives of three Provinces? If injustice
has been done, why do all those representatives, who are still
alive, put up with it? I, therefore, don't understand this talk
about injustice. I don't even understand what Sardar is be-
lieved to have done. I felt that the whole agitation was got up.
But if I don't understand this matter properly, you may reason
with me and convince me. I have no antipathy to Nariman.
My attitude has nothing to do with the charges which have been
levelled against him. The truth or falsehood of these charges
can be inquired into whenever Nariman wishes. I learnt only
today that he is your friend. I have expressed my opinion in a
perfectly objective spirit.
I was pained to read about. . .2 I have published only
what both of them told me, and that, too, because she wanted
me to publish it. It seems to me that . . .3 makes no distinc-
tion between truth and falsehood. You may show her this.
I had written to Dev. I have received his reply. I did
not write immediately.
I was glad to learn that the work in Saswad has not been
given up. I believe in the saying, "Not to embark upon a thing
in the first instance." If you take up any other work now,
cling to it.
It would have been better if you four had asked me to
give you an appointment. I accept your argument that I
wouldn't have been able to say much without knowing the posi-
tion at Saswad. You are also right in saying that this is only
the beginning of my experience of village life, and that, there-
fore, all of us are equal in that respect. Even so, my ideas
have an element of originality in them, and the power behind
them comes from ahimsa. I think, therefore, that all four of
you would have learnt something from me.
I like your effort to learn the art of thinking for I had found
your speech at Hudli lacking in thought. Your ideas there
seemed to me like so much smoke emitted by your brain. They
were not outpourings of the heart. I wanted to spare some time
and discuss them with you and convince you, as clearly as two
and two make four, that there was no real thinking behind
them. But you left in a great hurry and so I did not get any
opportunity. Since I was in no hurry to prove to you your
lack of thought, I didn't hold you back. I was sure that you
yourself would sooner or later see this deficiency in you. And
now I see your admission of it in this very letter of yours. It is
understandable that you do not see this deficiency in the ideas
you expressed at Hudli. But if you really learn how to think,
you are bound to see the deficiency in those ideas.
I, therefore, like your having given up the thought of
asking for my views regarding principles. I will like it better
still if you resolve to make no speeches till you have mastered
the art of thinking, and you will acquire the art the sooner
if you make no speeches.
Blessings to you all
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10389. Also C.W. 6828. Court-
esy: Premabehn Kantak
