366. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 19, 1928
DEAR DR. ROY,
I thank you and Dr. Sircar for your letter and the medicine
you have kindly sent me. You know my repugnance to medicine.
I would not take anything that contained something taken from
the human body except mother's milk. The tabloids sent by you
contain kidney and pancreas. Isn't this something taken from a
human body? Supposing that it is taken from a sub-human
animal, my objection will still stand. You know my weakness
for dietetical experiments. And ever since your discovery of
excess of uric acid in my system, I have felt impelled to make a
radical dietetic change. The comparative stability in the Ashram
has given me the opportunity and I am now taking simply fresh
fruits and nuts. The diet now consists of raisin-tea, which means
about 40 raisins boiled and the skin and seeds removed. This I
take three times a day, and I add to it half an ounce of almond
paste each time and twice two tolas of coconut milk and one or
two oranges each time. Coconut milk is prepared by pounding a
fresh ripe coconut and extracting the juice by adding a little water
and straining it through a stout piece of khadi. This I had been
doing for a fortnight without any way coming to harm. The
bowels are much more regular. I have not been weighed nor have
I had the blood-pressure taken, but the feeling about me is good.
I have purposely refrained from taking the blood-pressure and
weight because it seems to me to be of no consequence, if I other-
wise keep fit.
As you have taken so much interest in my health, I thought I
owed you the information of the change I have made and the
reason why I will not take the medicine so thoughtfully sent by
you. I wish Indian medical men would make original researches
and explore the possibilities of dietetic changes. It may be that the
general body of people will not take to what may be called
austere ways of treating diseases, but may not poor fanatics like
myself have a corner in the minds and hearts of medical men?
Has Indian medicine no fresh contribution to make to the medi-
cal science? Or must it always rely upon the patented nostrums
that, together with other foreign goods, are dumped down upon
this unfortunate soil? Why should the West have a monopoly
of making researches?
This letter is not written to you for acknowledgment and
reply unless you want to give me any direction. You may there-
fore throw it into the waste-paper basket if there is nothing more
to be said to me by way of advice and guidance.
Yours sincerely,
DR. BIDHAN ROY
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 13044
