384. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
September 23, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,
I am trying to send you somebody. Frontier Gandhi is not
sent out anywhere. So this will be rather difficult.
Do keep throwing out the names that occur to you. Why
is it not possible to find out from the books what amount was
sent by Sorabji? Durban has been urgently demanding it. May-
be Chhaganlal [Gandhi] will know and maybe Chhaganlal Joshi,
too. The books are there. For the rest, anyone can look into
them and find out. We don't have so very many ledgers, do
we? What is the difficulty?
I enclose a letter from Jaisukhlal. It contains complaints
against Chhaganlal Joshi. I had written to him that he should
allow me to show these complaints to Joshi. At last he has sent
me the permission. But he has added that I should send the
letter through you and obtain your opinion also. That is why
I am sending you the letter. Do let me have your opinion
and, unless you have some objection, show it to Joshi and ask
him to send me his reply. Or I shall send it direct to Joshi
if you so wish.
You may always take for granted thousands of blessings from
me on your birthday. I have cherished many hopes of you.
They have also borne fruit, and will further do so. But the real
test will come when I am no more, won't it?
I have assumed
that then, too, you will succeed.
I am reaching Ahmedabad on the 30th and from there I
shall have to rush off to Nadiad the same day. My wish to see
the elders before that is growing stronger and stronger. I shall
therefore try and drop in if I can. I shall leave soon after
receiving the blessings of the elders. There should be no fan-
fare. No one is to be informed. You should not expect me to
do any other work. At the most I shall spend one night
there.
I shall not have all that time and I shall arrive
in the morning and leave at night. For me this is nothing
but a pilgrimage.
You, too, should give up all thought
of taking advantage of my presence for some other cause.
Persons like Nanalal Joshi will of course know, and anyway
Shuklasaheb will have to be informed. However, everyone should
understand that my visit to Rajkot is not to be considered a visit
at all. It is likely that Khan Saheb will accompany me, and
you may take advantage of his presence then but don't make
any announcement in advance.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8505. Court-
esy: Narandas Gandhi
