207. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
January 26, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,
I have your two letters, but not knowing whether any letter
from me could reach you at Tirupattur I have refrained from
writing and am now sending you this in the hope that you will
receive it at the Bombay address given by you. I am trying to
reach you at the Poona station also through Shastri, for if you
want to stay in Bombay for two or three days, you will stay where
I stay in Bombay. The place you know: "Mani Bhuvan, Labur-
num Road, Gamdevi". You will present the accompanying note to
Manibhai or Dhirubhai, the two brothers. It is as good as a home.
You will find there also the late Dr. Mehta's daughter, Jekibehn.
Of course if you stay there one or two days, you should meet
as many members of the growing family that you have entered.
You might have to pay heavily for the choice you have made.
Perhaps you know something of what it has cost Mira to become a
daughter. She is generally the Cinderella not however having the
expectation of getting the golden slipper some day or other.
I sent you a card telling you that I have received the book
The Little Plays of St. Francis. I got on to one of the plays marked
by you, I suppose, and perhaps that is all the progress I shall
have made with it. It is a hopeless thing for me to try to read
or do anything outside the work in front of me.
About idol-worship I would like you not to worry. Let it
unconsciously simmer in the brain, and when you have leisure
and I have leisure and we can meet, you will discuss it to your
heart's content. But if there is a difficulty that gnaws you, you
must have it out and I shall try patiently to solve it if I can.
At the Ashram you are going to be truly at home and ask
everything that you may need for physical comfort. I will not
easily forgive you if you damage your health, because the foolish
people at the Ashram could not anticipate your want and you
foolishly would not express it. I would call it 'not playing the
game'. I am supposed to have the instinct of a mother. I do often
succeed in anticipating people's wants, but I admit that I have also
failed miserably and not anticipated wants that I should have. I
have therefore exacted a promise even from guests that if they
would make me feel at ease about them, they would at once tell
me what they need. If I had the time, I could give you some ludi-
crous instances, all at my expense, of how, if the friends had not
told me, they would have made themselves miserable and judged
me uncharitably in the bargain. People at the Ashram are a self-
satisfied lot. They think that nobody can possibly want more than
they do, wherein they are quite wrong. They would be quite
right if they were to say nobody should want more than they do,
for they themselves take more than what they should want and
more than [what] millions of people get.
Again, don't think that the Ashram is an abode of angels
where there can be no pilfering. As it so happens, we have just now
very dangerous neighbours. Their occupation is stealing at night,
and in broad daylight, and that without any compunction. Quite
selfishly we are trying to do some work in their midst. I say selfish-
ly, because through that service we would like them to leave the
Ashram untouched, but they don't, and they say it quite frankly.
You will make their acquaintance if you are so minded. These
are the known thieves, but there are unknown thieves also to
warn you that you are not entitled to possess anything beyond
the poorest garment that you have on your person and the coarsest
food with which you can manage. But if you will have more
than that, you expose yourself to be deprived of the superfiui-
ties by those who are in greater need. We have the vow of non-
possession in the Ashram, but we do not follow it strictly. At the
present moment It is only there as an ideal. You should study the
rules of the Ashram, if you have not done so already.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
The note of introduction in the letter posted to Bombay.
But you may go even without that letter for I have written
directly to Dhirubhai.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5989
