112. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
AHMEDABAD,
August 3, 1915
MY DEAR WEST,
This is for you and Chhaganlal. Herewith Passive Resistance
Fund a/c with my covering letter which speaks for itself. You may
publish the a/c there. You will see some items allocated in antici-
pation. £2,023 have been allocated to the improvements there.
This enables you to develop agriculture and keep the ground in such
order as to enable you to cope with emergency, it being understood
that the property is open to receive more Passive Resisters than
there at present. Of course you will not expend this amount if it
is not required.
Allocation of £3,000 to Phoenix settlement includes assistance
to Indian Opinion. This enables you to report cases of hardship
and to help such cases also. You may even open a branch office
in Durban and collect information about hard cases of immigrants
and give them free help, you can engage men for reporting cases,
etc. The expense will be justified only as far as you use the paper
to attend [to] local relief. Allocation to passive resistance relief
means relief given both here and there. I am supporting the
widows, etc., you have there your cases in Phoenix and elsewhere.
I have made a rough calculation.
For Valliama Hall up to £4,000 may be expended.
It is possible that there will be some talk about the Phoenix
allocations. But I could not do otherwise than to deal with the
whole matter as I have done. Your work if it is fruitful of results
will silence cold criticism in the end. If there is any further in-
formation please let me know. I am having this letter copied so
that I should know the contents if you referred to it in your
correspondence.
Yours sincerely,
I have read Maganlal's letter written on my suggestion. I
approve of it. Please let me have your views upon it. Should
any questions arise there regarding the accounts, you should refer
the questions to Mr. Petit.
From a photostat of the handwritten office copy: S.N. 6215
