298. LETTER TO UNDER SECRETARY FOR COLONIES
[LONDON,]
October 8, 1909
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 4th
instant, in connection with the British Indian question in the Transvaal.
The last portion of the letter is not quite clear to my colleague and myself.
The difficulty that faces us is this. The letter under reply says:
The Colonial Government must first decide . . . whether they are prepared to
introduce legislation on the lines proposed by Mr. Smuts.
I do not know whether the legislation proposed by Mr. Smuts is
on the basis suggested by me at the interview of the 16th ultimo, or
whether it is on the basis proposed by Mr. Smuts before he embarked
for South Africa. There is a fundamental difference between the proposal
submitted by me and what Mr. Smuts was prepared to give. It will be
admitted it is of the greatest importance to my colleague and me to know
the exact position taken up by Mr. Smuts after His Lordship's cable, which
evidently was sent after the interview in question.
We recognise that the negotiations will now take some time before
the final result is known. We are, however, desirous not to indefinitely
prolong our stay in this country. My colleague and I, therefore, feel
that it is time for us to inform public opinion before our departure. In
wanting to do so, we have no desire to embarrass the Earl of Crewe. Indeed,
we are grateful to His Lordship for the efforts he has made, and will
still make, in order to bring about a satisfactory settlement. In taking
up public activity we only wish to strengthen His Lordship's hands, and
to be able to render a satisfactory account of our mission to our country-
men in South Africa. We propose to interview those leaders of public
opinion who are likely to be interested in our troubles; if possible to
address meetings of representative men; to circulate a short statement
in the Press, etc., and, if we receive advice from the European and the
Indian Committees at Johannesburg, and if time permits, to pay a visit to
India, and to give to the Indian public an account of our mission here.
I assume that the Earl of Crewe has no objection to our making
public the net result of the negotiations, so far as they have progressed.
May I request an early reply?
I remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten
office copy: S. N. 5119
