121. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
CALCUTTA,
August 28, 1947
CHI. KAKA,
I have your letter. I had told Amritlal that so long as the
substance of my draft resolution was preserved he could make
in it any changes he liked. And in the last resort the general
body of the Conference has an unfettered right to alter even
the substance. It would, of course, be a question whether it
could retain me after it has altered the substance. But that will
be considered if and when such an occasion arises.
I might agree that the teaching of two scripts at the same
time can be unscientific, but I regard knowledge of both the
scripts indispensable, so much so that I would not give a certificate
even for the first course in the national language to a candidate
who did not know both the scripts. He would be eligible for
the certificate only when he had learnt the second script, too.
It is not correct to say that because I have not used the
phrase "whereas" in the draft resolution, the language of the
draft is not legal. The word is used in court documents. And
those who draft the resolutions are mostly lawyers, they use
the language of court documents and make the resolutions un-
couth. After all even a resolution is an appeal.
The Conference has a right to make changes under pressure
of new circumstances. I do not, in this case, wish to yield to
such pressure because I think that that will harm the country.
Hence my emphatic advice in the present circumstances is to
cling all the more resolutely to the policy to which we have
adhered till now.
To me, ever since I understood the problem, Hindi and
Hindustani have been two forms of the same language. And
there will be a difference between Urdu and Hindustani as there
is between Hindi and Hindustani.
I would, thus, describe Hindustani as a language midway
between Urdu and Hindi, one which would bring about a con-
fluence of the two. Accordingly, if in course of time only one
script survives in use, Hindustani will have become and will
remain one form of Hindi and Urdu.
100
We need not object if the Governments do not make know-
ledge of the two scripts obligatory but only encourage it. If
we keep our house in order and clean it regularly, we shall
have done our duty.
It will be tantamount to harassing the Urdu-speaking peo-
ple to make the Nagari script compulsory for all. I would,
therefore, earnestly appeal to all the members of the Conference
that they should not only acquire a good knowledge of both
the scripts, but also boldly advocate such a policy in public.
Only then shall we be able to influence the various State Gov-
ernments.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: G. N. 10990
