433. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
March 16, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
I have your letter, as also your telegram. You have certainly done
all that was possible. If the present amalgamation of the various Indian
Associations continues after your withdrawal, it will be a very great
gain. If young Gool, the doctor, works well and self-sacrificingly, he can
do a great deal. I am re-directing seven letters to you. There is nothing
new from Maud. I hope that you will carefully scan every amendment
that may be moved in Committee, and see to it that General Smuts does
not surreptitiously create a colour bar by moving the amendment to the
effect that those who may enter under the education test shall not be
1 Patrick Duncan, Member of Parliament from the Transvaal
2 Sir David Hunter, Member of Parliament from Natal
3 J. W. Jagger, Member of Parliament from the Cape Colony
4 Vide footnote 4 on p. 433.
subject to the Registration Act of the Transvaal. The amendment should
be that such men should not be subject to the registration laws of any
Province, because, if that is not done, the Orange Free State will be
barred, and the theory of equality as to immigration will be violated.
In an immigration law of the Transvaal, exemption from the Transvaal
Registration Act would have been quite enough, but, in a Union Immi-
gration Law, exemption from all registration laws is absolutely necessary.
Please note, too, that the minor children of Asiatics registered or entitled
to be registered, or entering under the immigration test, have to be
protected whether they are without the Union or within. General Smuts
is quite capable of bringing in an amendment which would read to mean
that Asiatic minors outside the Transvaal but within the Union shall
alone be able to enter the Transvaal. India has published the full report
of your presentation. It reads admirably. Lord Ampthill seems to have
acted perfectly, and I was glad to notice Dube speaking out so nicely.
The whole affair was evidently a very great success. I should like the
names of all who were present; Maud has not supplied me with them.
The writer in the South African News is a disappointing man. He leads
one to think that all one's courtesy is lost upon him. However, your
letter made him think.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5299
