634. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
September 25, 1935
BHAI MUNSHI,
I add the good wishes of you both to those of many others.
But isn't it God's will that prevails in the end? Who can thwart
the decrees of Fate? Have you considered what kind of figure I
would cut in the Sahitya Parishad? When my name was suggest-
ed on a similar occasion years ago, the late Ramanbhai had
remarked that I did not know even as much Gujarati as a raw
matriculate. I had at that time agreed whole-heartedly with him
when I heard the remark. As my era had already commenced
then, others who heard that sincerely meant remark had felt hurt,
but I saw in it nothing but sincerity of purpose and regard for
propriety. Our people's love is blind. They believe that a person
who is capable in one field must be so in other fields, too. If the
person is weak-minded, he would therefore soon come to grief.
Ramanbhai's remark made in 1915-16 holds true literally even
448
today, and I am therefore shaking in my shoes ever since my
name was suggested for the forthcoming session of the Parishad. In
cherishing the aspiration to make the Parishad a symbol of Guja-
rat's unity and culture, don't you think you are making its field
unlimited? And I see no likelihood of that aspiration being real-
ized through my becoming its President. This is precisely the state of
my mind. If even after knowing this all the members desire that I
must become the President and if the Parishad is to meet next year,
you may give me an opportunity to think again then. You have
approached me as advocate of the Reception Committee, but now
please become my advocate and reply to the Committee on my be-
half that you are personally convinced by my argument and agree
that I should be spared from having to become President.
Regarding the Advisory Committee for Hansa, I thought
I had said my say. But Mahadev gave me your message just now.
I see that you have enumerated fifteen languages, from out of
which you yourself agree to the exclusion of three, leaving twelve.
Fixing an upper limit of 20 for twelve languages, you may select
whatever names you like. I would find it difficult to make the
selection, since I do not know everybody. I was concerned only
with the size, and if my argument on that point appeals to you,
you yourself should select the agreed number of names. I will
accept your selection.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 7592. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
