12. LETTER TO BHARATAN KUMARAPPA
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
POONA,
November 2, 1945
MY DEAR BHARATAN,
I had your letter yesterday.
You have given a cautious and judicious opinion on Bhailal's
project. That is not what I wanted exactly from you. Did I
tell you that I lent him your book in typescript, which you
gave me to read for my foreword, and he cock-suredly told me
that his scheme was exactly in conformity with your thesis? I
said to him, and I repeat it now, that if I have understood your
thesis correctly, his project is quite contrary to the letter and the
spirit of your thesis. The rule of thumb that I applied was to
know whether his scheme would succeed if it was multiplied to
the extent of covering 700,000 villages. And my answer was it
could not succeed within a measurable distance of time. This
fundamental objection is apart from the fact that he, a tried
engineer and therefore an accurate man, has dared to build his
scheme largely on his calculation that people will do this and
that and the other thing will come true. If what I have said is
true and really flows from your book, as it does from my
instinctive belief, you have to say so in black and white. If my
argument is sound, the way to amend your opinion is to supple-
ment what you have given already by adding that, according to
your book as interpreted by you, the project is bound to fail in
terms of the millions, and is likely to fail even within the limited
compass, because he has built largely upon speculations, a thing
which a tried engineer should never do. Did you also notice that
his project contemplates a mill split up into fragments, owned
by the villagers or one intelligent villager? Just think what it
means. It must resolve itself into one gigantic State-owned mill or
mills centrally situated. In other words, 700,000 villages must be
converted into 700 or 70 cities. In still other words, a large
portion of the population must die of starvation, famine and the
like or be cut to pieces by the sword or blown up by gunpowder.
Love.
BAPU
SHRI BHARATAN KUMARAPPA
C/O SETH SHOORJI VALLABHDAS
CUTCH CASTLE, OPP. SANDHURST BRIDGE
BOMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
