392. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
November 6, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter. I do not think there is anything special about the
Gandiv I got. It gave all the trouble, you had, to Kaka. I found
out the cause of the trouble, removed it and it has never once
given trouble. The second mal must be as thin as possible. I am
using what Narandas sent from the Ashram. I think 6 threads.
For the moving wheel the mal knot should be from the outside.
Neither need be too tight. The wheel must move without any jerk.
It may be that the metal rings are not rigidly fixed in the wheels
or the axles are not straight or in a straight line. To me its beauty
lies in its smooth working and less liability to go out of order.
But as I have said in my last letter, you need not divert your at-
tention for the sake of the wheel. I suppose it is true about wheels
as it is true about most things that what suits one does not there-
fore suit all others. Experts have to adjust values of different
types. We workers must be satisfied with that which will give the
maximum of work with the minimum of trouble. If I had the
requisite mechanical training or was a genius in the art, I should
love to become an expert in carding and spinning and judging
bows, wheels and taklis. But I must treat it as a forbidden ambi-
tion, though I do not leave off the search. The search for me here
is duty ~9"cl.r.
Long or short, I hope to do at least one bhajan daily. The
Marathi I finished with Kaka's assistance. The Bengali too I
began but on learning from K. that they were all translated by
the Poet himself or under his supervision, I left off, thinking it a
profanation even to attempt. I have now, therefore, only 42
bhajans to do. Marathi being very short, I was able to do some-
times even three per night. I hope to finish before 42 days are
out.
One question in your letter just now stares me about the
Gandiv. I mount the wheel end on a beam of wood nearly 3
inches high and I fix it on to the beam with 2 movable pins. It
thus lies slanting from top downward. It can be even mounted
on a box to lie flat. K. tied it to the cane bottom of a chair and
278
worked seated in a chair. I am glad you saw Alexander. He
wrote to me directly. The letter was given to me about 10 days
after its receipt. I knew from him that he was able quite by
accident to see you. When you write to him please give him my
love and tell him I had his letter. I must not attempt to write
separately to him. Sufficient unto the day is the good thereof.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5418. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9653
