515. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 8, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
I have reserved your letter to the last deliberately in the hope
of hearing from you before or on Monday in reply to my post-
card which I wrote to you on Thursday and which I hope you
duly received. It contained an inquiry about your health. This
obstinate constipation is disturbing. I hope when this reaches you
all the effect of the attack would have worn out. I have got rid of
mine by simply dropping proteid food for a while. I am now
taking proteid through almonds. I should love not to go back
to milk. Save now for a visible weakness, the result has been excel-
lent. Almonds I am taking very cautiously and I cannot sustain
the strength on green vegetables merely and about an ounce of
almonds. I have gone to the ounce only for the last two days. I
must take a cereal. I have not decided what to take. I want to
try bajri or juwari—whatever the jail chapati for the day. If it
agrees, the problem may be solved to my entire satisfaction. But
there will be no haste, certainly no obstinacy. Immediately I feel
the need, I shall go back to milk.
In another ten days I shall have finished the translation of the
Bhajanavali. It has given me such a joy. I am not satisfied with
the performance. Save for the fact that it is an act of love, it has
no other merit—certainly no literary merit. But it will help you
to know the meaning of the bhajans and that was all I aimed at.
And when this is finished I hope to begin the other, viz., transla-
tion of preface to the Gujarati Gita. I do not think I shall trans-
late the verses, but I shall go through one of the existing trans-
lations and where it is different from mine, I shall note it and
translate all the marginal notes. This will simplify my work and
save a great deal of labour. Please share this with Kaka. He
will feel interested in the proposal.
The improvements in the Gandiv have exceeded all expecta-
tions. It now runs smoothly. It has the tension which was ab-
sent. But I am not going to weary you with a description of the
improvements. I am describing them in a letter to Keshu. I am
sure that for speed it cannot now be excelled by any other wheel.
370
But that has still to be tested. My assurance won't create more
yarn, I know.
You must give yourself ample rest and must not work under
tension. It is good for the wheel but not for human beings.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5424. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9658
