93. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI H. PATEL
HADALA,
Sunday [December 12, 1915]
BHAISHRI 5 MAGANBHAI,
I visited Bagasara today. I got another batch of letters there.
There was one from Shivpujan too. His argument seems to be
correct. We cannot experiment with the children who are put
in our charge. Therefore, if you consider it necessary, please
introduce immediately provision of ghee and milk for the sick
and for others who desire to take these. Supply ghee to those
who want it and arrange to get milk in sufficient quantity. I
think there is need to effect this change and watch matters for a
few months. It is certainly bad that so many should be in poor
health. If anyone needs buttermilk, we should give it to him
and see. Nobody should deprive himself of ghee from shyness.
Only those who are under a vow may abstain from ghee, or those
who even though not under a vow want to do without it.
Shanti should not be given oil even in vegetables. The expendi-
ture on dried fruit should be brought down.
Shivpujan complains of undercooking. Look into the matter.
Everything should be cooked well even if it takes more time.
I have nothing to say about the money sent for Anna. Both
of you enjoy a certain position and so what you have done at the
moment can be justified. This cannot be done for Mama. Pay-
ment could not be made to Krishnaswamy because there was no
question of his becoming manager. Mama of course has almost
reached the position of manager. Moreover in such work we must
have one strict rule.
I am sending Shivpujan's letter for you to see. Be more
lenient, not less, in my absence. I do not wish that the students
should have complaints to make against you. It is necessary
that Shivprasad, Shanti, Chhotam and others should get well
at once. Give milk to Sundaram. He can have only a dhoti
which we all have. We cannot give him one with a border.
If cold rotis do not suit him it is better to avoid them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 11007. Courtesy: Suryakant C.
Patel
