796. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
September 14, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,
I have your telegram. Prabhavati is going but not happily.
She has decided that she will cheer you up and come away
again soon. When your first telegram came I told her that she
should go at once. But she did not agree and wrote to you. She
waited a long time for your answer, but there was no answer to
the very last moment. Then when your telegram to me arrived,
I decided that it was my duty to persuade Prabha to go.
Prabha's difficulty is that she made a promise to Mirabehn
that she would do the work that Mirabehn did till the latter
returned. Later Ba also went away after extracting another pro-
mise from Prabha-for she knew about your telegram. Prabha
told Ba that she could go and promised her that she would not
leave till Ba returned. Still, since the work consisted of serving
me I told Prabha not to worry about me but go. She is a little
troubled as she goes.
Another thing is that you have both decided that Prabha
should serve in the Kanya Ashram for five years. She should not
get out of this. It is as well that she has not yet taken up this
work. But how can she give it up?
However, concerning all these matters I am neutral. I have
no right to come between you two. I only regret that the
education that Prabha has got from me does not have your
entire approval. But that education cannot go waste. What she
has assimilated is now part of her. You can now strike at her
heart as many blows as you like. I have told Prabha not to
pay any heed to my advice but to do as her heart and her
reasoning dictate.
I have your sweet and pure-hearted letter. Since I was
hoping that you would be coming here I did not answer it. I am
conscious of the regard and esteem in which you hold me. We
shall talk when we meet.
My commitment for paying you stands. I have made an
arrangement about it with Ghanshyamdasji too. It was you
who had raised the question of moral dilemma. It is you who
must take a decision. We shall do as you say.
I hope you are in good health.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
