297. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
WARDHA,
December 15, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
After reading the Ashram Samachar I had asked you to write
about certain matters; I had the news concerning them read out
to me yesterday. The note about the changes is a good one. I
see from the news that Velanbehn has started a separate kitchen.
All right.
Mirabehn has arrived. Prabhavati is likely to come, accom-
panied by her husband and Mahadev.
A Marwari merchant who sells pure ghee in Bombay was
here. He sells cow's ghee too. The rate is one and a quarter
rupees for a pound, but he promised to sell it to us at one rupee
a pound whenever we required it. His name is Khemraj Agrawal.
Address: 192 Kalbadevi Road, Bombay. He is known as 'ghee
merchant'. I have sent these particulars for your information
thinking that they may be useful to us when we need it.
I dictated the foregoing after the morning prayer. I have
now received today's mail, which contains a letter from you too.
Did I write to you and tell you that Madhavji and his wife are
here? Pyarali and Noorbanu also are here. I think it is neces-
sary to note in the diary particulars about every kind of work done.
If, however, someone does not wish to write about work done in
addition to eight hours' work or about social duties outside the
Ashram, we cannot force him or her to do so. I would, however,
say that such a person does not even know how to think. How-
ever, this is only about khadi students. You and I can claim no
hour as private. To keep aside an hour as private or to think a
private thought is certainly as much personal possession as money
can be, but it can be personal possession of even a worse kind.
Frightful instances of this occur to me even as I dictate this. Real-
ly speaking, the diary should contain notes about everything done
from four in the morning to eight in the evening. If it is a sacred
duty for the Ashram to maintain a daily cash account, it is equally
a sacred duty for all to maintain a diary. Metal is not the real
money; time is. The Lord has said: "Of reckoners, I am Time"
and he who does not keep an account of his time is a prince
among deceivers.
Perhaps I too would not understand the meaning of the sen-
tence: "We should tell anyone who does not attend prayers-if you
do not come, leave the Ashram." But what I wished to say was
this: "We should tell those who have agreed to join in prayers
or any other compulsory duties and yet do not take part in
them, that they should leave, for if they break their word in one
respect they are likely to do so in other matters too." Is not this
as clear as light? But you will not be able to carry out this all at
once, even after you have realized the necessity of observing rules,
for we have been lax for quite a long time. At present, there-
fore, you should merely wake up the people. After I return, I
shall, if all of you agree, take upon myself the responsibility of
acting upon my suggestion.
It is not as if I do not understand Tara's love for me even in
her refusal to come. I have a beautiful letter today from her too.
I can readily say what lesson we as a body can take from
the Ashram at Wardha. The peace, the respect for rules and
the sacrificial work done here have appealed to me very much.
By peace I mean absence of noise. Respect for rules means do-
ing everything, from prayer onwards, at the fixed time so that
the outward life of the Ashram may go on in an orderly manner.
In the sacrificial work, everyone is bound to spin yarn of not
less than 30 counts. A sari of eight and a quarter yards length
and fifty [inches] width has just been made. The Ashram in-
mates themselves wove it. Weaving it took 24 hours. The
yarn is excellent. All cloth of such fine count is sold. The inmates
of the Ashram themselves do not wear khadi of more than eight
or ten counts. Since all work is done according to rules, I don't
see anyone who worries. One of the reasons for this condition
here is of course that the number of inmates is small. I have
merely replied to your question.
I send with this letters received from Umiya and her husband.
They should be read out without fail at the women's prayer meet-
ing. Convey the news to others.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4162
