110. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
POONA,
Wednesday [February 13, 1924]
BHAISHRI NARAHARI,
Mahadev told me today about your mind being at peace.
I often feel tempted to wire, but I control myself. I do not want
to be impatient. You and I, all of us, are in the hands of God. We
should always obey the dictates of our conscience and think no
more. Why should we then worry about the result? I only want
to be assured that Manibehn is not at all worried and that she
understands the significance of your penance.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9044
1 1 1 . ANTI-INDIAN CAMPAIGN IN SOUTH AFRICA
[POONA,
February 14, 1924]
As one expected to understand the situation created in South
Africa by the anti-Asiatic movement now going on there, and
especially the Class Areas Bill now under consideration by the
Union Parliament, I deem it my duty to place my opinion on the
situation before the public.
The anti-Asiatic agitation on the part of Europeans in South
Africa is no new thing. It is almost as old as the first settle-
ment of unindentured Indians in South Africa, and is principally
due to trade jealousy on the part of white retail traders. As in
other parts of the world so in South Africa, interested men, if they
sufficiently persist, find no difficulty in gathering the support
round them of those who are not so interested, but who do not think
for themselves. The present agitation, I remember, was begun as
early as 1921 and the Class Areas Bill is, no doubt, one result
of that agitation.
Before dealing with the nature and effect of the Bill, it is
necessary to point out that it is in breach of the compromise of
1914 arrived at between the Union Government and the Indian
community of South Africa. But it was a compromise to which
both the Indian Government and the Imperial Government were
as much party as the Union Government and the Indian com-
munity, because the compromise was arrived at with the know-
ledge and concurrence of the Imperial and the Indian Govern-
ments. The latter had even sent Sir Benjamin Robertson as a
representative, technically to watch the course of the Commission
that was appointed by the Union Government to inquire into the
Indian position, but in reality to negotiate a settlement. The main
terms of the compromise were settled before Sir Benjamin Robert-
son, who represented the Indian Government, returned to India.
In accordance with that compromise, no further anti-Asiatic
legislation was to be passed by the Union Government. The under-
standing at the time was that the legal position of the Indian would
be gradually improved and that the then existing anti-Asiatic
legislation would, in time to come, be repealed. The contrary has,
however, happened. The public may remember that the first
attempt to break the spirit of the compromise was made when, in
the Transvaal, an attempt was made to enforce the existing legis-
lation adversely to the Indians and contrary to the practice that
prevailed at the time of the compromise. The Class Areas Bill,
however, goes much further in restricting Indian liberty.
Whatever may be the other implications of the compromise,
this much cannot be disputed by any party, that the settlement
of 1914 pledged the Union Government not to put further restric-
tions upon the Indian liberty, and apart from the general powers
of disallowance vested in His Majesty under the Letter of Instruc-
tions addressed to the Governor-General of South Africa, the
Imperial Government if they would be true to their trust are bound,
at any cost, to insist upon the observance of the terms of the com-
promise referred to by me.
We in India may not ignore the difficulties of the Union
Government which is dependent for its existence solely upon the
will of the Europeans of South Africa expressed through their
elected representatives to the exclusion of Indians and the natives
of the soil. This unwarranted exclusion is the original flaw in the
South African constitution, as it is to be found in the constitution
of most of the self-governing Colonies which have their native
populations and Indian populations. As the Imperial Government
permitted the flaw, it is in honour bound to prevent untoward
results arising from it. South Africa and Kenya will presently show
what moral worth there is in the Imperial system. Pressure of
public opinion may, and probably will, bring about temporary
relief in both the places; but it will be only temporary. It can
merely postpone the final act in the tragedy unless some unfore-
seen radical change, either in England or in India, takes place.
And now for the Bill itself. Unlike the Natal Municipal
Franchise Bill, which happily the Union Governor-General has in
effect vetoed and which applied only to Natal, the Class Areas
Bill is designed to apply to all the four provinces. It enables the
Government to segregate all the domiciled Indians and other
Asiatics alike for residence and trade. It is, therefore, an exten-
sion, in a modified manner, of the location system devised as early
as 1885 by the late Transvaal Government.
Let me say in a few words what the segregation may mean.
The Indian Location in Pretoria, where, in spite of the Law of 1885,
not a single Indian has been as yet compelled to remove, is situated
far away from the town itself and entirely outside the beat of the
buyer, whether English, Dutch or native. The only trade possible
in such Locations is trade among themselves. Segregation, there-
fore, carried out to the full means nothing less than compulsory
repatriation without any compensation. It is true that the Bill
appears to preserve to a certain extent the existing rights. But that
reservation is of little consequence to the Indian settlers. I do not
wish to burden this note by citing illustrations from my South
African experience to show how such reservations have, in practice,
proved almost useless.
Finally, let it be remembered that, when Indian emigration
to South Africa was unrestricted, the fear of the Europeans was
expressed to be that South Africa might be swamped by India's
millions. All the South African statesmen then used to say that
South Africa could easily digest a small Indian population and
could even give it a liberal treatment, but that the European settlers
could never rest content so long as the possibility of swamping
remained. Now that the so-called fear of swamping has been re-
moved, practically since 1897, the cry is raised for segregation;
and, if that is accomplished, the next step will be compulsory
repatriation. If the segregated Indians do not voluntarily retire,
the fact is that the more accommodating the European settlers
of South Africa find the Imperial trustees to be, the more grasp-
ing they become in their anti-Asiatic demands.
Young India, 21-2-1924
