80. LETTER TO SARALADEVI CHOWDHARANI
December 17, 1920
I love you more [for] loving me less for any hate you may
see in me. And you would be right in your regret over my being
engaged in N[on]-C[o-]O[peration], if it was a matter of politics
with me. As it is, with me it is my religion. I am gathering together
all the forces of hate and directing them in a proper channel. Hatred
is a sign of weakness as contempt of insolent power. If I could
but show our countrymen that we need not fear the English, we
will cease to hate them. A brave man or woman never hates.
Hatred is essentially the vice of cowards. N[ on-]C[ ]O[peration]
is self-purification. Even as the dirt comes to the surface when you
are purifying sugar, so does our weakness come to the surface
whilst we are purifying ourselves. But what I like about your
letter is your clear position. Your love for me is based on your
belief in my purity and gentleness. I am worth nothing if I have
not these and I should hold myself unfit for all the renunciation
of yours described in your previous letter.
I have been analysing my love for you. I have reached a
definite meaning of spiritual wife. It is a partnership between two
persons of the opposite sex where the physical is wholly absent. It
is therefore possible between brother and sister, father and daugh-
ter. It is possible only between two brahmacharis in thought, word
and deed. I have felt drawn to you, because I have recognized
in you an identity of ideals and aspirations and a complete self-
surrender. You have been 'wife' because you have recognized
in me a fuller fruition of the common ideal than in yourself. For
this spiritual partnership to subsist, there must be complete co-
incidence not from faith, but from knowledge. It is a meeting
between two kindred spirits. This partnership can take place whilst
either party is physically married to another, but only if they are
living as celibates. Spiritual partnership is possible even bet-
ween husband and wife. It transcends physical relations and per-
sists beyond the grave. It follows from what I have stated that
spiritual partners can never be physically wedded either in this
life or a future, for it is possible only if there is no carnality,
latent or patent. Are you spiritual wife to me of that descrip-
tion? Have we that exquisite purity, that perfect coincidence,
that perfect merging, that identity of ideals, that self-forgetfulness,
that fixity of purpose, that trustfulness? For me I can answer
plainly that it is only an aspiration. I am unworthy to have that
companionship with you. I require in me an infinitely higher
purity than I possess in thought. I am too physically attached to
you to be worthy of enjoying that sacred association with you.
By physical attachment I here mean I am too much affected by
your weaknesses. I must not be teacher to you, if I am your spiri-
tual husband, if coincidence or merging is felt. On the con-
trary there are sharp differences between you and me so often.
So far as I can see our relationship, it is one of brother and sister.
I must lay down the law for you, and thus ruffle you. I must plead
gently like a brother ever taking care to use the right word even
as I do to my oldest sister. I must not be father, husband, friend,
teacher all rolled in one. This is the big letter I promised. With
dearest love I still subscribe myself,
Yours,
LAW-GIVER
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy; Narayan Desai
