503. LETTER TO DESMOND YOUNG
March 21, 1942
DEAR MR. YOUNG,
I was glad to read your letter to Mahadev Desai and know
that you had returned safe and sound. I hope you are none the
worse for the hard life you must have had at the front.
With reference to the subject matter of your letter, I can
only give you my assurance that I am not in the habit of writ-
ing anything without ascertaining facts.
And when I have evi-
dence from persons I know, for the sake of truth and for the
sake of protecting the public I write and then, too, cautiously.
If you think that absence of complaint means absence of
guilt, you are vastly mistaken. The behaviour of troops, white
or brown, has become a public scandal. Even respectable and
well-known women are not free from danger. You may not know
that an Indian official's wife was recently ravished by soldiers
(Indian) on the train. The official had lodged a complaint too
but at the instance of his superiors he withdrew it. The instances
of looting in the open are too common to be decently chal-
lenged. There are guarded admissions of some of these by high
functionaries. I get almost daily complaints of such cases. Hav-
ing been absent for some time you do not know how things have
deteriorated in such matters. No wonder. Full-blooded soldiers not
on duty find vent for their exuberant physical energy by taking liber-
ties which cannot be allowed in a society not used to such conduct.
In Wardha, only a few days ago, soldiers who were loitering
in the streets of the town were molesting a woman. A strong
gymnast, seeing the molestation, belaboured the soldiers and
they took to their heels.
A wealthy merchant was waiting for
his train at Wardha Station when a troop train steamed in. He
saw two of them take milk from an old woman on the platform
without payment. On seeing the latter weeping this merchant
intervened. He was thereupon slapped, caught by the neck and
taken to the soldiers' compartment to receive proper punish-
ment. Happily, the bystanders who knew the merchant inter-
vened and he was saved from serious injury. I can multiply
such cases. I have thought fit not to give publicity to them. Nor
have I advised reporting to the authorities.
416
You will ill serve the common cause by ignoring facts be-
hind the worn-out plea that absence of complaint before the
police means absence of crime.
Happily in responsible quarters
there has come over a slow but sure awakening. I wish you
would find leisure to study facts and help as much as you can
to remove a growing menace.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10369. Courtesy: India Office Library, London
