34. LETTER TO CHANDULAL
MOTIHARI,
Kartak Sud 8 [November 22, 1917]
BHAISHRI CHANDULAL,
I have your letter. You have been keeping your vows well
enough and they are good ones to take. It is my conviction that
one cannot build one's character without the help of vows. They
are to a man what anchor is to a ship. A ship without an
anchor is tossed to and fro and finally broken on the rocks;
without vows, human beings meet a similar fate. The vow of truth
includes all others. How would a man who respects truth violate
brahmacharya or steal anything? "Brahma alone is real; all else is
non-existent." If this sutra is true, knowledge of Brahma is im-
plied in the observance of truth.
Non-violence and truth are convertible terms. This seems to
be the idea behind the saying, "One must speak truth, truth that
is agreeable." That is genuine truth which causes no pain, for that
alone is non-violent. Truth may sound harsh but it can never
result in suffering. Our employment of truth may offend the other
person, but his conscience will tell him that what was said about
him was true and was said with the best of motives. We are here
interpreting truth in its widest connotation. Truth does not mean
merely being truthful in speech; the term "truth" means exactly
the same thing as it does in the sutra about Brahma alone being
true. The English word "truth" also carries the same meaning.
I remember to have told you that you are not made to work
for women's education. I may be wrong, but I think it is quite a
difficult task and I have not felt that you have the strength required
for it. From my experience of you, I do not think that you can
take up the work by yourself. All the same, if you are so much in
love with it, by all means go on with it. I think Sharadabehn
also will not be able to manage without you now. It may be
just as well, therefore, if you do not give up that work.
I have not noticed much physical energy in you. You need to
spend, in the Ashram or elsewhere, two or three months in purely
physical work, as much of it as your body can stand—from
cleaning food grains to digging pits. This will give you fresh mental
energy. Your slowness in work will disappear. The eyes, hands,
legs, etc., need to be exercised. I have noticed that you lack energy.
I have read Nandlal Kisan's letter. We shall have a talk about
what we can do in the Indian States. You will meet me in
Bombay, or in Ahmedabad at any rate, in December.
If you have faith in yourself, you will be able to do much
in your family circle. It is for the son to bring round the mother.
A mother loves her son so much that she even submits to his wishes.
It will be a crime for you not to spare enough time for your
daughters.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 3258
