159. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 21/25, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
It is again Wednesday morning after prayer. If I am fortu-
nate like last week, I may get the post about 8 a.m. today. But it
gives me pleasure to copy out the verses (this time they will be
two) for you before I commence the weekly batch of letters. Here
then are 6th and 7th verses with the notes made at the time:
6. "O God with a curved mouth and big body, refulgent
like ten million suns, keep me ever free from harm whilst doing
beneficent acts."
NOTE. This is addressed to God represented by the mystic
letter ૐ pronounced 'Om'; mark its curved mouth and big body.
Its mystic splendour has been sung by the Upanishads.
7. "Guru (teacher) is Brahma, he is Vishnu, he is Mahadev,
he is the great Brahman itself. I bow to that guru."
NOTE. This refers of course to the spiritual teacher. This is
not a mechanical or artificial relationship. The teacher is not
all this in reality, but he is all that to the disciple who finds his
full satisfaction in him and imputes perfection to him who gave
him a living faith in a living God. Such a guru is a rarity at
least nowadays. The best thing therefore is to think of God
Himself as one's Guru or await the Light in faith.
No further comment beyond the notes seems necessary.
The decision as to further translation is made.
For my own
satisfaction, I must embark upon the translation. Any short
cut will be longer in the end. There will be no stopping after
making the commencement. I seem, therefore, to be dreading
the commencement whilst the present pressure continues. The
dread is more mental than real. But mind supersedes reality.
I see you are already in Sind. I hope the Sind cold has
not worried you. It can be as cold as the Punjab in Sind. You
must have met Jamshed Mehta—a noble type of man. He is
by himself an institution. And I expect to hear from you about
Kikibehn, Gangabehn and Mrs. Malkani and Mrs. Jeramdas, and
of course Anand and Vidya.
January 25, 1931
I have your letter from Sind. The rendering of the 2nd
chapter is excellent. There are two corrections I would suggest.
Instead of 'notion', I should have 'weakness' at page I and at
page 7 instead of 'followers of Vedas' I should have 'the Vedic
literalists'. The second correction is vital, not so the first. The
followers of the Gita are also followers of the Vedas. But these
follow the spirit. The literalists, as the very name implies, follow
the letter. I do not know whether I was to return the notes
you have sent. I shall not re-read your letter, but am preserving
the notes till I hear further from you. They are no longer requir-
ed for immediate publication, though this one is good enough
any day for publication subject to the vital correction.
What you say about rebirth is sound. It is nature's kindness
that we do not remember past births. Where is the good, either,
of knowing in detail the numberless births we have gone through?
Life would be a burden if we carried such a tremendous load of
memories. A wise man deliberately forgets many things even as
a lawyer forgets the cases and their details as soon as they are
disposed of. Yes, 'Death is but a sleep and a forgetting.'
My health is quite good. Energy sometimes astonishes me.
I fancy that I could not negotiate two hours' continuous standing
at the takli whilst I was at the Ashram. I was weighed on
Thursday and I was 98 lb., a gain of 2½ lb. in one week. It is an
achievement. I am, have been for the past five days on vege-
tables, brown bread, almonds (paste), dates and sour limes. Dates
I take principally in the morning. Brown bread is well toasted.
I have not felt the need of milk or curds; if I did, I should
take either. You will thus see that there is no cause what-
soever for anxiety. It may be that I may need a dose of milk
or curds periodically. If I do, I shall take it as I may take
medicine.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5430. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9664
