451. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[JOHANNESBURG,
After May 2, 1907]
[TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,]
May I once more take the liberty of correcting you? I fear you
have not yet understood the compromise. The cry is not "Trust the
Indians", as you have put it. The cry is trust the Indians in the interim,
and see whether the trust is not justified. Under the Registration Act,
all Indians have to be compulsorily registered. Under the Indian offer,
they can be voluntarily registered, and that now. But, supposing that
the lowest class of Indians, as you have been pleased to classify some
Indians, who enter the Colony, do not accept the proposal of the British
Indian Association, the key to the situation is in the hands of the
Government. A bill can then be passed cancelling all permits save
those issued under the compromise, unless they are exchanged within a
certain time. The law will then reach the culprits and leave the innocent
free. The Act at present punishes the vast majority of the innocent,
self-respecting people, for the sake of the guilty few. You dismiss the
objections of the Indian community by describing them as super-
sensitive. You dismiss Lord Ampthill and his friends equally uncere-
moniously by ascribing to them what you, I suppose, would call the
"Oriental taint", and depriving them of the possession of a spirit of
wider Imperialism. I can only remind you that Lord Milner, whom
you will not classify with Lord Ampthill, in his article in The National
1 This meeting, however, did not take place; vide "Johannesburg Letter",
p.468.
2 After addressing a letter to The Star, on April 30 (pp. 449-51), Gandhiji called
on the editor of the paper and had a discussion with him. The Star commented again
on the subject. The above was Gandhiji's reply. Vide "Johannesburg Letter", pp. 468-.
Review, in reminding the colonists of wider Imperialism, places before
them their responsibilities to British dependencies, and especially British
India.
[I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 11-5-1907
