194. LETTER TO R. GREGOROWSKI
JOHANNESBURG,
February 15, 1912
DEAR MR. GREGOROWSKI,
I enclose herewith statement for your Opinion on the new Bill.
You were good enough to give me your Opinion, which, as I told
you, proved most valuable to me, on the Bill that General Smuts
attempted to carry through the House last year. I enclose for
your assistance, in addition to the Statement for your Opinion, an
extract giving the necessary Sections from the Orange Free State
laws, as also your Opinion given last year, the Bill and the Natal
and Cape immigration laws.
Yours sincerely,
R. GREGOROWSKI, ESQ.
PRETORIA
cannot be demanded as a matter of right, identification as required in Section
25 (2) should not be peremptory.
1 Vide Appendix XV.
2 Vide Vol. X, pp. 413-.
[ENCLOSURE]
STATEMENT FOR COUNSEL'S OPINION
Counsel's opinion is requested on the following points arising
out of the Immigration Bill now before the Union Parliament:
1. Section 5, sub-sections (f) and (g) exempt from the prohibition
clause wives and minor children of lawful immigrants and
domiciled residents, as also domiciled persons themselves, who
satisfy an Immigration Officer as to their rights whether as wives
and children or as domiciled residents.
Does this Clause remove the ordinary jurisdiction of the courts
of law? And, if it does not, to what extent, if any, is the juris-
diction of the courts ousted [?] Will the decisions of Immigration
Officers be subject to appeal in the same manner as those of
magistrates' courts? Is the exemption clause in any way
affected by Section 7 2?
2. Several British Indians are today in Natal or the Cape by
reason of their having passed the education tests under the
immigration laws of the respective Provinces.
In what way are they protected under the Bill? Do they be-
come both domiciled and entitled to reside in their respective
Provinces by reason of their having entered them by passing the
education test, or are they protected only because their rights
have not been taken away specifically by the Bill ?
3. What is the position of those who entered Natal or the Cape
by passing the education test, but who are at present temporarily
absent from their respective Provinces?
4. The present laws provide for the protection of the rights of those
who are domiciled in the respective Provinces, but the Bill
protects the rights of those only who are both domiciled and
entitled to reside in the Union or any Province.
What is the exact meaning of the additional, if any, restriction
imposed by the clause underlined?
5. Section 7 says that the person referred to therein may at any
time be required to pass that (that is, the education )test.
Could a man who has once, after the passing of the Bill, passed
the education test, be challenged again, although he may prove
that he has passed the test?
Is a person who passes the test under the Bill liable to be
examined again upon passing from one Province to another,
although he may be in a position to prove that he has already,
upon entering the Union, passed the test?
6. Section 25 of the Bill gives the Minister discretion to issue a
permit to any person who is lawfully resident in the Union
desiring to absent himself therefrom.
What will be the position of those who fail to take out such
permits? Will it be enough protection for them if, rather than
take out these permits, they, for instance, appear before a Notary
Public, make a declaration as to their residence and then leave,
and, on return, submit the declaration filed in the protocol of
the Notary in proof of their right of domicile and residence?
7. Section 28 of the Bill, sub-section 2: those who enter the Free
State by passing the education test are subject in all respects
to the provisions of Articles 7 and 8 of Chapter 33 of the
Orange Free State Constitution.
Now Section 8 provides, among other things, that those who
are permitted by the State President to settle in the State shall
make and sign a sworn declaration before the Landdrost to whom
they make the application in which they shall declare that they
will neither directly nor indirectly carryon a commercial
business, etc. Could such a declaration be required from
immigrants entering the Free State Province under the new
Bill.
8. Will Counsel please generally compare the present Bill with the
laws it replaces, and state how far in other respects it is more
restrictive of the liberty of the subject?
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5626-
