463. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 25/28, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got on Tuesday the mail posted by you. Parvati's letter
moves one to pity. If Budhabhai will not listen, what can you
do? I am intentionally not writing to Parvati. Comfort her as
much as you can. When you wish me to write to both or one
of them, I will do so.
I see from Kusum's letter that you have to carry a fairly heavy
burden of work these days. Whatever the demands of work, you
should take enough sleep and snatch at least half an hour's rest
in the afternoon. It is good that Rajaji has come over as also Mira-
behn. I felt very happy. Why is it necessary for Amina to avoid
milk, ghee and sugar? What is she suffering from? I expect the
women there look after her properly. I hope you had understood
that the letter for Ba which I sent last week was to be delivered
to her after she was released. I had got an impression that she was
to be released in a day or two. Will Parvati Patki now live in
Khamgaon permanently? It was rather amusing that you did not
easily follow what I had written about the letter from Italy. That
happens sometimes.
If we can now spin fine yarn, the spinning-wheels, spindles
and slivers are much more responsible for success than our own
effort. Now that all of us are trying to spin yarn of fine count, there
should be no slivers of inferior quality in the Ashram. Does
every spinner use slivers made by himself, or do the slivers get
mixed up? I think if everyone would spin with his own slivers,
the quality of carding would improve very much. If we make fine
yarn as defined by us the centre round which everything else
should revolve, every process from the sowing of cotton seeds to
the weaving of the cloth is bound to become perfect. We shall
then have to evolve the best quality seeds, improve the soil, look
to the quality of the manure, pay careful attention to the manner
of separating the cotton from the pods, and so on. Fine yarn
means yarn uniformly of not less than 40 counts, which would
stand comparison with good mill yarn of the same count and from
which a weaver can weave cloth with ease. I chose the figure of 40
in this definition because it is possible to spin yarn of lower count
than that with some effort from slivers of inferior quality, but not
yarn of 40 counts. Please let me know what inconvenience you
think one feels in the posture in which one has to sit for spinning
on the Gandiva spinning-wheel. According to me, one of the many
excellences of this wheel is that you can spin on it while sitting
in any position. One can sit on a chair or a stool, put the spin-
ning-wheel on a box or a bench and spin. You can keep it to your
left or right, or even in front. When travelling in a train, I put
it on the same berth on which I sit and spin. There will be no
harm if Chhakkaddas's slivers arrive after some time. If you
have not sent Keshu's slivers before you send Chhakkaddas's, you
may send the two together with a sign to identify Keshu's.
What is the count of the yarn which Abbas spins? Please let me
know the length and circumference of his spindle. You need not
worry if you cannot spin yarn of more than 20-22 counts. I would
be satisfied with the quality of yarn that you can spin with the
best slivers and the thinnest spindle.
I did not receive the Anantapur report even during this week.
Who has signed the receipt which you have got? You may tell
Paras ram what you consider necessary. Why did Pyarelal leave
in such haste? Padma must send details of miscellaneous expen-
ses. Read the letter which I have written to her. What you have
written to Mahavir's uncle is quite correct. I was glad to learn
that Jivanlal's brother's wife had come there. Has she had any
education?
Your question about the Dattatreya temple is good. I don't
look upon the shrine as a temple. I think that it is a form of a sama-
dhi In any case, it cannot be used as a public temple. I am
also not inclined to make it a private temple, though it seems to
me that, if somebody goes and worships at the shrine, he cannot
be forbidden. Please find out and let me know what Panditji
believes and what he desires that we should do. Has any issue
been raised about this matter just now?
Who wrote to you and suggested that some amount should
be kept with Trivedi ? There are now very few women left in the
jail here. Trivedi would not like our keeping any such amount
with him. If, however, you think it necessary, you may do that
with his consent. I don't see any necessity of it. If at any time
we specially require something, we can write to the Ashram, and,
if we require it urgently, I would feel no hesitation even in ob-
taining it from Trivedi. Probably Ramabehn, Vasumati and
others are there now. Know their views also.
Read my letter to Liladhar. Do only what you think right.
Whose idea was the exhibition at Rajkot? Was the entire burden
on Jamnadas?
August 26, 1932
If the discharge from Manjula's ear persists, consult Dr.
Talwalkar and try the remedy which he advises. Ask Agam Giri
a straight question, whether he is dissatisfied in any way with the
Giri family, or whether he has any suggestion to make. Does
Mahavir write to you regularly? To me he does not. When
he had complaints to make, he wrote frequently enough.
August 27, 1932
Kaka has been transferred to the prison there. Apply for
permission to see him. I have written to Ba directly this time.
I don't believe that she can have lost 16 pounds of weight.
If
she lost so much weight, she would become a mere skeleton.
Have you seen her? Make a more careful inquiry. How much
milk does she consume? What other food does she eat?
Send to the Superintendent by registered post the postal
acknowledgement for the registration of the Anantapur report.
Keep with you a copy of the acknowledgement. When you send
it, inform me too. I have still not got these papers.
See my letter to Indu. There seems to be some estrangement
between him on the one hand and Kanu, Mangala and Nirmala
on the other. Please inquire what the matter is. Indu has be-
come eager to learn English. Personally, I think it would be wise
to let him occupy his mind in learning English if he studies no-
thing else.
I got your letter of the 25th posted separately. When you say
four heads of cattle, do you mean cows or bullocks? What was
1 Prof. Jaishankar P. Trivedi of Poona Agricultural College, who usually
supplied the needs of the Ashram members lodged in the Yeravda Central Prison
the loss? What were the injections, and for what were they
given? You did right in asking Narayanappa to leave. We
have endured much from him. It seems that Bhagwanji was right
in his judgment. But I don't believe that we made a mistake in
trusting Narayanappa. A person in a responsible position ought
not to disqualify anybody on someone's word, unless he is himself
convinced. Our policy had this good result, that Narayanappa
has now disqualified himself.
I hope Kusum is not nervous in the slightest degree. There is
no reason at all to become nervous.
The ceremonial reading of holy works on the Janmashtami
day was very well done. What is the number in the Ashram just
now? How many are women, and how many men? How many
are boys and girls under sixteen? And how many labourers?
August 28, 1932
Read Nimu's letter and persuade her to start eating ghee.
Ramdas's argument is correct. There has been no change in my
food - bajri, bananas, almonds, oranges and green vegetables.
Constipation has disappeared completely. In other respects also
the health is good. Even then, I will certainly start taking milk
and see the effect. I want to find out whether bajri helps in
preventing constipation in spite of my taking milk. I also see
that green vegetables play a big part in helping complete evacua-
tion.
Take the necessary steps immediately to see that the slivers
made are of the finest quality. You need not worry if there is
decrease in the quantity of slivers for some time, but pay your
attention to ensuring that the work is neat and careful and the
slivers are of the best quality, and that there is minimum waste.
There are 54 letters in all.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8247. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
