460. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
ABBOTTABAD,
July 13, 1939
MY DEAR IDIOT,
If your letter had not been received today, I would have
wired. I was impatient to know the cause of the long silence—
long for you. I am glad Dalip is on the mend. You will have
to come to Segaon to get strong. I hope from here my way will
be to Segaon without a break.
I do wish you will firmly cancel Sangli no matter how insis-
tent Tai is. You must tell her you are under treatment which
must not be interrupted. You must give the doctor a chance.
Yes, you may go to Jaipur on your way to Segaon. That
may be considered when my movement is fixed. Except Talcher
there is nothing on the horizon to keep me from Segaon.
We wish systems to die, not their authors or victims. We
must hope whilst there is life. If I suddenly lost my head, you
won't wish for me to die but you will pray that I may regain my
sanity and live. Does this answer your question? Recall what I
said about Dyer.
The information you give me about the States and Travan-
core is interesting and instructive.
I sent you yesterday Balvantsinha's letter. I have heard
again from the Sardar Bahadur in reply to my own letter. He
says the very fact of my sending Balvantsinha would [be] suffi-
cient charge for his board and lodging. Is this Punjabi courtesy or
Sikh courtesy or personal to him? This was in reply to my
offer of payment.
Ba and company are due tomorrow. Ba was impatient to come.
She was detained only because I would not bring out Sushila,
leaving Pyarelal alone. And Ba could not be brought along without
Sushila. I could not attend to her personally and she does need
medical adjustment every now and then and she has taken to
Sushila. Ba is not bringing Kanam this time. He will be left
with his maternal uncle. Nirmala is likely to go to Wardha soon.
In that case of course Kanam will join here. Now comes an
interruption.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3928. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7237
