252. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
BIHAR SHARIF,
August 13 [1921]
I have your two letters. Seeing that the whole movement
has been conceived in a spirit of service of the poor, I am not
likely to go wrong about the burning. To me it seems utterly
degrading to throw foreign cloth in the face of the poor because
we have no longer any use for it, that cloth which has brought
pauperism to the land and reduced thousands of women to a life
of shame. Not even the poor will understand a sudden manifesta-
tion of pity for them in the shape of silk kerchiefs, flimsy saris and
flimsier shirts, not to speak of thousands of stinking caps. The
central point in burning is to create an utter disgust with ourselves
that we have thoughtlessly decked ourselves at the expense of the
poor. Yes, I see nothing wrong in making it a sin to wear cloth
that has meant India's degradation and slavery. What I am
trying to do just now is to perform a surgical operation with a
hand that must not shake. I would respect the wonderful love
put into cloth prepared by a sister in Europe but I could not
even then reconcile myself to the use of forbidden cloth even as
one must not take at the hands of one's mother indigestible food
given in ignorant love. Lady Roberts sent me what she thought
was a preparation possessing the qualities of milk but which was
said not to have been made from cow's milk. As soon as I dis-
covered that it was made from milk, I wrote to her and asked to
be relieved from having to take it. She not only saw the point
but apologized for the mistake. The fact is I look upon life as one
of discipline and restraints. These things are often caricatured as
in the tortures that the so-called yogis go through. But in their
essence they will stand the closest scrutiny. You cannot have an
adequate notion how the people are silently and unconsciously
transferring their hatred of sinners to sin itself. English ladies in
Bombay were warned on the 1st of August. And there was Stokes
and an English nurse on the platform surrounded by no less than
three lacs of men and women. God only knows how the whole
1 Gandhiji was in Bihar Sharif at this time in 1921.
thing is going to shape ultimately. All I know is that many there
are today who are doing it all for love of humanity.
Yes, the money in Petit's hands is mine and yet I have no
control over it. I wish you had told me earlier of his refusal.
I am going to try. Please let me know what Malaviyaji has said.
If you have any difficulty of course you will fall back on me.
What is the final date of your departure?
I had a nice time with Stokes. We were together for about
six days during my travels in the U.P.
I agree with you that we must work against opium just as
much as against drink. I do feel that if the swadeshi programme
is gone through properly and peace and Hindu-Muslim unity persist,
we must get swaraj this year. Opium and such abominations
must then disappear at the very start of the new life.
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 962
