29. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 19, 1908
THE DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
PRETORIA
SIR,
My Association has received a letter in Gujarati from a British Indian
named Syed Ali, who has just undergone imprisonment at Boksburg.
I give below a free translation of the material portion of the letter. It
is dated the 17th instant, and is written from Springs:
I write the following, God between us. On the 19th day of
August, 1908, I was sentenced by the Magistrate to pay a fine of
10[s] or suffer imprisonment for seven days with hard labour for
trading without a licence. I accepted gaol. When I was admitted,
a Kaffir came to me and asked me to strip myself naked. I did
so. I was then made to walk, in that condition, barefoot, some
distance. I was then kept, together with Kaffirs, in cold water,
for twentyfive minutes. I was then taken out and taken to an office.
I was then given some clothes to wear, but I did not get any
sandals. I, therefore, asked the gaoler for some. At first, he said
'no', and then he gave me torn sandals. I asked for socks, and he
used abusive language (untranslatable).
I asked again, and he
said 'Look here, I will sjambok you.' I was then frightened and,
had I spoken again, he would certainly have struck me.
On the 20th August, the work given to me was that of carrying
and emptying closet buckets. I complained to the gaoler about
this work, and I received a kick and slaps. I still persisted in my
complaint, and told him that I would be glad to break stones but
would like to be relieved from the work of carrying and emptying
these buckets. I was then kicked again. I became helpless and I
had to carry those buckets.
On the 22nd August, Saturday, I was again kept in cold water
for nearly half an hour. It was extremely cold. I was shivering.
God knows how cold it was. I then became feverish. My chest
became bad. On the 25th, I was discharged. The gaoler, on
discharging, said 'You may come again, if you wish to die' and
I retorted, 'All right, you may kill me if you can.' I then returned
to Springs by the 11 o'clock train. And ever since I have been ill,
and I have been discharging blood from the chest, and am under
medical advice. . . .
I was treated worse than Kaffir prisoners. Happily, I was
the only Indian. I thank God that I was spared. All my book-
debts have become bad, but I do not care. I hope the community
will be able to preserve its self-respect.
My Association does not know how far the above statement is true,
but, on the face of it, in my humble opinion, it calls for a thorough
investigation, which I have no doubt you will make. In the meanwhile,
I venture to inform the Government through you that, assuming the
truth of the above statement, the advice given by my Association is,
despite all difficulties, to continue to suffer for what it believes to be
a principle.
I may add that the correspondent, as his name implies, is a direct
descendant of the Prophet, and I need hardly comment upon the
resentment that would be bitterly felt by Mahomedans, when they
1 Meaning "to flog with a whip of rhinoceros hide"
understand that such a person has been called upon to perform the
dirtiest work at the Boksburg gaol.
I have, etc.,
A. M. CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Rand Daily Mail, 21-9-1908
