69. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Vaishakh Vad 10 [May 30, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS 2 ,
Once again, I have not been able to write to you as I had
hoped to, so busy I keep. Since I have had two letters from you,
I write this. I shall not be able to write much, though.
I find no harsh words in your letter.
I don't see how you can join the struggle, since neither Magan-
lal nor anyone else from here can go [to India]. Chhaganlal or
Maganlal will write to you about all these matters. I should cer-
tainly like you to be with us. But how can we always get what
we want?
I return herewith the relevant part of your letter, with your
questions serially numbered, so that I have less to write and yet
you could follow [the answers].
1. [If there is no God, how can there be moksha? What is the meaning of
moksha ?]
To ask how there can be moksha if there is no God is to fail to
understand moksha. We can grasp only a part of the meaning of
moksha; the rest must be experienced; it cannot be put into words.
We have no organs with which to describe it. In so far as we
can understand, it means deliverance from having to assume
an endless succession of various bodies, and from the resultant
suffering. There is no need, however, to deny the existence of
God. We may try to define God in accordance with the limits of
our knowledge.
At any rate, God is no dispenser of rewards and
punishments, nor is He an active agent. But, if one atman can
be conceived after the embodied atmans have become free, it is God.
He is no material thing, but pure consciousness. This is also the
view of the advaitavadins. At no time and in no circumstances do
we need a kinglike God. By thinking that we do, we put a limit
to the power of the atman, which is infinite.
2. The same distorted meanings, and as many of them, have been
and are being read in the Bible as in any other holy book.
Those who level charges against Tolstoy are ignorant. I do not
know the truth about Marie Corelli. But to describe her as a
witch is sheer ignorance.
3. [What should I do if, though I would not injure a cow and have never
done so, I am attacked by one even when I am not in her way? What could
be the reason for my being thus attacked?]
If we are attacked by a cow, it must be because we fear cows
and other creatures and so the fault is ours. All fear is of the
nature of a moral weakness and, so long as we are subject to it,
we shall always have to face such misfortunes. While we fear
cows, we should take care not to stand in the way of any. If
accidentally we find ourselves doing so, we should put up with the
injuries. By hitting the cow, we shall do no service to ourselves or
to her.
4. [How can one say that a tiger will not kill a man living in his den with
out fear?]
A tiger will never eat up a man who, on occasion, lives in his
den without any fear whatever. In what circumstances he might
do so, would need to be considered.
5. I do not in the least approve of the European custom in regard
to marriages. When a young man is to be married, wisdom lies
in the parents choosing [the bride]. This is true for any young
man, even a man of 25 or older. Of course, the parents will con-
sult him.
6. [Did or did not Dharmaraja 3 commit a sin in declaring that Ashvatthama
was killed? Why did Lord Krishna advise him to say this?]
The only lesson I draw is that even a Dharmaraja may stum-
ble, so that we too should be on our guard. If we believe that a
Shri Krishna in the body advised a Yudhisthira in the body, there
is no harm in conceding that Shri Krishna was not perfect. If
we look upon Shri Krishna as the Supreme Being, the entire epi-
sode will have to be interpreted symbolically. One will then read
in it a meaning which accords with one's moral principles. The
shastras need not be regarded as infallible. We will never go
wrong if, having got hold of the inviolable principles of morality,
we interpret the shastras in the light of these principles and then
are guided by them.
7. [Is it necessary that there should be only one religion for the whole
world?]
Personally, I think the world as a whole will never have, and
need not have, a single religion.
8. There is no such rule that all wholesome foods can be taken
irrespective of one's condition. Food which is wholesome for a
labourer cannot be so for a tubercular patient.
I have no more time now, but this answers one of your
letters. You have committed many grammatical mistakes in the
letter to Miss Schlesin. I asked Chhaganlal to keep a copy. If he
has done so, I shall correct and return it.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5646
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
