399. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
August 25, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,
Yes, I have recovered from the effects of the fast in the sense
that there is no untoward consequence. I am steadily but slowly
regaining strength.
I have no desire to have a meeting of the Working Committee.
But, if it is needed by the Parliamentary Board, I have no doubt
that Sardar Vallabhbhai will call it. But have you need for it?
I have a telegram from Maulana Saheb and Sardar Sardul Singh
who evidently desire a meeting of the Working Committee at the
same time as the Parliamentary Board meeting. If such is also
your feeling, then of course the Working Committee must meet.
I am loath to be dragged to Bombay just now. Jamnalalji from
his sick-bed has been warning me not to leave Wardha before I
have reached 110 lb. I am now 98 lb. and I am gaining at the
rate of less than ½ lb. a day. Supposing that I keep up that pace,
it would not be before the 20th September that I can leave
Wardha. But of course Jamnalalji is exacting and he can be over-
ruled if both the meetings must take place in Bombay, and that
in the early part of September and if my presence is a necessity.
All these things I leave to you to decide and then move Sardar
Vallabhbhai accordingly.
Of course the appropriation of the name 'Congress' by
Panditji's party is a bad job. No one can act in the name of
the Congress without due authority. I believe Sardar Vallabhbhai
would be issuing a statement 1 in the matter. You must have seen
the brief statement that I have issued.
I hope you do not want the Working Committee to lay down
the procedure at the present stage to be followed by Congressmen
in the Assembly. If an amendment of the character you describe is
brought before the meeting just now I think it would be better not
to say anything. But the Parliamentary Board is the best judge
to decide as to what is necessary. But should an amendment be
moved, you have correctly interpreted my own opinion as to
the clear duty of Congress members.
They must vote against a
resolution or amendment accepting the Award. And since they
cannot vote for rejection, naturally they must abstain from voting
in regard to a resolution or amendment rejecting the Award.
I am glad that so many districts had undisputed elections.
I wish the rest of the districts would follow the good example
set by the overwhelming majority of the districts. But if a fight
is inevitable, I think that the decisions of Mr. Aney should be
loyally followed.
Yours sincerely,
DR. BIDHAN CHANDRA Roy
CALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
