22. LETTER TO THE SECRETARY, A.I.S.A.
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 19, 1927
DEAR SIR,
With reference to the collections made in Benares, it is quite
correct to state that they were all made for the Gandhi Ashram,
Benares. They should therefore have the whole amount not as a
loan but as a grant. It ought to appear in our books because
the collection was responsibly made. It should be entered as ear-
marked for Gandhi Ashram, Benares, and there would be no need
to get the sanction from the Council for the grant.
As to Laxmi Behn and Harjivan, my opinion is that the
whole thing should be left to Rajendra Babu to manage, such
help being given to him as he may require for facilitating the
execution of his decision. This thing may be further discussed
when we meet.
As to Gulbarga collection, I am conferring with Gangadhar-
rao. But the position generally is this. Whilst it is convenient for
us to know from which province collections have been received,
all these collections are on behalf of the Association. If the idea
is that the whole of the Maharashtra collections should be neces-
sarily spent for Maharashtra, and that other provincial collections
should be similarly treated, the doctrine is untenable. And I
made it clear during the tour at all the places where the question
was raised that whilst the places at which the amounts were
collected will be borne in mind at the time of considering the al-
location of funds, the Association could not undertake necessarily
to spend funds in the place where they have been collected. It is
therefore a matter of little importance what description is given to
the entry of Gulbarga collections in our books. Theoretically, it
is open to the Association to spend the whole of the Maharashtra
collection, say in Orissa and vice versa. That it would be gross
abuse of authority and that such abuse would break the Associa-
tion is also true. But I mention this merely to illustrate my mean-
ing and to show that so far as ledger entry is concerned, It is a
matter of no moment where a particular collection comes from.
Yours sincerely,
THE SECRETARY
ALL-INDIA SPINNERS' ASSOCIATION
AHMEDABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 19782
