136. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
August 19, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
In honouring by a leaderette what you please to call my "scheme"
with reference to the Asiatic Law Amendment Act, you have done it
and me less than justice by studying it superficially. By admitting the
clauses, as per my draft, into the Immigration Bill, the Government get
the legal right to recall every permit and, in place thereof, to issue certi-
ficates of domicile to every bona fide Asiatic resident of the Transvaal.
What form such certificates should take has, if you will re-read my
draft, been left to the Government to fix by regulation. The question,
therefore, of finger-prints is not made an issue at all nor, so far as I am
concerned, has it ever been a fundamental point, the main objection
being against the compulsion and the odour of criminality about the
Act. The draft submitted by me would enable the Government to as-
certain the exact number of Asiatics entitled to claim domiciliary
rights in the Colony and such Asiatics would be completely identified.
What the draft does leave out are the elaborate machinery and the
penalties provided in the Asiatic Registration Act, and it leaves children
under the age of 16 free from molestation, and avoids the pin-prick
inspection, with the power to take, at every street corner, identification
particulars contemplated by the Registration Act. But I submit that
any surreptitious entry on the part of children is completely checked
by reason of the provision that, on attaining the age of 16 years, they
must also take out certificates of domicile, and by stating on the certi-
ficates of domicile the number of children under 16 years. But, if my
scheme be considered faulty, the principle of embodying identification
legislation in the Immigration Bill can hardly be so considered, and
any defects that I may have overlooked can be remedied. The question,
therefore, still remains whether the public will take sufficient interest in
the welfare of Indian subjects of His Majesty to seriously study the
alternative proposed.
With reference to the other portion of your leaderette I can only
say that, if an honourable status be [not] guaranteed to my country-
men, no matter how humble they may be, imprisonment, deportation,
and any other similar calamity would be comparatively a boon as
against a surrender of their self-respect and a reversal of their solemn
declaration. Of one thing I can give an emphatic assurance, namely,
that there is not a single Indian who does not dislike the Act from the
bottom of his heart. I know most of those who have accepted registra-
tion under the Act in Pretoria, and I know this that they admit having
committed a crime against their nationality and their God, but they
have done so because, in their own words, they prized their pockets
more than their honour.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 20-8-1907
1 This read: " . . . The grave blunder that Mr. Gandhi and his fellow-leaders
have made has been in supposing that there was no limit to the length to which
British Liberals could be induced to go in support of tactics borrowed from the English
Radical Nonconformists. Now that he has discovered his mistake, we trust he will
retire from an untenable position, or at any rate leave the uncultured section of his
countrymen to determine their future course of action according to their own common
sense. Should the majority of them decide to set the law at defiance and bear the
consequence—including the surrender of their trading rights—the Transvaal Govern-
ment will be legally and morally guiltless. . . . "
2 This is in the Indian Opinion version, obviously an omission here.
