125. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Bhadarva Sud 1 [August 25, 1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
Received your letter regarding Polak.
The letter I had addressed to you from Phoenix has been
returned to me as, through a slip, I had left the address incomplete.
It is worth reading and I still want the same thing that I had asked
for in that letter. Hence I send it as it is.
I do not think Polak will become an Anglo-Indian out and
out. You are right in what you say about his nature. He is hot-
tempered. But he is a milch cow. His heart is absolutely frank
and he is unswerving in his duty. Praise is everyone's enemy;
how, then, can it be otherwise with him? But I do not so much
as suspect that he would be corrupted by praise. He is as honest
as he is frank. Maybe the words honest and frank are synonymous.
How can we believe that such men can go astray? Even supposing
that the thing does happen, I for one have no fear. He has done
us [good] service. If, after this, he breaks away, he will sacrifice
the bond [of friendship]. We, on our part, shall have nothing to
lose, for the basis [of our relationship] is one-sided. We have
dealings with a person so long as he seems truthful in speech and
conduct. Such association cannot but be profitable to us. If he
changes subsequently, the loss will be his, not ours. This has been
my experience during the entire campaign. Call to mind the in-
stances of Ally and others. You will not be right if you say that
the money and love I spent on them have been wasted. The money
could have been collected only for that purpose, and he worked
sincerely enough for the money that was spent [on him]. We had
nothing but gain at the time from Ally's association with us.
Later on in your letter you add that you have made up with
Polak. The foregoing comments, however, stand, and the views
you expressed were certainly worth knowing about.
I also believe that India can have no direct benefit from the
Races Congress. The only indirect benefit could be that . . .2
So long as he does it with an eye on . . . there can be no
bond of brotherhood with him. Selfishness and friendship have
always frowned on each other. I do not think there is brotherhood
among the English either. They too have learnt to follow the
policy of self-interest. "Honesty is the best policy" sounds a wicked
maxim to me. It images their conception of morality. This
criticism applies to the common behaviour of men. They [, how-
ever,] do have among themselves selfless people like Polak (according
to me). Their behaviour is not influenced by self-interest.
As you have said something about Polak, he has also given
me an account of the same incident. I see from that letter also
that Polak spoke to you frankly.
I believe I tore up [the report of] your speech, expecting that
I would get the full text from Natesan. Now it can be [published]
only if you have a copy and send it to me. I am writing to ask
that translations from Natesan's [book] be stopped for the present.
I destroy all your letters after reading them. I did give a
general idea of your views to Kallenbach and Polak. I hope, I
did not do anything improper.
Pray do not hesitate to write to me because I happen to be
busy night and day.
I have not read Mrs. Besant's speeches.
I did not see Gujarati's comments on your article. If any
other comments have appeared, they have not reached me. If
more appear in future, I shall get them, and the Gujarati's comments
will also be here. They are due only now.
I read something from Kavyadohan to the children at night.
I finished the story of Prahlad yesterday. The ideas so common
among us, which it faithfully reflects, are rarely to be found among
English books reputedly great.
I am sure you will see to it that Chhagan reads such books.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5628. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
