220. LETTER TO SWAMI SHRADDHANAND
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 17, 1919
DEAR SHRADDHANANDJI,
I write this in English as Mr. Shuaib desires that I should
do so for the sake of the company before which it is to be read.
The questions to which I am required to reply may be before
you. I shall, therefore, only refer to the numbers.
To question No. 1, my answer is—non-satyagrahis who join
satyagraha demonstrations must for the occasion subscribe to the
rules of satyagraha. They are, therefore, bound to refrain from
retaliation under the gravest provocation. For the occasion in
which non-satyagrahis participate, there can be no distinction bet-
ween satyagrahis and non-satyagrahis. Non-satyagrahis can only
join if they give an undertaking that, for the particular occasion
on which we seek their association, they will subscribe to our doct-
rine. I, therefore, hold that we are just as responsible for the
action of non-satyagrahis when they act with us as we are for
our own. I think it will be evident to you that without this under-
standing, satyagraha can easily be smothered by non-satyagraha.
You cannot have a combination of non-compatibles without an
explosion.
My answer to question No. 2 is really to be inferred from the
foregoing. I think we must apply to ourselves the ordinary rule
of law more strictly because we are satyagrahis. That a man is
to be presumed to have intended the consequences that can reason-
ably be proved to have followed from his conduct. I think that I
at least should have foreseen some of the consequences, specially
in view of the gravest warnings that were given to me by friends
whose advice I have always sought and valued. But I confess
that I am dense. I am not joking. So many friends have told me
that I am incapable of profiting by other people's experiences and
that in every case I want to go through the fire myself and
learn only after bitter experience. There is exaggeration in this
charge, but there is also a substance of truth in it. This denseness
in me is at once a weakness and a strength. I could not have
remained a satyagrahi had I not cultivated the quality of stub-
born resistance and such resistance can only come from experience
and not from inference. Pursuit of truth is any day a dangerous
occupation. It is much more so when you are working as we
have to work in an atmosphere surcharged with untruth and all the
weaknesses that follow from it. You will now understand why I
consider that we are responsible for the happenings in Delhi and
Bombay not very serious from our standpoint, and the very serious
and discreditable events in Ahmedabad and Viramgam. I acquit
ourselves of all blame so far as the happenings in the Punjab out-
side Delhi are concerned. They would have taken place without
satyagraha, if Drs. Satyapal and Kitchlew had been arrested on
any other occasion. I would, however, add that the events in the
Punjab give us an indication as to our future course.
My answer to question No. 3 is also involved in the answer
to No. 1. My answers are really inherent in the movement.
Satyagraha means all I have said and nothing less. Without the
conditions I have spoken of, it is impossible to ensure success.
Answer to No. 4: Did you get the full text of my speech?
You will see there the meaning of what I have said as to the possi-
ble abandonment. The movement can never be abandoned in
the sense you have understood it. But our satyagraha may have
to take, as it has already taken in Ahmedabad, such a turn that
in popular language it will mean an abandonment. But we shall
never be guilty of suicide—moral or political—because here we
have already begun what you have advised. We have as yet not
even postponed the breaking of all the laws selected by the com-
mittee, but my seeking re-arrest by trying to enter Delhi has been
postponed. We are now giving instruction in satyagraha in a
most active form, of course, openly, both in Bombay and Ahmedabad,
and the workers are hoping that they will be able to bring the
masses in a disciplined control in a short time. It may be necessary
from what I have heard today to go a step further and suspend
breach of all laws until we are sure of an atmosphere in which
we can work. I hope to issue a statement for publication as soon
as I reach Bombay. That would be tomorrow (Friday). There
is one item of serious news from Bombay. Mr. Jamnadas writes
to say that at a meeting of Mahomedan friends which I was to
address, but which I could not as I was suddenly called away
to Ahmedabad, he gathered that the Mahomedan friends conceived
satyagraha merely as a weapon of the weak. They said that
immediately they got the opportunity, they would certainly not refrain
from violence. This to my mind is a dangerous attitude. Talking
in terms of politics and not of satyagraha, it seems to me that no
movement of violence can possibly succeed here so as to restore
to Islam what it is entitled to, whereas real satyagraha, if it per-
meates the masses, can do so in a day. Such is my unshakable
conviction.
No. 5 : I think the question is variously answered in the fore-
going paragraphs.
A letter was posted to you yesterday, giving full replies to the
one received from you yesterday. I may sum up the advice
tendered in that letter. Suspend civil disobedience until, in the
opinion of your committee, the time has arrived for offering it, and
work incessantly amongst the population and by all acts of service
inspire them with faith in satyagraha.
From a photostat: S. N. 6546
