255. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
AMRAOTI,
(AS AT WARDHA)
November 16, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I had your long letter.
I see that you are ever thinking of Andrews as a good
mother would think of her son, looking after him and anticipat-
ing his wants and protecting him from all harm. You are quite
right in saying that without some such care his anxiety complex
overtakes him and he then suffers, and his work with him.
Nevertheless, if you feel that for more efficient work you should
come to India for a month or two, you should not hesitate. In
this, both he and I agreed, but he is there on the spot and you
will do what you think proper after consultation with him and
other friends. Not that at the present moment any substantial work
can be done. Sir Samuel Hoare has made up his mind about
everything. He believes in his 'mission'. He almost thinks that
we are incapable of looking after our own affairs or even know-
ing what is good for us. He will not let us make mistakes. The im-
mediate needs of the Britishers blind him to the realities. I
feel that, in these circumstances, friends over there can do very
little beyond watching, waiting and praying. We must look
after ourselves, and if we succeed in demonstrably helping our-
selves, you over there will be able to do substantial work.
Hijli affair seems to have been satisfactorily settled. I sup-
pose I am right in presuming that my very simple letter to the
Governor of Bengal had its effect.
It may be said that the funeral ceremony over the remains
of Vithalbhai Patel passed off fairly well. So far as the public
were concerned they demonstrated in an unmistakable manner
what they stood for. The procession is described in Anglo-Indian
papers to have been at least a mile long. The whole of Bombay
turned out to do honour to the memory of the deceased. They
identified themselves with the cause for which he stood, viz.,
India's unadulterated Independence, not of association with Bri-
tain but undoubtedly of the slightest control. That the people
are today helpless and unable to help themselves does not affect
232
their mentality. They know what they want and they seize every
occasion that offers to them to let the world know their mind.
I wish you would succeed in bringing Subhas Bose to Eng-
land.
I am dictating this during the few minutes that I have at
my disposal before motoring away to the next destination. I know
you had last week an accurate letter from Chandrashankar
Shukla. I am not going to put the strain on him by sending you
another descriptive letter. The same demonstrations and enthu-
siasm continue unabated. I do feel that untouchability is going
much more swiftly than many may imagine. No less than 1,50,000
people must have taken part in the numerous meetings and demon-
strations. If they did not want to endorse the movement, one
would think that they could not possibly have attended in such
large numbers. They know that at the present moment I am
touring solely in regard to untouchability, and that no poli-
tical mission is mixed up with it, and yet they attend, and, in spite
of the very hard times we are going through, they give their pices
and their rupees. It is, therefore, sad to think that the Anglo-
Indian papers are seeking to minimize the importance of the tour
and even seeking to discredit it. I wonder if they had telegraphed
to you the so-called egg-throwing incident at Nagpur and the prepa-
rations for boycott in the U.P. I enclose cuttings about the inci-
dent and my very brief reply. Of course, the sanatanists' opposi-
tion is undoubtedly there. But, up till now I have not noticed any
support being given to them by the public at large. The sanatanists
would not have hesitated to damage the movement if they had
any public support worth the name.
More I have not the time
to say. But you must read Harijan as part of my weekly letter.
Distribute it as much as you like, and if you want more copies
you can have them for the asking. And you may take it that
it will hide nothing of the opposition to the movement. I have
refrained from dealing with the egg-throwing question and the
opposition in the U.P., in the pages of the Harijan, first, because
I have dealt with the two things in the public press, and secondly,
because they have no bearing on the movement. They have a
political bearing in the sense that the Anglo-Indian newspapers
are resorting to unscrupulous tactics. But I do not want to
deal with such things in the pages of the Harijan. I want it to
be free from political controversy even though just now I am out
of prison. Immediately I am inside prison walls I may not take
notice of any politics even though they may have profound in-
fluence upon the Harijan movement. And I am trying as much
as it is humanly possible to act as if I was a prisoner. If, how-
ever, you find any omissions in the Harijan or my letters, you
will not hesitate to draw my attention to such omission.
I take it that you will share this letter with the friends who,
you think, should see it.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1474
