58. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[February 11, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
While I was busy looking into the old letters, some more have
arrived from Rohri. Rohri means Sabarmati and Sukkur means
Ahmedabad; here, however, the distance between the two places
is less.
I am surprised to know about Gangabehn being angry. I have
today written separately to her. Such things are bound to happen
from time to time.
I wrote to you about mava in this morning's letter, and now I
read in your letter that neither of them wants it. Anasuyabehn
knows a shop where good mava is sold. You can arrange with its
owner. If you fail in that, let me know. He will surely buy if
you offer it at one anna less than the market rate. There will be
no problem if they buy the milk at Ambalal's place. Neverthe-
less, it is necessary to become familiar with the mava shop.
Yes, that is what Chhotelal is. If you cannot keep him, I
shall not say that you have failed. Those who can retain him
would be occupying a high place even in the "Honours" list.
I have just got up after the midday nap. I dreamt about
you in sleep. You were singing with me. I remarked that you
knew singing quite well. You replied that you certainly did and
that it was only in Ahmedabad that people took no notice of
you. Before you joined the Ashram, you said, you had been thrice
elected president of conferences of poets, and that you had had an
invitation from as far as Srinagar. You added that after you had
joined the Ashram your pride had been humbled and you had
ceased to be regarded as a poet. We laughed at this; the dream
ended there and I awoke.
I for one am sure that we shall not find it convenient to
employ labourers in the Ashram. This practice which we cannot
bring ourselves to end voluntarily now, we shall be eager to end
after bitter experience. Therefore, think again. But do not end
it reluctantly so long as you do not feel that we are strong
enough to do so. It would be all right for the present if you put
some restrictions. I suggest two: (1) that the labourers should
wear khadi, and (2) that we should not exceed the present or any
other fixed number.
I remember Abdullabhai. He must have left by now.
There was a telegram from Motilalji asking me to stay on
[in Delhi] till Tuesday—and to put up at Vithalbhai's. Make a
change, therefore, in the address and add one day.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5563
