29. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
August 17, 1918
CHI. DEVDAS,
I read your two months' report about the Hindi class and was
satisfied. You have come to like the work as if you were born
for it and proved yourself so fit for it that it has become difficult
to replace you. Besides, I cannot imagine that anyone else can do
better. May God keep you firm in your determination. Preserve
your health, and may you live long so that the Madras Presidency
reverberates to the unifying tunes of Hindi, the great gulf which
exists at present between the South and the North disappears and
the people in the two parts become one. Anyone who brings this
about will, through that single achievement, rise to be among the
immortals. May you attain that position. You have the capacity
for this and should not give it up on any account. Increase your
knowledge of Hindi day by day and strengthen your moral charac-
ter. One who is truthful, chaste, who observes the rule of non-
hoarding and is full of compassion and valour will make his power
felt in the whole world. Through it, you will be able to draw
people towards you. You will then find it easy enough to teach
them Hindi. Holding these views, how can I think of sending
you to the war? You are as good as in the war, though working
there. Do not lose patience. It does not matter in the least that
you cannot go to the war. How can I ask the other brothers,
either, to do so? Harilal is no more a brother and Manilal cannot
come; I have written to Ramdas to come, if he can. If you have
not continued the morning prayers and the sandhya start them at
once. Be sure they will be a great support to you. Any person
or nation that discards without sufficient reason a practice coming
down from a distant past loses something of great value. In this
modern age, great oceanic waves are rising above us all; morning
and evening sandhya is the means whereby we may save ourselves
from being submerged by them, if, that is, we understand their
significance and follow the practice intelligently.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
