168. LETTER TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
SEVAGRAM,
March 6, 1942
MY DEAR JAIRAMDAS,
Your long letter is not long enough for the news you have packed
into it. It is all illuminating. I shall keep you to the 1st July. Devibehn
should religiously practise writing Hindi every day even if it is 10 minutes
by the watch. She will find a vast improvement. You know the Persian
characters because Sindhi is written in it with slight changes. Why do
you not write in Urdu then ? In the Ashram here a splendid Urdu
atmosphere has been created. Pyarelal has become the Maulvi. As you
know he is original in many things he does and so he is in teaching
Urdu. The way he imparts Urdu instruction has created special interest
among the inmates and almost all, including little children, attend the
class. Therefore, if you write in Urdu there will be no difficulty in
deciphering your letters. I can but I take time. Pyarelal and Amtul
Salaam are to the manner born. Nevertheless I do not want to put
an undue strain upon your loyalty. Therefore do not exert yourself to
write in Urdu unless you feel the impulse from within.
What you say about the Hurs and Pagaro is most instructive as
also very painful. 1 How are we to make a nation out of this material ? The
problem becomes tremendous from the non-violent standpoint.
What you are doing in the way of constructive work is good. I
am sure your search will result in giving you a village after your liking.
Chandwani is expected here any day between 9th and 15th instant.
Maulana 3 wires to say he is calling a W.C. Meeting on the 17th.
Wardha heat has already commenced. It will be a sorrowful meeting
of the W. C. without Jamnalalji.
Your notes about the questions addressed to you and your answers,
I return. I think your answers are all correct. I cannot improve upon them.
If you can stand the strain of a journey I would certainly like you
to attend the meeting of the A.I.V.I.A.
I hope Premi will pass her exam with distinction.
Mahadev is all right.
Love.
BAPU
From the original : C. W. 11055. Courtesy : Arjun Jairamdas
1 For several months preceding, the Hurs, under the instigation of the Pir of
Pagaro, had been on a rampage, killing, burning and plundering on wholesale scale.
On April 1 Martial Law had to be proclaimed in the areas most affected; vide also
Vol. LXXVI, pp. 122- and ff.
2 P. B. Chandwani
3 Abul Kalam Azad, President of the Indian National Congress
92
