81. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[February 14, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL,
I have your letter. The marriage will be at Akola. The day
has been fixed for Sunday, 6th March. I have to go to Akola
direct from Bombay. I am likely to reach Bombay not earlier
than the 4th. Being a Monday, the 7th will be spent in Akola.
We can leave on the 7th evening and reach the Ashram on the
8th evening or the 9th morning.
I have written to Nanabhai asking him not to put up any
show. He should give the bride not even the most insignificant
jewels. I am giving her nothing. In South Africa, you use foreign
dress with my permission but Sushila need do nothing of the
sort; in her khaddar sari she will look as resplendent as Sita.
Let me know if you want any change in these arrangements. After
you are married you are both free to live as you like. But I
certainly wish that you should give no jewels to Sushila and that
there too she should wear no cloth other than khadi.
The more I think the more I feel that you are going to have
a jewel. My only fear is whether you would be able to take care
of her.
Please keep your passion under control; let her study. The
girl would be helpful in many of your activities. She can even learn
composing. If she tries she can improve her Gujarati but it all
depends upon you whether you would make a doll or a compa-
nion out of her. After all, she is just a child. She does not
know the ways of the world. If, henceforth, you will observe
more restraint than hitherto I see a blissful future for both of
you.
May God grant strength and wisdom to both of you.
Now you can easily go to South Africa in March. You can
make the necessary preparations.
You should start from there on the 4th and meet me in Bom-
bay on the morning of the 5th.
I am writing to Ramdas and Devdas that they may come
along if they want to.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have sent your letter to Sushila. Write nothing to Harilal.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1130. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
