178. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
[JOHANNESBURG,] 2
January 29, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,
I suppose I owe it to your usual courtesy that I am in posses-
sion of a copy of the Gazette Extraordinary containing the Immigration
Bill. I understand that the Central News Agency has not yet got
a supply of this number of the Gazette.
I see that the Bill has been somewhat altered from the copy
that I saw now nearly a month ago. I do not know whether it is
General Smuts' intention to make the changes I have already
submitted are necessary. Sub-Sections(f) and (gp of Section 5
are a complete innovation, and, in my opinion, subversive of princi-
ples of justice. That a man should prove his domicile to the satis-
faction of an Immigration Officer, who may not have a legal training
or ajudicial mind, seems utterly absurd, nor can I see the slightest
reason why he should be the arbiter to decide as to whether a parti-
cular woman, whom I claim to be my wife, and a particular child
whom I claim to be mine are my wife and child or not. This
innovation disturbs the existing legal position.
Similarly, Section 7 will debar educated Indians in the Trans-
vaal, for instance, from entering Natal on passing the existing edu-
cation test. This, again, will disturb the legal position, and will be
a manifest injustice. It is one thing to have an almost impossible
education test for checking oversea immigration, and another thing
to impose that test for interprovincial migration. I draw attention
to the fact that last year's Bill did not disturb the existing position.
Lastly, Section 25, sub-section 2, is an improvement on the
three-year rule that was laid down in the draft you were good
enough to show me. It is still an exceedingly hard requirement.
I do think that those Asiatics in South Africa who are at present
domiciled should be able to claim as a matter of right permanent
certificates of domicile, and not be at the mercy of an Immigration
Officer as to whether they should get such certificates or not. It is
true that the clause is only permissive, and that nobody is bound
to take out certificates, but its effect would certainly be to practi-
cally compel, especially the poorer class of Asiatics, to go a-begging
for these certificates, and then take with them documents fixing
an arbitrary period of absence.
I do hope, therefore, that these three points will be satisfactorily
settled. Whilst I have conferred with a number of my associates,
I have not taken any public action yet and I do not propose to
take any until I hear from you as to General Smuts' intention. Will
you please, if you conveniently can, wire whether the points raised
by me will be favourably considered by General Smuts.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
PS.
After signing my letter to you, I re-read Chapter 33 of the
O. F. S. Laws. I see that sub-section 2 of Section 281 [of the
Union immigration bill] is somewhat differently worded from what
it was originally intended to be last year. Whilst those immig-
rants who by passing the education test may enter the Free State
should suffer from the disability to have fixed property registered
in their name or to carry on a commercial business or farming,
they should certainly not have to make the sworn declaration contem-
plated in Section 8 By reading the latter part of Section 8, you
will understand exactly what I mean.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5601
