549. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
May [18]1, 1932
DEAR COLONEL DOYLE,
Major Bhandari told me today that he was instructed
to prohibit Shrimati Mirabai (Slade) from seeing me, should she
desire to do so. As it so happened, she having been discharged
from Arthur Road Jail yesterday came today to see me. It would
have been courteous if she had been previously informed by Gov-
ernment that she would not be allowed to see me. But that is
perhaps a small matter. What is of the highest concern for me is
that of all the Ashram people Mirabai should be singled out for the
prohibition, whereas hitherto she has never been prohibited from
seeing me. I have always been under an impression, and have been
grateful, that the Government had tacitly recognized not merely
the fact of Mirabai being an inmate of the Ashram, but being
nearer to me than an Ashram inmate, if such a thing was possible.
I may mention that she is under strict instructions not to take an
active part in the present political movement and not deliberately
to seek imprisonment. Her activity has been confined purely to
conducting the constructive khadi movement and reporting to
friends in the West the present political happenings. If these be
a disqualification, there is hardly a person whom I should be able
to see.
If therefore I cannot see Mirabai, I do not know how far I
would be justified in availing myself of the permission to receive
other visitors. Needless to say that I do not discuss politics with
Mirabai or any other visitor, nor have I the slightest desire, even
if it was possible for me, to direct the movement from within pri-
son walls. All interviews take place in the presence of the Superin-
tendent. If therefore the Government have any regard for my
feelings or Mirabai's, I hope that they will reconsider their decision
and permit her to visit me as before.
Will you kindly place this letter before the Government and
request an early decision?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (2), Pt. I, p. 95
