361. LETTER TO MRS. E. BJERRUM
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
May 11, 19281
I must try to answer your questions today.
What you say about prayer at the Ashram is largely true.
It is still a formal thing, soulless; but I continue it in the hope of it
becoming a soulful thing. Human nature is much the same whether
in the East or in the West. It does not therefore surprise me
that you have not found anything special about prayers in the
East and probably the Ashram prayer is a hotchpot of something
Eastern and something Western. As I have no prejudice against
taking anything good from the West or against giving up anything
bad in the East, there is an unconscious blending of the two. For
a congregational life a congregational prayer is a necessity and,
therefore, form also is necessary. It need not be considered on that
account to be hypocritical or harmful. If the leader at such
congregational prayer meetings is a good man the general level
of the meeting is also good. The spiritual effect of an honest
intelligent attendance at such congregational prayers is un-
doubtedly great. Congregational prayer is not intended to sup-
plant individual prayer, which, as you well put it, must be heart-
felt and never formal. It is there you are in tune with the
Infinite. Congregational prayer is an aid to being in tune with the
Infinite. For man who is a social being cannot find God unless he
discharges social obligations and the obligation of coming to a
common prayer meeting is perhaps the supremest. It is a cleans-
ing process for the whole congregation. But, like all human
institutions, if one does not take care, such meetings do become
formal and even hypocritical. One has to devise methods of avoid-
ing the formality and hypocrisy.
In all, especially in spiritual
matters, it is the personal equation that counts in the end.
The roll call is not the ordinary roll call. It is a note of the
results of the daily yajna, that is, sacrifice. Everyone says what
he has spun. Spinning has been conceived in a sacrificial spirit. The
idea is to see God through service of the millions. The day must
not close without every member of the congregation confessing
whether he or she has or has not performed the daily sacrifice to
the measure of his or her promise. It is therefore not business
at the end of the prayer, but it is the finishing touch to the pra-
yer. It is not done at the beginning of the meeting, because those
who are late should have the opportunity of registering their sacri-
fice. Remember, too, this is a sacrifice not intended to be made
in secret. It is designed to be done in the open.
In my opinion, Christianity or the message of Jesus is a res-
ponse to the human want even as are the messages of Krishna,
Buddha, Muhammad and Zoroaster. Though they were designed
and delivered at different places and at different times, they
have also a universal value. According to the needs of the time
one message puts more emphasis on one thing than upon an-
other. A man of religion will not hesitate to profit by all these
messages and according to his predilection derive more comfort
from one than from another.
I do believe that real art consists in seeing the hidden beauty
of moral acts and effects and, therefore, much that passes for art
and beauty is, perhaps, neither art nor beauty.
I think I have now answered all your questions. You will
please remind me if I have missed any and you will not hesi-
tate to write to me again if I am anywhere obscure or uncon-
sciously evasive.
XXXVI-20
My love to both of you.
Yours sincerely,
MRS. E. BJERRUM
UNITED THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE
BANGALORE
From a photostat: S.N. 13221 and 15365
