142. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
Your letter of the 18th instant surprises me. I never asked
the Bombay Board to make an advance payment of Rs. 500 on
account of the Central Board, but I asked them, if they would,
to pay Rs. 500 to Poona on account of the expenses that Poona
had to incur because of my activities being directed from Poona,
If I had intended the Central Board to pay, I would have ap-
proached the Central Board myself without the slightest hesitation.
I asked the Bombay Board because of its being well able to bear
these expenses, Poona being next door to it. You need not there-
fore refund the amount asked of you, but refer them to me.
As for the 5000 copies of my statements I am not aware that
I asked them to print them. There certainly was some conver-
sation about a reprint of my statements in pamphlet form, but I
cannot now recall whether I talked about it to Seth Mathura-
das, or Sjt. J. K. Mehta, or Pyarelal or Chandrashankar. As a
matter of fact, I warned them against incurring the expense, as
I had the impression that the Ajmer people were reprinting
them and therefore asked them to enquire before embarking upon
this expense. But there never was the slightest intention on my
part that the Central Board should be called upon to bear these
expenses, and my own opinion is, as it always has been, that
propaganda work should be more or less self-supporting. There-
fore, I should consider it bad management if the sale of 5000
copies of my statements did not cover even the printing expenses.
You should refer the Bombay Board to me about this item also.
Sjt. G. K. Devdhar's letter to you is quite in order. When
Haribhau asked me about the matter I agreed with him and
he was the bearer of G. K. Devdhar's message that they should have
Rs. 500 over and above the grant they would receive from the
Central Board, and I told him to tell Devdhar that I would en-
deavour to secure that amount either from the Central Board or
the Bombay Board. But I first chose to write to the Bombay
Board for the reason I have already stated, and I was glad that
promptly and without demur they sent a cheque for Rs. 500.
Had they told me that it was on account of the Central Board,
I would have asked Haribhau to return the cheque.
I am sending a copy of this letter to the Bombay Board for
their information.
I am sending you a copy of my letter to the Bombay Board.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18994
