119. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Chaitra Sud 7 [April 16, 1929]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
According to your reckoning, it should be the 7th day [of the fortnight].
My calculation might be different. I wrote the enclosed two letters yesterday.
Today, I received your letter. It is good you wrote it. Even after receiving my
letter, you would have written the same kind of letter. You are no doubt
Lakshman. By writing such beautiful letters, you have overwhelmed Bharat.
As and when I think of Chhaganlal's helplessness, I feel like crying. I had
cried at a time when Harilal had let me down. I had wept when Rama had
indulged in theft and had deceived me. Now, Chhaganlal has reduced me to
that position. That is because I have so much love for him and faith in him.
He has done something improper. . . .2 I felt so bad about it. Instead of reciting
the Bhagavad Gita in the morning, I got immersed in thoughts of Chhaganlal.
I thought that. . . 3 would not have done so. Even if he had wanted to leave
phoenix, he could have. . .4 and left in an orderly manner. I have compared
him and West. I consider West to be superior to Chhaganlal in some ways
but in others, I feel Chhaganlal is superior to West. But in the general moral
conduct, there has been a lapse on the part of Chhaganlal now. It is beyond
endurance. This suggests how much discipline we all need to observe. This
also suggests the need for a man to take a vow. We should direct our mind
to what we want to do - that is a vow. If the mind is let loose, a man comes
across hundreds of obstacles. A vow is the key to progress. Such poor resolve
that "as far as possible, I will not eat meat" will certainly make me eat meat.
And a firm resolve like "even if I die, I will not eat meat" will save me and
help me progress. The three vows I had taken before going to England
certainly saved me. Chhaganlal had not taken any such firm vow, etc., and
even though he gave me an impression of a vow regarding phoenix, I believe
that he had not taken the vow as far as he himself was concerned. Otherwise,
the things would not have come to this pass.
If you want to send this letter as well as the others written to you . . .5,
you can.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
From the date on Chhaganlal's letter, I notice that your calculation [of
the day] is the same as mine.
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32925
1 From the reference to the Chhaganlal incident; vide Vol. XL, pp. 209-12, Chaitra
Sud 7 in the year 1929 corresponded to April 16.
2,3, & 5 A few words at each of these places are illegible in the source.
99
