40. LETTER TO SIR WILLIAM WEDDERBURN
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
May 27, 1899
SIR,
I venture to enclose herewith a copy of the Memorial of the
British Indians in the Transvaal with reference to their position
in virtue of the latest notice issued by the Transvaal Government,
requiring the Indians in that country to remove to Locations on
or before the 1st July this year.
It will be seen from the notice that the Government propose
to remove the Indians to Locations for the purposes of sanita-
tion. Would it, then, be unreasonable to ask the Colonial Sec-
retary to see that the sanitary reasons do exist before the Indians
are removed to Locations? The petition furnishes, in my humble
opinion, ample proof to show that there can be no sanitary reasons
for the measures proposed to be adopted by the Government.
The grievances of the Uitlanders which have attracted world-
wide attention and which nowadays fill up columns of the lead-
ing newspapers are, it is submitted, insignificant compared to
those of the British Indians in the Transvaal as well as other
parts of South Africa. Will it, then, be asking too much of the
sympathizers in England and the Indian public to give this very
1 This is a printed letter and was evidently sent to a number of people
in England and India.
important matter (important because it affects the future of the
whole of India so far as emigration outside India is concerned)
their best attention?
The petition referred to in this letter is in the hands of the
British Agent in Pretoria, but pending the result of the Confer-
ence between the High Commissioner and the President of the
Republic at which the Indian question will also be discussed, the
despatch of the petition to Mr. Chamberlain has been delayed. It
may not even be sent to him. But as time is of utmost import-
ance in this matter, it was considered prudent to send the peti-
tion lest the negotiations referred to above might prove abortive.
A copy of the petition by Mr. Parker, of Pretoria, a natural-
born British subject, with reference to the same matter, is also sent
herewith. It may throw a great deal of light on the question.
I remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 417/1899, Volume XX, Parliament
