71. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Unrevised
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
November 6, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
It is on Sunday night I am writing this though it is dated for Monday.
I am fairly tired and not in the mood to write.
Thank God I am not to preside at the Congress. It would have
been a most frightful thing, had I been obliged.
A remarkable incident happened at the Farm during the week. We
were making very fair headway with the fence. One day when I was
not at that work, Desai came and informed me that someone had tom
up the fence. This is the analysis of my mind. The thought could not
have occupied more than a second. 'Some evil-minded person has done
it. I must inform the police.' 'You coward. Your philosophy is skin-
deep. No, the police must not be informed either for your or my sake.
The fence should be re-put and someone must sleep near it, if
necessary.' Thus resolved I went down to the fence myself I found
that the probability was that the fence was tom up by cattle. Anyhow
we fixed the poles much more strongly than before. I took with [me]
plates and nails to fix on to the poles. No one slept there and there
has been no further interruption. The incident, however, touched me
deeply and set me thinking as to the right course of conduct. The most
prominent idea that forced itself on me was that we, if we were to
carry out the ideals we hold were unfit to hold more land than we
actually used. The corollary is not that we should give up the land
(though even that may not be quite so farcical as one may imagine)
but that we should fence only so much as we wanted and used and
no more. Then we should be able to overtake any damage with much
greater ease. I discuss this only to show you how my mind is working
and how more and more introspective I am becoming daily. This does
not in any way alter my plans during your absence. I shall go through
the programme as we have mapped it. Fencing will be finished.
I have accepted the tender of Stewarts and Lloyds for £72 odd
for erecting a windmill. I have described to you the whole thing I think.
They will send an erector in the course of the week.
I have also told John that he might buy four oxen for which money
will be advanced to him. It may mean £30. I feel that it is much better
88
to let the natives feel that here they may depend upon the fairest
treatment. And I have no doubt that if it proceeds from the heart and
is uniform, continuous and not from affectation, it will bless both the
parties. Anyhow just now I am generous as your steward. Of course
John has to repay before the year is out. I am letting Basella too do
pretty much as he likes. I see that I can get much more satisfactory
work that way.
We had a very busy Sunday. A party of 13 came, all but two
unexpected. These were Miss Schlesin and Gordon. The others were
Indians. Poor Mrs. Gandhi, she may foam and fret afterwards. But
just on such occasions she is at her best.
I note that you are seriously affecting the lives of your people there.
Your telling me that they love me now more and more flatters me,
but it ought not to. They love me as they see me through your glasses.
However, of this when we meet.
Of course you will continue your practice as long as you find it
necessary. But I do say that it would be unwise to take precautions
beforehand on the basis of Kennedy leaving you for certain. In your
place I should simply let the future take care of itself. If you return
committed to a definite course, naturally your actions will be in that
direction. Whereas if you leave the future in the lap of the gods, you
will find your course much smoother and certainly far more natural.
With love to you and all to whom you have introduced me,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
I can report nothing about Call.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
