404. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
August 20, 1932
One of the many causes of illness is impatience. First the
mind becomes impatient, and then the body. But it is the univer-
sal experience that 'the impatient get nervous and the calm
remain self-possessed'. If the world is on fire, will impatience help
us to put out the fire? And is it for us to put out the fire?
Do you know that firemen do not shoot water at the raging flames
when a great fire breaks out? They direct their attention to the
parts round the flames. If they can save them, they should be
regarded as efficient, that is, as [karma] yogis. If we do our
own duty well, we would in effect have put out the fire. It may
not seem to the physical eye to have been put out, but you
may rest assured that it has been put out. My long search for truth
has revealed to me no other way but this, nor is it likely to reveal
any other in future. If what I have said is not correct, it would
become impossible to follow the path of truth and cling to it
scrupulously. We can insist only on that which is possible. If
anyone demands air of the mountains on the moon, we would
have to call him a Shaikhchalli for his desire can never be satis-
fied. And this is also true about the scope of our duty. Really
speaking, everyone's duty is clear enough for him to see, for one
does not have to look far to find it. One has to look no farther
than the tip of one's nose. We have merely to clean the dirt im-
mediately in front of our feet. As we clean it, we shall discover
more dirt to be cleaned and will clean that too. It does not matter
that, at the end of our lives, there will be as much dirt to be clean-
ed as when we started. In truth, however, can we say that life
ends? The body perishes, but does that matter? And if life
does not end, we should not feel disheartened to discover that the
dirt has not disappeared. A tailor's son goes on stitching all his
life. If he falls dead with a yawn, a needle in his hand, he
would be a man of true devotion to duty.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 371
