101. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
SEVAGRAM,
August 1, 1945
BHAI KAKUBHAI,
I have your letter. Chi. Kanu has given me the details in
writing, but I shall not go into them. All this misunderstand-
ing arose because I could not explain myself fully.
"God has tied me with a cotton thread. Whichever way he
pulls me I am His. I am pierced by the dagger of love." This
is from a famous bhajan of Mirabai. Swaraj hangs by that
thread; it does not snap because the weight is that of love.
The languages of India are full of allegories featuring yarn.
Narandas has conceived of a yarn bank. If such a bank is organ-
ized well, it will ultimately beat the money banks. Narandas is a
supreme devotee of khadi. None among us can beat him in his
tapascharya. He has no other work. I am a witness to the work
he has done for the charkha. I am a lover of his work. He
has added immensely to the importance of Rentia Baras. It is not
a work of Kathiawaris alone and this time Kathiawaris alone are
not to do it. In this scheme the Charkha Sangh was to play
a major role and its benefit would have been also quite large.
Chi. Kanu after finishing his work in Bombay was to proceed
further. Collection of funds was of secondary importance. Yarn
was the main thing. The Charkha Sangh had to collect only
the yarn delivered at its door and send the acknowledgement to
Narandas's bank. The ownership of the yarn would have certainly
remained with the Charkha Sangh. Suppose yarn worth crores
of rupees was produced, the Charkha Sangh would have got it
without striving. Chi. Kanu is a child, an errand boy. He is
not a leader. He could not explain what he wanted to say.
From what he says he did not absent himself so as to humiliate
you. This thing was such that there was no need for explanation.
Goddess Lakshmi was to come to your door to bless you. However,
what has happened has happened. I do not think it can be
rectified. Do whatever you can. I had reckoned that Kanu
would go from house to house, revive spinning, repair charkhas,
enrol volunteers, collect yarn, and that well-tied bales of yarn
would be heaped at your place.
If I have succeeded in explaining to you the scheme, then I
can say that I have compensated for the long letter you wrote
to me.
I understand about the processes of cotton. Dawn is when
one wakes up.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 10856. Courtesy: Purushottam
K. Jerajani
