480. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 28/[May 2, 1932]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have already written to you today a letter about the pro-
blem of Harilal. I hope you will receive it without delay. I need
not, therefore, write anything more about the matter.
Send more pills for Gangabehn made from ten tolas of chaiarj
and ten tolas of asafoetida. I had received the quantity which I had
asked you earlier to send. If you send the pills with somebody
who is coming here to see me, I will arrange for their being deli-
vered to her.
Personally, I liked Tilakam's going to Thana. Others also
may go, if they are not likely to be a burden on Pyare Ali. That
would look nice too, for we should be as happy to be a Muslim's
guest as a Hindu's. Besides, it would be a painful thing if anybody
felt that, since Tilakam was not one of us and since he came from
an Antyaja family, the present arrangement was good enough for
him. If Jamna willingly goes there, Noorbanu will shower love
on her. Since the first day that we met I have always felt a beauti-
ful light of purity shining in her eyes.
I hope Gangadevi is all right now. I had a letter from San-
tok. She says that she would like Radha to stay on in Deolali
for four months more. If that is likely to restore her health com-
pletely, it would be all right. I have had no letter at all from Ba.
I cannot say that the change of hands in spinning has reduced
the pain. But I see that, had I not made this change, I would have
been unable to continue working. I can see from my experience
of drawing the rounds with the right hand that slowly rotating the
wheel causes much less strain in the elbow than drawing the rounds
hour after hour. I now draw about 200 rounds daily with the
right hand. That is five or ten more than the number I used to
draw with the left hand a week ago. The average then was 187½
[rounds] a day, or say rather that I kept up that average with an
effort. Of course, more time is spent now in spinning. But in
any case I had been giving more time in a week previously. From
every point of view, therefore, the present practice seems all right.
There is no cause at all for worrying about the condition of my hand.
There is, of course, no ban on printing copies of "Watching
the Heavens" and the other articles I send, but I think it would
be wiser not to print any. Rather than print copies, the better
course would be for somebody to dictate to a group of five to
ten persons. This would be more in keeping with our principles.
By following this practice, we would learn again the art of writing
a neat hand. The copies made in this manner could then be cir-
culated among those who might wish to read the articles. Those
persons may make more copies if they wish to. Or everybody
should pass on the copy supplied to him, on the same day on
which he receives it, to another person whose name is given to
him. In this way it will be possible to circulate a few copies among
a large number of persons and all those who get them will read
the article with special interest and derive greater benefit from it.
Think over this.
[May 2, 1932]
Read carefully what I have written about the work done
during the National Week this time. If you agree with me, show
it to all others, and also try to follow in practice as much of
it as can be done. If you wish to make any changes in my
suggestions, you may certainly do so. I have, generally speak-
ing, only my experience to go by. In the Ashram you have a
veritable mine of experience. It is possible, therefore, that you
will find some of my suggestions impracticable, but there is no
doubt that we ought to pay attention to the fineness of the
count and strength of yarn and to reducing waste. At the exami-
nation, this was the method of evaluation formerly adopted.
The candidate was awarded marks equal to the figure of the
count multiplied by that of the strength. I do not know what
method is followed now. I would introduce the factor of waste in
calculating the marks—reduce the marks in proportion to the
quantity of waste. Mahadev and I have thought out this method.
Waste up to one tola for every pound [of yarn] may be condoned.
If the waste exceeds one tola, for every additional tola the marks
arrived at by multiplying the figure of the count by that of the
strength should be reduced by sixteen. That is, the marks should
be reduced by one for every 1/16 tola of waste. If the waste is as
much as ten tolas, the candidate should fail. However, you your-
self may decide whether waste of one tola or of more than one
tola per pound should be condoned. I have given the figures
merely as illustrations to explain my idea. If I were an exa-
miner, I would even take into account how the candidate sat
when spinning, in what condition he maintained his spinning-
wheel, whether he kept the place where he sat for spinning
quite clean and whether he could repair a spinning-wheel when
it went out of order, and calculate marks for all these. This
means that the work of the candidates would be constantly ob-
served by somebody. This observer would be one of the exa-
miners at the test. I would not mind if such a practice had the
effect of reducing our output. What is essential is that we should
be sure in our minds that we were vigilant and were progres-
sing from day to day. I have stated in the accompanying note
that when the yarn spun is of less than 20 counts, the spinning
should not be counted as yajna. This does not mean that no credit
should be given for the spinning done. The candidate would go
on spinning every day and be awarded marks for his work, the
yarn could be made use of, but such a spinner should not be
considered to be performing yajna. He would be only a can-
didate.
Read the letter which I have written to Dr. Mehta. Forward
to Jetpur the letter which I have written to Manjula, Maganlal's
wife. I have forgotten her father's name. If you do not remem-
ber it, Champa or Ratilal will probably know it. Read the letter
before sealing it, and communicate the address to me also.
I
have already written to you regarding Kusum. Nobody has
come to see me till now except Trivenibehn. About Budhabhai,
do what you think proper.
Post the accompanying letter to Hill only if you think it is
all right, for if he comes just now it is you who will have to
shoulder the burden. You must have received my letter regard-
ing Harilal. I had another letter of bitter complaint from Manu.
BAPU
[PS.]
In some of the letters this time, I have omitted "Blessings
from". The words are understood. I have omitted them to save
time. As I write with the left hand, I naturally like to save as
many words as I can. You will observe that I pay more atten-
tion to making every letter in a word distinct. I think that, if I
write still more slowly, the handwriting with the left hand may
be a little better. Is there no limit to the wishes of an old man
who has arrived at death's door?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8224. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
