89. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Jeth Vad 14, 1969 [July 2, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
You have asked me some questions about serpent-bite and
cited the experiences of others. What I say about this should be
treated as no more than my inference. It is not based on expe-
rience. The instances you have come across do not deserve much
attention. There may be something behind the cases of frenzied
shaking of the head from side to side, but for the most part they
are cases of fraud. I believe the same about cures of snake
[-bite] and scorpion [-sting]. Possibly there is something in them,
but one had better not go inquiring into these matters. We are
to concern ourselves only with activities that tend to spiritual
welfare. Everything else— even health— is subordinate to that.
Certain it is that he who strives to realize the Self will have
everything else given to him.
Many people put on woollen clothes all through the year.
Though it is true that they are non-conductors, it will be better
not to use them in summer, for one may otherwise grow a little
too soft in body. Instead of trying to maintain the body at an even
temperature, we should train it to stand both cold and heat.
God exists, and yet does not. He does not, in any literal
sense. The atman that has attained moksha is God and therefore
omniscient. The true meaning of bhakti is search for the atman.
When the atman realizes itself, bhakti is transformed into jnana.
Narsimha [Mehta] and others gave themselves to such devo-
ted search of the atman.
Krishna, Rama and others were divine incarnations, but we,
too, can be like them when immense punya 3 has accrued to us.
The atmans about to attain moksha are so many divine incarnations.
We need not believe in their perfection while yet alive.
It is difficult to say who was the greatest among Krishna,
Rama, the Buddha, Jesus, etc. Their achievements differed, be-
cause they lived in different times and under different circum-
stances. In point of character alone, possibly the Buddha was the
greatest. But who can say? They have been described by their
devotees according to their own inclinations. Vaishnavas attribute
perfection to Krishna. One has to, of course. Otherwise single-
minded bhakti would be impossible. Christians do the same to
Jesus. In India, Krishna being the last [of the incarnations], his
figure is invested with especial greatness.
Those who deny the existence of God will end up on the
wrong path, for they will be obliged to deny the existence of the
atman. Avatar is, and will always remain, a necessity. It is only
when people are in utter despair and immorality is widespread
that a belief in avatar comes to prevail. A small number following
normal morality in the midst of a wicked majority looks for sup-
port. In a situation of this kind, a man of great moral strength
who has no fear of the wicked but of whom the wicked stand in
fear, is looked upon as an avatar after his death, or even during his
life-time. It is not probable, in most cases, that such a person re-
gards himself as an avatar right from the beginning.
Comparison of religions is uncalled for. One must gain a
mature understanding of one's own religion and then study others.
For purposes of comparison in a general way, the criterion is
compassion [taught] as a rule of life. The greater the scope for
compassion in a way of life, the more of religion it has. "The
ethical way has its roots in compassion"— that is the first principle
to be taught to everyone; and the second, "Brahman is the Rea-
lity; the Phenomenal world is unreal." No single principle may
appeal to all, but it would seem that one who is in quest of the
atman will have the right principle spring to his lips at the right
time.
Caste-distinctions are both necessary and unnecessary. Their
forcible observance is unnecessary. . . . G's action in giving en-
couragement to the pariah was praiseworthy.
In fact, there are as many paths as there are human beings.
So long as men differ [in temperament], their paths are bound to
differ. He who sees the identity of his atman with the atmans of
others will also see unity in the [different] religions.
When the atman is free from bondage to the body, it is said to
have attained moksha. The nature of that state is not to be describ-
ed. It can only be experienced. Ghosts, etc., are an evil order of
beings. Those guilty of wicked deeds are born in that order.
I have glanced through the book on milk-treatment. I was
not impressed by it. That is, however, because of my present
frame of mind. Even if anyone could prove that meat had a high-
ly beneficial effect on the body, it would remain unacceptable. I
hold the same view about milk. It is but another form of meat
and man has no right to take it. [To argue] that because a baby
sucks the mother's milk, man should take cow's milk is the very
limit of ignorance.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahatma Gandhijina Patro
