290. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
July 3, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
Both of you have been regular in writing to me. I did read
all your letters, but I could not reply. Now that I have gained
some strength, I try to write a few letters every day. My
weight also is increasing. I eat fairly well. I am on milk and
fruit just now. There is no cause for worrying about me.
Only God knows where I shall be when you get this letter. Per-
haps with Vallabhbhai. We must accept whatever is ordained for
us. Can we alter anything even if we wish?
It will be enough if you go on doing your duty devotedly.
I like that Sushila helps you. If both of you lead a life of self-
control, Sushila will be able to do a lot. The arrangement
you have made for Sita seems good.
I see that Shanti cannot
be trusted. He is extremely unsteady.
Jalbhai had come and seen me. I understand what you
say regarding his daughter.
What you have done regarding Sorabji seems all right. If
we adhere to principles, sometimes friends desert us. We need not
worry about that. It is, of course, necessary to be sure in all
cases that what we believe to be moral is not in fact immoral
and that there is no consideration of self-interest in our motives.
More immorality is practised in the world in the name of morality
than is done openly. Immorality can flourish only under the cloak
of morality. This is the reason why so often moral dilemmas
arise. In order to learn to distinguish rightly between morality
and immorality, the observance of yamaniyamas is essential.
Devdas and Lakshmi are here. They are quite happy. I
am sure someone must have given you an account of the wed-
ding. Both seem to be fortunate. They have been receiving bless-
ings from unexpected quarters.
Ramdas is unfortunate. He cannot be either happy or at
peace, and his health is deteriorating.
Nimu also keeps poor
health. And the same is the case with the children. She now
seems to have developed some complaint of the vaginal tract and
even an operation may be necessary. But Ramdas is a bhakta
and of a trustful nature. He is always anxious to know what
his duty is and tries his best to do it. I believe, therefore, that
ultimately he will be happy. However, it is a fact that God does
test his bhaktas severely. Ramdas knows that, and so, even if he
remains unhappy all his life, he will not cease to be a bhakta.
Both of you should write to him from time to time. Ramdas
and Nimu have placed their lives in the hands of Jamnalalji.
But they have not been able to go to Wardha as yet, for mean-
while Nimu's ailments were detected. It will, therefore, be some
time before they can go to Wardha. I hope you write to Jamna-
lalji occasionally. Janakidevi and the children are here.
Only
Madalasa is at Wardha with Vinoba. Ba is here, of course.
Mahadev and Mathuradas also are here. Manu has come and
will stay for some time. Harilal remains drowned in casks of
liquor, or say rather that his belly is always full of them.
Thanks to their weight, how can he shoulder any other bur-
den? I am not complaining against him. I believe that his
conduct must be the bitter fruit of my own sins and endure it in
silence.
I understand what you say regarding West. Finally, do what
seems best to you. If you form an unfavourable impression
about him, I cannot remove it. I read West's letters to Devi-
behn when I was in England. It seemed to me after reading
them that he had not changed. Tulsidas has taught us that
we should see the good in men and remember that only. We
also may have our weaknesses. If people boycott us because of
them we pull a long face. We forget that people keep good rela-
tions with us despite our weaknesses. I hope this will be
enough by way of advice.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4810. Also C.W. 1222. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi
1 Daughter of Jamnalal Bajaj
55-16
