327. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,
July 4, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
I have your letter. Your letters to me are love letters, each
time I suppose not less than an hour's effort even for you—a ready
and fast writer. Now that we know each other so well, you can
certainly save your time by writing only when you must. Though
I treasure your long letters, I would be satisfied with a mere post-
card telling me of important events.
You have your work cut out for you at Poona. Are you
coming to Wardha on your way to Poona or on your way back or
both ways? The weather is much cooler just now.
I have shared your letter with Kumarappa. If you can
establish contact with rickshaw-pullers, it would be a great thing.
They can easily spin, weave and add to their meagre earnings.
I am sorry Krishnarao is leaving you. Of course, ultimately
you will have to rely upon yourself. Though your arms may not
be strong enough to work at the bow, it is good that you will
know the process of carding. That would enable you to regulate
and control carding by others. If your girls learn spinning, you
will insist upon their carding. Unless they do, they will never
spin regularly. And it is a bad job to depend upon others for
slivers. If they form a kind of spinning-club, they can have a
division of labour. Some may gin, some others may do the card-
ing, many can make slivers and all will spin.
The clothes you have for Quetta relief, may be sent to Dr.
Gopichand for the refugees in the Punjab, unless of course there
are refugees in Simla itself, in which case you can distribute your
clothes among them. Only I fancy that in Simla you will have
the most well-to-do refugees, whereas in Lahore the poorest must
have congregated.
I shall hold on the money. It can be sent where they have
spent what is being collected now. There is always in such cala-
mities an ample fund in the beginning stages.
You need not get out of your 'Ville' to sell those paper sheets
and envelopes I have sent you. I am in no hurry to have the price
of them. And ultimately even if they could not be sold there, there
would not be any difficulty in selling them here, without any
loss. I know we cannot make the profits that you can, but you
must not give undue labour to their sale.
The slivers I have sent you, should give you at least 25
counts, as they are capable of giving 30 counts.
Please hand over the enclosed letter to Andrews.
Love.
BAPU
SHRI RAJKUMARI AMRIT KUNVAR BERN
MANORVILLE
SIMLA
From the original: C.W. 3539. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6348
