16. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
Sravana Krishna 7 [August 21, 1924 1]
DEAR SHRI GHANSHYAMDAS 2 ,
God has provided me with conscience-keepers. You, I think,
are one of them. Some of my own children, some ladies and a
few grown-ups like Jamnalalji and yourself want to make me
a perfect man. Regarding you thus, how could I be offended
by your letter? In fact, I want you always to caution me in
this manner.
You complain against three things: One, my absolving the
Swaraj Party of the charge of corruption; two, my giving a testi-
monial to Suhrawardy; and, three, my trying to get Sarojini
Devi elected as [Congress] President.
In the first place, it is one's duty to say only that which,
after a painstaking inquiry, one has come to regard as the
truth, even if the world considers it to be an error. In no other
way can one become fearless. I cannot consider anything dearer
to me than moksha . Yet even that moksha I would renounce if it
were to conflict with truth and non-violence. In all these three
things I only followed truth. When I said that, I had in mind
what you had told me at Juhu. In the absence of any definite
proof, it becomes my duty to treat the Swaraj Party as free from
the guilt imputed to it. If there is any evidence that you can
furnish I shall certainly examine it. I shall even make it public if
you will allow me to do so; if not I shall know and keep it to
myself and remain silent.
As for Suhrawardy, I only testified to his sagacity and I am
having practical experience of it even now.
About Sarojini Devi your fears are, I think, uncalled for. I
hold strongly that she has served India well and is still doing so.
While I have done nothing so far for her presidentship, I do
believe that if the others who have so far occupied that office
were fit for it, she too is fit. Everybody is charmed with her en-
thusiasm. I can bear witness to her courage. I have noticed
nothing blameworthy in her character.
Please do not conclude from this that I approve of everything
done by her or anyone else.
God has filled this world with objects, animate and inanimate,
good and bad. The wise man considers only the good and ignores the
bad, even as the swan leaves the water and takes only the milk from a
mixture of milk and water.
Yours,
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6030. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
