240. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 11, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. Of course you were quite right in deli-
vering your whole soul to me. I quite agree with you that we
have to evolve an organization and that therefore there should be
method about the business. But in your affection for me perhaps
there is a trace of impatience with the people who organized the
tours. However, all will profit by the warning received. I am
taking all the necessary rest amid these very lovely surroundings
and shall have more when I am taken to Mysore. Rest is not to
be taken at the Ashram. Dr. Mehta insisted on a cool place being
selected. And I am to remain where I was to tour during April.
You can see from the handwriting that I am getting stronger
day by day. I had quite a fair walk yesterday. So much for
myself.
I like this idea of your riding. It should brace you and en-
able you too, to go to the villages and see something of rural life.
Have they provided you with a proper saddle? You should try to
follow all the shades of village Hindi. I am not going to be
satisfied till you have mastered Hindi so well as to be able to
follow and speak the villagers' Hindi. Do not be frightened.
It will come because of your love of your work. I shall not be
impatient. But, for your work a thorough knowledge of Hindi
is a necessity. You will therefore seek every occasion for speak-
ing and knowing it. Insist on understanding all that goes on
about you.
Here is a letter for you from Noorbanu whom you must re-
cognize, the fat, fair lady. She recently gave over to the Ashram
several thousand rupees worth of her jewellery. She and her
husband are just now living at Mahabaleshwar. They have just
come in to see me. Do write to her in reply. Their address is
Mahabaleshwar College, Mahabaleshwar. Mrs. Noorbanu Pyareali
is her full name.
I am anxious to know how the new wheel is working. Have
you good wheels there?
Do you get good fruit for yourself?
With love,
BAPU
[PS.]
Mahadev and Devdas have gone out to hawk khadi.
From the original: C.W. 5215. Courtesy: Mirabehn
