42. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
November 16, 1943
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA (HOME DEPARTMENT)
NEW DELHI
SIR,
Dr. Nayyar1, whom the Government of India, or maybe
the Government of Bombay have placed with me, received on
the 12th instant a wire addressed to her by her brother who
is a railway employee in New Delhi, to the effect that his wife
had a Caesarian operation and had lost so much blood, that he
had applied for Dr. Nayyar's temporary discharge. This wire
was received in Yeravda, as appears from the date marked on
it, on the morning of the 5th. The second wire, which was
sent from New Delhi on the 9th instant and received at
Yeravda on the same afternoon, was delivered to her on the
15th instant. The wire reports the patient's death. Dr. Nayyar
has already complained about the delay in the delivery of the
first wire. She is naturally prostrate with grief which has been
aggravated by the delay in the delivery of the wires. I do not
know that, if she were a condemned criminal, the news of the
death of a dear one would be withheld from her as this has
been, without any cause that I can guess. It seems to me
that those who are lodged with me have to suffer extra hard-
ship by reason of their being so lodged.
For, it is not only
Dr. Nayyar who has to suffer, others do likewise. Thus Dr.
Gilder is debarred from receiving visits even from his ailing
wife or his daughter. Little Manu Gandhi can receive neither
her father nor her sisters, nor can my wife receive visits from
her sons or grandchildren. I discount the fact that the former
could have gone out if she resented the restrictions. I know,
too, that my son Ramdas was permitted to visit his mother
1 Dr. Sushila Nayyar
2 Mohanlal Nayyar; vide p. 210.
205
when she was very ill. I do not understand this denial of ordi-
nary rights of prisoners. I can understand the restrictions against
me by reason of the Government's special displeasure against
me. But the restrictions on the others it is difficult to under-
stand, unless it be that the Government do not trust those who
are put in charge of us. On any other basis it is difficult to
understand why the Superintendent of the camp, or even the
Inspector-General, cannot deal with the wires of the nature I
have referred to, and with the visitors who may be permitted
to visit the co-detenus.
I request early relief.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3922. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 46, p. 5
