31. LETTER TO JAYAKRISHNA P. BHANSALI
DELHI,
April 19, 1946
CHI. BHANSALI,
I have gone through your letter three times-twice word by
word and the third time for dictating a reply. By clinging to
the letter of the pledge we often come to observe it only in form.
The spirit is the real thing which alone makes us aware of our
understanding of it. Flawless observance is possible only after
we achieve a harmonious blend of the letter and the spirit. It
has always been painful to me because I have expressed such an
opinion in the context of my vow to abjure milk. I see there
is a subtle pride in being content with the observance of a vow
in its spirit. I therefore do not deceive myself. Literally accord-
ing to my vow I gave up animal milk for all time, but since
by milk is generally meant buffalo's or cow's milk and also be-
cause at the time of taking the vow I was not at all aware of
any other milk, I took advantage of my own ignorance and
started taking goat's milk. Even then it did hurt my soul but some-
how I consoled my mind. Had I been able to stick to my resolve
of abjuring all animal milk, possibly I might have been freed
of this body. Nevertheless, my heart bears testimony to the fact
that I have fulfilled my vow in letter as well as in spirit. If I
were to apply the same rule to you, and I ought to, you should
observe your pledge literally and stick to the Ashram. And by
staying on you will also be observing it in spirit.
Whereas other people felt that the movement had been in
vain I never had any such feeling. Failure has no place in the
vocabulary of satyagraha. Satyagraha has endless time [to
operate]. It may not therefore care for [any outside] help.
There is much more to it than I have said here. If I begin to
expound it I will have to devote a lot of time to it, which you
also would not want me to do. Let me therefore be quiet having
shown you what your dharma is.
I think you have raised a very good point. I am not shocked
by it at all.
Blessings from
BAPU
BHANSALIBHAI
ASHRAM, SEVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
