578. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
SODEPUR,
January 16, 1946
CHI. JIVANJI,
I have with me three letters of yours dated December 13,
1945, January 7, 1946, and January 11, 1946.
I will not argue at length about another Tamil translation
of An Autobiography. Nor have I the time for that. I am dictating
this reply in the early hours of the morning, and that also while
racing against time. I have seen in English more translations
than one of a good book. I don't find anything wrong in it.
Our only aim in retaining the copyright can be to guard against
possible misuse of the privilege. But if we have authorized one
person, and then another public-spirited person who can do a
better translation comes forward, why should we not give him
the permission? This is my line of reasoning. More when we
meet and can talk at leisure. But meanwhile I will accept
your decision as final and correct. For I may decide something
in haste and you may have to bear the burden, which would not
be proper.
I have decided for the present to refuse permission for a
Finnish translation, for the person's intention seems to be to make
profit.
About Harijan we shall decide after I hear more from you.
For, as long as the Government does not share our desire that
its publication should be resumed, I think it will be a great risk
to embark on the venture. I think I have discussed this matter
with you earlier. The lifting of the ban will not be enough
for resuming publication. Discuss the matter with Mavalankar
and Sardar, if he is there, and then write to me. We wish
to do nothing in haste.
I have received the new edition of The Constructive Programme.
You are right when you say that you can afford to send, and
should send, a large number of copies only if a proper account
of the copies is kept and the money is regularly remitted to you.
Do not send more copies just now. Two of the newspapers here
published the whole text. You may publish the booklet in the
other languages you intend to.
You have given a full explanation about the preface, as also
about the price.
Chi. Kanu will write to you separately regarding the Bha-
Janavali. Do not publish the new edition till you get all the
material from him.
I should like you to publish the translation sent by Rajendra
Babu. Discuss the matter with Kishorelal and Narahari also.
The Rashtrabhasha dictionary follows me wherever I go. I
have not forgotten, either, about the foreword to the book on
Gita According to Gandhi written by Mahadevbhai. I will be
happy if I can finish it before leaving for Madras. But all that
is in God's hands. I rest content with the work I can do from
day to day. I cannot, of course, attend to all the things. I see
in this my inefficiency. If I cannot overcome it, I cannot hope
to live up to 125 years. But be it as it may. If you think it fit,
you may reprint Nation's Voice.
Your suggestion for adding something more to the para-
graphs on cow-protection in The Constructive Programme seems a
good one. I would describe it as "improvement of livestock". I
agree that it should not have been left out. We will remember
the point at the time of the next edition. If the current edition
is exhausted soon and any suggestions for improvements occur to
you, let me have them, too.
I am leaving here on the 19th and reaching Madras
on the 21st. The address will be c/o Dakshina [Bharat] Hindi
Prachar Sabha, Thyagarayanagar, Madras. I will be in Madras
for 15 days at the most. If I can finish earlier, I will try.
Then on the 8th to Sevagram. After spending a day in Bombay,
to Poona on the 21st.
Blessings from
BAPU
Not revised.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9962. Also C.W. 6936. Cour-
tesy : Jivanji D. Desai
