128. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON NATIONAL SCHOOL
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
Magh Krishna Ekadashi, Samvat 1975 [February 26, 1919]
TO
THE EDITOR
SIR,
I am sure your readers know that a National School is being
conducted in the Satyagraha Ashram for the past two years. Fur-
ther admissions have been stopped, mainly because the teachers
on the staff of the school wish to prepare and equip themselves
fully for the requirements of the National School curriculum and
because their number is not large enough. Just now the School
needs at least five additional teachers. All teaching is done through
Gujarati. Hence, even persons who possess a high proficiency only
in Gujarati will serve the purpose. Since, however, higher educa-
tion is given entirely through English, the need for men with profi-
ciency in English will remain till such time as we have teachers
who can impart higher education through Gujarati. Even so, the
teachers at present on the staff being well-equipped in English, the
School can take on men with high proficiency in Gujarati; in
fact, it wants to encourage such men.
A few words about the School: It has three graduates [on
its staff], with one music expert and an equally competent Sanskrit
scholar. The Ashram and the School are situated on a beautiful
spot on the banks of the Sabarmati. Quarters have been built for
teachers here. They are paid enough to keep them above want.
Two of the teachers draw no salary, since they do not need any,
and, of the remaining three, the highest salary drawn by anyone
is Rs. 75. The School is in a position to pay up to this maximum
to a competent teacher. In my view, anyone who works in this
School will be taking part in an experiment which seems small
enough at present but which, as time passes, will produce ever
bigger results. If the experiment fails, it will not be for lack of
effort. I trust that those who love the profession of teaching and
who, though making their living through teaching, are interested
primarily in teaching for itself and only incidentally as a means
of livelihood will come forward to help this School.
Candidates must necessarily be in a fit state of health, for they
are to learn as well as teach. They must know the fundamentals
of agriculture, on which 80 per cent of India's population de-
pends for its livelihood, and also of weaving, which used to be a
means of living for hundreds of thousands of people. A knowledge
of Hindi, too, is essential for those who undertake to work for
national education. In my humble opinion, even from the point of
view of their long-range economic interests, young men fresh from
college will also do well to plunge into this experiment of national
education. They will stand to lose nothing, and may possibly gain
In some ways.
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 6430
