291. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before April 6, 1924]
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
I send you herewith eight chapters of the history of satya-
graha. See that not a single correction in it is left out. You will
see that they are all essential. I have cancelled the last paragraph.
Why are you still sore about that translation? A 'ja' may be
placed at the wrong place. There is nothing whatever to be said
against [your translation of] 'Kingdom of Heaven'.
There are two remedies for you. One, that you should forget
your malady. It may be a sort of mental hypochondria, in the
same way that some imagine a physical malady where there is none.
We should know our faults, but at the same time should not ex-
1 These were the first in a series which started appearing in Navajivan
from April 6; the English version of the chapters started appearing in Young
India from April 17. The latter was published in book form, as Satyagraha in
South Africa, in 1928. The Gujarati edition was released in two parts during
1924-25.
aggerate them. There is always a middle path in all things, which
is really not the middle but the true path. The other remedy is to
throw off your cowardice. Being a coward, you make Durga suffer,
and for the same reason you beat that coachman. Why did you get
frightened because he beat you? Cowards also lose patience some-
times. You are not lacking in love, but you do not examine your-
self carefully. You have no self-confidence. Why don't you always
say to yourself, "I will never give way to fear", "I will always
correct myself whenever I make a mistake"? As a last resort,
you have the mantra of Rama[nama]. Did you read the letter I
wrote to Majli on the subject? You must have got a copy.
Do write a letter about Mahomed Ali. Such questions may
arise in the minds of others also. If you write, I shall get an
opportunity to give an explanation. In any case, I shall write
something [about it] tomorrow. Write after my article reaches you.
We shall put Durga under the treatment of the Poona vaidya. Will
she come here on Thursday? The vaidya comes on Thursday.
Let her come to stay here for a few days. Do expect some fresh
crowding here. In a dharmsala everyone can come and find
room. Is it truly a place of dharma? If it is, there should be
no need for hesitation.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 8762
