77. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
June 7, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
I thoroughly understood why there was no letter from you.
The cause of it grieved me much and I wished I was with you
as your nurse. I am glad that you are much better now. India
as a whole will never understand you fully and your energy be-
ing unapproachable excites jealousy. May you bear it well with
a light heart.
As your quack physician, I shall certainly want to know all
about your health, diet, etc.
Polak I know has been writing to you regularly. I do not there-
fore wish to inflict a long letter on you. If you have the time, you
will doubtless read this week's I[ndian] O[pinion] which re-
produces the whole of the correspondence I have carried on with
Mr. Fischer. The Unionists put up a spirited fight at first but they
weakened in the end. Fischer's information that the Imperial Gov-
ernment had accepted the measure as it stood did the trick. I
can hardly believe that they could ever accept the Bill as drafted.
If you have followed the debate as printed in the pages of I. O.,
you will have noticed that your name was very freely used by
several speakers and that mostly to the advantage of our cause.
Yes, the visit is bound to produce far-reaching results in many
ways.
The Bill has been read a second time in the Senate. There
may be some alterations made but I do not think there is enough
fight left in W. P. Schreiner to carry all the amendments that are
necessary to prevent a revival of the struggle. Have I told you
that Mrs. Gandhi, Mrs. Doctor and the wives of Chhaganlal and
Maganlal are joining the struggle? Pray do not disclose this just
yet. Of course there are many men at the settlement who are
joining this time. If the struggle comes, as seems almost cer-
tain, my return to India must stand indefinitely postponed.
Polak has now opened office. I have no anxiety about
Ritch's expenses. And Polak will presently find his own. The
London Committee remittance has been stopped since March
last. So that the only burden is I. O. and if the struggle revives,
Medh's family will have to be supported. Apart from this, there
will be only the incidental current expenditure. Medh's I would
rather not beg in South Africa. But the other expenses we either
find here or do without. I am collecting steadily the amount to
be placed at your disposal for the London Committee which I
hope you will reorganize. If there is any deficit in the £600 to be
collected for 3 years' existence of the Committee, I have a pro-
mise from our friend Rustomjee that he will find it. I think that
if anyone is reliable in S[outh] A[frica], he certainly is. That
reminds me of your cap and umbrella which I hope were safely
delivered to you.
Kallenbach is here for a few days.
Hoping that this will find you in good health,
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 927
Courtesy: Servants of India Society
