31. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
March 11, 1899
TO
THE EDITOR
"THE TIMES OF INDIA"
[BOMBAY]
SIR,
I venture to enclose herewith a copy of a letter received by
the Indian community in Natal from the Indian traders in Um-
tali, Rhodesia. The letter speaks for itself. The authorities seem
to have rendered assistance to the Indians, but, in my humble
opinion, nothing less than an emphatic declaration from the Colo-
nial Office to the effect that the white settlers in British South
Africa cannot with impunity interfere with the liberty of
the British Indian settlers, in addition to adequate punishment
to the wrongdoers, will meet the case.
It will be noticed that
Justices of the Peace and other prominent Europeans took part
in the violence. The omission on the part of Mr. Chamberlain to
take any notice of the unlawful proceedings of the Durban mob
in 1897 1 has, I am afraid, led the white settlers to think that
they can do anything they like with the Indians. In the Durban
case there was no necessity to punish the mob. But we here feel
that a despatch from Mr. Chamberlain strongly disapproving of
the whole thing would have produced a salutary effect.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
(ENCLOSURE)
UMTALI, RHODESIA,
January 22, [1899]
GENTLEMEN,
We beg to call your attention to the following circumstances.
We have been trading both at Beira and Macequece, and last March
we applied for a licence to trade at Umtali in Rhodesia, which was granted
in April. We then built a store, but found that the European traders were
very indignant, and they held a meeting protesting against the issue of licen-
ces to British Indian subjects, as they considered them undesirable, but they
were not supported by the High Commissioner.
We traded peacefully up to the 7th of last December, when a country-
man of ours (a merchant of Beira) also applied for a trading licence, which
he got. This again excited the traders of Umtali, and they laid the matter be-
fore the Chamber of Commerce, requesting that body to take the subject up
and oppose the granting of licences to Asiatics. Their meetings were reported
in the local papers, and had a serious effect upon the minds of the public.
The Government, however, took little or no notice of the agitation.
Later
the European merchants of the town, headed by Justices of the Peace and
officers of the local volunteer force, in all a mob of about one hundred and
fifty persons, attacked and broke into our store by violence about 9 p.m. on
the 4th of January, 1899. Seeing how violent the attitude of the mob was
and how unlawful their action was, we were very frightened, but, fortunately
before our persons or goods were removed over the Portuguese border, In-
spector Birch, with some constables, came on the scene and informed the raiders
that their action was grossly wrong and illegal, and that the ringleaders would
be prosecuted.
The police only being ten in number, the raiders practically defied them.
The Inspector fearing violence, which certainly would have been accompanied
with loss of property and possibly with loss of life, suggested that we should
be allowed time to make arrangements about leaving.
After a good deal of
discussion, this was agreed to. Immediately the crowd had dispersed, the In-
spector informed us that we were not even to think of going, but that he had
merely suggested this allowance of time in order to summon assistance. All
the available mounted police were then called in from old Umtali and guard
placed over our store. The same evening about midnight fifteen Englishmen
attacked the store of Allarakhia Hussein in this town. They broke the doors
open, threw the goods about, assaulted the shop assistants and the policemen.
The assistants, three in number, ran away, deserting the store, and leaving
the goods to the mercy of thieves. Inspector Birch, acting on behalf of the
Government, has rendered us all the protection in his power.
On the morning of the 5th January, the members of the Chamber of
Commerce came over to our store, and reminded us that the time for packing
up and going had already expired. We replied that matters were now altered.
The promise to go was extracted from us by violence and not binding;
further that there were sufficient police in the town to protect us from the
mob. The members of the Chamber of Commerce then left in a dissatisfied
humour. The ringleaders of this raiding had been bound over to keep the peace
towards us for three months in sureties of one and two hundred pounds.
Two of them had been committed to the High Court for trial. We have
resumed business as usual, but the Rhodesian merchants are now fighting the
question of allowing Indian traders in Rhodesia.
Their first step will be to bring the matter before the new Legislative
Council of Rhodesia praying them to grant power to local bodies to refuse
licences to "undesirables" (which is the term they apply to us). They have
been guided in this line of action by the decision recently upheld by the Privy
Council regarding the refusal of the Licensing Board of Newcastle, Natal,
to grant a licence to an Indian. We understand your Congress have taken
this in hand.
In conclusion, we beg to inform you that, as the Europeans in South
Africa in combination are fighting hard for our expulsion from this territory,
we also desire to combine and fight for our rights as British subjects. We res-
pectfully request you to give the matter your earnest consideration and take
up our cause, and, in fact, that of the British Indian subjects in general.
As we are allowed to trade freely in some parts of South Africa both
under the Portuguese, French, German, and Dutch Governments, we cannot
understand why we should be opposed in British territory, seeing that we are
by right under the protection of the British flag.
III-
It appears also to us, the Indian policy of Great Britain is directly op-
posed to the persecution of British Indian subjects.
We have communicated with our English agents about this matter, and
also with Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India. We are determined to have the
matter brought before the British Parliament, and we would pray for your
assistance in fighting out this great question upon constitutional lines.
p.p. NATHOO VALLEY & Co.
B. R. NAIK
ALLARAKHIA HUSSEIN
The Times of India, 15-4-1899
