199. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 25, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I get your letters. If occasionally you cannot write for want of
time, I will know that that was the reason and also that there
was nothing urgent to write about.
It seems you note the weights of only the boys and girls.
Since we wish to know the effect of the new regimen, it would be
better if you note the weights of all the inmates. You may do so
every fortnight. The weights should be recorded on fixed dates
in a separate register kept for the purpose. Have you shown in
the record of weights sent to me the weekly increases?
In every
case in which there is loss in weight, the reason, if it can be
147
ascertained, should be noted. What effect did the change have
on the incidence of constipation? Can we say by how much the
consumption of rice has decreased? I should like a record main-
tained of the quantity of each kind of grain consumed and the
number of persons among whom consumed and the record sent to
me. What vegetables do you serve? Do you buy any from the
market or what is produced in the Ashram suffices? Does any
fruit grow in sufficient quantity in the Ashram to meet your
requirements fully? I know that you require time to think about
and plan all this. You may carry out only those of my suggestions
which you can and leave the rest. If, however, we can have
correct information on these matters, we can so plan things as
to benefit considerably both in regard to health and expenditure.
Our farm, orchard and kitchen should be run with this aim in
view.
It is not, it ought not to be, beyond our capacity to banish
illness from the Ashram. All that is necessary is that somebody
should pay attention to the problem and maintain strict vigilance
about it. If you can select someone from among the many workers
at your disposal, train him for the job. You can train even some
of the boys or girls if you find them suitable.
I was pleased by the certificate which you have given to
Kanhaiyalal. What progress has his wife made?
Tell him about the climate of Orissa. If their health is not
good, don't send them to Orissa just now. If, however, they are
ready to endure all hardships, they may leave even now.
I am glad to learn that Manekbai has arrived there. I don't
suppose you knew her before. I hope Ba sees her frequently.
Amtussalaam must have left for Delhi.
I got the slivers sent with Prabhudas. There is no change
in the condition of my elbow. However, I have started spinning
since yesterday. As there has been no improvement though I had
stopped spinning, I don't think it right to continue the restric-
tion. I have informed the doctor, too. If the pain increases, I
will stop spinning again. I am not being unnecessarily obstinate
in this matter. I look at it entirely from the point of view of
dharma.
I am certainly very glad that jowar and bajri are grown in
the Ashram itself. It would certainly be good if the hand-mill is
revived even for our own needs only. But I am afraid that this
thing is beyond our capacity. Of course the practice of getting
1 & 2 Kinds of millet
small quantities ground occasionally in the Ashram will continue.
Doesn't Bhau keep good health?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I.
