61. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 26, 1928
MY DEAR JAWAHAR,
I have your letters. I am sensing all that is going on in Delhi
and can understand every word of what you have said in your
letter. I can't give you an adequate conception of my grief as I
follow the Conference proceedings from day to day and read bet-
ween the lines. Father's illuminating letter only confirmed my own
reading from a distance. Then came Kripalani's letter yesterday
to Krishnadas, and yours has come today to put the finishing touch.
What a miserable show we are putting up against the insolence
of Lord Birkenhead and the crookedness of the Commissioners?
I had not expected much from Sir John Simon, but I was not at
all prepared for his resorting to all the known tricks of bureau-
cracy, and this the latest trade on untouchables adds to the
ugliness of the whole picture. However, we have to be patient.
You must therefore patiently go through the agony and mend
where you can.
Do come as early as possible. I hope Kamala is keeping up
her strength, if not actually adding to it. I wonder if Father has
told you that, before you came, when Father was with me in Banga-
lore, he and I had contemplated your stay in Bangalore because
of its magnificent climate during summer. There are just four weeks
of somewhat trying weather, but you could always go to Nandi
Hill only 35 miles from Bangalore where you have delightfully cool
weather. In no case should Kamala be allowed to lose what she
gained in Switzerland.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13079
1 In his letter, dated Allahabad, February 23, Jawaharlal Nehru had
written: "I wrote to you a few hours ago and informed you that I hoped
to be in Sabarmati on Monday or Tuesday night. Immediately after I received
a summons from Delhi to go there and remain there for the next fortnight or
more to assist in constitution drafting . . . . Personally I have had enough of this
All-Parties Conference. After ten days of it, the strain was too great for me and
I fled to avoid riot and insurrection! I feel better already after a three-day
absence, but another dose of all the parties may go to my head. I am thus
