351. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
September 13, 1936
CHI. PRABHA,
I have of course asked Mahadevbhai to write to you. I
returned to Segaon yesterday. Except for a feeling of weakness I
am all right. I am still on a diet of milk and fruit only. Mira-
behn has gone to her hut. Ba is not here at present. She will
probably go to Devdas at Delhi. Lilavati is at Maganwadi.
Manu is with Gomati. She might now go with Ba. This leaves
Balwantsinha, Munnalal, Pyarelal and Khan Saheb here. Very
probably, Nanavati will come over. Several persons are in a way
free because the Maganwadi kitchen has been merged with the
students'. Moreover, the place is no more crowded.
Amtul Salaam has come and most probably she will leave
for Bombay in the evening.
I showed your telegram to Jayaprakash, but he is not a
person whom I or anyone else can stop from following his own
bent. He may have left today. Father is here. He had a
severe attack of fever. A doctor is going to examine him. The
particular ailment which Jayaprakash suffered from has abated.
Rajendra Babu will however stay on for the present.
Kanti has gone to Bombay for his studies.
281
Tell me now, haven't I given you plenty of news?
How are you? What is your diet? Do you suffer from head-
aches? Are you able to get milk? What about fruit?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I just read your letter of 2-9-36. How could it be that you
had no letter from me for 22 days? It is true that I could not
write during my illness, but that was a matter of 10 days.
I have not at all received the letter sent through Kanti. How
could I be angry with you? Or, why should I be displeased with
you? I remember no occasion when you ever gave me cause for
anger or annoyance. It may be that letters go astray or that I
am unable to write because of the pressure of work, but never
think that I refrain from writing because I am annoyed with you.
That I weigh 108 lb. after the fever should be regarded as a
good sign. Instead of writing to Kanti's address, write now direct-
ly to me. Kanti's address is: Satyagraha Camp, Vile Parle,
B.B. & C.I. Rly. Drive away your melancholy. Write to me
regularly. My birthday [according to the Vikram calendar] falls
on October 12.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3454
