83. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
June 20, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
The Bill is so bad that passive resistance is a necessity. By the
time this is in your hands, some of us may be already in gaol. I
propose to go to Johannesburg next week and from there send a
final letter to Mr. Fischer reciting our objections and asking him to
meet them next year. If he gives a definite written promise that
he would do so, the struggle will be suspended. There is very little
hope that he would. But before I ask fellow-passive resisters to
embark on what would undoubtedly be a very bitter and pro-
longed struggle, I want to adopt all legitimate methods that
prudence may dictate to avert the misery that must result from a
renewal of the struggle.
These are the defects in the Bill:
(1) The Free State difficulty appears to remain and therefore
the racial distinction.
(2) The existing rights are disturbed in that
(a)
the right of appeal to the Supreme Court is modi-
fied,
(b) the right of the South African Indians to enter the
Cape is taken away,
(c)
the right of domicile of ex-indentured Indians
. . .1 pay the tax seems to have been taken away,
(d) the existing marriage position is considerably modi-
fied, though the amendment has eased the tension
considerably.
I have only just received the amended Bill by Mr. Schreiner's
favour. There may be other defects in it. I shall prepare a full
statement to be sent to you next week. I am not explaining the
behalf of the Zoroastrian Anjuman, the Governor-General informed him
that he had given his assent to the Bill the previous week.
above-mentioned points, as I am anxious to spare you the trouble
of having to read a long letter.
Now for your questions.
1. As you will have seen, the Bill has received the Royal assent.
2. Passive resistance will be resumed probably [at] the beginning
of the next month.
3. In order to court imprisonment we will enter all the Provin-
ces in disregard of the new Act and will refuse to show certi-
ficates or any other papers. Both educated and uneducated
Indians will join the struggle.
4. So far as I can judge at present, 100 men and 13 women will
start the struggle. As time goes, we may have more.
5. I do not expect to raise much cash but I do not anticipate any
difficulty about getting sufficient food and clothing by beg-
ging. If we all go to gaol, Kallenbach has undertaken to do
the begging himself. He can be thoroughly relied upon to see
that no family is starved so long he has life in him. If no
funds arrive unasked from India or elsewhere, we shall per-
form our wanderings on foot, and no money will then be spent
on telegrams and cables. Just at present Miss Schlesin does
all the public work in Johannesburg but for her maintenance
works elsewhere. I am raising a special fund for the London
Committee to be placed at your disposal. I am also getting rid
of other pecuniary burdens. Indian Opinion staff has been
brought down to a minimum and they will be thrown on their
own resources. Some of my private burdens are being found
by Dr. Mehta.
6. The struggle is expected to last a year but if we have more
men than I anticipate, it may close during the next session of
the Union Parliament. We are making provision for an
indefinite prolongation.
7. It is difficult to answer what amount will be required to see
the community through the crisis. At the lowest calculation
made by me, nothing in cash will be required. But as I get
cash, I shall use it for ending the struggle quicker and for
giving support to families and Indian Opinion. Some people
from Natal and the Cape will certainly join the struggle.
My prayer to you is: Please do not worry about us, do not
beg for funds publicly and do not injure your health for the cause.
This prayer is selfish. I am anxious to meet you in the flesh in
India, work under you and learn, may I say, at your feet, all I
want to and must. In some things I want to be disillusioned if I
am in the wrong and I want you to be disillusioned if I am in
the right and we do not agree. I shall not misunderstand you if
I do not receive any letters from you. But whenever you have time
and health, I shall value your letters and advice. They would be a
source of comfort.
After the receipt of Mr. Hall's letter I had decided not to
write to you personally. But your letter leaves me no choice.
I must write another letter regarding your cable to Polak. He
will come if it is at all possible. Funds and his family are the
chief considerations. I shall discuss the situation with him to-
morrow and leave him to write to you on his return to Durban.
He will have a day more than I have for mailing letters.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 928
Courtesy: Servants of India Society
