3. LETTER TO J. X. MERRIMAN
LONDON,
July 15, 1909
DEAR MR. MERRIMAN 1 ,
I have taken the liberty of speaking to Lord Ampthill regarding
the interest you have taken in our struggle, and his Lordship has
promised to seek an interview with you. I hope that something will
come out of your private effort. I need hardly say that the whole thing
has been kept absolutely confidential.
We have just received a cablegram saying that the struggle has
taken its first victim. A young Indian who was serving imprisonment
as a passive resister, was discharged in a dying condition and died six
days after his discharge. There are at present about 100 Indians in the
Transvaal gaols and during the struggle, over 2,500 Indians have
passed through them.
The question as I have told you, is exceedingly simple. All we
want is repeal of the Asiatic (Registration) Act, which is now
considered no longer necessary by General Smuts: the repeal, placing
the status of highly educated Indians on a footing of equality under
the Immigration Law, leaving it open to the administration under the
education test, to make it so severe as to debar from the Colony more
than say six persons per year. What we bitterly resent is the racial
bar, involving as it does a national insult.
1 John Xavier Merriman (1841-1926); Prime Minister of Cape Colony,
1908-10
2 Arthur Oliver Villiers Russell, Second Baron of Ampthill (1869-1936);
Governor of Madras, 1899-1906; acted as Viceroy and Governor-General of
India in 1904; took active interest in the Indian struggle in South Africa and was
President of the S. A.B.I Committee. He wrote the introduction to Doke's
Biography of Gandhiji.
3 Gandhiji went to London after serving a prison sentence for organizing
a non-submission campaign against the Immigrants' Restriction Act.
4
Sammy Nagappen, who died on July 6, 1909; vide Vol. IX, p. 299.
3
4
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
I hope you will not mind my troubling you in this matter.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M.K.GANDHI
J. X. MERRIMAN
REFORM CLUB, LONDON
The correspondence of John X. Merriman, pp. 139-40
