185. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 31, 1933
MY DEAR ANAND,
I have your letter about Devdas. You have given me a good
account. I can see from it how delighted Devdas must have been
to receive news from an eye-witness. But I must confine this
letter to the bombs which you say have burst upon you.
You must not exaggerate things that come from Father.
You have to be prepared for these things, and if you will but
keep calm and yet firm, all the clouds will vanish. You should
talk gently but firmly to both the parents and tell them that you
must be allowed to regulate your future. They have given you a
liberal education. They may not now quarrel with the fruits
162
thereof. Having made your position absolutely clear in as humble
a manner as possible, you should take your own line of action.
You may avoid arrest in Karachi. After all, Hyderabad is your
scene of action, and there you will act in consultation with friends.
One thing you should avoid as a good satyagrahi. You may not
consult your convenience or predilections in choosing the scene
of action. You should, therefore, dismiss the idea of courting
arrest somewhere near Wardha. You may not do it outside Sind.
It would be inconsistent with the spirit of satyagraha.
I have discussed the whole situation with Vidya, and I think
she agrees with me. I did not have to reason with her, but she
volunteered the statement that when she resigned herself to your
seeking imprisonment and her remaining in Wardha, she concur-
rently resigned herself not to see you during your incarceration.
It would be enough, she said, if you are permitted to write to
her as, of course, you would be, and I think that is the correct
position even though you may not seek arrest in Karachi. Vidya
is really getting on excellently. She does not look moody; she
is not morbid and is feeling more and more cheerful. And I
expect you too to be cheerful and to write cheerful letters to her.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani
