26. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
JOHANNESBURG,
February 1, 1908
DEAR MR. SMUTS,
After the conversation that Mr. Chamney had with me on Thursday,
I sought an interview with you again, and Mr. Lane told me that
I would be able to see you before I went. I was not, however, fortunate
enough to do so.
The conversation with Mr. Chamney made me a little uncomfortable,
because he still harped away on the Asiatic Act. Indeed, from him
I gathered that the registration that will now proceed will be legalized
under that Act. At the interview with you, I did not understand any
such thing at all, and the joint letter of Messrs Quinn, Naidoo and
myself, too, makes it clear. I am most anxious to see this business finished
without the slightest difficulty and with perfect satisfaction to yourself.
I am, therefore, naturally most anxious to avoid any misunderstanding.
Pray believe me also when I say that I shall leave no stone unturned
to remove the difficulties in your path owing to the clamour of anti-
Asiatic agitators. May I, therefore, ask you to be good enough to re-
assure me on the point? To legalize voluntary registration under the
Asiatic Act would be to re-open the question at the sorest point. You
were good enough to tell me that the method of legalization will be
discussed later on as between us. I have already suggested that the
best way to do so would be under the Immigrants' Restriction Act by
amending it in so far as may be necessary.
I take it, too, that the form of application and registration will
be settled in consultation with the leaders of the community, and that
this will be done as quickly as possible, so that registration may proceed.
I left a message, too, with Mr. Lane with reference to the ten finger-
prints. I discussed this with Mr. Chamney, and he could show absolutely
no justification for the ten finger-prints. Indeed he admitted that, for
identification, one thumb-impression was quite sufficient. While to
me, personally, it is immaterial whether thumb-prints or digit-impressions
be given, there are many amongst the Asiatics to whom the latter present
an impassable difficulty, and, as I know you want only effective identi-
fication, I do hope you will accept thumb-impressions. In answer to
my inquiry, I have now received telegrams from the Protector of
Indentured Immigrants and the Principal Immigration Restriction
Officer in Natal. The Protector says:
The system of taking ten finger-impressions from indentured Indians on arrival
commenced in April 1903, on being found desirable.
The Immigration Restriction Officer who controls the immigration of
free Asiatics has replied as follows:
Referring yours of date both thumb-impressions only required for certificates
issued in this Department.
You will now see that the information given to you by Captain (?)
Clarke is incorrect. The distinction observed by the Immigration
1 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 40-.
2 The version available in India Office Records has "legislation".
Department and the Protector's Department, too, is most valuable
testimony in favour of my contention. The Protector has to deal with
a class of Asiatics who have every temptation to hide their identity.
Classification in their case is, therefore, necessary. The Immigration
Department has to deal with a class of Asiatics and others who have
always to prove their identity in order to make good their claim to enter
or remain in Natal. Hence that Department requires only thumb-
impressions. Does not this show conclusively that you do not need
digit-impressions at all? And, as my expert adviser tells me, the system
of classification, besides being totally unnecessary, is costly compared
to the system of identification merely. At the Cape, too, only thumb-
prints are required. And, in this connection, I do wish to impress upon
you the fact that the question of discretion is an element which will
lead to favouritism and even fraud ultimately. A man who may be
perfectly wealthy, I need hardly point out, is not necessarily an honest
man, and yet, because he may be known otherwise, his signature alone
will be accepted. To my mind, the only exception that should be made
should be in the case of those who may be able to pass the education
test prescribed by the Immigration Act. These, of course, carry identi-
fication on their own persons, but with reference to the others, speaking
from experience, I urge that the discretion be dropped; but if you insist
on ten finger-prints there will be applications wholesale for the exercise
of discretion, and I am positive, armed as I am with expert opinion
on finger-impressions, that you do not need ten finger-prints for
identification.
I also venture to suggest that the open permission to Indians to
trade without licences will give rise to bickerings amongst the Colonists.
Do you not think it will be better either to issue licences or to take from
them deposit of licence fee against provisional receipts?
I hope I have done the proper thing in adopting a familiar tone
in writing this letter, which is purely personal and confidential, and
your reply will be also so treated. If in any of the public statements
I have been making you think that I have been at all indiscreet, pray
correct me.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
GENERAL J . C . SMUTS
PRETORIA
Indian Opinion, 4-7-1908
Also India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08
