121. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
COONOOR,
February 5, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I am writing this letter in the morning after cleaning my
teeth. I have already written to you regarding . . .'s address.
You must have received it through Om. Kanjibhai was to come
here, but he has had to remain behind because of the earthquake
in Bihar. But he definitely wants to come, and so does Bhula-
bhai.
The attempt which I made to see Shri Aurobindo was for the
sake of the Gujaratis [in Pondicherry]. His refusal was courteous.
He said that he saw nobody.
The Revered Mother did not reply
at all. My visit to that town has been dropped now. In a way
I am glad that it has been. But I intend to send Chandrashankar
and Bapa there. Let them see and observe as much as they can.
We lose nothing by addressing 'Mother' as 'Mother'. The etiquette
of addressing a person by the name which has been bestowed on
him was observed even at the Round Table Conference. You will
probably say that it would be ruinous to follow the example of
the Round Table Conference. But my point is that even there
people were obliged to observe this etiquette.
Your guess as to Raojibhai's reason for going to . . .4 is cor-
rect. . . .5 also has gone there now and Ramdas tells me that our
Harilal, too, has been there. He who has many sons and daughters
should have a mother as well, shouldn't he!
I think I have already written to you about the Zamorin.
He lives in utmost simplicity.
There is no ostentation at all.
His palace too is a palace only in name, and there is hardly any
furniture. He showed me the utmost courtesy.
I was introduced
to his son.
He offered me coconut water and gave me fruit when
I left.
He was very pleased that I confined the conversation to
formal courtesies.
He is old and said that his memory was be-
coming weak. He is a good man.
I am glad I called on him.
Coonoor is a beautiful place. If one can get accommodation
here, the daily necessities are cheap.
It is very cold in winter
though not extremely so. Our workers have been doing good
work among the hill people.
I had received an invitation from
them, and so I suggested that, if they wished to give me eight
days' rest, they should let me have it in Coonoor so that I could
work among the hill people and also dispose of the papers which
had accumulated.
I am staying in Nagesvara Rao's bungalow
here. I am lodged above the garage.
It is a small but good
room. The garage can be used as a room. My room above it is
a clean one. I am glad I came here. The hill people come to see
me every day. In Ooty, on the nearby hill of Kotagiri, and
here, we had large meetings such as had never taken place in
these parts. Deputations of Harijans came and met me.
There
is a fine mutt exclusively for Harijans, which I visited.
The hill
people are much addicted to drinking.
Our workers have
been doing good work among them.
Raja will see me tomorrow.
Bihar has been receiving good help; people from all over the
country have been sending money and clothes. From the Ashram,
Panditji1, Parnerkar2, Raojibhai3, Bal and others have gone there.
Swami and Dhotre also have gone. Mathuradas has been planning
to go and may go any day. Others also are ready, but I have
kept them back.
I will follow Rajendrababu's instructions.
Whether or not I should go, that also I have left to him. I
have told him that he may call me there whenever he wants me.
My own inclination is to go there after covering Karnataka and
Orissa. That will mean I shall reach there about 20th March.
I have been collecting money at every place I visit. This time
I come into contact only with people who give me coppers. I
do meet, of course, a few who belong to the middle class. They
give what they can.
But there is no limit to the generosity of the
poor. Every day hill women come and give me a few coins tied
up in a corner of their saris. Ramachandran of the Ashram is
with me at present. I am sure you know him. He is a scholar
and a fine man. Jivaraj's health has been very much affected.
But he is a brave man and continues to look after the hospital.
At intervals he pays visits to Matheran and takes rest for a few
days.
You must have heard about Perin and Jamnabehn. Prema
and Lilavati (Asar) went back [to jail] as soon as they were
released. Lilavati is an obstinate girl. Perhaps she will die in
jail. Amtussalaam is here. She has taken ill. Her loyalty is
wonderful. I am sending Amala just now to Sabarmati for Hari-
jan work. We will watch how she behaves there.
Bidaj also has been handed over to the Harijan Sevak Sangh.
It is intended to take the dairy back to the Harijan Ashram.
That will enable us to give training to some Harijans and ensure
that the dairy is run well.
A copy of Ba's letter is enclosed. Please convey to Mani
whatever you can from this. I have asked for permission to see
her and Mahadev. I have sent a wire. A reply is expected in a
day or two. I will go there on the 6th March. I also have heard
about . . .2. Tell Mani that Mridu has sent a long message for
her: 'She still suffers from her disease. She remembers Mani
every day. She expects to be free in March. If Mani wants
any other books, she may call for them. She has had letters from
Durga, Mani Parikh, Velanbehn and others. After resting for some
time, she hopes to return to jail.' Abbas Saheb's 80th birthday
seems to have been celebrated with enthusiasm. Kaka worked
hard for that. The old man was very much pleased. Kalyanji
is writing a short biography of him. All our men of letters visited
him in this connection and refreshed the memory of half-forgotten
old days.
I am glad that you are experimenting with neti . A wick made
with hand from a piece of fine cloth may be found more useful.
It can suck up harmful matter. You can make such a wick from
your worn-out dhoti. It is necessary to do pranayama exercises
along with it. Neti and pranayama will certainly help to keep
the nostrils open. I am glad that your constipation has disappear-
ed. I am sure the change which you have made in your food
will benefit you.
Kelappan did not intentionally hide the fact of his relations
with that lady. He didn't think there was anything improper
in it. He also was influenced by "Self-respect" and "Jatpattod".
Nor is there anything against the lady. Kelappan is not a bad
man. He is only simple-minded and also obstinate. I wish to
put Rajaji in charge of the work in Malabar. I have not made
up my mind finally, though. I may also appoint Ramachandran
instead.
Your plan for Aunt seems a good one. Let her remain where
she is. Hasn't she been indiscreet enough? But your fear is base-
less. The refreshment served by Sir Chimanlal is not likely to
contain much. If most people don't relish what he serves, what
can the poor man do?
The visit to Bengal is still undecided. I can't say what will
finally happen.
I had a wire from Muriel [Lester]. I have asked her to come
and see me near Coimbatore, and also suggested that she should
tour with me for some time. Amritlal Sheth has not written to
me recently. He served an ultimatum on me too. I don't
mind, let the truth come out even from the bowels of the earth.
Isn't even man's body a piece of earth?
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
[PS.]
The frost has ruined crops all over the country this year. In
some parts it has been frost and in some other parts it has been
unseasonable rains. These things seem to have a direct connec-
tion with the earthquake.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 70-
