25. LETTER TO LORD SAMUEL
DETENTION CAMP,
May 15, 1943
DEAR LORD SAMUEL1,
I enclose herewith a cutting from The Hindu dated 8th
April last, containing Reuter's summary of your speech in the
House of Lords during the recent debate. Assuming the cor-
rectness of the summary, I feel impelled to write this letter.
The report distressed me. I was wholly unprepared for
your unqualified association with the one-sided and unsifted
statement of the Government of India against the Congress and
me.
You are a philosopher and liberal. A philosophic mind has
always meant for me a detached mind and liberalism, a sym-
pathetic understanding of men and things.
As it seems to me, there is nothing in what the Gov-
ernment has said to warrant the conclusion to which you are
reported to have come.
From the summary, I select below a few of the items which,
in my opinion, are inconsistent with facts.
enclosed. The communique stated: "The Government of India have received
a request from Mr. Gandhi to forward a short letter from himself to Mr.
Jinnah expressing a wish to meet him. In accordance with their known
policy in regard to correspondence or interviews with Mr. Gandhi, the Gov-
ernment of India have decided that this letter cannot be forwarded and have
so informed Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Jinnah. They are not prepared to give
facilities for political correspondence or contact to a person detained for
promoting an illegal mass movement which he has not disavowed, and thus
gravely embarrassing India's war effort at a critical time. It rests with Mr.
Gandhi to satisfy the Government of India that he can safely be allowed
once more to participate in the public affairs of the country, and until he
does so the disabilities from which he suffers are of his own choice." How-
ever, from the document published in The Transfer of Power, Vol. III, pp.
974-6, it is evident that the Viceroy of India was of the view that the letter
should be forwarded and that Jinnah, if he wished to meet Gandhiji,
should be allowed to do so.
1. The Congress Party has to a great extent thrown over demo-
cratic philosophy.
The Congress Party has never "thrown over democratic
philosophy". Its career has been one progressive march towards
democracy. Everyone who subscribes to the attainment of the
goal of independence through peaceful and legitimate means
and pays four annas per year can become its member.
2. It shows signs of turning towards totalitarianism.
You have based your charge on the fact that the Working
Committee of the Congress had control over the late Congress
Ministries.
Does not the successful party in the House of
Commons do likewise? I am afraid even when democracy has
come to full maturity, parties will be running elections and their
managing committees will be controlling the actions and poli-
cies of their members. Individual Congressmen did not run
elections independently of the party machinery. Candidates
were officially chosen and they were helped by all-India lea-
ders. 'Totalitarian', according to the Oxford Pocket Dic-
tionary, means "designating a party that permits no rival loyal-
ties or parties". 'Totalitarian State' means "with only one
governing party". It must have violence as its sanction for
keeping control. A Congress member, on the contrary, enjoys
the same freedom as the Congress President, or any member of
the Working Committee. There are parties within the Congress
itself. Above all the Congress eschews violence. Members ren-
der voluntary obedience. The All-India Congress Committee
can at any moment unseat the members of the Working Com-
mittee and elect others.
3. They (Congress Ministers) resigned (not?) because they had
not the support of their Assemblies.
They resigned because de jure they were responsible to their electorates,
de facto they were responsible to the Working Committee of the
Congress and the High Command. That is not democracy. That is
totalitarianism.
You would not have said this if you had known the full
facts. The de jure responsibility of the Ministers to the electo-
rate was not diminished in any way by their de facto responsi-
bility to the Congress Working Committee, for the very sim-
ple and valid reason that the Working Committee derives its
power and prestige from the very electorate to whom the
Ministers were responsible. The prestige that the Congress en-
joys is due solely to its service of the people. As a matter of
fact, the Ministers conferred with the members of their parties
in their respective Assemblies and they tendered their resignations
with their approval. But totalitarianism is fully represented by
the Government of India which is responsible to no one in India.
It is a tragic irony that a Government which is steeped in
totalitarianism brings that very charge against the most democratic
body in India.
4. India is unhappy in that the line of party division is the
worst any country can have--it is a division according to religious com-
munities.
Political parties in India are not divided according to reli-
gious communities. From its very commencement the Con-
gress has deliberately remained a purely political organization.
It has had Britishers and Indians, including Christians, Parsis,
Muslims and Hindus, as Presidents.
The Liberal Party of
India is another political organization, not to mention others
that are wholly non-sectarian. That there are also communal
organizations based on religion and that they take part in
politics is undoubtedly true. But that fact cannot sustain the
categorical statement made by you. I do not wish in any
way to minimize the importance of these organizations or the
considerable part they play in the politics of the country. But
I do assert that they do not represent the political mind of
India. It can be shown that historically the politico-religious
organizations are the result of the deliberate application by the
alien Government of their "divide and rule" policy. When the
British imperial influence is totally withdrawn, India will pro-
bably be represented solely by political parties drawn from all
classes and creeds.
5. The Congress can claim at best barely more than half the
population of India. Yet in their totalitarian spirit they claim to speak
for the whole.
lf you measure the representative character of the Congress
by the number of members on the official roll, then it does not
represent even half the population. The official membership
is infinitesimal compared to India's vast population of nearly
four hundred millions. The enrolled membership began only in
1920. Before that the Congress was represented by its All-India
Committees whose members were mainly elected by various
political associations. Nevertheless the Congress has, so far as
I know, always claimed to speak the mind of India, not even
excluding the Princes. A country under alien subjection can only
have one political goal, namely, its freedom from that subjection.
And considering that the Congress has always and predomi-
nantly exhibited that spirit of freedom, its claim to represent
all India can hardly be denied. That some parties repudiate
the Congress, does not derogate from the claim in the sense in
which it has been advanced.
6. When Mr. Gandhi called upon the British Government to
quit India, he said it would be for the Congress to take delivery.
I never said that when the British quitted India, "the
Congress would take delivery". This is what I said in my letter
to His Excellency the Viceroy, dated 29th January last:
The Government have evidently ignored or overlooked the very
material fact that the Congress by its August resolution asked nothing
for itself. All its demands were for the whole people.
As you should
be aware, the Congress was willing and prepared for the Government
inviting Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah to form a national government, subject
to such agreed adjustments as may be necessary, for the duration of
the war, such government being responsible to a duly elected assembly.
Being isolated from the Working Committee, except Shrimati Sarojini
Devi, I do not know its present mind. But the Committee is not likely
to have changed its mind. 2
7. If this country or Canada, Australia, New Zealand or South
Africa or the United States had abstained from action as the Congress
in India abstained . . .3 then perhaps the cause of freedom everywhere
would have gone under. . .4 It is a pity that the leaders of the Con-
gress do not realize that glory is not to be won in India by abandon-
ing the cause of mankind.
How can you compare India with Canada and other
dominions which are virtually independent entities, let alone
Great Britain or the United States-wholly independent coun-
tries? Has India a spark of the freedom of the type enjoyed by
the countries named by you? India has yet to attain her free-
dom. Supposing the Allied powers were to lose, and supposing
further that the Allied forces were to withdraw from India
under military necessity, which I do not expect, the countries
you name may lose their independence. But unhappy India
will be obliged to change masters, if she is even then in her
defenceless state. The Congress does not abstain out of cussed-
ness. Neither the Congress nor any other organization can
possibly kindle mass enthusiasm for the Allied cause without the
present possession of independence, to use your own expression
either de jure or de facto. Mere promises of future independence
cannot work that miracle. The cry of "Quit India" has arisen
from a realization of the fact that if India is to shoulder the
burden of representing, or fighting for the "cause of mankind",
she must have the glow of freedom now. Has a freezing man
ever been warmed by the promise of the warmth of sunshine
coming at some future date?
The great pity is that the ruling power distrusts everything
that the Congress does or says under my influence which it has
suddenly discovered is wholly evil. It is necessary for a clear
understanding that you should know my connection with the
Congress and Congressmen. It was in 1935 that I was success-
ful in my attempt to sever all formal connections with the
Congress. There was no coolness between the Congress Work-
ing Committee members and myself. But I realized that I
was cramped and so were the members whilst I was officially
connected with the Congress. The growing restraints which my
conception of non-violence required from time to time were
proving too hard to bear. I felt therefore that my influence
should be strictly moral. I had no political ambition. My
politics were subservient to the demands of truth and non-vio-
lence as I had defined and practised for practically the whole
of my life. And so I was permitted by the fellow members to
sever the official connection even to the extent of giving up
the four-anna membership. It was understood between us that
I should attend the meetings of the Working Committee only
when the members required my presence for consultation in
matters involving the application of non-violence or affecting
communal unity. Since that time I have been wholly unconnected
with the routine work of the Congress. Many meetings of
the Working Committee have, therefore, taken place without
me. These proceedings I have often seen only when they have
been published in the newspapers. The members of the Work-
ing Committee are independent-minded men. They engage me
often in prolonged discussions before they accept my advice
on the interpretation of non-violence as applied to the problems
arising from new situations. It will be, therefore, unjust to
77-
them and to me to say that I exercise any influence over them
beyond what reason commands. The public know how even
until quite recently in matters of moment the majority of the
members of the Working Committee have on several occasions
rejected my advice.
8. They have not merely abstained from action, but the Congress
has deliberately proclaimed the formula that it is wrong to help the
British war effort by men or money and that the only worthy effort
is to resist all war with non-violent resistance. In the name of non-vio-
lence they have led a movement which was characterized in many places
by the utmost violence, and the White Paper gives clear proof of the
complicity of the Indian leaders in the disorders.
This charge shows to what extent the British public has
been misled by imaginary stories as in the Government of
India publication on the disturbances; statements have been torn
from their context and put together as if they were made at
one time or in the same context. The Congress is committed
to non-violence so far as the attainment of freedom is concern-
ed. And to that end the Congress has been struggling all these
twenty years, however imperfectly it may be, to express non-
violence in action, and I think it has succeeded to a great ex-
tent. But it has never made any pretence of war resistance
through non-violence. Could it have made that claim and lived
up to it, the face of India would have been changed and the
world would have witnessed the miracle of organized violence
being successfully met by organized non-violence. But human
nature has nowhere risen to the height which full non-violence
demands. The disturbances that took place after the 8th of
August were not due to any action on the part of the Con-
gress. They were due entirely to the inflammatory action of the
Government in arresting Congress leaders throughout India and
that at a time which was psychologically wholly wrong. The
utmost that can be said is that Congressmen or others had not
risen high enough in non-violence to be proof against all provo-
cation.
It surprises me that although you have admitted that "this
White Paper may be good journalism but it is not so good as
a State document", you have based your sweeping judgment
on the strength of that paper. If you would read the very
speeches to which the paper makes reference, you will find there
ample material to show that the Government of India had not
the slightest justification in making those unfortunate arrests on
August 9 last and after, or in making the charges they have
brought against the arrested leaders after their incarceration—
charges which have never been sifted in any court of law.
9. Mr. Gandhi faced us with an utterly illegitimate method of
political controversy, levying blackmail on the best of human emotions,
pity and sympathy, by his fast. The only creditable thing to Mr.
Gandhi about the fast was ending it.
You have used a strong word to characterize my fast. His
Excellency the Viceroy has also allowed himself to use the same
word. You have perhaps the excuse of ignorance. He had no
such excuse, for he had my letters before him. All I can tell
you is that fasting is an integral part of satyagraha. It is a
satyagrahi's ultimate weapon. Why should it be blackmail when
man under a sense of wrong crucifies his flesh? You may not
know that satyagrahi prisoners fasted in South Africa for the
removal of their wrongs; so they have done in India. One
fast of mine you know, as I think you were then a Cabinet
Minister. I refer to the fast which resulted in the alteration
of the decision of His Majesty's Government. If the decision
had stood, it would have perpetuated the curse of untouchability.
The alteration prevented the disaster.
The Government of India communique, announcing my re-
cent fast issued after it had commenced, accused me of hav-
ing undertaken the fast to secure my release. It was a wholly
false accusation. It was based on a distortion of the letter I
had written in answer to that of the Government. That letter
dated the 8th February was suppressed at the time when the
communique was issued. If you will study the question, I refer
you to the following which were published in the newspapers:
My letter to His Excellency the Viceroy dated New Year's
Eve, 1942.
His Excellency's reply dated January 13, 1943.
My letter dated January 19, 1943.
His Excellency's reply dated January 25, 1943.
My letter dated January 29, 1943.
His Excellency's reply dated February 5, 1943.
My letter dated February 7, 1943.
Sir R. Tottenham's letter dated February 7, 1943.
My reply dated February 8, 1943.
And I do not know from where you got the impression
that I ended the fast, for which supposed act you give me cre-
dit. If you mean by it that I ended the fast before its time,
I would call such an ending a discredit to me. As it was, the
fast ended on its due date, for which I can claim no credit.
10. He (Lord Samuel) considered that the negotiations broke down
on points on which they could not have broken down, had there been
any real desire on the part of the Congress to come to a settlement.
The statements made by the President of the Congress, Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad, and Pandit Nehru, who carried on the prolonged
negotiations, I venture to think, make it quite clear that no
true man could have shown more real or greater desire for a
settlement. In this connection it is well to remember that Pandit
Nehru was and, I have no doubt, still remains, an intimate personal
friend of Sir Stafford Cripps at whose invitation he had come down
from Allahabad. He could, therefore, leave no stone unturned
to bring the negotiations to a successful issue. The history of the
failure has yet to be written. When it is, it will be found that
the cause lay elsewhere than with the Congress.
I hope my letter has not wearied you. Truth has been
overlaid with much untruth. If not, justice to a great organi-
zation, the cause of Truth, which is Humanity, demands an
impartial investigation of the present distemper.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosure 1
THE RT. HON'BLE LORD SAMUEL
HOUSE OF LORDS
LONDON
From a photostat: C.W. 10378. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 75-82, and Correspondence with
Mr. Gandhi, pp. 25-
