37. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Monday [November 28, 1921]
DEAR SHANKERLAL,
I have received your detailed letter. I shall definitely look
forward to knowing such details at least for the time being.
We need two committees to serve our purpose:
(1) To find and assess the damage done to private persons or
private property during the recent disturbance and to collect funds
necessary for the proposed relief.
(2) To inquire into the part played by the police and the military
during the recent disturbance with special reference to the charge that
they took sides.
Our purpose will be served by having two such committees.
There is no reference in this to the origin of the disturbance because
it is not necessary and it will lead to more dissentions. Both the
committees should meet in camera and only the required evidence to
be published by the committee(s) should be made public.
There should also be co-opted members in both the committees.
I have already given the names. Let Prof. Giddes give his speech. It
would be good invite both the sides. If (the members of) these two
committees go and the co-opted members join them and if the Parsees
and the Christians do not lodge any complaint with the Government,
then we can make considerable headway.
Do keep in contact with Chhotani Mian. We can certainly not
engage lawyers for the people. Those who want to may do so. But
as a committee we cannot be a party to it. Even as individuals for
whom non-co-operation is a matter of duty, we cannot do it. There-
fore, those who are arrested, would not be able to have from us legal
help, etc.
1 From the contents; vide Vol. XXI, p.497. Gandhiji left for Surat on
December 1, a Thursday.
2 What follows in this paragraph is in English.
3 On November 17, when the Prince of Wales arrived in Bombay, there
were demonstrations against his visit, including bonfires of foreign cloth,
resulting in riots on a large scale.
32
LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
33
I saw that steps had already been taken in the case of
Anasuyabehn before I reached. Bhai Mohanlal has vacated the
premises and elections are to be held soon.
Settle the matter about sending money to Gujarat for the
swadeshi movement immediately.
Take proper care of your health. I think I shall leave for Surat
on Thursday morning.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati : S. N. 32700
