567. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
May 23, 1926
Here is a letter from Santanam in reply to mine. I shall no
longer strive with him but wish him every success in his struggle.
His is a very good letter.
I saw your letter to Jamnalalji yesterday in Bombay. I hope
you have already got rid of pleurisy. With proper care this is a
complaint that can be brought under subjection without diffi-
culty. Where do you think your tour should commence? If it is
to be in the Southern Presidency and if you do not propose to
come to Ahmedabad before commencing the tour, Jamnalalji
told me he would join you wherever you want him to. If, how-
ever, you consider that the Southern Presidency should for the
time being be left alone, some other province can be selected. The
selection will then be made here. If it will be too late for your
letter to reach here you will telegraph your intentions. In no
case will you think of commencing the tour, if you have not got
rid of your pleurisy entirely, because more travelling is likely to
do some good. Travelling in the monsoon has its danger for a
a pleurisy patient.
I need not entertain you with a description of my talks with
the Governor. You may know in one sentence that I began the
talk and ended it with the charkha. And for the 2nd interview,
like the good advertising agent I am, I took with me Mithubai's
khaddar saris to demonstrate to the Governor and his wife the
possibilities of Andhra khadi. The Governor listened to all I
had to say about the spinning-wheel with great attention but, if
you ask me how much he was impressed I cannot say.
I saw Mathuradas, Kaka, Devdas and Behram Khambhatta.
My rapid wandering was worth while if only to see these precious
patients. Devdas is quite all right and much healthier looking
than he was while he was admitted to the Hospital. Kaka has
made splendid progress but he must cover still more ground.
Mathuradas is better than he was but he cannot be said to be
out of wood entirely. Not that there is any danger imminent but
he has to take extraordinary care of himself. Behram Khambhatta
has some intestinal growth. You may not know him. He is one
of the devoted, selfless and silent workers always deliberately
putting himself in the background. And his wife is equally good,
an incarnation of Sita.
If it will serve as any stimulation for you to become stronger
I present you with the information that ten to one I shall not be
going to Finland, for, Paul seems to have put his foot into it.
Any way he is at sea and does not know how to manage me or
my travelling. He offers to milk the she-goat, evidently thinking
that it would be the business of my attendants to perform the
ceremony from day to day. However the thing will be finally deci-
ded within the next fortnight at the most.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 19568
