617. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
December [22]1, 1927
CHI. RAMDAS,
I have your letter. You are needlessly worried. I am hope-
ful that my health will be restored. But if it does not happen
and I remain bed-ridden then. . . .
I began this letter four days ago. Just then the doctor
arrived and it was left there.
I now take it up in Madras
where I arrived today. We shall see about that. For the pre-
sent let us resolve that on the Vasant Panchami day you will
be entering a new life and shouldering a new responsibility in
the name of God and with His help.
Apparently there is nothing wrong with my health. But the
blood-pressure is very high.
There is no doubt of that. All I
need is rest. It is not also true that I do not observe the rules
about health which I prescribe for others. But I shall explain
this to you one day if you ask me.
Today I wish to write about one point in your previous
letter. Why should Nimu not do independent work? You know
that millions of our poor people work like that. We have become
sweepers and scavengers! What about Ramjibhai and Ganga-
behn? In countless peasant families both husbands and wives
earn. In factories both men and women work. Here both Anna
and his wife Gomatibehn take salaries and also do the Hindi
work. By following this practice your family life will become not
difficult but smooth and you will become an ideal couple. Thou-
sands of people have children while they work. Yes, it is true
that they are not able to live in comfort. But you must ask me
for further clarification on this point. I wish you to have a
happy, simple, useful and interesting life. The circumstances are
also favourable. Everything depends on your education and
Nimu's. I wanted to train her but could not manage it. There
were obstacles in the way. I fell ill and on returning to the
Ashram could not cope with three obstacles at the same time.
But Nimu is herself a good girl and hence I am not worried.
The only question is how far your body will co-operate.
I shall not write anything more now. Imam Saheb has fallen
ill and has come here. I am going to meet him. I hope to reach
the Ashram in January or earlier.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Motanan Man, pp. 39-40
