245. LETTER TO PYARELAL
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,
May 16, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
There was no letter from you yesterday. It would be good
if you did not keep me without letters these days. I am now
putting out of my mind the distress of Mahadev and Sushila. It
should now be considered entirely a matter of the past. I am send-
ing today by book-post three letters from Mirabehn. Both you
brother and sister may peruse the letters and let me know your
reaction. Is not Mirabehn's description similar to that of Ravana's
palace by Tulsidas? Ravana is lying unconscious and his nume-
rous queens are reclining around him in various states of undress.
I laughed and cried when I read it. How could I have been affected
in that way? Disregarding Mirabehn's exaggeration, I was affected
by what remained in the letter and I wrote that I would change
my practice. What if the suffering witnessed on the 14th was
the result of those physical contacts? So far I have not found
any clear evidence to conclude that it could not have been so.
Then have all these women become impure by my touch? If that
is so, have I been like that from the beginning? In that case,
is the peace that some women and young men are supposed to
have found by being close to me a delusion? If that is the case,
do I have a place in the world? Who am I to find fault with
Mahadev and Sushila? Who can say that I may not be thrust-
ing my own faults on them?
What have you all gained from
me? Is it only disappointment? Would it be proper for me to
guide you? Such thoughts pass through my mind. I am main-
taining my calm in the midst of this turmoil. My attention is
centred on you. If you remain composed then I may regain
my self-confidence. Your action will help me only if it is natural.
Or, if I find that whatever steps you take express your sense of
duty, then too I shall feel at ease. This means that I have found
the guru that I have been looking for. I shall consider myself
fortunate if that happens. It is my belief that such should be the
148
result of my training. I shall attain glory only if those who are
my heirs have reached higher than I. Right now I see you,
Mahadev, Sushila, etc., as occupying a loftier place. This does
not mean that now I cannot guide you in any matter at all.
But it does mean that if the experience of the 14th is indicative
of my generally diseased mind, the situation in which all of you
sustained yourselves would have reduced me to bits!
I shall not elaborate further.
If possible, decide about the time of your coming. After you
receive this letter, write to me at the Wardha address.
Today's post has not yet arrived. I expect to hear that
Sushila has regained her calm.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am sending "Thought for the Day" copied from the Times
of India of today. The person who copied it is also a Sushila.
She is the headmistress of a high school at Rajkot.
Post Mirabehn's letters to Rajkumari. I have received your
letter. Is Sushila so mad ? It is unbearable that she should lose
her place with me. I am awaiting your detailed letter.
From the Gujarati
original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
