262. LETTER TO N.
March 29, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
I have your letter of 26th instant. You are right. I do want
truth and love to peep out of every word I write, and if they do
not do so, it is not due to want of effort on my part. You need not
therefore be afraid about my consciously rubbing up R. the wrong
way. I wrote to him yesterday expressing about the same
sentiments that you have in your letter before me. He sent me
two letters in the same cover, both of them were unsatisfactory.
I could see that truth had not yet dawned upon him.
You will describe your new situation as fully as you can,
your surroundings, the neighbours, the population of the village,
the things that can be purchased in the village, its distance from
Mysore or Bangalore or any big centre, distance from the nearest
railway station, the condition of water supply, the composition of
the population and the like. Tell me also whether you can have
good milk there. What are the cattle in the village? And if you
cannot get good cow's milk, and if there are goats there, you will
not hesitate to have goat's milk for S. You should learn to milk
goats yourself and have the goat brought before you, so that you
are sure of the purity of the milk supplied, and if there are cows there,
learn to milk the cows yourself. If you feel weak or if you find
that your digestive apparatus does not keep up to mark, I would like
you to go back to milk and butter, but no butter so much as milk,
and take unfired milk, as you saw me take it. I should then have
no anxiety about your health.
Whilst I would like you to live the life of the poorest of Hari-
jans, I do not want you to do the impossible, and therefore what-
ever your health peremptorily demands, you should take if you can
get it for the begging. If you cannot, in a perfectly honourable
way, God will give you the strength to suffer privation, but even
then you will not misfeed yourself. Fasting is better than taking
food that you cannot assimilate or that gives you no stamina. A
few dry dates or raisins or figs well washed will at a pinch sustain
you and even S., but I am sure that if you have living faith in
living truth, it will not try you beyond your capacity for endu-
rance.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20751
