403. LETTER TO SURENDRAJI
April 19, 1932
Your letter did not require immediate reply, and I also thought
that as a prisoner I should keep myself within proper limits. Hence
I delayed replying to you. I have completely forgotten what you
had said in your previous letter (written to me when I was in
England). You should never hesitate to write to me anything you
think about me. It would be a weakness in you to feel such hesita-
tion. If friends and co-workers put before me their criticism
whenever they think that I am committing an error, I would learn
much from it, because there would be no malice in their criti-
cism. Moreover, if we are displeased with anything which a
friend may have done, it is a test of our friendship and love for
him to tell him immediately what has displeased us. Love is not
love if it hesitates to speak out through consideration for the feel-
ings of the person loved.
330
In the statement, "true brahmacharya is that which remains
inviolate in any condition"1, the word 'condition' should be
understood comprehensively. That is true brahmacharya which does
not succumb to any temptation or allurement. If a beautiful young
woman makes advances to the stone image of a man, there will be
no effect on the latter. A man is a true brahmachari if, in similar
circumstances, he remains like a stone. And that image nei-
ther hears with its ears nor sees with its eyes. Similarly, a man
also should not go seeking temptations. Anybody who does that
is not a brahmachari. A brahmachari should not knowingly do any-
thing which may be regarded as a sign of lust. But your chief
contention is this, that the sight and company of women are
found in experience to be inimical to self-control and must, there-
fore, be avoided. This reasoning seems wrong to me.
That is not true self-control or brahmacharya which can be
preserved only by avoiding even such association with women as
may occur in the ordinary course and is necessitated by our
work of service. It is only outward renunciation uninspired by
genuine desirelessness. The suppressed craving is bound to break
through when it gets a suitable opportunity. Scripture tells us
that our pleasure in sense-objects does not disappear completely
till we have had a vision of the Supreme. But the converse is equal-
ly true. Till our pleasure in sense-objects has disappeared complete-
ly, we cannot see the Supreme. In other words, our progress in
regard to both is simultaneous. The meaning of the last statement
should be carefully understood. Our pleasure in sense-objects
does indeed disappear only after we have had a vision of the
Supreme. That is, though our cravings may have subsided, our
instinctive pleasure in sense-objects will have survived somewhere
deep in us and, therefore, till we have seen the Supreme there will
always be a possibility of the cravings being aroused again. After the
vision of the Supreme, there can be no cravings whatsoever. That
means that such a man loses the consciousness of sex and becomes
sexless. That is to say, he ceases to be a figure and becomes a
cipher, in other words, loses his self in God. When craving has
ceased altogether, there can be no pleasure in sense-objects. I
think this is easy enough to understand. If in this discussion
we substitute the word 'Truth' wherever the words 'Supreme', 'God',
'Brahman', 'Parabrahman', etc., occur, the argument will be clear
and it will also be easy to understand the meaning of realization.
Self-deception will not avail anybody here. Those in the Ashram
who, under the pretext of living according to the ideal of the
Ashram being one family, gratify their lustful fancies mentally are
the hypocrites of Chapter III [of the Gita]. Here we are talking
about persons who scrupulously follow Truth and are considering
how they should behave. Hence, even if ninety-nine per cent of
the inmates of the Ashram act as above, so long as the remain-
ing one per cent sincerely try to live according to our ideal of the
Ashram being one family, the aim of the Ashram will have been
fulfilled and the manner of life which we have deliberately adop-
ted in it will be justified. We need not, therefore, think what others
do, but consider only what is possible for ourselves. But, at the
same time, we should also take care not to imitate others with-
out regard to our own limitations. Others may claim that they can
live freely according to the ideal of our being one family, but we
ourselves, if we feel that we do not have such strength, should avoid
physical contact with women inmates without disputing the claim
of those others. We are carrying on a new and dangerous experi-
ment in the Ashram. Those who can join it without violating
Truth may do so, and those who cannot may keep away from it.
We do not regard it as everybody's duty to mix freely with the
women inmates. All that we do is to permit such freedom. Those
members who can take it without violating dharma may do so,
but those who are afraid of violating dharma by such freedom
may, even though they live in the Ashram, keep themselves miles
away from the company of women. One inmate of the Ashram
may be able to treat . . .2 as his daughter. But another inmate
may not be able to cultivate such a feeling towards her, though he
wishes that he could. It would then be his duty not to be free
with her. In this connection I have given the illustration of a
corpse. If you feel that it is wrong to imagine such a case even as
an illustration, you may suppose 'A' and 'B' instead. If 'C' can-
not feel towards 'B' as 'A' does, it is the moral duty of 'C', so
long as he lives in the Ashram, never to touch 'B'. I have tried
to enforce this rule in all cases in which I came to know the truth.
You should forget what happened about the chair. No im-
portance need be attached to it. You are a sincere seeker, and,
therefore, the ultimate result will assuredly be good. So long as
one has got reason, one is bound to use it. It is not at all neces-
sary to smother it. You may commit errors, but you will learn
through them and some day you will make experiments which
will prove beneficial. And it is not as if all your experiments sug-
gested by your reason fail. What does it matter if five such
experiments in a hundred fail? All of us have a right to make mis-
takes. Whenever we realize that we have made a mistake, we shall
start afresh and go forward.
I do not remember on what occasion I made it but the state-
ment that a person who observes the vow [of brahmacharya] can
render greater service to women is perfectly true. And there can
be no question that I must have served them better in the measure
in which I have succeeded in my effort to observe it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 108-10
