100. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May 2, 1933
BHAI HIRALAL SHARMA,
Your Hindi letter made me extremely happy. It is asto-
nishing that your first letter in Hindi is in such a clear hand.
And your Hindi too is quite good; how is it so? I have read
your letter and the prescriptions with care.
The Gandhi family is not unacquainted with nature cure. But
this is only a polite statement. Their faith is not much, but that
too cannot be said of all. What can they and other poor fellows
do? Whatever knowledge and love of nature cure they possess
is only because of me. But my knowledge is so incomplete that
I become helpless in emergency cases. I have never had the
time to make a systematic study of the science. But I have ac-
quired a smattering of it because of my interest in it. Owing to
my deficiency I have ever been in search of an expert in nature
cure. One such doctor was Hanumanta Rao, a devoted and a good
man. He died a victim of his own cures. His knowledge was
insufficient but his faith was unique. Next came Gopala Rao.
He has established a clinic and settled at Rajahmundry. Pinning
my faith on him I conducted a foolish experiment. I gave an
account of it in the newspapers too. The acquaintance with
Gopala Rao has disheartened me. Gopala Rao is a man of
conviction but his knowledge is very limited, and the pity of it
is that he is not fully conscious of his limitations. Now I have
found you. I do not want you to leave me. I want you to stay
on in the Ashram and recognize with humility the extent of
your knowledge. First win the confidence of the Ashram in-
mates and then invite the public for your cures. If you are not
urgently required to return, you can cure a few patients at any
rate before going away. But you can certainly stay on if you
like the Ashram and Narandas takes a liking to you. I am not
concerned whether your understanding of nature cure is perfect
or incomplete. What I want is Truth. There is no harm if we
proceed only to the point within our reach, and remain content
with that. There is no reason why your wife should not come
and live at the Ashram if she is prepared to abide by its rules. I
shall write a letter to her too and enclose it with this.
You did well in going to the Harijans with Bhagwanji. If
possible, you should come to see me at the earliest possible op-
portunity before you leave the Ashram. We can then discuss
what should be done about the health problems of the Harijans.
You may come on any day except Sunday. We can meet in the
afternoon.
I am awaiting your suggestions regarding the Ashram diet.
I want to make the diet there complete in respect of health
requirements. The idea of keeping Harijan children in the Ashram
has always been there but not many such children can be found.
You can advise those who conceal their ailments to bring it to
light; and those who cannot subdue their passions may leave for
good.
I am considering what to do about Kusum. As regards
Ramabehn you can prescribe the treatment you choose if you
have no doubts as to the diagnosis and the cure of her trouble.
The same applies to Jamnabehn
It will be excellent if you
can induce Amina to give up rice and other starchy foods and
tobacco. She uses it in the morning to clean her teeth. What
you did about the report in Bombay newspapers of your arri-
val was all right and quite fitting.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, pp. 39-41
