292. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
CAPE TOWN,
March 13, 1914
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I had your ocean post message as also cable from London.
There was also Reuter's cable giving the gist of your interview
with Reuter's agent. I have expanded your ocean letter and sent
it to I[ ndian] O[pinion ]. I took the liberty of omitting Mrs. Gan-
dhi and Manilal because they are your own. I omitted Kallen-
bach, Polak, and West because their names did not seem to me to
fit in with the others. Perhaps you will make time to write to
them individually if you have not done so already. Regarding
the omission of the last three, I am not decided in my judgment.
In such cases I obey the first instinct.
I do hope you had a nice time with your people. For the last
two weeks I have felt like writing a letter to your dear father,
but I did not know whether it might not be considered presump-
tuous— I could still write, of course. I shall abide by your judg-
ment and if I may write, please let me have Mr. Andrews' full
name.
Mrs. Gandhi was near death's door last week. I have there-
fore done hardly anything else save nursing her during the last
10 days. She rallied 2 days ago and the improvement continues.
Owing to the illness I have been obliged to remain at home.
I had a chat today with Sir Benjamin. He tells me the report
has been shown to him and that it is on the whole good. But as
you know we may not accept his verdict.
Copies of the reprint of your lecture have been sent to most
of the men with whom you came in contact. The Bishop has
written a charming letter in acknowledging his copy. Mrs. Drew
is sailing for London tomorrow. She has sent £5-for the P[assive]
R[esistance] fund. She sent me some names for sending the reprint
to. The papers have published notices as per enclosed cutting . There
is a request daily from a few for copies. An attempt is being made
to induce Indians to take up copies for distribution among Euro-
pean friends of theirs. W.P. Schreiner had a complimentary copy.
He paid for 6 extra copies for his friends in England. So you see
your mission is showing a double success. The great saint and
the cause that brought you to S. A. are being advertised to the
good of humanity.
I suppose I ought to tell you that I had cable news of the
death of my eldest brother in Porbunder. He was like father to me.
He it was who sent me to London. He used to be very bitter
against me for being in S. A., but his last letter was, to my
great joy, one of complete reconciliation. His one wish was to
meet me. And I was longing to hurry back to India. But it
was not to be. I have now the responsibility of having to look
after 5 widows in my father's family and of course their children.
However I am quite at peace with myself. There is a very remark-
able manifestation of sympathy for Mrs. Gandhi and myself as the
news of the loss is spreading among the community.
I hope that you were able to recover your health in London
and that you had a good time among your people.
With love
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4099
