32. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BOMBAY,
May 5, 1919
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have sent Jivan 4 for Ba and Rami 5 . It contains two bottles being specially
sent by Bhai Jugatram. They have plenty of Jivan there. It is good if Prabhudas
also takes it. Take it from Ba. Give it to Rami and Prabhudas in the morning
but not more than one spoon. The correct procedure is : after brushing the
teeth and cleaning the mouth one should lick one spoon of Jivan and then
drink a glass of milk. However, my purpose of writing this letter is different.
I was reminded of Jivan and so began the letter with it.
Swadeshi movement will gather great force but the tragedy is that we
are not ready for it. After talking to Sir Fazalbhai, I am convinced of one
thing, i.e., the biggest swadeshi movement lies in producing indigenous cloth.
And so, I have come back to our original position. We should start spinning
cotton and weaving clothes in every home. My advice to Santok is that she
should go to Vijapur and return after learning to spin yarn. Whatever hand-
1 This para is already reproduced in Vol. XV, pp.72-.
2 Gandhiji started this on January 9, 1919.
3 The letter is in a different hand but the subscription is by Gandhiji.
4 A kind of Ayurvedic tonic
5 Harilal Gandhi's daughter, later married to Kunvarji Khetsi Parekh
6 The remaining portion of this letter is already reproduced in Vol. XV on
pp. 276-.
LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
31
spun yarn is there, get it woven soon. Get as much cloth as you can, woven
in Ahmedabad from the mill-spun yarn. Dakshini Maharastrian sarees are
woven there but in those, mainly imported yarn and imported silk are used.
Cannot we get them made from the indigenous yarn? Avantikabehn has told
me that even if they are thick, Maharastrian women will wear them. We are
not at all prepared to make clothes for women—so bad is our plight. Think
about this and do whatever you can. Show this letter to Kaka and others. For
me, you must get the dhotis made from yarn spun by you, in time. The work
of spinning yarn must be taken up in the Ashram. I do not think I will be
able to come there for sometime yet.
How is your health?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32930
