127. LETTER TO "THE INDIAN SOCIAL REFORMER"
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 26, 1919
TO
THE EDITOR
THE INDIAN SOCIAL REFORMER
SIR,
I have read the paragraph in your Issue of the 23rd instant
about the Patel Marriage Bill. I have never yet given an inter-
view to anybody on the Bill, and the views attributed to me represent
but a partial truth. Being laid up in bed, I had not taxed myself
about the Bill, but having been asked by several people to ex-
press my opinion, I began to study the Bill, and as is my wont,
I tried first to understand the author's position. The Hon. Mr. Patel
told me there was no occasion for me to be in a hurry to form
my views, as the Bill was not likely to come up for discussion
before September, and in order to help me to study the Bill, he
sent Mr. Daftari to me. Mr. Daftari has supplied me with a long
and exhaustive memorandum on the subject. I have not yet
been able to study it, and with the present programme of work
before me, I do not know when I shall be able to study the memo-
randum which requires looking up old law cases. My position, so
far as I can state it, without the aforementioned study, is this:
In my opinion, the question specially as between Brahmins and
Dheds does not arise in this connection at all. Dheds stand in the
same relation to Brahmins as Kshatriyas, Vaishyas or Shoodras.
Their peculiar disability is not affected either one way or the
other by the Bill. If the Bill constitutes an attack upon Varnashram,
as a believer in Varnashram-dharma, I should oppose it. I am told
by orthodox friends that it does constitute such an attack. I am
told by the supporters of the Bill that not only does it not inter-
fere with Varnashram, but it merely seeks to restore the pre-British
state of Hindu Law, which was wrongly interpreted by judges,
who being ignorant of it, were guided by biassed or corrupt
Pandits. Both sides have very able lawyers. Without deciding
one way or the other, I have suggested that the effect of the Bill
should be restricted to inter-marriages among sub-castes. This
might satisfy the most ardent reformer at least as a first step, and
would enable men like the Hon. Pandit Malaviya to support it.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Indian Social Reformer, 2-3-1919
