395. LETTER TO KAILASNATH KATJU
GUDIATHAM (SOUTH INDIA),
September 1, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
My weakness of body is my excuse for dictating this letter.
But for that weakness I would have gladly written myself. I
thank you for your letter and the first instalment of your contri-
bution to khadi. Your letter is so good and is likely to influence
others. If you have no objection, I would like to publish that
part of it which relates to khadi. But please do not hesitate to
XXXIV-28
refuse permission if you would on any account not like the publica-
tion of the letter, whether with or without your name.
As for the black alpaca chapkan concerned, give me an order
and I can have for you one made of very fine black khadi. It
looks as good as alpaca. You may not know that in Madras many
advocates and vakils wear khaddar chapkans even when they do
not use khadi for other articles of dress and as it so happens,
the khaddar chapkans, the poor practitioners find to be suitable
because of their comparative cheapness. In your case I may not
think of cheapness at all. If you give the order, I am not going
to secure for you the cheapest but the most expensive and the
most elegant.
Now a word about personal spinning. I quite agree with
you that love of khaddar need not include personal spinning. But
love of the starving millions does, for two reasons: first, because,
personal spinning renews our daily bond with them. Secondly,
by personally spinning each known member of society creates a
spinning atmosphere which makes it easier for workers to induce
the unwilling, because unbelieving, villagers to take to hand-
spinning. I would like to add a third reason which I know you
would not despise. Every yard of well-spun yarn adds to the wealth
of the country, be the addition ever so infinitesimal. You know
what the lawyers do so often whilst awaiting their turn in the law
courts. They either play with their pencils or with their paper-
tape or worse still open out their little pen-knives and fidget with
the edges of the desks at which they are sitting. I wonder if I
could induce you to take up the little takli which could be made of
silver, gold or ivory if you like, and put in a delicate little cylin-
der. Takli-spinning is easily learnt. Will you take to it? It will
be, I know, laughed at in the beginning; then it will cease to at-
tract notice one way or the other and if you could go through
the two stages and persist, it will be copied by others. I hope
you do not resent my saying all this to you. You have given me
an inch with hearty goodwill and you must not be surprised if I
now ask for more.
Yes, indeed, I demanded great sacrifices from lawyers. But
looking back to 1920 and ' 21, I feel that I asked for nothing very
extraordinary and I feel that I had a right to demand the largest
measure of sacrifice from those to whose profession I once be-
longed.
The little ones now consider themselves too big to sit in my
lap. Please, however, tell them that whenever I meet them again,
am going to make them pay for still remembering me.
I am passing your cheque for Rs. 100/- to the Treasurer of the
All-India Spinners' Association.
Yours sincerely,
DR. KAILASNATH KATJU
9, EDMUNTON ROAD
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat: S.N. 13275
