266. LETTER TO HUMAYUN KABIR
SEVAGRAM,
August 21, 1944
MY DEAR HUMAYUN,
I value your frank letter received today. You deserve a long reply
but I must be brief, if I am to reply at once which I am doing.
I do not endorse any Pakistan but I do endorse Rajaji's scheme
even if it be called Pakistan. It is a concrete form of the Congress
resolution. The Rajaji Formula merely furnishes a basis for discussion.
It opens a way to the solution of the communal tangle. Everybody who
does not like it is free to oppose it. If you think that it will harm the
country you are bound to oppose it. If Muslim opinion dislikes it, it
must go. It will go also if Hindus and others oppose it. The Rajaji
Formula furnishes a scheme for voluntary acceptance. There is no room
for discussion, if it is to be imposed by force. I could be no party
to a forcible imposition of a thing even if of my own coining. Here
therefore there is no question of ignoring or disregarding nationalist
Muslims or any other section. Quaid-e-Azam represents the League.
I represent nobody but myself.
I did read your contribution to Bharat Jyoti. Your book, I am sorry,
I have not been able to touch.
You should know that we (Rajaji and I) have reserved the right
to oppose even the modified scheme of partition, if it ever goes to
the poll. We are not enamoured of it. But if there must be sovereign
states, we have said what we will voluntarily endorse. But we would
be pleased if the country, i.e., in this case the majority of Muslims
concerned reject it jointly with other inhabitants of the areas concerned.
So you see that you should come if you can spare the time. It
is not too late.
Amtul Salaam had a lot to say about you and your wife's kindness
to her. She also told me that you had stolen a Hindu girl for wife1,
that she was extremely devoted to you and that she was able to remain
Hindu.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 Shanti
148
