483. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
October 24, 1932
The comparison with Banabhatta and Valmiki is not right.
One may compare the two types of yarn with "Balakanda" and
"Kishkindhakanda," or better still, with "Kishkindhakanda" and
"Uttarkanda". Fine yarn of 200 counts or more is "Uttarkanda" in
the absence of which "Kishkindhakanda" would lose all value. Our
forefathers forced the poor to produce Dacca shabnam to gratify the
delicate tastes of people who loved luxury. Let us atone for their
sin by spinning as yajna yarn of the finest count and offer it to the
Lord. The art in both cases is the same, but in olden times it mini-
stered to selfishness. Let our art help in spreading the spirit of ser-
vice, it is necessary to revive the old skill in order to popularize
khadi among all classes of people. We should prove that what was
possible then in the days of slavery can be done in the age of free-
dom too. Will not the devotee do for God what a libertine would do
for a prostitute? This involves neither great trouble nor any expense;
for, all that we wish to do is to learn slowly to spin fine yarn in a
spirit of self-sacrifice. I have also found from experience that, if we
try to spin finer and finer yarn, we shall more likely discover ways
of producing better and cheaper khadi. Here we have the practical
application of the Gita verse beginning with "Yavanartha udapane".
If this reasoning appeals to you, I need not explain to you
why I put down 20 counts as the minimum for a voluntary spinner
to achieve. There is however nothing sacrosanct about this figure;
it is not laid down as a rigid rule. It is only a test of the devo-
tion of the voluntary spinner. An institution must lay down some
such rule. Drawing out any sort of yarn should not pass for yajna.
There ought to be some rule, some standard. If this is admitted,
then 20 counts is not a high requirement. A voluntary spinner should
not spin as if he was doing forced labour. He should enrich his
yajna with devotion and art and beauty, identifying himself with
the work, that which is offered as sacrifice should be of the purest
quality, shouldn't it?
1 Vinoba Bhave had objected to spinning of fine yarn. He had compared
coarse yarn with Valmiki's Ramayana and fine yarn with Banabhatta's Kadambari.
He had also mentioned the difficulties one had to face in the villages.
2 Literally "morning dew"; kind of muslin
3 Vide Vol. XXXII, p. 124.
292
If I have not been able to explain my point of view, you may
write to me again and ask me. I have no doubt in the matter,
but I cannot rest at ease till I have satisfied you.
The problem of working in the villages is a very difficult one.
We need not worry what the smriti has to say regarding onions.
We should go by our experience. As medicine, they are good. I
have tried them very often. I also dislike their odour and gene-
rally do not eat them, though I certainly would if I found it
necessary. One may eat them with the last meal of the day, for
one meets few people thereafter. If eaten in small quantities as
medicine, the odour will probably be less acute. If we cannot get
cow's milk anywhere at all, I would say that the country is heading
towards bankruptcy. If a person touring villages carried with
him mawa of cow's milk, he would get both ghee and protein in it
and, if he should dissolve the powdered mawa in hot water, it would
then be as good as milk. I do not suggest the addition of sugar
or jaggery to the mawa, since, in the first place, that is not neces-
sary and, secondly, it may mean indulging the palate. Thus, one
can live on rotlas1, pendas onions and tamarind or sour lemon.
Public workers should not have their dinner late in the evening.
The only things which they may accept from the village people
are rotlas and onions, or they may cook their own food. Wherever
they go, they should boil water for their use and drink only that.
This way they will not have to depend on others, and no one will
be put to trouble as nothing will have to be specially prepared for
them. They should sleep in the open, accepting if available a char-
poy to keep themselves, so far as is humanly possible, safe from
the danger of snakes, etc. I am giving all this advice without expe-
rience of course. I know that the facilities which were offered to me
in the villages may not be available to others. Follow from this
whatever is practicable and desirable, and reject the rest. I have
made all these suggestions so that you may be prompted to
think more about the problem. I realize very well how exceeding-
ly difficult it is to go into the villages. However, despite the diffi-
culties, we must go. I, therefore, very much like the beginning
you are making. Every public worker ought to have some know-
ledge of simple remedies. It is quite easy to acquire it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 174-
