401. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
VALMIKI MANDIR, READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
June 12, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
From you, almost straight away, I went to the Working
Committee which, owing to his illness, was held at Maulana
Saheb's quarters. I gave them the gist of our conversation,
told them that I gladly endorsed your suggestion about the
parties meeting to fix up names subject to the proviso that no
party should talk of parity, you should invite them simply to
submit to you a joint list of the Cabinet of the Provisional
Interim Government which you would approve or, if you did
not, you would invite them to submit a revised list bearing in
mind your amendments, that the list should represent a coali-
tion Government composed of persons of proved ability and in-
corruptibility. I suggested too that in the place of parity there
should be active enforcement of the long-term provision in your
joint Statement that in all major communal issues there should
be communal voting to decide them. I suggested also that in
the event of absence of agreement between the parties in spite
of all effort, you should examine the merits of the respective
lists of the two parties and accept either the one or the other
(not an amalgam) and announce the names of the Interim Gov-
ernment but that before that final step was taken you should
closet yourselves until a joint list was prepared. I told the
Working Committee that you had seemed to endorse my sug-
gestions.
I told them further that, so far as I knew, it was a point
of honour with Congressmen that there could be no joint con-
sultation in which Maulana Saheb was not associated with the
talks. You said it was a sore point with Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah
and I replied that the soreness was wholly unwarranted and
that the Congress could not be expected to sacrifice its faithful
servant of twenty-five years' standing whose self-sacrifice and
devotion to the national cause had never been in question. But
I told you that your great experience and ability to handle deli-
cate matters would show you the way out of the difficulty.
Finally, I told the Committee that I drew your attention
to the fact that the European vote which was being talked of
was unthinkable, in connection with the Constituent Assembly,
and nothing but a public declaration by the European residents
of India or one by you on their behalf could make possible
the formation of the Constituent Assembly.
I gathered from
you that the question was already engaging your attention and
that it should be satisfactorily solved.
Probably you have already moved in the matter of the
joint talk. Nevertheless, I thought that I owed it to you and
the Working Committee to put on record what I had reported
about our talks. If I have in any way misunderstood you, will
you please correct me?
I may say that the Working Committee had its draft letter
ready but at my suggestion it postponed consideration of it
pending the final result of your effort adumbrated in this letter.
The draft letter takes the same view that I placed before you
yesterday on parity and the European vote and their election
as members of the contemplated Constituent Assembly.
I close with the hope that your effort will bear the fruit
to which all are looking forward.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 204-. Also The
Transfer of Power, 1942-47, Vol. VII, pp. 877-
84-21
