347. LETTER TO A LADY FRIEND IN SOUTH AFRICA
[After June 18, 1919]
At the rapid pace things are moving, it is difficult to do full
justice to any particular movement. Economic distress, poli-
tical repression and an awakening amongst the masses in particular
in all countries have all played an important part in bringing about
the present world conditions where, enquiring of every country,
you find them affected without exception by unrest of a deep-
seated character. In America, it is class warfare; in England, it is
labour unrest; in Russia, Bolshevism, and in India, it is an all
round unrest due to repression, famine and other causes. The situa-
tion which now faces the western nations was inevitable; for wes-
tern civilization, based on the basic principle of brute force as a
guiding motive, could have ultimately led only to mutual destruc-
tion. But in India against all odds, the high principles of our hoary
civilization have still a strong hold on the masses; and if the rapid-
ly widespread growth of Bolshevism which is attacking one nation
after another in Europe was to be successfully arrested in India,
and even any possibility of its finding a congenial soil safeguarded
against, it was necessary that the people of India should be re-
minded of the legacy of their civilization and culture, which is
comprised in the one word "satyagraha"—the highest mantra one
can know of.
In the last week of January, 1919, the Government of India
published the text of two Bills, now popularly known here as the
Rowlatt Bills. The Bills secured to the Government of India arbi-
trary powers which they had under the Defence of India Act,
specially passed as a war measure for the duration of the war and
six months after. But what could be tolerated in a time of war
cannot be permitted in times of peace when the Government should
solely devote their attention to problems of reconstruction and not
instead be over-anxious and stubborn in claiming arbitrary powers
as essential for maintenance of peace and order. At a time when
the Parliament itself has felt the need of Indianizing the adminis-
tration of this country and the Montagu-Chelmsford Reform pro-
posals were before the country for criticism, and when the members
of the Civil Service and the Anglo-Indian capitalists, fearing that
they may lose the privileged positions they have been holding at
the expense of the Indian masses, employ fair and unfair means to
nullify the utility of the Reform proposals, and the Viceroy, the high-
est authority in India, openly countenances them by an announce-
ment in the Imperial Council akin to a surrender to the cla-
mour of vested interests, no Indian can calmly contemplate the
future of public life in this country, with the Rowlatt legislation
in the Statute-book. The opposition in the country to the Rowlatt
legislation has been unanimous beyond comparison, and in the
Imperial Council when the Rowlatt Bill No. 1 was passed into
law, on March 18th, not a single Indian member voted for it. On
account of the strong opposition to the Bill, the Rowlatt Act No. 1
was made temporary for three years and also specially designated
as "The Revolutionary and Anarchical Crimes Act". But these
concessions amounted to nothing practically.
After consideration of all the circumstances, I came to the
conclusion to inaugurate the offering of "satyagraha" against
the Rowlatt Act. At the end of February, 1919, the Satyagraha
Pledge was taken by me and other leaders and the people were also
invited to take the Pledge, which states that, being conscientiously
convinced of the injustice of the Rowlatt legislation, until it is repeal-
ed, the signatories will resort to civil disobedience and binding
themselves to follow Truth and refrain from violence. I toured over
India preaching the principles of satyagraha, and after the passing
of the Rowlatt Act No. 1, recommended, as a first step, a hartal
and 24 hours' fast and 30th March, 1919 was fixed for the same.
Later, it was postponed to 6th April, but in some places it was
observed on 30th March, and on that day, at Delhi the mob was
fired upon, on some ground or other, by the authorities, resulting
in some deaths and many wounded. This incident roused such
feeling in the country that the demonstration arranged for 6th
April was largely attended and even Anglo-Indian critics had to
admit it was an unprecedented demonstration. On 7th April,
copies of proscribed literature, including Hind Swaraj, were sold by
the satyagrahis in all the centres. On the evening of 8th April, I
left for Delhi to personally acquaint myself with the conditions at
Delhi, and I was served with an order by the Punjab Government
and the Government of India, not to enter the Punjab by the
former and to reside within Bombay Presidency by the latter. As a
satyagrahi, I could not obey the order, and, on entering the
Punjab, was arrested. I felt so glad at it, for the soul was now free
while the body was taken care of by the Government. I sent mes-
sage to the people asking them to welcome it as happy news and
celebrate the event. But, instead of being kept in confinement, I
was brought into the Bombay Presidency and set free. I returned
to Bombay only to find the city full of disturbances. That evening,
I addressed a huge mass meeting on the sea sands, where I gave
expression to my keen disappointment at the misguided action of
the people and characterized their action as duragraha, and told
them that, if they should again betray the trust reposed in them
by acting as duragrahis, the only course open to me would
be to offer satyagraha against them by observing dharana and
giving up this body as a penance for inaugurating satyagraha and
taking the huge moral responsibility for the good conduct of the
movement and its followers. But disturbances in the Punjab at
Lahore, Amritsar and other places and at Ahmedabad, near which
the Ashram is situated, have been of very grave character, involv-
ing the proclamation of martial law. Loss to life and property has
been enormous. But the disturbances in the Punjab are not due
to the satyagraha movement but the outbreaks in Bombay and
Ahmedabad were sufficient to show to me that real satyagraha
would consist in suspending the civil disobedience programme and
in preaching the principle of ahimsa. The Satyagraha Sabhas,
accordingly, suspended civil disobedience on 20th April, which
event was shortly followed by the deportation of Mr. B. G.
Horniman, a noble-hearted Englishman and fearless Editor of
The Bombay Chronicle. Orders of forfeiture of security and pre-
censorship were passed on the Chronicle and it is only for the last
fortnight the Chronicle has been appearing without comments under
pre-censorship and it is only a few days ago the censorship has
been removed from the paper, the maximum security of Rs. 10,000,
having been deposited by the proprietors. During the six weeks
from 20th April, the events in the Punjab have been of an un-
precedently cruel character. Martial law had been proclaimed in
several areas and was withdrawn only a week or two ago. Aero-
planes have been used to throw bombs, machine-guns have been
used, and educated public leaders have been arrested under serious
charges of waging war against the King, etc., and are being tried
by a Martial Law Commission. Mr. K. N. Roy, Editor of The
1 Sitting at one spot without food or drink for the purpose of exerting
moral pressure. The source has "dharama", evidently a misprint.
Tribune, has been tried for seditious writings and tried by a Spe-
cial Tribunal and denied legal help of his choice and sentenced
to two years' rigorous imprisonment. After perusing the connected
records, I am convinced that in Mr. K. N. Roy's case, a serious
miscarriage of justice has occurred. The actions of the mobs during
the disturbances also have been unworthy and of a highly con-
demnable character.
The circumstances that led to the suspension of civil dis-
obedience exist no longer and the civil disobedience campaign
might be safely begun now with sufficient safeguards to see the
satyagrahis do their part of duty in keeping the peace.
In order to keep the people fully engaged and teach them that
the best way of expressing one's sympathy with the principles of
satyagraha is to practise them, I have begun an active swadeshi
campaign; and within the short period of six weeks, it has spread
very rapidly. Many Indian sisters have bravely volunteered in the
cause, of the movement, and, in addition to themselves observing
the vow by wearing Indian-made clothes woven from Indian
yarn and also setting up handlooms, have found men to work them.
A true sympathizer's duty with the swadeshi movement is not only
to wear swadeshi clothes but also to help in producing them.
In Bombay, the shuddha Swadeshi Stores have been already open-
ed and other centres will also be opening similar stores soon. Shuddha
swadeshi consists in wearing clothes hand-woven from hand-
spun yarn. Of course, at this early stage, it will not be possible
to get fine shuddha swadeshi clothes but one should not mind that.
Indian Opinion, 12-9-1919
