188. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 28, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
I am waiting for your reply to my letter. Meanwhile, I
congratulate those of you who have undertaken to help in the
kitchen. Some of you are old enough to be able, if they wish,
to assume the whole responsibility for it. The fact that we ex-
perience difficulties particularly in the kitchen is due entirely to
our shortcomings. I list below for your information as many
rules as I can think of. If you follow them, you will not find
the least difficulty in running the kitchen.
1. Never lose your temper whatever happens, whether some-
thing is spoilt or broken. Never be impatient. Never worry about
anything. Find out the cause of the trouble and remove it.
2. If a co-worker does not finish his work or is lazy about it
do not get irritated with him, but take upon yourself the addi-
tional burden.
3. Do thoroughly and as perfectly as you can whatever you do.
4. Never play with one another while in the kitchen. Do
not hit anybody even in jest.
5. The best thing is not to speak a word unless necessary.
If anybody cannot control himself, he may talk in low whispers and
make harmless and innocent jokes. However, everybody should
gradually form the habit of speaking nothing at all.
6. If you do talk, do not indulge in malicious criticism of .
one another or back-biting.
7. It is enough for small boys to wear only tucked-up dhotis
in the kitchen. The girls also, when sitting, should tuck-up their
skirts behind and wear only jackets above them. It is not neces-
sary for them to wear the half sari in the kitchen. This saves cloth
and minimizes the danger of clothes catching fire. If anybody
wears a shirt, the sleeves should be tucked up at the elbow.
8. When anybody feels the urge to sneeze, he should hold
the kerchief over his mouth before sneezing, so that he does not
blow spittle from the mouth. Use the kerchief for blowing the
nose and, if you perspire, wipe the drops with it. One ought not
1 Vide pp. 151-.
167
to let the drops fall into anything. This means that everyone must
carry a handkerchief.
9. For wiping the utensils, etc., there should be a separate
towel in the kitchen and it should be washed everyday with soap.
10. Everyone working in the kitchen should take special care
to keep his nails clean. They should be trimmed regularly. If
there is still any dirt under them, it should be removed with
pointed straw.
11. No one should touch or taste any cooked item for sam-
pling it.
12. If, to ascertain whether a vegetable or some similar dish
has been properly salted, it has to be tasted, the leader of the
boys may take some in a spoon and taste it and, after doing so,
immediately wash the spoon clean.
13. If some special dish or dishes have to be cooked for a sick
person or a person who is observing a vow, do not regard this
as a burden but cook the thing cheerfully. Experience will show
that, if the time-table for the various jobs has been strictly fol-
lowed, no burden will be felt at all.
14. Make it a point to arrive at the kitchen punctually at the
time appointed for you. Know that every minute matters, so that
you should arrive two minutes earlier but never a minute later.
15. If you have no work in the kitchen, do not remain there
to gossip or just to look at the others working.
16. The kitchen should be kept clean all the time. All the
things should be in their proper places. After one's job is done,
one should not leave without arranging the things in order.
In addition to these, you may introduce other rules that you
may think of. If you think that any of those given by me should
be dropped, you may drop them with the consent of the elders.
But scrupulously follow whatever rules you lay down. Everyone
should make a copy of the rules and keep it with him.
I have often felt that the kitchen provides a means for us to
test how far we practise the teaching of the Gita.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am not writing a separate letter to the women today, since
this one is already longer than I had intended it to be, and,
moreover, such a letter should do quite well for them also.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8955. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
