263. LETTER TO RAMESHCHANDRA
ON TOUR,
December 13, 1927
BHAI RAMESHCHANDRAJI,
I preserved your letter till now in the hope of answering it.
Only today can I do so.
Eating flesh and eating vegetables both involve violence but
without the latter man can survive nowhere, while without the
former he can ordinarily survive anywhere. If sensitivity to pain
differs among creatures, the pain experienced by a cow in the
throes of death cannot be experienced by plants. For all living
beings, violence in some form is unavoidable. The votary of non-
violence will commit the minimum of violence. The other religions
do not enjoin flesh-eating; they just do not forbid it. It is well to
know the custom in the other religions or even in Hindu dharma,
but if our reason considers vegetarianism superior from the moral
point of view, we must accept it. The votary of non-violence will
progressively restrict himself, even in the use of vegetables. It is
difficult, not impossible, to remain a vegetarian in places like Green-
land. Even if proved impossible, it cannot establish the necessity
of flesh-eating everywhere. Though our acts are seldom without
a fault, we abstain from many on the basis of comparative
merit. Abstinence is constantly on the increase in the life of a
seeker after moksha, and it is essential too.
Eggs and milk differ. Eggs are not essential. Milk too is not
essential for crores of people. I have eaten eggs in England under
a delusion, as I ate meat in India. But on coming to my senses I
left them and even in the company of vegetarian friends I accepted
only those dishes that did not contain eggs. I have now come to
know that a great number of unfertilized eggs are laid. This can
be systematically checked and generally unfertilized eggs alone
are eaten. But this cannot make eggs an item of our food.
Non-violence is a comprehensive dharma. Violence does not
consist only in taking life away from the body. Abandoning
brahmacharya too is violence in my eyes. It is well known that
a brahmachari must abstain from flesh-diet, eggs and milk too.
Brahmacharya is more easily attainable with vegetable diet alone.
In conclusion, though the question of diet is very important
for a religious man, yet it is not the be-all and end-all of religion
or non-violence; nor is it the most vital factor. The obser-
vance of religion and non-violence has more to do with the heart.
He who does not feel the necessity of abstaining from meat for
inner purification need not abstain from it.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6279
