308. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
PATNA,
March 20/21, 1934
BA,
I have still not received your letter this time. I am writing
this on Tuesday after morning prayer.
I am in Patna. By my
side is Satisbabu, spinning on the takli. There is Rajendrababu's
sister. Prabhavati too. Om and Kisan are preparing to go to
bed. Swami also is sitting near me. Mirabehn has gone to get
the milk ready.
Malaviyaji, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Dr.
Mahmud, etc., are here just now.
There was a meeting of all of
them on Sunday.
At that meeting a new committee was ap-
pointed for relief work in Bihar. Jamnalalji also is a member
of it. The work is progressing well. I visited Motihari and other
places. Even big mansions have been reduced to heaps of brick
and mortar.
Everywhere in the streets we saw heaps of bricks
and ruins of buildings. The fields are covered with sand ejected
with water from the bowels of the earth. Till this sand is removed,
no crops can grow, and removing it is no easy work. For
it is not only one or two bighas that are so covered. Thousands of
bighas have been covered and in some places the layers are six
inches thick or even thicker. The people's misery, therefore,
is beyond measure. But even then life is so dear that people, dizzy
with the thought of having escaped death, can forget their hard-
ships and keep smiling faces. They have no food in their homes
and no clothes to wear, but they do not seem to worry much
about that. Such is the scene here. What can we do to help
them? Those who are working in the midst of the people may
serve them humbly and unostentatiously. They may plead with
the idle to start working, and teach sensualists self-control by their
own example. They may teach people Ramadhun and turn them
Godward. There are such silent workers, too, at many places.
God's ways are beyond our understanding. He erased the dif-
ference between birth and death in a matter of two minutes. Who
was born and who is dead? Whether human beings are born or
die, His play goes on. Why then rejoice and grieve? The
Lord's name is the only truth.
He who is aware of Him and
serves Him, that is, His creation, as well as he may, lives. Those
who do not do this are as good as dead, though living.
Well,
having started to write a letter I have given you this week's dis-
course.
There may be a few words which you may not under-
stand. But Dahibehn or Shanta or Lalita, one of them will
surely be able to understand them.
If, however, there is any
word which none of you can understand, ask me its meaning.
After writing the above yesterday, I could not go on further.
I have resumed the letter today, Wednesday, in the morning
(8.45). I shall soon be called to a meeting. There was another
letter from Madhavdas.
His health has improved so much that
he sees no need now to go to Porbandar.
He will remain in
Bombay and start some business. Devdas and Lakshmi are quite
happy.
Rajaji has still not gone to Delhi.
Most probably he
will come here and meet me before going there.
Blessings to you all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 19-20
