241. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 21, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I have before me your letter and postcard. The body will
take its toll. We never know when we commit a breach of the
laws that govern the body. And in nature as in human law igno-
rance is no excuse. Your fever therefore does not surprise me.
I expect that the energetic remedy adopted by you checked the
progress of malaria. Yes at such times services of friends become
a boon and induce an early recovery. I know what lavish care is
bestowed upon guests in Sivaprasad Babu's home. I am glad
you are having these sweet experiences. It makes attacks such as
you had not only bearable but even a prized visitation in that
they enable one to understand human nature at its best. And
when it acts equally towards all and in all circumstances, it ap-
proaches the divine.
Your description of Ganga is quite poetic. I felt much the
same as you have done. And it was probably the same spot
where I was walking. I wrote my impressions for Navajivan. This
was quite 10 years ago I think.
Milk diet still continues. The weight is 105½ lb. It has
produced no effect on the elbow. I feel no better than when I was
taking almonds and bread. So far as the bowels are concerned,
I was most assuredly better under that diet than the milk diet.
I do not know when you will get this letter. The distur-
bance of my correspondence still continues. The incoming post
has become regular but there is much delay about the outgoing
post.
I am in correspondence with the Government about [it].
I cannot understand this sudden disturbance at all. But there it is.
Fortunately for the peace of my mind I commenced my career
as a prisoner even in South Africa with the assumption that a
prisoner had no rights. If you are still outside prison walls,
you will know why you do not get my letters regularly, if you
do not.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Remember us to all the friends. If you at all can, try to see
Devdas. He is so near you.
SHRIMATI MIRABAI
C/O BABU SIVAPRASAD GUPTA
SEVA UPVAN
NAGWA
BENARES
From a photostat: C.W. 9508. Courtesy: Mirabehn
