17. LETTER TO RASIK
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Thursday, Ma[gsar] Sud 11 [November 26, 1925]
BHAISHRI RASIK,
Herewith answers to your questions:
1. There is nothing wrong in the shraddha ceremony performed
after death, and it may be regarded as essential for those who
believe in it. It is quite proper that you will not give a com-
munity-feast. I regard it as neither necessary nor proper. Unlike
the shraddha ceremony it is devoid of any religious sentiment. If
your mother asks you to feast the community after her death, you
should humbly suggest to her not to bind you with such a wish.
If she still insists on it, you should feed some invalids with the
amount which might have been thus spent or hand over the
sum to the community for utilizing it as a scholarship for some
needy student.
2. If you really do not want to get married and if your
mother importunes you, you should humbly resist the pressure.
I think parents have no right to marry their children against the
latter's wishes.
3. And the simple diet you take will help you in your
practice of brahmacharya. But for checking impure thoughts you
should make ceaseless efforts with absolute devotion to God,
in the form of recitation of Ramanama and should harness your
mental as well as physical energies to some benevolent activity or
to some honest profession.
4. You simply cannot serve in a place where you are requir-
ed to utter falsehood or practise deceit, even if this means starva-
tion or ruin of your family. It is on this account that I have
often maintained that a person desirous of staying free should
teach himself some independent craft as weaving and the like and
subsist on that. In my opinion it is absolutely not binding to
support an able-bodied member of the family.
5. To a certain extent physical strength and spiritual strength
are necessarily related. We do come across some instances where
an extremely dynamic soul dwells in an extremely feeble body.
But if the body is worn out with disease the soul too usually
loses its vigour.
6. There is no harm in taking milk and ghee to acquire a
reasonable amount of physical strength.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10623
