237. LETTER TO P. S. TO LIEUT.-GOVERNOR
Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 1, 1903
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
To HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
Mr. William Hosken and other leading residents of Johannes-
burg, whose names appear at the foot of the enclosed petition
addressed to His Excellency, have entrusted the Association with
the task of submitting same to His Excellency, which, on behalf
of the Association, I do hereby.
In doing so, I may state that the petition owes its origin to
the request of the Association to the gentlemen in question to put
their views before the Government regarding the notice No. 356
of 1903 and to express their opinion generally regarding the
Indian question. This they have gladly done.
I may be permitted to mention that, with very few excep-
tions, all the Europeans with whom we have come in contact
have expressed sentiments similar to those of the petitioners. A
few have approved of the notice in ignorance of the state of the
law which it is intended to enforce, as also owing to misunder-
standing as to the real scope of its meaning.
As to the subject matter of the petition, my committee
would be prepared to agree to the principle of the legislation,
submitted as model by the petitioners, with slight modifications.
It would generally meet the object sought to be served by the
notice in question and cannot fail to regulate the granting of
licences to the satisfaction of the most vehement opponent of the
British Indian, in that, subject to the control, in extreme cases,
of the Supreme Court, the popularly elected bodies would regu-
late the granting of new licences and would, at the same time,
remove from the statute book the existing legislation which puts
an unnecessary affront on His Majesty's loyal Indian subjects.
The proposed legislation would moreover regulate the future
immigration which the notice does not do.
In talking to the European gentlemen, my committee has
also found that their opposition is not so much against the
Indians as against the Chinese. To quote one glaring instance,
when the statement dealing with Asiatics, made in the pamph-
let published by the Johannesburg branch of the South Africa
League, was brought to the notice of the executive of the Lea-
gue, they admitted at once that the use of the term Asiatic was
an error. Their objection was entirely against the Chinese and
not at all against the British Indians.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
India Office : Judicial and Public Records, 402
[ENCLOSURE]
The following is the text of the petition signed by W. M.
Hosken and others, referred to in the above memorial of the
British Indian Association:
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR OF THE TRANSVAAL
PRETORIA
THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED, RESIDING IN THE COLONY
OF THE TRANSVAAL
HUMBLY SHEWETH—
Your petitioners have read the Government Notice recently published
in the papers regarding the Asiatics, and would venture respectfully to ex-
press their opinion on the question as follows:
1. Your petitioners regard it as necessary that the immigration of
Asiatics into the Colony should be regulated by law, and would, therefore,
suggest that in the place of the existing anti-Asiatic legislation, the Natal
Act or the Cape Act may be copied with advantage. It would do away
with race or colour question, while setting at rest any fear of an influx of
undesirable people of any nationality.
2. But the notice in question, if it is meant to be permanent, ap-
pears to your petitioners to be in conflict with the declarations before the
war of Her late Majesty's Government, in that they were then opposed to
the anti-Asiatic laws of the late Republic so far as British Indians were
concerned, and protested against their enforcement.
3. While, as stated above, your petitioners would object to an un-
restricted influx into the Colony of the Indian population, in their humble
opinion the present population is entitled to fair and honourable treatment.
4. The refusal to transfer existing licences from one person to another
or from one place to another would be tantamount to requiring the pre-
sent holders to close their businesses sooner or later, and then at a heavy
loss.
5. The notice in question is not clear whether all existing licences
will be renewed from time to time. It would be unjust to withhold licen-
ces to trade outside Bazaars from those Indians who obtained them last year
from British officers.
6. In your petitioners' humble opinion the best solution of the in-
tricate question will be in Town Councils or Health Boards being granted
powers, as in Natal, to refuse or grant licences to new applicants, subject
to safeguards against abuse thereof in the shape of the right, to the ag-
grieved party, of appealing to the Supreme Court against their decisions.
The renewals of existing licences, too, should be subject to the sanitary report
from year to year.
7. In your petitioners' humble opinion the British Indians resident in
the colony are an orderly, law-abiding and useful section of the community,
and are quite equal in honesty and sobriety to others who are not British
subjects, and yet enjoy full trading and other rights.
8. It is evident that the Indian supplies a felt want, because the
general public support him.
Your petitioners, therefore, pray that the notice in question will be
reconsidered in view of the points herein submitted, or such other relief will
be granted to His Majesty's Indian subjects as may seem meet.
And for this act of justice and mercy, your petitioners as in duty
bound shall for ever pray, etc., etc.
Johannesburg, April, 1903
W. M. HOSKEN, L. W. RITCH
India, 25-9-1903
