252. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
July 23, 1932
CHI. KAKA,
I have received your letter after waiting for a long time. As
it is heavily censored, I have not been able to get full news about
your health. I have of course written to Colonel Doyle about your
health. I have suggested to him that he should send you to me,
in which case your health will of course improve and we could
also study astronomy and even write about it.
My suggestion is twofold. Either Shanker and/or Bal should
be sent to you, or you should be sent to me. Shanker is here.
He of course wishes to be near you and serve you. I have no
direct communication from Bal but I keep getting news about
him and the other boys. Someone or another writes from Visapur.
About astronomy my intention and purpose was as you had
inferred. It was not in my mind that astronomy helps one to
know the hour of the night by looking at the stars, nor was I
thinking that the Vedic gods and goddesses are directly connec-
ted with planets, stars and constellations. I am familiar with Bhai
Hiralal's ideas. I have read all the articles he sent me. All that
is interesting. But my interest is of quite a different kind.
Looking at the sky the impression we get of infinity, of purity,
of order and of grandeur is one that purifies us. It may perhaps
be that on being able to reach the planets and the stars one will
get the same experience of good and evil that one gets here on
earth. But truly divine is the peaceful influence of their beauty
and coolness at this great distance. Also when once we are able
to establish communion with the heavens it does not matter where
we may happen to be. It then becomes like receiving the Ganga
in one's own home. All these thoughts have made me a keen
watcher of the infinite skies. So I am acquiring knowledge of astro-
nomy enough for my own satisfaction. At present I have gathered
quite a collection of books on the subject. Professor Trivedi has
sent me three books by James Jeans. Of them I have read the
1 Satish Kalelkar, addressee's elder son
2 Addressee's second son
3 The Stars in Their Courses, The Universe around Us, Mysterious Universe
276
two bigger ones. I like them both. I have now started a syste-
matic study of astronomy. At present I am reading a book by
Kharas. The author, it seems, has taken a good deal of trouble
over it. The book is profusely illustrated, which is a great help.
I find this book interesting because I have already read other
books. Had I begun with this book I may not perhaps have liked
it. No effort has been made to make it entertaining.
I cannot, as yet, write to you about the kind of book on
astronomy which I want in Gujarati, as my ideas on the subject
are still taking shape; it would be neither easy nor desirable to
indicate a framework at this stage.
It is quite all right that your spinning is reduced. Nothing
need be done at the risk of your health.
Vallabhbhai has added to his work of preparing envelopes.
He spins ten slivers every day on the Gandiva spinning-wheel and
is immersed in the study of Sanskrit. We have sent for all the
24 parts of Satavlekar's series. It is about a fortnight that he
started the study and is already finishing the first three parts. This
is really good progress. He will probably finish all the parts in four
or five months. He aspires to know enough Sanskrit to be able
to read the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.
Mahadev has reduced his spinning by half. Too much time
was taken up in spinning yarn of 40 counts. It was also very tiring
for him. His yarn of 40 counts turns out to be very good.
I can't say that my left elbow is completely cured; but with
the doctor's permission I have gone back from the Magan spin-
ning-wheel to the Gandiva. But I turn the wheel with my left
hand and draw the thread with the right. I haven't sufficient con-
trol of the right hand to draw a thread as fine as I would like
to. But even then, the thread is finer than the one I could draw
on the Magan wheel. My speed also has somewhat increased, and
if my left elbow does not betray me, my speed must increase a good
deal. I visualize a tug of war between my speed and the fineness
of the yarn.
These days, Satyagrahashramno Itihas takes up my time. I do
not feel like writing anything else before the history is finished.
The study of Urdu and of the currency problem and Swadhyaya
Samhita are of course going on. I may not, therefore, be tempted
to write on the characteristics of daivi sampat . The idea is yours and
I think it is proper that you yourself should write on the subject.
The history of the Ashram is taking a strange shape. I find
the task is also difficult. There is in it very little about indi-
viduals. I have explained what the Ashram observances are, and
how they are being followed. Therein I have written at length
on non-violence, varnashrama, bread-labour and brahmacharya.
Perhaps the work will be finished in a fortnight.
I am keeping
your suggestions before me. But all your suggestions cannot be
incorporated in it. I myself do not know what shape the history
will take finally.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9487. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
