188. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[October 9, 1920]
Started writing this letter on Friday evening and finished it
on Saturday morning at 3.15.
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. Lakshmi will be ours as long as she re-
mains with us. Dudabhai may take her away if he wants to.
To me she is like a daughter. Though she is not well bred, we
have got to bear with her. The only unhappy part of the business
is that I have invited the burden and you have to bear it. Well,
that has been my way, and there is nothing for you to do but to
put up with it. In this lies your training. Though it is difficult
enough, you have agreed to submit to it.
What do I do about Harilal's children? I will keep them as
long as he permits me to. When he wants to take them away,
who can stand in his way? Have not their interests suffered?
Should we hold ourselves responsible for this? I leave everything
to God. The responsibility and the right, both are His. He uses
us only as His instruments. The moment we have rid ourselves
of the "I" in us, we shall have done our duty. Dudabhai handed
over the girl to me. That was a moment of trial for me; how
could I possibly be found wanting in that? Our duty is now to
do the best we can for her. If Dudabhai keeps interfering, we need
not mind that; this means that he may either leave the girl to
us or take her away. I have applied the same rule to Harilal.
My own wish is that the girl should grow up to be a Mirabai;
what would it matter, though, if she should become a prostitute
instead? Only, we may not help her to become one. If this
does not explain everything, you may ask me further. As Rukhi
and Manu, so Lakshmi: this is the long and the short of it.
Tell Imam Saheb that I always think about the Khila-
fat. I had tried a little to intervene. I can say no more. The
two brothers, besides, are far away. Ask him not to worry. A
great many things are done without proper understanding. No
one can prevent them. There is God to look after all and so
everything will end well. Does Amina learn anything?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 5768. Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
