245. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
June 19, 1933
All these days I have kept your letter of 8th instant under
my mattress in the hope of either writing myself or at least
dictating. But I found myself too weak to do it before today.
There are yet 55 minutes for the silence to break. I am utilizing
what I can of these minutes to reply to your letter. I like it very
much. I understand all you say and it satisfies me also. No one
can banish you from the Ashram but yourself. So long as it
gives you satisfaction and you think that you can grow there, you
will stay. If the purificatory fast is resumed as it will be some
time or other, your place will undoubtedly be in it without the
taint of publication and tomtoming that unfortunately and inevi-
tably accompanied mine.
Everyone will judge for himself or
herself whether he or she has the qualifications. In theory no one
is truly qualified for everyone of us has more or less sin in
us. Hence I have called it primarily for self-purification. It is
enough if one has the inner urge for service, greater dedication
and greater purification and confidence in one's ability to go
through the ordeal. The ability comes from the intensity of the
urge and (which is the same thing) the deep and ever deepening
conviction of the necessity of the penance. A seeker after Truth
has no strength he can call his own. The necessary strength (and
no more) is given or rather sent to him for the moment and for
the mission to which he is called.
If the chain is begun whilst I am alive, your turn as every-
body else's will be determined by me or in case of death some-
one whom I may have named. If I have failed to do so the
participants will elect the leader from among themselves.
This is as far as I have thought the thing out.
This letter has turned out to be rather important. I am
therefore having it multiplied on the typewriter without your
name.
I hope you are keeping well both in mind and body.
Love.
From a photostat: S.N. 19100; also S.N. 21488
