224. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
ON WAY TO WARDHA,
Wednesday [March 16, 1921]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Please note one thing, that the amount of Rs. 500 given
by Dabholkar is meant for the spinning-wheel, the swadeshi move-
ment, and the amount of Rs. 600 given by Vasumatibehn is for
the Ashram. Both the cheques are handed over to Revashankar-
bhai.
Dr. Mehta has offered Rs. 1,50,000 for the Ashram. The
money is to be drawn in the course of two years as and when
needed. The amount is for the construction account. You may
draw from this Rs. 20,000 immediately from Revashankarbhai.
For the present, we should merely complete what is already begun
and postpone the rest. I think it necessary that the money from
Sheth Rustomjee and the other amounts with us should be kept
apart. This sum of Rs. 1,50,000, you should know, is purely an
answer to the soul's prayers. The test of the spinning-wheel is
a very difficult one to pass. I saw the Surat spinning-wheel, costing
one and a half rupees. I thought it was exquisite. It produces
good enough yarn. Its inventor is really one of God's good men,
a student who has joined non-co-operation. I have suggested to
him that he should go and see you. Encourage him. I am taking
one specimen with me. Shankarlal believes that our model uses
too much wood. This man has ensured more revolutions with
less wood. It is necessary that you should thoroughly study this
matter. We wish to see the spinning-wheel introduced in five
crore homes. The model, then, must be as cheap as possible, and
strong as well. Give earnest thought to the problem and scruti-
nize the different models which people invent. It is very essential
to study the work which Shankarlal is doing. You should examine
very closely the one-and-a-half-rupee spinning-wheel and draw up
a report on it. Give more attention to our students and see that
they produce more yarn, and of better quality. It is necessary, too,
that we learn carding well. You should also write what time it
takes to learn spinning. We must have among us experts for all
processes. We should now let the work outside go on by itself
and, concentrating more on the work among us, learn merely to
watch others' work. Find out the difference between the method of
spinning which Lakshmidas teaches and that which you do, and
adopt the one which is scientific.
Write to me about other matters, too, in the Ashram, if there
is anything important enough.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 5791. Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
