20. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
December 22, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),
It no doubt puts a very heavy responsibility on us when
parents of grown-up girls entrust them to us. God will help us
to bear it. When, however, you feel in a particular case that the
responsibility will be beyond your strength, plainly refuse to accept
it. Send away any girl who refuses to submit to your discipline.
Explain the position clearly to the parents and the girl before you
accept her. If we do not take such steps of practical wisdom, God
will not help us. He never helps the timid, the lethargic and those
who are not vigilant.
Have any facilities you require, but safeguard your health.
If you think that tea and coffee are essential for it, take either
without the slightest hesitation or without feeling ashamed about
doing so. Giving up tea or coffee is not at present the purpose of
your sadhana; that purpose is the service of those among the inmates
of the Ashram who suffer.
I cannot think of one single remedy which will help Madhu
and all others in the Ashram who suffer from constipation. I will
tell you how I overcame it in my case. For three or four days, I
ate only cooked greens like tanka. That completely restored my
bowel movement. Then I added almonds to the diet. You do not
need them for the people there. Perhaps you will not get even
greens. But you can certainly get onions. If those who suffer from
constipation eat boiled onions, that, too, will probably help them.
If you can get tomatoes, you may mix them with onions. If simple
boiled onions do not taste well, even with the addition of salt, and
if tomatoes are not available, they may use kokum.
The persons may try shirshasan. It has helped people to over-
come constipation from which they had suffered for many years.
The asana should be done only on an empty stomach. It is quite
easy to do. The skirt should be tucked up behind and one should
stand on one's head, supporting the body against a wall. After
some practice the support of the wall will not be necessary. The
head should be supported by the palms joined together.
I suppose you know that these days I eat the rotlas of jowar
and bajra, and vegetables, served to prisoners in jail. The vege-
16
tables for me have to be cooked separately, because those cooked
for other prisoners contain spices. I continue to eat dates. In place
of milk I take four tolas of almonds. I keep fairly good health. If
I do not keep it up, I will resume milk.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8768. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya
