652. LETTER TO TARABEHN MODAK
October 16, 1945
DEAR SISTER,
If you had written your article in ink, I myself would have
read it earlier. But as it was in pencil, I could not read the
whole article though there is plenty of light in my room. Ulti-
mately I made someone read it out. I know from personal
experience that there is a lot of difference between reading some-
thing and hearing it read. Daily I make someone read out cut-
tings from newspapers and if and when I have time, I read them
myself. Sometimes when a thing is re-read there is a striking change
in my understanding. I feel this must be a common experience.
Of course you have to realize yourself. I have mentioned this
important, though irrelevant, thing because I thought it worth
mentioning. I would be pleased if you accept that there is violence
in writing in pencil things sent by post. The letters written in
pencil fade away in course of time.
I am sending back your article. Please note the changes
I have made in what I could read myself. The changes are just
from the point of view of language. The rest I find is quite all
right. I am giving a gist of my experiences so as to make what
I have said more clear.
I saw the work done by teachers trained under Madame
Montessori, and carefully observed the working of the Nursery
School. Of course the things were foreign and the poor teacher
had not digested what she had been taught. What to speak of the
children? They could not even observe normal discipline. I am
not criticising anyone. I have given the gist of my experience
just for your information. Imbibe whatever you find useful and
discard the rest. The conclusion I have drawn from this experi-
ence is that we shall be able to propagate scientific knowledge of
child education only when our teachers are competent. They
should have the will to become one with children. I am afraid I
am not saying anything new in this. These things are certainly
not beyond your range of experience but since I have come to
know you and also love you I hope you will not find fault with
me for saying the things you already know.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
