303. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 28, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
You may ask any questions you like. You will not probably
get such an opportunity again. You don't know that I can, if I
choose, reply a question in just one line or may fill pages. If I
cannot write a long letter, I shall be content with a short reply.
The reply, however, will not be incomplete.
To believe that your tongue had an effect on my right hand
is like believing that, because the branch of a tree fell as soon as
a crow came and sat on it, it fell because of the crow's weight.
I do get dreams, but the mind hardly ever takes note of them.
I attach no importance to dreams.
I think there are complete sets of Carlyle's and Ruskin's
works in our library. If we have them send me a list of the volumes.
How many copies of the consolidated list of books do we
have? If we have more than one copy send one to me.
I have never written to you about the grown up women. I feel
inclined to do so this time. They do not seem to come together
for any common purpose. That is, their Association has broken
up. I have written to Lakshmibehn and Durga on this matter, but
I seem to have produced no effect on them. The women should get
the strength to assume responsibility for joint work. If you have
sufficient courage and confidence in yourself, take up this task.
If you do so, however, you must resolve not to be defeated. We
have, in fact, achieved nothing if we are able to do something
when all the circumstances are favourable. A carpenter gives
shape to any piece of wood and a sculptor makes an image from
any stone; we are, likewise, worth our salt only if we know how
to live with all types of people and get work from them. I think
this is the main thing we have to learn in this life. For that, our
heart should be as large as the sea. If we observe the defects of
a person the very moment we see him or her and are deterred by
them, our work would suffer. Everyone has defects. We have
them and so have others. If we are determined to mix with
them despite the defects, only then can we succeed in our work.
1 The addressee had then been receiving from Gandhiji letters written
with his left hand.
246
I know that this is a difficult task. I have been engaged in this
one task all these years and yet I cannot say that I have succeed-
ed in it. I do seem, though, to have succeeded in some measure.
That is why I muster courage or have the presumption to guide
others.
You may now do what you think proper. You can, if you
wish, put this letter before the women.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10278. Also C.W. 6726. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
