105. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
October 2, 1905
DEAR MR. CHHAGANLAL,
Mr. Kitchin writes to me that at one of your meetings it was un-
animously decided to dismiss Hemchand. When Hemchand wrote to me
he had received notice of dismissal, I immediately assured him that the
notice would be withdrawn, and I entered into correspondence with both
Messrs Kitchin and Chhaganlal. When Hemchand's services were
retained, I had a chat with him and I told him that he would be
trained in the Press, and that, so long as he behaved and worked well,
he should consider himself a permanent fixture. Hemchand I know well,
his people I know better. I consider him to be a good and valuable
hand who, if the press had to undergo serious difficulties, would stick to it.
Apart, however, from all that, when I heard of Hemchand's dis-
missal, I felt that my pledge was at stake. It was for that reason that I
gave him the assurance I have done.
May I now ask you to ratify my assurance and revoke your decision
as to his dismissal in the light of what I am now telling you? For the
future, I think that in all such matters I would appreciate the considera-
tion greatly if I were to be consulted before arriving at any final decision.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
[To this is added a handwritten note in Gujarati.]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Please read the above letter. I have written a similar letter to others.
Kitchin has, it seems, made much of the matter. I have sent him too a
telegram. If you find it necessary to be present at the meeting, you may do so.
Lachhiram is not getting the paper still. Let me know to which
address you send it.
You should get a kavad made for Manilal for fetching water. It
seems, he finds it difficult to carry water.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Gabru, Box 5709, says that he received the Opinion only for a week
and that he is not getting it now. I do not understand why the names
of [subscribers to the] Madresa [Fund] have not appeared. This should
not happen in future.
From the typewritten (English) and handwritten (Gujarati) office copy signed
by Gandhiji: S. N. 4377
