497. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 7, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
If we make it a rule to draw up a balance-sheet of our
spiritual progress from time to time, we shall be able to get rid
of unnecessary fears and appear to the world as we really are.
Obviously, this is true only about sincere people. Those who are
insincere will not be able to keep up the practice of drawing up
such a balance-sheet. They will find it impossible.
I believe everything you say about Narandas. He ought
not to take up work beyond his strength. No one should do
that. But generally man deceives himself. He is generous towards
himself, and when he has done a small thing he believes that
he has exerted himself overmuch. Ordinarily, therefore, when
someone works hard I do not feel inclined to dissuade him from
doing so. But Narandas's way is different. He always takes
too much work upon himself. Since he generally does his work
in time, a stranger may not perhaps see how much he had work-
ed. Hence it is but proper that Narandas should not undertake
new burdens. I have written to him to that effect. You should
keep a watch.
My suggestion about a balance-sheet is not likely to make
anyone mechanical in his or her work. If any person living
in the Ashram becomes so, I would blame our method of running
it. I know that that method is not perfect. But no one living
in the Ashram has become mechanical in his or her work, and
many who were mechanical have come to be filled with new
life. I infer from this that our method must be at least 51
per cent effective. Those who are in charge of the various activities
in the Ashram are not experts in their respective fields. It is
not their fault that they are not. But it has always happened
that the Ashram has either undertaken some new type of activity
or has decided to carry on a traditional activity in a new manner,
and, therefore, it has had to train its own experts. This has
resulted in some unnecessary expenditure of time and money,
and despite that the Ashram has not always done its work so
well as to Win praise. The Ashram, however, exists not to win
praise but to serve. If it does the work of service so well that
it wins praise for it, we may feel happy. But, even if it is criti-
cized, we should continue to serve. The conclusion to be drawn
from this is that, as we become progressively more efficient, we
shall be able to do more work and shall feel the burden of work
less and less. Here is a recent experience. When I started the
practice of rotating the wheel with the left hand, on the first
day I could spin only 93 rounds. I also took more time and got
more tired. When my efficiency had increased relatively, I could
spin more than 200 rounds in less time and felt less fatigued.
I have now started spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel. Yes-
terday I spun 24 rounds and spent much time. Today I spun
56 rounds in less time. The fatigue, too, was less. What is true
about an individual and his small task, is also true about an
organization and its big undertakings. "Yoga is skill in work."
Work here means service, yajna. All our difficulties arise from our
inefficiency. If we become efficient, what seems a hardship today
will become a source of joy. I am convinced that in a well-
organized set-up based on right principles, no tensions should
be felt.
You have joined the Ashram to acquire this efficiency. You
will not learn it from anyone. Everyone has to acquire it from
the atmosphere in the Ashram. If any person like you does not
acquire it, he or she will not remain in the Ashram till the end.
I am not talking about those who have no ambition. They will
perhaps remain. Since the Ashram is really an institution based
on the principle of freedom, everyone in it may rise as high as
he or she wishes. But no one will be able to help a person who
does not aspire to rise. It is for you to create the atmosphere in
which you can work well. You can attract your friend to the
Ashram. Really speaking, however, that would be self-centredness
on your part. All those who live there are your friends. Give
them what you have and receive from them what they have. If
you believe that you have nothing to learn from others except
from one or two persons, you are sunk in the well of self-delusion.
I think there is none in this world from whom we may not learn
something.
What you write about Ramakrishna is very likely to be true.
I do not regard myself as having attained any degree of spiri-
tual realization, and I am sure, therefore, that I make mistakes
again and again. But being innocent mistakes, they seem to
have done no harm so far. I, therefore, continue on my path
with an untroubled mind and also draw co-workers into my
experiments.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Passive exercises help the weak; for example, massage,
ardhashirshasana ardhasarvasana lying down and raising the legs or
the hands slowly upwards. In all these, the patient remains
passive and gives his or her mental co-operation. Do you follow
this?
Prayers have often been attacked, but they have been kept
up for 16 years. How much time do they take? How much
of that time can be saved? Anyone who accepts the necessity of
prayers will not grudge the time given to them. We can point
out a drawback in everyone. On the whole, however, our pray-
ers seem all right. For my information, though, what change do
you desire?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: 10284. Also C.W. 6732. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
