339. LETTER TO TRANSVAAL BRITISH INDIANS
[LONDON,
November 6, 1909]
We of the United Kingdom have learnt, through those who are
working here on your behalf, about your sorrows and trials under the
British flag. That you are fighting for the honour of your race and your
motherland commands our admiration. In our opinion, the Transvaal
Government has no right to debar British subjects who may be of a
different race or a different colour to themselves from entering that Colony
because of colour or race. We hold it to be contrary to the traditions
of the Empire to which you and we belong. We appreciate the modera-
tion of your position in that, whilst you naturally insist upon your national
honour being preserved untarnished, you do not oppose the desire of
the Colonists in the Transvaal to regulate and restrict immigration from
India under general and non-racial legislation, and on economic grounds
which to the Colonists appear to be just.
The method you have adopted for seeking redress appeals to us who
believe in religion as the guiding force of life. In making your position
good, and in convincing the authorities of the justice of your cause and
of the earnestness of your demand, you have not resorted to methods
of violence and physical force, but you have heroically suffered in your
own persons by refusing to accept a law which you rightly consider to be
repugnant to your conscience and by submitting to the penalties pro-
vided by it for non-submission. 2,500 of you have already been impri-
soned — mostly with hard labour, and for long terms up to six months.
Some of you have become impoverished. Wives have patiently borne
separation from their husbands, and have also been reduced almost to
starvation. Your merchants have allowed their goods to be sold, and
have allowed their creditors to take away their stock. In undergoing
such suffering you are showing the true spirit of the great teachers of
the different religions of the world. We sympathise with you. We mean
that our whole life shall testify how earnestly we desire for you strength
and courage to continue your struggle, and, as a tangible expression of
our sympathy for you, we subscribe our names herein below, and pay
whatever we feel impelled to give towards the relief of your distress.
We hope that the authorities, as well in the Transvaal as in London,
will open their eyes and give immediate relief.
Indian Opinion, 11-12-1909
