59. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
SEGAON,
November 17, 1936
CHI. AMRITLAL,
I got your letter after Vasumati had left. So the address
for the information of the relatives could not be given. I am
sending Kanu your address.
Among other fruits are pomegranate, custard-apple, pineapple,
jambu, sweet guavas, mangoes, fully ripe rayan, sweet berries, etc.
There is no harm in taking bananas occasionally. But it is better
to take them in place of rotli. You may wash them and add butter
or ghee. It is possible that some of these fruits may not suit
you as the apples did not. You should give up such fruits.
I follow the point about soap. Chhotelal says that even soap
powder is more expensive than the soap made at Maganwadi.
Can you say anything on this matter? You are gaining weight
satisfactorily. It should go on. See that you do not have the
slightest indigestion. Mirabehn is also recouping her health and
she does not feel tired while walking. She does some work also.
Although sometimes she does transgress the limit. One day she
even had fever. I was scared and so was she. She took almost
nothing on that day and remained on honey, water and lemon
juice and was well again. Amtul Salaam lives at Santa Cruz.
Do go there. The address is Easter Villa, 7th Road.
See Kanti if you can. Your recipe for making gruel is cor-
rect. No lumps will form even if you put paste of flour made
in cold water into the boiling water. I had made gruel for 75
prisoners at a time by this method. It cooks in a very short
time. It takes quite a long time if we put the cold mixture on
the fire and it requires stirring continuously. Do you under-
stand what I write? I hope you do. You must pour into boiling
water the thick paste of flour, stirring the while. The intake
of milk should be up to 120 tolas. Make a habit of taking
lemons.
There is nothing about Harilal in the newspapers. I do
wish to know, however, what he said on the occasion, where
51
it was and what happened there, and so on.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10724
