375. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
[NADIAD,]
July 29, 1918
DEAR KISHORELAL,
This letter is meant for you and Shri Narahari. To the extent
that Shri Narayanrao's charge that distinctions are made between
Maharashtrians and Gujaratis is justified, it is our duty to try to
remove the causes. Here is a field for the exercise of non-violence.
The first step to take is for you all to come together and examine
how much of truth there is in the charge. The Gujarati ladies
should try to mix freely with the Maharashtrian ladies. The most
important thing is to see that the children make no such distinction.
It is not necessary to give exaggerated importance to what I have
said; just reflect over it for a moment and do all that may need
to be done.
As for prayers, I place this before you for consideration. We
should not take the plea of inability so far that, in the end,
we find ourselves incapable of doing anything at all. We should
do the teaching as well as we can and overcome our shortcomings
by gradual effort. Do you think I would use the plea of inability
if I was myself required to teach Sanskrit? I know that my San-
skrit is no Sanskrit. But I would certainly teach it if no other
person was available and I would get over my deficiency day by
day. It was in this way that Parnell topped them all in his know-
ledge of the rules of business in the House of Commons. You al-
ways think of your weakness and are afraid of doing anything.
Would you not be happier if, using all your strength, you disposed
of every task that fell to you?
In what manner should the children learn to use their strength?
It is a difficult thing to teach them to defend themselves and yet
not be overbearing. Till now, we used to teach them not to fight
back if anyone beat them. Can we go on doing so now? What
will be the effect of such teaching on a child? Will he, in his
youth, be a forgiving or a timid man? My powers of thinking
fail me. Use yours. This new aspect of non-violence which has
revealed itself to me has enmeshed me in no end of problems.
I have not found one master-key for all the riddles, but it must
be found. Shall we teach our boys to return two blows for one,
or tolerate a blow from anyone weaker than themselves but to
fight back, should a stronger one attack them, and take the beat-
ing that might follow? What should one do if assaulted by a
Government official? Should the boy submit to the beating at the
moment and then come to us for advice, or should he do what
might seem best in the circumstances and take the consequences?
These are the problems which face us if we give up the royal road
of turning the other cheek. Is the first course the right one because
easier to take? Or is it that we shall come upon the right path
only by treading through a dangerous one? The foot-tracks which
go up the Himalayas lead in all directions, sometimes even away
from the destination and yet an experienced guide will take us in
the end to the summit. One cannot climb the Himalayas in a
straight line. Can it be that, in like fashion, the path of non-vio-
lence, too, is difficult? May God protect us, may He indeed.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
