267. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
July 25, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS,
Received your letter on the 23rd. It would be better if the
weather there agrees (with you). Has any companion been
given? Are sufficient clothes provided? I had received Popular
Astronomy. I could not know who sent it. From the name in the
book I thought that it must have come from Pranlal. It has so
happened that a copy of the book has come to my hands for
some months past. Shivaji (brother of Vinoba) of the Ashram
has made a deep study (of the subject). I had written to him
to send me any book he liked. And so this book came to me.
So I have with me two copies at present. It has good maps, but
the contents are not of much value. At present I have got with
me better books (from the point of view of contents) than this.
There can be no observation of the sky in this season. In September
or October when the sky clears and the sunset will take place
earlier, if you are allowed to remain outside till 7.30 or 8 you can
observe the sky.
I see that your views about social reform are very advanced.
My attitude in such matters is different. I would not discuss any
matter which does not seem to be of immediate importance and
about which there is the slightest room for doubt. Divorce is such
a matter. For one thing, among the masses divorce is not pro-
hibited, and where it is prohibited many other reforms need to
be introduced before we can go as far as divorce. I would not
therefore spend my energy in discussing the subject and create
confusion in the minds of people.
As regards [artificial] birth-control, my mind revolts against
it. It is possible that old ideas unconsciously influence my views,
but reasons for which I oppose it [really] exist today and we can,
therefore, see for ourselves the great harm done by [artificial]
birth-control. By adopting artificial means to prevent conception,
even those who are strong today are likely to become weak. The
whole attitude to life behind the practice of birth-control is dan-
gerous and mistaken.
Its supporters believe that it is not only
man's right but also his duty to satisfy his natural sex desire,
and that if a man does not discharge this duty his development
will be retarded. I see great evil in this view. I observe it daily
in experience. It is impossible to expect self-control in those
who have recourse to these artificial means. These means are
being advocated on the assumption that self-control in this matter
is impossible. And to regard the control of the sex urge as im-
possible or unnecessary or harmful is to my mind a denial of
dharma, for self-control is the very basis of dharma. There are
many other simple and innocent methods of preventing the birth
of weak progeny. Leaving them aside, how can a dangerous
method like birth-control be adopted?
Almost everybody ad-
mits that it is full of dangers.
Thus, from whatever point of
view I think about it, it seems to me highly undesirable. I am
prompted to write all this again because you have still time to
think and, since the subject is very serious, it is necessary that you
should examine it carefully. I shall have no fear then what con-
elusion you come to, for I believe that your truthfulness will save
you in the end or that, if I am wrong, you will be able to correct
my error.
If you are convinced that birth-control is morally
right, you will not rest until you have converted me to your view.
And I am easy to deal with. However strongly I may cling to a
view, I don't hesitate to give it up immediately if I discover my
error or if it is pointed out to me by somebody.
All three of us are well. I now take milk, but I do not
see any benefit. I have yielded to the pressure of the doctor
here. The pain in the elbow persists, but it pains only when it
is moved in a certain way, and hence there is no cause for
anxiety about it. I have already written to Taramati in regard to
visits. Besides making envelopes, Sardar has taken up two other
things, viz., spinning and study of Sanskrit. He is pursuing the
study with great energy. You have probably seen the 24 books
by Satavlekar. Out of these he has finished three in 15 days.
This is excellent speed.
Devdas had another relapse, but from the latest information
I have received it appears that fever has again come down. He
says in his letter that the Gorakhpur Jail authorities looked after
him very well. The position about my correspondence has be-
come uncertain now. Incoming post is delivered fairly regularly,
but the letters which I write are delayed a good deal before they
are despatched. You need not, therefore, worry if you don't get
my replies to your letters soon.
Give me detailed information about the food which you get
there, whether you can digest it, what exercise you can take,
what your weight is and how you sleep. What are you reading
at present?
I am progressing well with my Urdu reading.
I can now
write a little. I am happy about this.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Have you received the Gandiva spinning-wheel? Mahadev
reminds me that you wrote to me about having received it. My
memory may be said to be failing a little now.
Can you spin
on it?
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 112-4, and Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Depart-
ment, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. 11, p. 465
