140. LETTER TO SIR JAMES DUBOULAY
NADIAD,
April 4, 1918
DEAR SIR JAMES DUBOULAY,
Although the Kaira matter is not under your Department,
I feel that as you are a member of the Executive Council and
as perhaps of all the members you know me best, I would not
hesitate to place the position before you.
The situation is not of my seeking nor is it the work of
the Home Rule party in any shape or form. The initiative entirely
belongs to the Kaira people. Even at the present moment I am
endeavouring as much as possible to keep it outside the poli-
tical view. The people have tried every means at their dispo-
sal of serving what they believe to be justice and they have
failed. What was I to advise? Were they quietly to sell their
treasured belongings or incur debts to pay the Government dues
and be noted liars in the bargain? For be it remembered that
the local officials think that their figures are absolutely right
and the people's wrong. The people naturally look up to pub-
lic workers for advice. For me to have advised them to suffer
the wrong would have been to increase their weakness and send
their discontent underground. What I have done enables the
people to state their case boldly and if they are in the wrong or
the Government unbending to suffer their property to be sold.
This is at best a striking and orderly demonstration of their
grief and of their faith in the ultimate triumph of truth and in
the desire of the Government to do justice. I cannot help saying
that the doctrine of infallibility of the officials is alike dangerous
and intolerable. I can see nothing wrong in the Government
adopting the principle of arbitration as between themselves and
the ryots. They can only gain in prestige. The Talati and Mukhi
rule which is the rule of fear must give place to the rule of law.
Anyway that is what I am striving for throughout India. Will
you not assist?
For the facts of the case I enclose herewith my letter to the
Press. If you wish to see me I am at your service.
From a copy: C.W. 10662. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
