313. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
SEGAON, WARDHA,
May 21, 1938
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
This is all about Phoenix. Manilal thinks that Indian Opinion does
not serve the purpose for which it was established. It taxes much more
energy than it is worth simply to keep it going. The subscribers do
not pay because they want the paper but because Manilal makes a
personal canvass and they cannot repel him. Muslim subscribers can
be counted on one's finger-tips. Indian Views is a formidable rival.
Manilal can't descend to the level to which Indian Views descends.
He has not the ability to draw to himself co-workers. Rather than it
die a natural death, Manilal thinks it would be a good thing to give
it a decent burial. His wife is firmer still in the opinion that Manilal
expresses. Manilal returns to South Africa alone this time. I have told
him that he should make one more brave effort to keep Indian Opinion
alive. A journal that has played a prominent part in mounting public
opinion in South Africa and has been instrumental in helping the Civil
Resistance Struggle ought not [to] be given up without an honest
struggle. I have, therefore, asked him to see the subscribers and notify
to them that if they cannot guarantee the upkeep by paying subscription
in advance and without personal canvass, the paper must be closed.
He should also make an effort to get helpers in editing and conducting
the paper. If he cannot get them, then he can close it. If that happens,
what of the Phoenix Trust land and the building ? I am quite convinced
that the Press is not to be given to anybody as a going concern unless
that person is a trustworthy person. So far as I can see, it will not
be possible to find such a trustworthy person. In that case it would
be wise to wind up the press, sell the machinery, etc., for what they
may fetch.
So far as I can see you are the only active trustee. Umar Zaveri,
because I suppose he is too much engrossed in his difficulties and affairs,
has lost interest in the Trust. I do not know that Ritch can render
much help. No doubt you will see them both. But they will need the
whole thing to be done by your hands. I hope we can hold on to the
land, turn it into a model agricultural farm, and settle on it Indians or
even Zulus - provided of course that is made self-supporting. I do
not want this Trust to engross the whole or even much of your time.
293
But I want you to give your serious attention to it and put it on a
firm footing. I have told Manilal that he is free, even after the paper
is given up, to settle down on the Phoenix land, subject to such terms
as may be agreed upon between him and the trustees. But as I
understand Manilal and his wife, their fixed attention at the moment
is not to settle down in South Africa for their livelihood, but to return
to India to give themselves to a life of service.
Now I think I have told you all.
I have a letter from Hannah only today. I am looking forward to
her coming. You won't be anxious about her. Manilal will give you
all the news about myself and others.
Love.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
