421. LETTER TO MANILAL NATHUBHAI DOSHI
[After June 1, 1927]
I got your letter. Brahmacharya is to be observed in three ways-
in mind, in speech and in body. As long as the mind feels the
slightest evil desire, there is always a danger of the desire for in-
dulgence being aroused. The evil desires of the mind are not
controlled in a moment; their control, being the aim of man's
highest effort, takes ages to attain. It is logical to believe that a
person who conquers the evil desires in him in this life has succeeded
in doing so by reason of the efforts in many lives rather than
merely through his efforts in this life. If in our conscious moments
the body is about to violate brahmacharya, it is our duty at that
time to commit suicide and destroy the body. Hence one cannot
be too vigilant towards one's body; anyone who cannot be so
vigilant has yet to learn the first lesson of brahmacharya. Brahma-
charya in speech is practically included in bodily brahmacharya,
for, though it is the mind that inspires speech, in itself speech is
a bodily function. There remains the mind. As one acquires
greater control over the mind, one finds it easy to keep the body
under control without having to struggle to do so, but until the
mind is completely subjugated, there is a chance of involuntary
emission. We should not be frightened at such emission. It is the
mind we should fear. Involuntary emission is Nature's warning to
us that the mind has not been subjugated. We see that even
lustful men remain complacent because they do not have involun-
tary emission. They feel pleased with themselves because of their
freedom from such emissions. But, truly speaking, their being
self-satisfied in this manner is their fall. In America they employ
means which prevent involuntary emissions while the mind remains
filled with lustful thoughts. But to regard such a man as a brah-
machari amounts to murdering the language. Hence, though safe-
guarding of the vital fluid is the external form of brahmacharya,
one cannot definitely say that its preservation is necessarily a
manifestation of brahmacharya. Nevertheless, there is no doubt
that it is an essential aspect of complete brahmacharya. My point
in writing this is that, if there is involuntary emission despite our
continuous and sincere struggling to avoid it, despite our vigilance
and after we have neglected to adopt no measure which can
possibly help us to avoid it, we need not get frightened or lose
heart and feel that we have committed a great sin; rather we
should look upon it as kind Nature's warning and look deeper into
ourselves. We should find out where evil desires are lurking in
the mind and strive harder still to banish them. The effort is its
own reward. If we have been cheating ourselves and mentally
indulging our secret desires, we should make sure that we run
away from those activities or associations which cause our down-
fall or make us weak. It should not matter if, in doing so, one
ruins one's business or loses one's wealth and passes for a fool
among the people.
It is necessary to be almost completely free from sensuous
desires in order to be blessed by the vision of God; the desires that
still remain will be destroyed only by that vision. There is no
sure means which can help us to have this vision. No one else can
bring us to it. Truly speaking, the Shastras and those learned in
them can only recount their experiences, and, if we lack faith,
their experience may awaken faith in us; but no one else can
make the necessary effort on our behalf. I can, therefore, tell you
only this: do not give up your struggle for a single moment. To
get a vision of God is the highest aim of human effort. Add up,
therefore, all the struggles that human beings are ready to
undertake to get certain things in this world and add up all those
efforts; it is necessary, in order to get a vision of God, to make
an effort a myriad times more difficult than the sum of all those
struggles of human beings in this world. If one does not gain
that vision, even after such an effort, one will be free to raise
questions; there will be some justification for lack of faith
then. But, till then, we must not give up our faith and our
struggle.
The example of Mansukhlal which you have cited is in-
appropriate. He possessed much knowledge of the Shastras, and he
struggled [for self-control] but he had not become free from desire,
neither did he make such a claim. Hence the fact that he felt
a desire for a thing like a water-melon during his last hours is not
enough reason to fill us with despair or to justify our disparaging
him. We should not deceive ourselves and believe, living in
these evil times and in this world full of difficulties, that we can
easily become free from desires, nor should we entertain such
expectations even of a person whom we believe to be good lest
we get a shock or doubt his goodness when we have a contrary
experience of him. We should remember that the soul's power is
unlimited. He whose desires have totally perished is practically
fit to be God. Let us not believe that good men with whom we
come in contact have gained such fitness and thereby reduce
God's measuring rod to the littleness of our finger.
If we see any person standing even on the first notch on that
yardstick, we should feel happy and hope that, if one person can
become fit enough to stand on the first notch, all of us can, if we
but try, acquire the strength to stand on the second notch, and
strive on in that hope.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
