223. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
August 20, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I was very pleased to receive your note written just before your
landing. I fully expected that you would work away on board and pre-
pare the two statements, but I had hoped that you would give yourself
sufficient rest and not overdo it. I am looking forward to both the
pamphlets1, which Ritch re-christened "books".
After my last cablegram, I hope you have no difficulty in under-
standing the scope of the new amendment. Anyhow my letters, giving
you the first amendment as also the second, will be presently in your
hands and you will be able to know exactly the position here. I am
sorry to say, at the time of writing, we stand where we were last week. I
had thought that we should know the result about the beginning of this
week for certain. Such, however, was not to be the case. Lord Ampthill
in his last letter however, says that he hourly expects a reply from Lord
Crewe or General Smuts. We are seeing Mr. Schreiner tomorrow, to
further discuss what you will find dealt with in the copy which will be
kept with this letter.
The Natal friends have seen Mr. Bottomley, through the Acting
Manager of the African Banking Corporation. Mr. Bottomley is cer-
tainly working very well. Through him they saw Colonel Seely also
yesterday, and are likely to see him again. The matter will also be
taken up by him in John Bull; thus there will be some fuss made, but I
very much fear that nothing is going to come out of these interviews. If,
however, our friends return convinced that they will get justice, not by
1 These were on the Transvaal problem and on Indian grievances in South
Africa in general. Polak wrote to Gandhiji on August 21: "I have written a pamphlet
on the Transvaal trouble and had hoped to send you advance copies by this mail. But
that has not been possible. Mr. Gokhale has read it, thinks it good and, whilst, he
considers it much too strong in parts (I have since toned it down somewhat), has
passed it. Mr. Jehangir Petit has personally undertaken to charge himself with the
cost of printing and publishing 20,000 copies. I have illustrated it from my own
photos. There will be a block of Volksrust Gaol and another of Pretoria Gaol, with
suitable letter press . . . " The pamphlet was entitled A Tragedy of Empire: The treat-
ment of British Indians in the Transvaal. For the other pamphlet, vide "Letter to H. S. L.
Polak", p. 337.
2 This was dated August 16.
3 This is not available.
4 Members of the Natal delegation
praying for it, but by demanding it at the point of the passive resistance
bayonet, their visit will have been of some use.
I was dictating this letter when I was interrupted by Millie and
Waldo. Both of them are looking very well. Millie seems to be quite
happy in her new and temporary home.
Dr. Mehta is staying at the hotel. Both he and I went to Louth
last Sunday to put his son at Mr. Worral's Grammar School. He
understands the struggle much better, and I think he has begun to see
that passive resistance is a sovereign remedy for most of the ills of life.
He bought for you and Millie yesterday a magnificent edition of Omar
Khayyam. It is more an album than a book. The whole of it is lithograph-
ed; the pictures are splendid and so is the colouring. You know how
well Arabic letters lend themselves to ornamenting. There is a great deal
of Arabic or Persian writing in the book. I have never seen anything
like it. The book, together with others, has been just delivered and
Millie has seen it. Maud is so charmed with it that she is going to save
her pennies to enable her to buy a copy. Dr. Mehta has given £10 to
the poor Passive Resisters' Fund opened in our columns; he offered
£25, [but] I advised him to give £10 and the balance to the Phoenix
School. Cordes wrote for some books and other things, the result of
which is that Dr. Mehta and I went over to a bookseller's yesterday, and
the books as per list herewith have been already bought. They will
form part of the Phoenix library at the same time as they are used for
the school.
You know that I have a Life Policy for about £660. It is with
Mr. Rewashanker Mehta . I would like you to get hold of the policy
and see the Agent of the Company. It has been long preying upon my
mind. I have no longer, I conceive, any use for it. If they would re-
fund the premiums paid to them less whatever they may wish to
charge, so long as the deduction is not unreasonable, I would like to
give up the policy and receive back a large portion of the premiums
paid.
I am looking forward to hearing from you everything about
Kaliandas.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5019
