134. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 14/18, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
Again I commence the Ashram letters with yours and that
just after the morning prayer.
The 5th verse is: "May the Goddess Saraswati (of learning)
the Destroyer completely of black ignorance, protect me, she who
is white as the mogra flower, the moon and a garland of snow, who
has worn white robes, whose hands are adorned with the beautiful
bamboo of her veena (a kind of violin), who is seated on a
white lotus and who is always adored by Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva
and the other gods."
January 18, 1931
To me the thought here is very beautiful. Learning of course
means wisdom. The emphasis on threefold whiteness—that of snow,
moon, flower—and the white dress and white seat is intended to
show that uttermost purity is an indispensable part of wisdom or
learning. As you explore the deeper meaning of these and kindred
verses, you will find every virtue personified and made a living
reality instead of a dead dictionary word. These imaginary gods
are more real than the so-called real things we perceive with our
five senses. When I recite this verse, for instance, I never think
that I am addressing an imaginary picture. The recitation is a
mystical act. That when I analyse the act intellectually, I know that
the goddess is an imaginary being, does not in any way affect the
value of the recitation at prayer time. If all this is not clear to
you, you must unhesitatingly tax me.
So you are to be travelling again. I can only say 'do not over-
do it, do not strain yourself beyond endurance.'
I telegraphed about Surendra . He must have given up his
fast. For me, I am quite right. I have not yet gone back to
vegetables or bread. Almonds, dates and a little milk or curds and
lemons seem to keep me perfectly fit. To be able to keep standing
at the takli for nearly two hours is not a bad feat for me and I sit
at the wheel for nearly two hours without any support to the
back. Add to that nearly 45 minutes for carding and sliver making.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5429. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9663
