49. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Wednesday, [On or before January 23, 1907]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have not yet answered the points you raised in your letter
of the 9th.
I did not follow what Mr. Anglia and Mr. Osman said
about advertisements.
I want a list in English, with prices, of Hindi and Tamil
books available with Mr. Abdool Haq or Doraisamy. A White
wants such books for Indians who work with him, that is, he
wants books which Indians of average ability and knowing some
Hindi or Tamil can understand. I have promised him a list.
Let me know what happened about the demand for a Hindi
section.
I have not yet selected a photograph for the block.
I have great faith in you. I am in no position to give
thought to myself. There is much work to be done. We are
only a few, and not all of us well up in general knowledge. As
I think of all this, I feel inclined to send you immediately to
England. I want to know, however, if you have fully grasped
the Indian problem here. What do you feel yourself? What
encouragement is Maganlal likely to give? What does Anandlal
think? All the same I want your opinion immediately whether
Thakkar can assume the responsibility for the Gujarati section.
I should like you to sail off, - no harm even if it takes four
months - provided of course Maganlal agrees to share the finan-
cial burden and Miss West picks up the accounts. I leave it
to you whether or not to talk to others. You may talk about
it only if you think fit. If you yourself feel that you should not
go yet, there is no need to pursue the matter further.
In any case from next week pass on the responsibility for
translations, etc., in the Gujarati section to Thakkar, so that you
may be free for other work. It will suffice if you supervise the
general policy of Indian Opinion. I don't think the last issue was
bad. I will let you know after I hear from you as to what was
held over. Entrust feature-writing to him, so that you may be
free. Of course, if anything improper appears, such as should
not have been published, the blame will be yours.
Mr. Medh wants to leave. He has a chance of getting a
job in Durban. Relieve him, therefore, on Monday, and pay
him the arrears of his salary. Write to me if you think that a
substitute will be necessary.
I shall wait for more information about Tongaat. There
was a telegram here also.
You will be surprised to know that Mr. Isaac had been to
Pretoria. I will take him round here too, and send him to Pre-
toria once again. Kalyandas told me that he had not received
the complete list relating to Pretoria. Send me one again. I
sent you the figures yesterday, from which you may understand
which amounts to credit and which to debit. I have not looked
into them. If there is anything in these figures to which it is
worth drawing my attention, please let me know.
What you say about advertisements concerning fish is right.
We will not refuse such advertisements if we receive any, but we
will not solicit them.
So long as the name has not been changed in the Colonial
Office, we must take out the licence in the name of Madanjit.
Please do so.
I had received the cutting concerning Jivanji. But what
was to be done about it? You gave a summary of it in Gujarati.
Have you received Jivanji's money from Mombasa? If not collect
it from Adamji. It will be well to go to the Cape during Easter.
I will write to Abdool Gani.
It is impossible for us to bring out the Tamil [section] just
now. Its time will come by and by.
I see no need to write to Mr. Aiyar. Your replying in the
negative is sufficient.
Anandlal has sent the list of Gujarati types. I will order
them. Haria must have sent the receipt for Kalyandas's luggage.
Take delivery of it. You should not omit the advertisements from
here without consulting me.
If you find it necessary to spend time over accounts, you may.
I am writing to Dawad Sheth.
Haria has given the key of the safe to Kalyandas. He will
send the deposit. [£] 1,286 has been credited here. [You] will
get the credit note. Haria says that you have to collect some
dues from Jameson.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 4788
