303. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 17, 1937
MY DEAR HENRY,
Your letter is revealing. It shows what an intellectual gulf separates
us. This does not worry me, for at heart we are still one.
I do not know what Mahadev wrote when he showed me what
you had written. I asked him to write to you. You had a perfect right
to differ from me publicly. But you had no right to give an opinion
on imperfect data. I wonder if even now you know in what context
I wrote the thing. And you certainly do not know the background to
it. There was a time when you would not judge even my action without
first demanding an explanation from me. In this case, the world would
not have gone wrong if you had waited for an explanation. Remember
that this was a newspaper letter. You could well have missed a mail.
You could even have sent the article to me asking me to pass it on
to the Leader, if in my opinion, you had correctly stated my attitude.
Do you know that nobody here resented the remark so far as I
am aware ? The rule of the sword need not connote all that you have
pictured. The rule of the sword may be benign. I tell you that it is
still the rule of the sword, it is not autonomy.
Of course, I have great regard for Sir Tej's legal talent. I know
that he loves his country no less than I do. Still I dare to repeat that
1 Vide also Vol. LXV, p. 175.
286
neither his legal knowledge nor his deep study of the present constitution
makes him an infallible judge of the legality of the Congress position.
I offered to have the decision of a legal tribunal on the question. Why
must I prefer Sir Tej's opinion to my own legal advisers trained in
the same surroundings as Sir Tej but much more detached than he
because of their being without [the] prepossessions of Sir Tej, he being,
as you tell me, one of the authors of the Act? But I must not weary
you.
Your letter leaves me unconvinced. Nevertheless, I love you as
well as before. I had even forgotten your reference.
K. is here just the same man that you and I knew him. He has
become one of the household and will stay for three months if he
is allowed to by his firm. He is awaiting a cable reply.
Love to you and the growing family.
Yours,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
