192. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS BHIKHABHAI
SABARMATI,
July 21, 1926
DEAR SHRI PRABHUDAS BHIKHABHAI,
I have your letter. I believe it is possible to conserve the
vital fluid by learning to control one's breath, but that does not
solve the problem of brahmacharya. Brahmacharya means control of
all the senses. Perhaps you do not know that medical scientists in
this age perform a surgical operation which prevents the emission
of the vital fluid; would you call a person so operated upon a
brahmachari? A shastri explained to me the meaning of conser-
vation of the vital fluid, and said that in Sanskrit the phrase viryani-
graha has reference to the sublimation of the vital fluid so that it
flows upwards. And then he told me that Krishna whose doings
are described by the author of the Bhagavata was a person in whom
the vital fluid was sublimated in this manner, and so he was free
to have relations with any number of women. Are you prepared
to look upon such a person as a brahmachari ? You will now see that
the brahmacharya achieved through mere breath control is of little
value. The real value of brahmacharya lies in the expenditure of the
great energy required for mastering the senses; when, through such
expenditure, the senses become atman-oriented, the power which
is generated by the effort can pervade the entire universe. It is
my unshakable conviction that such brahmacharya cannot be achiev-
ed by methods of purely external control. In the second chapter
[of the Gita]1, Shri Krishna, who had the wisdom of experience,
says that fasting may calm a man's desires, but that his pleasure in
objects of the senses does not disappear completely. It disappears
only when he has realized God, and he will have to strive during
life after life before he realizes God. Remember what Shankara-
charya said in this connection. If a man, sitting on the shore,
attempts the impossible task of emptying the sea by taking out the
water drop by drop, on a blade of grass, he may, if he has the
necessary patience and if he can find an empty hollow large
enough, succeed in transferring the water after millions of years the
number of which can be calculated arithmetically; to realize God
requires more patience than this, and, according to the Lord,
achieving brahmacharya means realizing God. Please understand
that in saying all this I am not at all underestimating the value of
breath-control.
I believe it to be an aid in our effort, but by
itself it is not enough. It can be a stage, and not a very ad-
vanced one at that, in the difficult journey towards the goal of
brahmacharya. My only complaint against you is that you seem
to attach more importance to it than it deserves.
Vandemataram from
KATHLAL
MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19935
