264. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Bhadarva Shud 1 [September 4, 1910]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I write this with a heavy heart. I constantly think your going to
India has been a mistake.
I was deeply pained to read your letter to Doctor [Mehta]. How
can I bear your contracting tuberculosis? I write this under the im-
pression that you are still there [in England]. Maud will redirect this
to you if you have left for India.
Please do as you think fit. Treat the following simply as a piece of
advice from me. I wish to see your health improved.
Considering only your health, I feel that the best thing for you
would be to go to Phoenix. You will get fresh air there. You will also
be able to work on the farm, which is good for a tuberculosis patient.
Moreover, I hope to be able to assist and nurse you. This will be
possible only if you are at Phoenix. And, God willing, you can stay on
this Farm too. The climate here is even better than that of Phoenix.
Brahmacharya, which is necessary for a patient like you, can easily be ob-
served here. I therefore think it will be better if you come over here.
You can go back to India if your health does not improve here. Should
you be keen on going to India, I have written to Doctor [Mehta] to
send you Rs. . . .3 every month.
Even otherwise, you may stay in
Bombay and do some public work there under my guidance. Your main
work will relate to the struggle here. By doing this you will be free from
worry about your livelihood and you can easily pass your life in public
service. Whether you are ill or well, I wish your life is spent in the ser-
vice of the country.
Many things come to mind about which I should write, but I do
not feel like doing so. My suggestion about your coming over here stands
even if you have already reached India. In case you do not feel inclined
to come here, my suggestion regarding Doctor [Mehta] is there for you
to consider.
However, even if neither of these alternatives is acceptable to you
and you want to live independently on your own earnings, be sure that
I would not come in your way. My only desire is that you should take the
course that will give you most satisfaction.
I shall be waiting for your letter during the next week like a
chataka longing for the rains.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a handwritten copy of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4936
Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
