243. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised
CHANDA,
November 13, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have just arrived in Chanda and whilst the others are
coming, I have taken up your letter. It is now 9 p.m. The pro-
gramme is fairly strenuous. I was in Hinganghat at 6 p.m.
Tiwari has handed me your letter. I have also read yours
to J1. So far as he knows there is probably very little left in
A.I.C.C. a/c. The books are not with him. He has sent for the
accounts. Meanwhile I have suggested that Rs. 500 might be
sent at least on a/c. If the funds are exhausted, I do not know
what is to be done. I have an earmarked a/c at my disposal.
I am loath to part with that fund. I am drawing upon it for
Hardikar and I want to do likewise for the list of workers you
have sent me. It too will be soon exhausted. In the circumstances,
the office staff has to be reduced if not given up altogether, i.e.,
if the civil resistance movement is to continue. The more I
look about me, the more convinced I feel that those who are in
the fight will have to do without funds except such as may re-
main in hands such as mine. I have just managed for Gujarat
and Karnatak. The lady who was to have paid Rs. 50,000 has
just sent the message that she would like to pay Rs. 10,000 to you.
If she does, I shall expect you to pay the U.P. workers out of
this. Anyway I think it is best for you to confer with Jamna-
lalji and if necessary with me as to the management of the funds
that are still available. I have sent notices everywhere that no
more help need be expected through me. I am trying to run
through whatever is at my disposal.
Now about the informal meeting. You will see from the pro-
gramme herewith that I am in Delhi between 10 and 14 De-
cember. Thakkar Bapa says I can take up the bulk of 14th for
our meeting.
I am supposed to entrain for Andhra on 14th
immediately after 4 p.m. Ansari who was with me on Sunday
suggested Delhi. You will now make your choice-24th inst.,
4th Dec. or 14th Dec., i.e., if the conference is to come off at all.
As to the Harijan tour, I am not worrying at all over the
proposed boycott in U.P. I am finding no difficulty here. Con-
gressmen and non-Congressmen are co-operating in arranging
for the tour. You are unnecessarily hard on the liberals whom
I would include among non-Congressmen. We have to get work
even from them. They work according to their lights. In any
case, I do not want a single Congressman to work for this move-
ment who would go to jail. I have said this to everyone who
has come to me. I am sending back some of the best workers
who have just come out. Ba I hope is going soon and so is
Manibehn Patel.
Kakasaheb, Swami, Surendra are going.
Those Congressmen who are too weak to go or who have lost
faith in civil disobedience and who are anxious to work for
the Harijan cause I am taking, but not those who want Harijan
work as a mere cloak. This movement, if it is to become uni-
versal, must be able to continue even if every Congressman is in
jailor it must perish. I feel too that Congressmen should not
handle this movement to strengthen the C. D. movement or the
Congress hold on the people. It would be going about it the
wrong way. Such an attitude will damage both the Congress and
the Harijan cause. Cases of this type have come under my
notice. I have expressed strong disapproval of any such work. I
think I have now sufficiently answered all your questions. If not,
please ask again.
You will have noticed that the Sarkar Salaam in Hijli has stop-
ped. Shall I write to Sir Tej about the Frontier treatment?
I had a nice letter from Krishna. She seems to be happy
in her new home.
I hope Mother's progress continues.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
