70. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
March 4, 1929
CHI. MIRA,
This sheet tells you where I am writing from.
Tomorrow takes me away from you for a fair distance. My
third-class travelling is becoming a fraud in a way. From Delhi
I had a whole compartment given to me and the party. There
was thus greater freedom than in the 2nd class and I had the
satisfaction of having the whole company with me. The separa-
tion pained me. The being together gives me joy.
The Mandir is making visible progress, so I fancy. The
joint kitchen is becoming more and more popular, and I do not
think, at the end of the year, anybody would want to break it
up. But let us see.
Do not be anxious about me. There are three services from
Rangoon per week. I hope to write to you therefore three times
a week. The sailings from Calcutta to Rangoon are Sundays,
Tuesdays and Fridays. So you too need not write more than three
times per week. The steamer always leaves in the morning.
You will not forget to give me a summary of your work after
some time now. I want your informed opinion on the soft spindles
and a description of your improvements on the bow, also your digest
of comparison between the results of well carded slivers and what
they used to have before. I hope you are keeping a diary of these
bare experiences. I want you to treat your experiment scientifically.
I want you also to tell me from time to time all about the
morning and the evening prayers and what you sing there. And
give me also your final changes about food. I am attaching more
and more importance to your experiment, for I know you are
accurate about these things, and will not easily deceive yourself.
I have a curious party with me this time. It includes a mad
girl graduate. She is the daughter of a well-known Tamil leader
— Rajaji's friend. Last time I was in Delhi, she and her cousin
came in to see me. I suggested their coming to the Ashram for
a change. The father jumped at the idea. And there they are.
In order to be able to look after her more easily, I have cropped
her hair. Now she and the cousin are going with me to Burma.
She will listen, if at all, to me and no one else. It is a serious
responsibility. But it is God's, not mine. Then there is Champa
with her two babies—Dr. Mehta's daughter-in-law whom you
know. Dr. M. wanted me to take her with me. I expect she
will be left in Rangoon. The rest are Pyarelal, Girdhari, Subbiah,
Mahadev and Purushottam. Mahadev arrives this morning. As
Purushottam was still somewhat constipated, I suggested his
joining me. He being with me, I am able to avoid the lights for
the prayers. He recites the Gita without any assistance.
I am more and more reverting to uncooked food. During
the journey I had raw vegetable, chopped up with bread. So
bread was the only cooked preparation. Fruit is now becoming
a superfluity. Raw green vegetable is proving a perfect and
cheap substitute. Cabbage, cauliflower or any bhaji serves the
purpose. And one needs such a small quantity when you eat the
vegetable in a raw state.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5348. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9404
