168. LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH
ANANDKUNJ, RAJKOT,
April 14, 1939 2
NAMDAR THAKORE SAHEB,
I am able to answer your letter dated April 10, 1939, only
today.
It pains me to note that you have shaken your responsi-
bility off your shoulders. The Muslim and the Bhayat names
to which you refer were nominated by you. My promise there-
fore meant and could be interpreted to mean only that I on
my part would help you to fulfil your promise even if the
Chief Justice's Award went against you. It passes my under-
standing how anyone can interpret my promise to give what I
had no power to give. I am acting only as the Sardar's and
the Parishad's trustee. It is obvious that I may not give any-
thing outside the terms of my trust. Therefore, my promise can
only mean that if you desire to retain the names in question, I
would help you on behalf of the Sardar to do so subject to the
majority of the Sardar's names remaining intact. I hold that
it is impossible to put more meaning into my word. Unfortu-
nately you have taken an extraordinary step and thrust upon me
the responsibility of accommodating in the Sardar's list the names
of your nominees. What pains one is that you should misconstrue
my promise in a manner that would render nugatory the right
secured by the Sardar.
Conference being postponed till second week May. Your presence during
A. I. C. C. meeting absolutely necessary. Will first week May for A. I. C. C.
meeting suit you better?"
Therefore, although after your letter the only thing that re-
mained for me was to send you seven names on behalf of the
Sardar, I entreated three out of the four nominees named by
you to allow themselves to be included among the Sardar's
nominees and to work as one team with the rest. But my
entreaty has ended in failure. I have exhausted all effort to
honour your nominations if it were at all possible. You have
mentioned a fourth name in your letter. I did not think it neces-
sary to put Shri Mohan Mandan to the trouble of coming to
me to discuss things, as he is not a Harijan.
The exclusion of the above four names, however, does not mean
that the representatives nominated by the Sardar will not guard the
special and legitimate rights of Muslims, Bhayats, Harijans or any
other section. These members recognized no caste distinctions so far
as the Committee and service of the people are concerned. They
have before them only the cause of the Rajkot people as a whole.
They are on the Committee because the party they represent con-
ducted the fight for the rights of the Rajkot people. You appre-
ciated their endeavour and gave the right of nominating the names
of seven Rajkot State subjects outside the officials to the Sardar
or the Parishad. These names are as below:
1. Shri Popatlal Purushottam Anada1, B.A., LL.B.,
2.
" Popatlal Dhanji Malaviya
3.
"Jamnadas Khushalchand Gandhi
4.
"Becharbhai Walabhai [Wadher]4,
5.
"Jethalal [Harikrishna] Joshi5,
6.
"Vrajlal Mayashanker Shukla
7.
"Gajanan Bhawanishankar Joshi7, M.A., LL.B.
Let me once more entreat you to listen to me. You say
that you are unable to enlarge the Committee. This is not
right. The Chief justice's Award does not mean any absolute
obligation to limit the number of the Committee to ten. The
two parties can make any alterations by mutual agreement. The
Sardar is still desirous of helping you to keep your four nomi-
nees. The only condition is that the Parishad's majority should not
be affected in the extended Committee. According to the Chief
justice's Award, the Sardar has a majority of four at present.
Instead of that, for your sake and for the sake of avoiding bad
blood, the Sardar is willing to reduce it to a majority of one.
Can you expect anything more?
In your Notification of December 26th, the time-limit for
the Committee to complete and submit its report to you was
fixed at one month and four days. May I remind you that the
limit may not be exceeded?
During the second satyagraha struggle there were confisca-
tions, fines and other repressive measures. It is hardly necessary
to remind you that these should be now cancelled.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
Harijan, 22-4-1939
