162. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 29, 1939
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter only today. The rakhadi was tied by Amtul
Salaam and now I am writing this letter.
First your questions. Why don't you hand over the sum of Rs.
125 to Deo ? There should be no objection to accepting anything
which somebody might give for the book . You may hand over
to Deo whatever you receive or a part of it.
I fully agree with Deo's argument, that his expenses should
be met by Maharashtra itself. If Maharashtra does not bear
them, it means the province does not want his services.
Patwardhan may come and stay with me whenever he wants.
It is always crowded here, of course.
Come over for a visit whenever you can. There is no ques-
tion of overcrowding in your case. Rest assured that if you come
over here you will get well. Yes, there is one risk, of course, that
meanwhile I may have to go out. But what even if I have to?
You will immediately know if that happens.
Kelkar and I alone know what efforts I have made to win
him over. It was I who got him appointed on the Working
Committee, the sole reason being that he was regarded as Loka-
manya's heir. I thought it my duty to accommodate him as much
as I could and do my best to win him over. I still think so. Despite
my differences with Lokamanya, I regard myself as his devotee.
I had the highest regard for his learning, patriotism and courage.
There is no truth at all in Swami Satyadev's statement. I
could never say such a thing. If I did, my truth and ahimsa
would stand disgraced. I do believe, of course, that he would
resort to untruth and violence for the sake of the country. He
himself told me so. We had some correspondence too about the
matter. He had advocated shatham prati shaathyam against which
I had asserted shatham pratyapi satyam. Didn't you know this?
I think I have answered all your questions.
I was eagerly waiting for your letter. I have no comments to
make on your activities which you have described. I don't believe
that you should consult me in everything you do. What even if
you make a mistake? I am confident that you bear in mind, and
will always bear in mind, the Ashram vows in all that you do.
Yes, Rajen Babu did ask about you. I told him that you
were certainly capable of shouldering the responsibility and that if
you agreed to do so I would not oppose. It would, I said, take
a heavy load off his shoulders, but I added that I would not press
you and suggested that he should address the request for you to
Deo, as you are working under him. Are you satisfied now?
The letter from Sushila is enclosed. I will use the dhoti
when I get it, no matter of what quality it is.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10401. Also C.W. 6840. Court-
esy: Premabehn Kantak
