301. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
September 10, 1928
CHI. BALKRISHNA,
I have your letter. But I have never held that one who is
actually a soldier—and not one in outward appearance—should
also be a jnani. But I would certainly say that anyone who was
not a soldier, or could not become one, could never be a jnani.
The same is true about being a brahmachari. We do not see in life
that anyone who has mastered one of his senses is necessarily a
man of knowledge, but all of us hold that immorality is impos-
sible in a jnani. I do not think I need to be a jnani to be able
to put my hands on the shoulders of girls when walking without
being disturbed by the touch. A father with many daughters who
has pure feelings towards them may still be sunk in ignorance
in other respects. He may even have impure feelings towards
other women. It is but natural that I should have fatherly feel-
ings for the girls in the Ashram. I have cultivated this state of
heart over the years. Though I have, thus, pure feelings towards
them as towards most women, I am not in a position to claim
further that I have always experienced such pure feelings towards
every woman. My present condition is certainly pure, but, so long
as I have not become completely free from every kind of impure
feeling, I cannot say that I feel no fear about the future too. I have
never believed or felt myself to be a jnani. On the contrary, I
realize my state of ignorance every day. I have never felt that I
am committing the slightest wrong in putting my hands on the
shoulders of girls, for I know that they are but daughters to me.
That being so, it is also not true that I have done them harm by
my conduct. I have felt that through such intimacy I have en-
tered their heart and that in consequence they have become purer
in their feelings towards men. I have also considered the matter
from the point of view of the effect of my conduct on society.
There is certainly a belief among Hindus that even a father should
shrink from touching his daughter. This seems to me a wrong
notion, an enemy of brahmacharya. That brahmacharya which enter-
tains such fear is no brahmacharya. Rishyashringa's brahmacharya
is not our ideal. Nevertheless, for the past three weeks I have
practically given up putting my hands on the shoulders of girls
regarded as grown-up, for the doubt which occurred to you occurred
also to other inmates of the Ashram. In such a matter I need
not insist on my own point of view. Putting one's hands on the
shoulders of girls cannot be a matter of principle, and therefore
as soon as the issue was raised I discussed the matter with every-
one and gave up the practice. The girls have felt a little hurt by
this, but on the whole they are reconciled to it and in time will
get completely reconciled. No one, of course, should imitate my
practice. Anyone who has fatherly feelings towards girls will not
shrink, when necessary, from touching them in a manner befitting
a father and the world also will not censure him.
I do not understand what you write about . . .2 and
why you are pained by the matter. You admit that you made a
mistake in writing to him and advising him to follow my advice
and in asking me to guide him. After that, where was the need
for me to discuss the matter with you? Moreover, how could I
believe that you could tell me anything more than what . . .
would about his relation to his wife? Despite what you write
and tell me, I believe that my advice to . . . was the right one.
I have sent him there with the advice, and in the hope that, if he
was sincere in the vow of brahmacharya which he had taken in
regard to his wife, he would even now observe it. He has gone
there to demonstrate that he is a brother and a friend of his wife.
This is my view of the matter, which he has completely under-
stood. If, instead of behaving as a brother, he acts like a husband,
you may assume that his vow of brahmacharya in regard to his
wife was insincere. It was only waiting for an opportunity to be
broken. I suppose you have not overlooked the fact that he was
never free from impure feelings towards other women. If . . .
still writes to you about himself, I suggest that you should come
and see me in the matter.
I had suggested this course to you even
earlier. I think it best that you should give up the attempt to
guide . . . independently. If you do not understand what I have
said in this letter, ask me again. You should have no doubt at all,
I have none, about the rightness of my advice to . . . If you have
any, however, or feel any doubt later, ask me again and again.
I very much liked your caution regarding the common kit-
chen. Our ideal of the Ashram is that even visitors should ob-
serve brahmacharya while they stay in it. This rule is made cate-
gorical in the new set of rules. That has naturally added to the
number of those taking their meals in the common kitchen. How
can we say that even those who take the vow of brahmacharya are
not brahmacharis of their own will? I, however, believe your
statement that many have joined the common kitchen out of
their respect for me. The kitchen has led to a new idea during
the past few days. There is no suggestion that it should be aban-
doned, but a proposal is being discussed whether those who can-
not sincerely be its members and cannot whole-heartedly adopt
its other implications should not leave the Ashram.
I shall await your letter regarding the effect of the use of lin-
seed oil. How do you obtain fresh linseed oil? Do you obtain a
day's or a month's requirement, at a time?
Do you get oil
pressed by an indigenous or an English mill? If it is oil pressed
in an indigenous mill and if you know the process through which
the seed is passed before it is pressed, please let me know. If you
do not know this, get the information and let me have it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 801. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave
