275. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
WARDHA,
December 10, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
There is no post from you today. The manager of every de-
partment should inspect it daily and should note having done so
in his notebook. You should look into the notebooks when you
are free from other work. If we want to remain vigilant and
keep a watch over ourselves, we should never neglect such pro-
ceedings. We of all people cannot neglect them, for we have at-
tached so much importance to this thing that we sent away Jagan-
nath from the Ashram. We have relieved some others, too, for
the same reason. I forget the names of these persons. If there
is laxity in observing rules which are easy to observe and if we
tolerate it, the Ashram will not only break up one day but I
am sure there will also be a blot on its fair name. If defi-
ciencies remain despite our vigilance, the world will forgive us for
them. But it will have a right to censure us for what may happen
through our remissness.
I have been thinking a great deal these days about such
matters. I feel extremely concerned and am becoming confirmed
in the views which I expressed when I was there. That is, those
who regularly violate rules which are easy for all to observe should
be asked to leave the Ashram or should themselves leave it. That
will save us from many dangers.
Our Ashram is not an asylum for the infirm and the crippled.
There grown-up men and women have come together inspired
by a certain ideal. I exclude from this, but only partially, the
women who have been there from the beginning. If those who
have thus voluntarily come together do not observe the rules which
they themselves have made and if we tolerate that, I think we
are traitors to dharma and society.
42-17
If all of you in the Ashram do not know, you may know by
this that Rajibehn, who lived in the Ashram for some time, died of
illness in her village. Chandulal had come here and he gave me
the news. She was guilty of serious lapses, but she had eaten the
salt of the Ashram and it is, therefore, our duty to pay her the
tribute of remembrance.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4158
