415. LETTER TO VICEROY
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
May 18, 1930
H. E. THE VICEROY OF INDIA
DEAR FRIEND,
The authorities having permitted the use of newspapers, I am
able somewhat to follow the course of events in the country. I
should fail in my duty if I did not express my opinion on your
latest statement.
You seem to ignore the simple fact that disobedience ceases to
be such immediately masses of people resort to it. Do you not
see that hundreds of men who have been known for their peaceful
nature, who have an unbroken record of service to their credit and
whose integrity is beyond suspicion are imprisoned? They are no
law-breakers; they are no haters of the English. And what of
the most peaceful demonstration of thousands of simple villagers
who are by instinct the most law-abiding? To describe the move-
ment of such men and women as lawlessness is, in my opinion, doing
violence to the language. The very motive which is the essence of
crime is lacking. It is the noblest of motives which takes away
men like the hoary-headed Abbas Tyabji from their soft ease to
court the hardships of a jail life.
You protest your affection for India. I believe in your profes-
sion. But I deny the correctness of your diagnosis of India's disease.
The best constitution that can be devised will fail to bring real
contentment and peace unless the grievances on which public at-
tention is concentrated are immediately removed. The salt tax
cannot remain. The liquor revenue must go. The foreign cloth
importation which has produced a partial paralysis of the village
life must be stopped. Have you not noted the strength of popular
feeling in these matters? Or are the hundreds of thousands of men
and women who are taking part in the movement wicked-minded
or misled or fools and the English officials the best judges of what
is good for India?
If I am not mistaken, you will find the spirit of the people to
be proof against repression, no matter how severe it may be.
You will not coerce millions of people into subjection for all time.
India must not live for England. She must live for herself, so as
to enable her to make her contribution to the world's progress. As
a slave nation she is a mere burden on earth because it is a false
life. No Round Table Conference can therefore be of any avail,
unless you see things from our standpoint and, leaving coercion,
rely simply on carrying conviction. Even those who you think
from our firm determination to abide by the policy I was privileged to an-
nounce in November last."
are with you are with the Congressmen so far as wants are con-
cerned.
I remain,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(34), pp. 41-2; also S.N. 19972
