154. LETTER TO FULCHAND B. SHAH
July 3, 1932
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I got your letter of April 31 [sic], 1932, as also Raojibhai's of
June 10, 1932, only today. All of us were glad to read them. This
time 15 lines in your letter were completely censored. If it is pos-
sible, tell the person who deals with all such letters, or the Superin-
tendent, to show you the portions which he thinks should be cen-
sored, so that you may write the letter again. If this is done,
the context would not be suddenly broken as happens at present.
Tell everybody there not to expect, or wish for, a separate letter
from me. Though there is no restriction on me as regards the
number of letters I can write, I think I myself should put a limit
on it. Hence I write as few letters as I can. But I do reply to
letters from co-workers in jails, or write to one of them when there
are many co-workers in the same jail. That serves the purpose
of writing to all of them. If, however, anybody wishes to write to
me about something specially, he may certainly do so, as Raoji-
bhai has done. We shall not often get opportunities like the unique
one we have got just now for self-examination and study. All of
us, therefore, should realize that we should so act and spend our
time that we would be able to give a good account of every
moment. Even a drop of water should not be wasted. We should
regard everything in the country, no matter in whose possession it
is, as belonging to us and take care of it and use it accordingly. It
is plain that this serves several purposes. Tell the boys and girls
there that, when they can use the permission to write letters, they
may write to me if they don't wish to write to anybody else. It
is a strange thing that the rains have not yet commenced here. By
now there should have been quite a good amount of rain. Culti-
vators are worried. Give the accompanying letter to Raojibhai.
That is, what follows is meant for him.
I have discussed the matter with Sardar and both of us have
come to the conclusion that neither (he nor I) can give an opinion
from here. We cannot know many of the facts without being pre-
sent on the spot, and hence I have written to Maganbhai and told
him that he may do what he thinks best, taking into account all
the relevant circumstances. I have written to him quite a long
letter to this effect. I received your letter today and am replying
immediately. I have thus not delayed by a single moment. Raoji-
bhai should not worry about the matter at all.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9445-b. Courtesy: Chandrakant F. Shah
