350. LETTER TO F. MART BARR
As AT PATNA,
March 31, 1934
CHI. MARY,
I was wondering why you had not written earlier.
I was
agreeably surprised when Narmada agreed to put herself under
your charge. I know that it would have been her making if she
could have held on. But it was too great a change for her.
Without any company, without a knowledge of English and finding
herself in a hut instead of a palatial house, she will collapse.
But I quite agree with you that you have unexpectedly an
opportunity of being all by yourself. I have no doubt that you will
make the best use possible of it. I am glad to find that Duncan
is getting on.
I have undoubtedly thought often of living with Harijans. But
it is no easy matter without injuring the cause.
To live with them
is certainly not a troublesome thing, but it is a matter of joy.
But living with them would shut out the sanatanists.
And my
purpose today is to work on the latter rather than the former, be-
cause my mission just now is to call caste Hindus to repentance.
I have therefore left the matter in the hands of local men.
In a
place in C.P. I was able thus to stay in a Harijan boarding [house].
I think that the velocity with which the Hindus are responding to
the call for repentance is satisfactory. The progress will be still
greater when caste Hindus have realized the enormity of the sin
of untouchability.
The tamarind water you mention is quite all right.
It does
not give you any rheumatism. In order to counteract any such
effect it might possibly have I would suggest your adding 10 grains
of soda to every drink of tamarind water.
I hope that you are
keeping good health.
I am just now touring the affected areas. Some of the destruc-
tions wrought by Nature defy description. For instance I can-
not give you an adequate picture of a house whose walls have
sunk actually three feet deep in the ground.
There are cracks
everywhere in its massive walls which could not be less than 18
in. in width. Most of the fair lands are covered with two or three
feet of sand where it was impossible to get any sand at all before
339
the earthquake. How far will the twenty lakhs of the Committee
and the 30 lakhs of the Viceroy take the people? The damage is
so enormous.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6022. Also C.W. 3351. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
