359. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
AHMEDABAD,
July 27, 1933
DEAR GURUDEV,
I have read your Press message regarding the Yeravda
Pact, in so far as it applies to Bengal. It caused me deep grief to
find that you were misled by very deep affection for me and by
your confidence in my judgment into approving of a Pact which
was discovered to have done a grave injustice to Bengal. It is now
no use my saying that affection for me should not have affected
your judgment, or that confidence in my judgment ought not to
have made you accept a Pact about which you had ample means
for coming to an independent judgment. Knowing as I do your
very generous nature, you could not have acted otherwise than
you did and in spite of the discovery made by you that you have
committed a grave error you would continue to repeat such errors
if the occasions too were repeated.
But I am not at all convinced that there was any error
made. As soon as the agitation for an amendment of the Pact
arose, I applied my mind to it, discussed it with friends who
ought to know and I was satisfied that there was no injustice done
to Bengal. I corresponded with those who complained of injustice.
But they, too, including Ramanandbabu, could not convince me
of any injustice. Of course, our points of view were different. In
my opinion, the approach to the question was also wrong.
A Pact arrived at by mutual arrangement cannot possibly be
altered by the British Government except through the consent of
the parties to the Pact. But no serious attempt seems to have
been made to secure any such agreement. Your appearance, there-
fore, on the same platform as the complainants, I, for one, wel-
come, in the hope that it would lead to a mutual discussion, in-
stead of a futile appeal to the British Government. If, there-
1 Vide Appendix X. Rabindranath Tagore had forwarded a copy of this
message along with his letter dated July 28, 1933 to Gandhiji; vide footnote 1,
p. 349.
fore, you have, for your own part, studied the subject and have
arrived at the opinion that you have now pronounced, I would
like you to convene a meeting of the principal parties and convince
them that a grave injustice has been done to Bengal. If it can
be proved, I have no doubt that the Pact will be re-considered and
amended so as to undo the wrong said to have been done to Ben-
gal. If I felt convinced that there was an error of judgment, so
far as Bengal was concerned, I would strain every nerve to see
that the error was rectified.
You may know that up to now I
have studiously refrained from saying anything in public in
defence of the Pact, save by way of reiterating my opinion accom-
panied by the statement that if injustice could be proved, re-
dress would be given. I am, therefore, entirely at your service.
Just now, I am absorbed in disbanding the Ashram and de-
vising means of saving as much as can be for public use. My ser-
vice will, therefore, be available after I am imprisoned, which
event may take place any day after the end of this month.
I
hope you are keeping good health.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. RABINDRANATH TAGORE
From a photostat: G.N. 4639
