406. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA
August 20, 1932
I do not know with certainty what Shankaracharya meant
by maya. This is what I believe. The world which we see and
believe in is mere appearance; it is a product of our imagination.
But in its true essence it does exist. We do not know what
that essence is. We say that it is Brahman, but we characterize all
descriptions of the latter as inadequate. The world also is Brah-
man and not different from it. The difference which we see is
mere appearance.
My view is that the span of our life can be lengthened or
shortened. The truth is that every species is born with its natural
functioning determined. We do not know and need not know
what they are.
The divisions of time are man-made and they are smaller
even than particles of dust in the cosmic cycles of time. Even if
crores of units of our time as big as the Himalayas were added
together, the total would be smaller than a cosmic cycle of time.
It is very little, therefore, which man commands. Let him be
pleased with it as much as he will.
There are innumerable physical causes of dreams. I have
experienced that, while dreaming, we can be conscious of its un-
reality. Such a moment may possibly be the point of transition
from the dream state to the waking state. Involuntary discharges
are sometimes the result of purely physical causes and take place
even without impure thoughts in one's mind. They can be stopped
by changes in one's food. Mostly they are caused by constipa-
tion. When such discharges are due to milk, mostly the imme-
diate cause is impure thoughts, since milk has a tendency to stimu-
late passion. But that is not the case with you. That is, milk can-
not stimulate passion in persons whose bodies have become weak
even if the person is of a passionate nature. All the power of the
milk is used up in building the body of such a person. Dr. Rajab
Ali's view is correct within certain limits. But what he says does
not apply to persons who are completely healthy in body and
mind.
The desire to work for the welfare of the world is an essen-
tial element in the nature of a man of spiritual knowledge. There
can be no exception to this.
I cannot say for what length of time I can keep out all
thoughts from my mind, since I have never tried to test this. But
I know that I am able to keep out unnecessary thoughts. If any
such thoughts come, they have to run away like thieves.
Hypocrisy is nothing but the mask which falsehood wears.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 371-
