345. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
Unrevised
SEGAON,
February 5, 1937
CHI. PREMA,
My right hand needs rest and it takes time to write with the
left hand. How can I spare that much time? The burden of
work has increased considerably and so I dictate most of the
things I have to write. On Mondays I make full use of my
right hand.
1 Vide "Letter to Narahari D. Parikh", p. 333.
The amanuenses are Vijaya and Manu, and also sometimes
Prabhavati. Probably you do not know Vijaya. She is a
Patel woman and hails from Bardoli. She has, so to say, forced
herself on us, for we had made a firm rule not to make any
fresh admission. Vijaya prevailed upon us to break that rule.
She put her case in such a manner that I could not send her
away. So far I have not regretted admitting her. She
goes on doing her work silently and makes up for Lilavati's
absence.
Shankarrao must be all right now. I have asked Haribhau
Phatak to give me news about his health. But I think you
will be able to give detailed news.
I had told Patwardhan that he could come whenever he
wished. But, then, don't the hills seem beautiful only from a
distance, as they say?
You seem to be going through a fairly severe test. It is
at once easy and difficult to put more money in villagers' pockets.
If they follow our advice, we can, without any capital or with
a minimum of it, double the earnings of all villages. I am
not including in this the money earned from villages by those
who exploit the villagers. If, however, they do not follow our
advice, that is, refuse to do the work suggested by us or to learn
the crafts we try to teach them, it is not only difficult but
impossible to increase their earnings. Another big difficulty is
this. Only a handful of workers are willing to go to villages,
and they, too, are inexperienced. Their bodies are not accustom-
ed to the hardships of village life. They don't know the villagers'
nature and are ignorant of their needs. They cannot use
their hands or their intelligence.
The knowledge acquired
by them in schools and colleges is of little use to them. In
these circumstances we have to be patient. We should have faith
in ourselves. If the villagers possess sound health, even with-
out Government help we can improve the economic condition
of villages considerably, say, to the extent of 50 per cent. I
mention 50 per cent as the minimum. My belief is that we can
improve it to the extent of 90 per cent. Improvement in physical
health, social reform and moral uplift, these are the three main
things. They require no Government help at all.
If we get a little Government help only in economic im-
provement, our task would be very much easier. But in the
absence of progress in respect of the foregoing three things, Govern-
ment help will be of little use. If, therefore, you become a
real expert in the science of khadi and refuse to leave the village
despite all temptations, you will realize from first-hand exper-
ience the truth of all that I have said above.
You are not doing right in not insisting on cow's milk.
Whenever you go out, you can carry with you ghee and pendas
made from cow's milk. The pendas should be without sugar, i.e.,
made from mava only. If you wish, you may eat jaggery with it.
This keeps down the expense and fully meets one's requirement
of milk. Instead of eating dry pendas you can turn them into
powder and mix them in warm water to make milk. Such milk
lacks only vitamins, but absence of vitamins from the diet for a
few days does no harm.
Narmada is Narmada Rana. This whole episode is a piti-
able one. It is perfectly easy to understand that everybody
cannot observe life-long brahmacharya. Those who cannot curb
their physical senses may by all means marry. But I cannot
tolerate secret indulgence. Man falls through such secret indul-
gence for no restraints are observed then. I have no prejudice
at all against grihasthashrama. It is a necessary state, and a beauti-
ful one. But, being an ashrama, it has dharma at its heart. Grihastha-
dharma is a fine thing, but self-indulgence is reprehensible. My
opposition is solely to self-indulgence.
Jamnalal's question to you was perfectly right. He wanted
to know your point of view as a woman. Whatever Vinoba,
I or others may say, it is very necessary to know what a mature
and pure woman feels. And ultimately the real contribution
has to be made by the woman. The burden of demonstrating
the importance and necessity of brahmacharya should not be on
man alone.
Till now it has been mostly shouldered by him,
and in consequence it has become his right. This has earned
a bad name for brahmacharya. What is more, though it should
have been easy to observe, it has proved so difficult that most
people find it impossible to observe. In this, too, I blame
mostly man. He has done his best to keep woman his inferior.
Flattery and brute force have played an equal part in this. Be
that as it may, one half of man's body became and has remain-
ed weak. The result has been that man has failed in most of
his endeavours, as he deserved to do. There is some awaken-
ing among women now.
But at present it is assuming a
perverted form. Man has been indulging her whims and feed-
ing her ego under the pretext of respecting her freedom and
woman has taken freedom to mean self-indulgence. Let those
men and women who can save themselves from this do so. Save
yourself.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10388. Also C.W. 6827. Court-
esy: Premabehn Kantak
