624. LETTER TO AMBALAL SARABHAI
SATYAGRAHAASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Thursday, January 12, 1928
DEAR BROTHER,
Seeing your letter I should neither answer it nor go there.
But I cannot help replying. We are both stubborn. We would
both consider each other obstinate. Your obstinacy lies in
writing to Gujaratis in English. I am obstinate in writing to
Gujaratis in Gujarati. In the case of one of us the obstinacy
will be justified. Shall we ask the poet Nanalal to judge? If not,
I am willing to make Saraladevi the judge, provided she does
not show partiality. I would certainly like to come to your place
on Sunday. I am sure I am still the same as I was in 1915.
Even then, though I used to be hard pressed for time, people
dear to me did take my time by stealing or snatching it, and
I let them do so. Even today they have not abandoned their
ways and I am not able to go against them. What else can a
non-violent man do? Hence, even though, mercifully, there is no
illness in your family and even though to a Mahatma an occa-
sion like Saraladevi's birthday is of no importance, I would
come if I could manage it. I do not know what I would be
having to eat, though I would certainly lose some time. But I
am really sorry. Some twenty men and women belonging to the
International Fellowship are starting their work in the Ashram
from tomorrow. Sunday is the last day for them. So as soon as
I return from my visit to the Vidyapith, I have to present my-
self among them. What can I do now? I have suggested that
you should invite all of them one evening and call a few friends.
Surely, I can take that much liberty with you? But if this is in-
convenient I would not wish you to do it. The letter about your
small car was also being despatched, but your letter came in the
meantime and so I am sending that letter along too. You are
free to take my time whenever you wish. Please do so.
Surely you do not think me such a fool as not to under-
stand the affection dripping through your letter?
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11120. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
1 Vide the preceding item.
