204. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SEVAGRAM, via WARDHA, C. P.,
May 31, 1942
CHI. MIRA,
I have your very complete illuminating letter. The report
of the interview is perfect, your answers were straight, unequi-
vocal and courageous. I have no criticism to make. I can only
say, 'Go on as you are doing.' I can quite clearly see that you
have gone to the right place at the right time. I therefore need
do nothing more than come straight to your questions which are
all good and relevant.
(1) I think we must tell the people what they should do.
They will act according to their capacity. If we begin to judge
their capacity and give directions accordingly, our directions will
be halting and even compromising which they should never be.
You will therefore read my instructions in that light. Remember
that our attitude is that of complete non-co-operation with Japa-
nese army, therefore we may not help them in any way, nor
may we profit by any dealings with them. Therefore we cannot
sell anything to them. If people are not able to face the Japa-
nese army, they will do as armed soldiers do, i.e., retire when
they are overwhelmed. And if they do so the question of having
any dealings with Japanese does not and should not arise. If, how-
ever, the people have not the courage to resist Japanese unto death
and not the courage and capacity to evacuate the portion invad-
ed by the Japanese, they will do the best they can in the light
of instructions. One thing they should never do-to yield willing
submission to the Japanese. That will be a cowardly act, and
unworthy of freedom-loving people. They must not escape from
one fire only to fall into another and probably more terrible.
Their attitude therefore must always be of resistance to the Japa-
nese. No question, therefore, arises of accepting British currency
notes or Japanese coins. They will handle nothing from Japa-
nese hands. So far as dealings with our own people are concerned
they will either resort to barter or make use of such British cur-
rency that they have, in the hope that the National Government
that may take the place of British Government will take up from
the people all the British currency in accordance with its capa-
city.
(2) Question about co-operation in bridge-building is cov-
ered by the above. There can be no question of this co-oper-
ation.
(3) If Indian soldiers come in contact with our people, we
must fraternize with them if they are well disposed, and invite
them, if they can, to join the nation. Probably they have
been brought under promise that they will deliver the country
from foreign yoke. There will be no foreign yoke and they will
be expected to befriend people and obey National Government
that might have been set up in place of British Government. If
the British have retired in an orderly manner leaving things in
Indian hands, the whole thing can work splendidly and it might
even be made difficult for Japanese to settle down in India or
any part of it in peace, because they will have to deal with a
population which will be sullen and resistant. It is difficult to
say what can happen. It is enough if people are trained to
cultivate the power of resistance, no matter which power is oper-
ating-the Japanese or the British.
(4) Covered by (1) above.
(5) The occasion may not come, but if it does, co-oper-
ation will be permissible and even necessary.
(6) Your answer about the arms found on the wayside is
most tempting and perfectly logical. It may be followed but I
would not rule out the idea of worthy people finding them and
storing them in a safe place if they can. If it is impossible to
store them and keep them from mischievous people yours is an
ideal plan.
Love.
BAPU
Bapu's Letters to Mira, pp. 341-2; also Gandhiji's Correspondence with the
Government, 1942-44, pp. 250-
