290. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
December 16, 1940
DAUGHTER,
Your behaviour upsets me. You are full of anger and also
pride. You think you know a lot, but in fact you are a fool.
You talk of principles, but understand nothing about them. You
do not act on principles or, maybe, you have only one principle,
viz., to stay near me and to serve me. This is no principle. It
is a matter of affection. If I allow you to do some service out
of love, you start flinging principles at my face. When will you
understand this simple thing? Your going to Sind would be
futile till you do not understand this.
Think over this letter. Cast away anger and pride and learn
humility.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 463
240
291. INSTRUCTIONS TO SATYAGRAHIS
WARDHAGANJ,
December 17, 1940
Under Gandhiji's instructions I have to make the following announce-
ment: All Provincial Congress Committees and other Committees will please
note that there is to be no satyagraha during Christmas, that is to say,
between December 24 and January 4, both days inclusive. Satyagrahis
outside the three permitted classes may start satyagraha on and after January
5 and all lists approved by Gandhiji may be finished by April 5.
A number of applications are being received here direct from various parts
of the country. In many cases we have referred them to the Pradesh Congress
Committees concerned. But we have not been able to reach all applications.
All intending satyagrahis will please note that they have to apply to the P.C.Cs
of their respective provinces clearly stating their names and addresses, age,
occupation, their freedom from commitments and illness and declaring faith
in Truth and non-violence and in the constructive programme. Concretely
stated, they should express their belief in non-violence as the only means of
attaining swaraj and the only worthy way of ending all wars within the
terms of the Bombay resolution 2 of the A.I.C.C.; that they believe in the
vital connection between non-violence and constructive programme, and
that their faith in the constructive programme is evidenced in regular spin-
ning and habitual wearing of khadi, and insistence on the use of hand-
made articles and promotion of village industries and crafts, in the total
abolition of untouchability, and in the insistence on communal unity.
The best thing perhaps would be for all provinces to have forms stating
all these details which should be filled in by those intending to offer satya-
graha in the presence of responsible Congress workers. Some provinces have
already started this procedure.
This will prevent a good deal of waste of
time and money involved in postage.
Over and above the fulfilment of the aforesaid conditions, those who
have not decided to give up their studies and who have not secured permis-
sion of their parents or guardians should not apply.
I would request the Press not to make unauthorized statements about
satyagraha. Thus for instance the report that instructions have been sent to
Delhi to suspend satyagraha is without foundation.
The Hitavada, 18-12-1940
