395. LETTER TO SHANKARLAL ON 'IDEAS ABOUT
SATYAGRAHA'
[September 2, 1917]
BHAISHRI SHANKARLAL,
You want to know my ideas about satyagraha. Here they
are in brief:
The English phrase "passive resistance" does not suggest the
power I wish to write about; "satyagraha" is the right word.
Satyagraha is soul-force, as opposed to armed strength. Since it is
essentially an ethical weapon, only men inclined to the ethical way
of life can use it wisely. Prahlad, Mirabai, and others were satya-
grahis. At the time of the Morocco fighting, the Arabs were under
fire from French guns. The Arabs were fighting, as they believed,
solely for their religion. Reckless of their lives, they advanced
running towards the French guns with cries of "Ya Allah". Here,
there was no scope at all for fighting back to kill. The French
gunners refused to fire on these Arabs and, throwing up their caps,
ran to embrace these brave Arabs with shouts of joy. This is an
1 E. S. Montagu (1879-1924), Secretary of State for India, 1917-22 and co-
sponsor of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms
2 Published in Gujarati, 2-9-1917
3 Glory to God
example of satyagraha and the success it can achieve. The Arabs
were not satyagrahis by deliberate choice. They got ready to face
death under pressure of a strong impulse, and had no love in
their hearts. A satyagrahi bears no ill-will, does not lay down
his life in anger, but refuses rather to submit to his "enemy" or
oppressor because he has the strength himself to suffer. He should,
therefore, have a courageous spirit and a forgiving and compas-
sionate nature. Imam Hassan and Hussain were merely two boys.
They felt that an injustice had been done to them. When called
upon to surrender, they refused. They knew at the time that this
would mean death for them. If, however, they were to submit to
injustice, they would disgrace their manhood and betray their re-
ligion. In these circumstances, they yielded to the embrace of
death. The heads of these fine young men rolled on the battle-
field. In my view, Islam did not attain its greatness by the power
of the sword but entirely through the self-immolation of its fakirs.
It is soldierlike to allow oneself to be cut down by a sword, not
to use the sword on another. When he comes to realize that he
is guilty of murder, the killer, if he has been in the wrong, will
feel sorry forever afterwards. The victim, however, will have
gained nothing but victory even if he had acted wrongly in court-
ing death. Satyagraha is the way of non-violence. It is, therefore,
justified, indeed it is the right course, at all times and all places.
The power of arms is violence and condemned as such in all re-
ligions. Even those who advocate the use of arms put various
limits on it. There are no limits on satyagraha, or rather, none
except those placed by the satyagrahi's capacity for tapascharya, for
voluntary suffering.
Obviously, it is irrelevant to raise issues about the legality of
such satyagraha. It is for the satyagrahi to decide. Observers
may judge satyagraha after the event. The world's displeasure
will not deter a satyagrahi. Whether or not satyagraha should
be started is not decided by any mathematical rule. A man
who believes that satyagraha may be started only after weighing
the chances of defeat and victory and assuring oneself of the certainty
of victory, may be a shrewd enough politician or an intelligent
man, but he is no satyagrahi. A satyagrahi acts spontaneously.
Satyagraha and arms have both been in use from time im-
memorial. We find them praised in the extant scriptures. They
are the expressions, one of the daivi sampad and the other of the
asuri sampad We believe that in former times in India the daivi
sampad was much the stronger of the two. Even today that is the
ideal we cherish. Europe provides the most striking example of
the predominance of the asuri sampad.
Both these forms of strength are preferable to weakness, to
what we know by the rather plain but much apter word 'cowardice'.
Without either, swaraj or genuine popular awakening is impossi-
ble.
Swaraj achieved otherwise than through resort to one or the
other will not be true swaraj. Such swaraj can have no effect on
the people. Popular awakening cannot be brought about without
strength, without manliness. Let the leaders say what they like
and the Government strive its utmost, unless they and we, all of
us, strengthen the forces of satyagraha, the methods of violence are
bound automatically to gain ascendancy. They are like weeds
which grow wild in any soil. The crop of satyagraha requires will-
ingness to exert oneself or a venturesome spirit by way of manure.
Just as, moreover, the seedlings are likely to be lost among the
weeds if the latter are not plucked out, so also will weeds of
violence keep growing unless we keep the land free of them by
tapascharya and, with compassion, pluck out those which have al-
ready grown. We can, with the help of satyagraha, win over those
young men who have been driven to desperation and anger by what
they think to be the tyranny of the Government and utilize their
courage and their mettlesome spirit, their capacity for suffering, to
strengthen the daivi sampad of satyagraha. It is therefore very much
to be desired that satyagraha is propagated as quickly as can be.
This is in the interest both of the rulers and the ruled. The satya-
grahi desires to harass neither the Government nor anyone else. He
takes no step without the fullest deliberation. He is never arrogant.
Consequently, he will keep away from 'boycott' but be always
firm in the vow of swadeshi as a matter of duty. He fears God
alone, so that no other power can intimidate him. He will never,
out of fear of punishment, leave a duty undone.
I need hardly say now that it is our duty to resort to satya-
graha to secure the release of the learned Annie Bai and her co-
workers. Whether we approve of every or any action of hers is
another question. I, for one, certainly do not approve of some of
them; all the same, her incarceration by the Government is a great
mistake and an act of injustice. I know, of course, that the Govern-
ment does not think it a mistake. Maybe the people are wrong
in desiring her release. The Government has acted according to
its lights. What can the people do to express their outraged feelings?
Petitions, etc., are good enough when one's suffering is bearable.
When it is unbearable, there is no remedy but satyagraha. Only
when people find it unbearable will they, and only those who find
it unbearable will, devote their all, body, mind and possessions, to
securing the release of Annie Bai. This will be a powerful expression
of popular feeling. It is my unshakable faith that before so great
a self-sacrifice even the power of an emperor will give way. People
may certainly restrain their feelings in view of the forthcoming visit
of Mr. Montagu. That will be an expression of faith in his sense
of justice. If she is not released, however, before his arrival, it will
be our duty to resort to satyagraha. We do not want to provoke
the Government or put difficulties in its way. By resorting to satya-
graha, we reveal the intensity of our injured feelings and thereby
serve the Government.
From a photostat of the Gujarati draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6373
