350. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
November 11, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I should like to write a very long letter to you, but I do not know
how to. I am full of information of the greatest importance but I cannot
give it to you in a presentable form during the time at my disposal.
The first thing, however, I want to deal with is Maud's condition. I had
only once joked with her, asking whether she wanted to go to South
Africa, and the joke proceeded from a remark made by Hajee Habib,
but it is evident that she has been very seriously thinking about it. Last
evening she could not restrain herself, and told me she wanted to go to
South Africa very badly and work for the cause. I was not surprised,
and yet this is not quite accurate, because I was taken aback a little, as
I have felt she was permanently fixed up at the place where she is, not
that I am at all in love with it, but it appeared to me to be the best in
the circumstances. She is very sweet-natured. I think she is capable
of great self-sacrifice, and she is willing to work, but I do not know
how far the Phoenix life would suit her. Personally, I feel that, if she
wants to go to South Africa merely to earn her living, it is hardly worth-
while; but if she wants to work for an ideal, she must have the strength
and courage to do it. I have told her all I could about things. I have
told her as well as I could about the jarring notes there, and I have told
her, too, that there is no money in it. I have further told her how Millie
herself finds it difficult to reconcile herself to life at Phoenix. She is
in possession of all the information that I can give her. I have further
told her that I am not in a position to give a definite opinion, that first
of all she must secure Pater's and Mater's consent, and then Sally's. After
she has the approval of the three, she should place her position before
you, and finally depend upon Millie's advice. I have told her, too, that
however much she may regard my view, and like it, I consider myself
incompetent to enter into all a woman's feelings, and when she has ac-
cessible to her Millie's loving assistance and advice, she cannot do better
than rely upon her judgment. She tells me that she wants to be able
to send home £4 per month. I have told her that this is not impossible,
but that the chief thing to consider is whether she will be able to appre-
ciate and love the Phoenix life. I have told her, too, that there is no
definite work that can be assigned to her—that it may be anything, from
what is considered the meanest household duties, to teaching, and
moulding the characters of the children at Phoenix. Now, I think, I
have told you everything. She will be writing you fully. You know her
much better than I do, and you will be able to guide her in the path
you think best for her moral well-being. The other household matters
that I would like to discuss with you must wait, unless I get the time
between now and reaching Madeira, but my programme for the voyage
is so full that domestic matters which are not urgent are likely to be
crowded out. Maud is writing to you very fully, and she has promised
to show me her letter, and if I have any further suggestions, after I have
read the letter, I will write again. Millie is coming here from Westcliffe
on Friday, and I shall fully discuss it with her, as also with Pater and
Mater, if I get an opportunity of seeing them. Millie will sleep at the
Hotel, so I am looking forward to a long and quiet chat with her. Natural-
ly, we are much nearer each other now than we were ever before, having
seen more of each other than in Johannesburg, where I rarely met her
apart. Waldo and Brownie are looking superb. I still retain the opinion
that it is difficult, if not impossible, to match Waldo in beauty, and he
is daily becoming more and more wilful! He is certainly very original,
and you will appreciate the fact when I tell you that Simmonds completes
his happiness. Sally, who is sitting by me, just reminds me that I should
not finish this letter without telling you something about Brownie; that
he is outgrowing his superficial ugliness, and that he has begun to speak
is stale news, but probably you do not know that the first name he learnt
to pronounce was Sally's. Sally may be a good worker in her office;
she claims to be an estimable suffragette, not to be beaten by mere man;
I can certainly certify to her being at her best when she is with Waldo
and Brownie. When one meets a woman who is at her best with
children, you know what an opinion I have of her.
Since dictating this letter, I have seen Sally. Just fancy Sally saying
she is also anxious to go to Phoenix and that she would simply love the
life. I wonder if the taint (?) of simplicity runs through the family and
if it only requires a little nursing to bring it all out. She says that it was
she who suggested to Maud that Maud should go out, but she also adds
that they do not want to desert the parents, and so she recognises that
one or the other should stay. I do not know how to take all this. I am
afraid that I am very largely responsible for their enthusiasm. I have
spoken in such glowing terms about the charm of simplicity and all that,
that they have pictured Phoenix as a Paradise. Simmonds cautions me
against any hasty advice or hasty step. His caution I appreciate very
greatly, and I therefore pass it on to you. I have no intention of advising
the girls to take the plunge.
As I mentioned in another letter, I should like to write at very great
length, and yet this is being dictated after one o'clock a.m. and there is
a vast amount of humdrum work to go through before Saturday.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5175
