368. LETTER TO DEVESHVAR SIDDHANTALANKAR
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE STATE),
May 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have carefully preserved your letter of 29th January in the
hope some day of being able to write to you. It was received
during my tour and I was not able to read the cuttings till during
the last three days. Lying on my sick-bed I have been gradually
overtaking my correspondence and I have now gone through the
cuttings. They are valuable. In some places your translation does
not do justice to the original. But the pains you have taken to
be just leads me to hope that the mistake is due to inadvertence.
The extracts you have collected certainly makes one sink. I
am not a critical student of religious books including the Koran.
I have read these books with sympathy and with a view to deriving
religious consolation. The effect therefore produced upon your
mind by the passages collected by you was naturally not produced
upon my mind. The commentary you have given upon the text,
"there should be no violence in religion," is quite new to me
and gives a different meaning from the one which the text bears
without the commentary. I would however like to consult
Mussalman friends about it. But after all the careful thought
I have given to the passages extracted by you, I adhere to the
conclusion that Islam is not a religion of the sword; but it is like
all other great religions a religion of peace. I say so for this
reason. I have met numerous Mussalmans who no more think of
slaying men of different faiths than you or I do. And these
Mussalmans are by no means scoffers. They are devout followers
of their faith. The long line of Sufis whose veneration for the
Koran cannot be questioned owe their illuminating philosophy
of peace and love to the Koran. I have read Maulana Shibli's
Life of the Prophet as also portions of his Al Kalam. I have read
also his Leaves from the Lives of the Companions of the Prophet. The
sum-total of the impression left on my mind by these writings is
of an elevating character. I hope you do not wish to suggest
that Maulana Shibli and such other writers on Islam have written
what they did not believe and in order to throw dust in the eyes
of others. All this does not however mean that I regard the life
of the Prophet to have been perfect or that the Koran itself is a
perfect book. Like all other religious books including our own,
there are passages which cause difficulty. But the difficulties caused
in reading the Koran are not greater than those caused by reading
books of other faiths. Christianity, I surmise, admittedly is a
religion of peace; but the Old Testament which is part of Christian
teaching is full of blood and thunder, and the history of early
Christianity is also by no means creditable to the Christians.
You ask me to quote from the Vedas passages alike to those
in the Koran. You have yourself admitted the reference to the
dasyus. The gloss you put upon the passages relating to dasyus
may be quite all right; but that is precisely how sympathetic com-
mentators of the Koran explain similar passages. Dasyus do not
consider themselves to be wicked.
Everybody justifies his description of practices by imputing
wickedness to those whom he distrusts.
General Dyer himself
surely believed that English men and women were in danger of
losing their lives if he did not take the measures he did. We
who know better call it an act of cruelty and vengeance. But
from General Dyer's own standpoint, he is justified. Many Hindus
sincerely believe that it is a proper thing to kill a man who wants to
kill a COW and he will quote scripture for his defence and many
other Hindus will be found to justify his action. But strangers
who do not accept the sacredness of the cow will hold it to be
preposterous to kill a human being for the sake of slaying an
animal. Guru Nanak who undoubtedly read the Koran and is
reported even to have gone to Mecca, returned with lofty regard
for Islam. Kabir did likewise. So did Dadu. I cannot there-
fore help thinking that it is a fruitless and undesirable effort to
show that the Koran is a wicked book and that followers of the
Koran are still more so. I suggest that the better method is to
find out the good points and the beauties of these writings which
have transformed the lives of those who have believed in them.
It is unsafe and even dangerous to judge Islam and Mussalmans
by the conduct of many of those who are misrepresented here in
India and then to seek to ascribe their conduct to the teachings of
the Koran. In order to defend the general trend of the Koran
in favour of peace I am not required to disprove any atrocity by a
single Mussalman or to explain away the few misdeeds that I see
going on before me. But my liberal estimate of the Koran thus
enables me to extend to the Mussalmans the justice that I would
have extended to fellow-Hindus. It is an easier task to sympa-
thize with the different religions of the world than to pick up one
and seek to prove it as the only true religion and then set about
demolishing all the rest.
I have entered into a long reply to your letter because I believe
you to be a seeker after Truth. If you want any further expla-
nation from me, I shall gladly give it.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DEVESHVAR SIDDHANTALANKAR
NAINI (U.P.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 12383
