131. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
Phagan Vadi 4, Samvat 1966
[March 29, 1910]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have received your letter.
I can appreciate your inability to come here without respected
Khushalbhai's permission. It is your duty to act according to his
wishes.
You can assist the objectives of our struggle here even if you re-
main there. Now that [Hind] Swaraj has been proscribed, I see that a
strenuous fight will have to be put up there too. To do that you must
build your character. Do you know the fundamental principles of our
religion? You will, perhaps, say that you are able to recite the whole
of the Gita and also know its meaning and wonder why I am asking
you about fundamental principles. Knowing the fundamentals, as I
interpret it, means putting them into practice. The first attribute of
the divine heritage is 'fearlessness'. I hope you remember that verse .
Have you attained to the state of 'fearlessness' to any extent? Will
you do what is right fearlessly, even at the cost of your life? Practise
fearlessness and try to attain that state till you succeed. You will be
able to do a lot if you achieve that. In this context you should remem-
ber the lives of Prahlad Sudhanva4, and others. Please do not think
that all these are legends. There have been many Indians in the past
who have done such deeds and that is why we memorize the stories of
their lives. We should not think that Prahlad and Sudhanva, Harish-
chandra and Shravana do not exist in India even today. We shall
meet them when we deserve. They are not to be found in the chawls
1 Gandhiji's cousin, addressee's father; Gandhiji had asked the addressee
to go to South Africa; vide "Letter to Narandas Gandhi", Vol. IX, p. 454.
2 The Bhagavat Gita, XVI, 1-
3 Son of demon-King Hiranyakashipu, he was a great devotee of Vishnu and
came out unscathed from many ordeals.
4 Vide Vol. IX, pp. 199 & 236.
5 King of Ayodhya who suffered great hardships and, while in the service of a
chandala (out-caste), he was even ready to kill his wife Taramati for the sake of truth.
6 A devoted son, who carried his blind parents to various places of pilgrimage in
baskets put in slings attached to the two ends of a pole. While fetching water from a
river, he was killed by King Dasharatha, who mistook the sound of the water filling
the pitcher for an elephant drinking.
of Bombay. You cannot expect a wheat crop from rocky soil. I shall
not write more. Do ponder over the attributes of the divine heritage
again. Read this letter bearing in mind those attributes and then try
to act accordingly. Do read afresh the chapters on Satyagraha in
[Hind] Swaraj and ponder over them. Do ask me any questions when
you feel like doing so. You may live in Bombay but be quite sure that
Bombay is a veritable hell, absolutely useless.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4925
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
