403. LETTER TO LORD PETHICK-LAWRENCE
[June 12, 1946]
DEAR FRIEND,
I promised to send you a copy of Rev. J. J. M. Nichols-
Roy's address . I do so herewith.
I have not yet traced Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah's address
referring to the way the Interim Government, if formed, would
work. But I have got the Muslim League Council's resolution.
I send a cutting of it herewith. It speaks volumes for me.
On top of this comes the interview given by the President
of the European Association. I spoke last evening at the prayer
meeting without knowing anything of the latter which I hold
to be a dangerous statement. It fills me with distrust of the
future well-being through the proposed Constituent Assembly.
I suppose the Statesman's leading article today represents
the general British attitude in India. The article is headed
"Slow Motion". "Deliberation, wariness, sobriety in an ap-
proach to great decisions are proper; but not swither and lo-
quacity or delays due to mere tactical manoeuvring." All this
is a prelude to what I consider an unwarranted attack on the
Congress. If you of the Mission and the Viceroy share the
view, you should really have no dealings with the Congress,
however powerful or representative it may be. Naturally you
should be the sole judges of what the Congress has appeared to
you to be like.
For my part, as a detached observer, as I hold myself to
be, I think that the Congress has not been procrastinating.
It has been extraordinarily prompt in its dealings in connection
with the work of the high mission which you are shouldering.
But my purpose in writing this letter is to tell you that it will
be wrong on my part if I advise the Congress to wait indefi-
nitely until the Viceroy has formed the Interim Government
or throws up the sponge in despair. Despair he must, if he ex-
pects to bring into being a coalition Government between two
incompatibles. The safest, bravest and the straightest course is
to invite that party to form a government which, in the Vice-
roy's estimation, inspires greater confidence. Then there is a
possibility within 24 hours of forming a National Government.
If, however, no party inspires confidence such a declaration
should be made and the Viceroy should run the Government
in the best way he knows. But the Congress Working Com-
mittee should not be delayed indefinitely. As for me, I would
gladly stay behind if you want me to. But I feel that I shall
be a useless adviser. I can only advise out of the fulness of
trust. I become paralysed when distrust chokes me.
I am sorry to send you this letter. But I would be an un-
worthy friend if I disguised my feelings. You should know me
as I am. Hence these tears.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 209-10
