550. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
August 26, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have received no letter from you for a week. Pyarelal
says that he has not shown me some of your letters. I did not
have the time and since there was no letter from you, I did not
write. Today I saw your letter to Pyarelal. There is no limit to
your foolishness. I shall not press you to come. If you do come
in your present state, you will not feel happy here. What you
ask is a thing you should not ask and even if it were possible
for me to give it I should not give it. So you may take the
chapter as closed. When you find that you cannot help coming
to me without laying down preconditions, rush to me and become
one with me.
You must live there in total detachment. Then only will you
be happy. When you go home you should go as an outsider or
as a doctor. Do not involve yourself in the cares of the household.
It would be best if you could start earning. You can then
satisfy Mother's hunger. You have no special needs. Give up the
temptation of sending your savings to me. You can be absorbed
in many places if you take up a job. By refusing to accept
my help, you are not earning merit but incurring sin. Are you
ashamed to be known as my daughter? Lilavati introduces
herself as my daughter. Your false pride is eating me.
Mohanlal and Shakuntala should live away from Mother.
Mother's place is here. Parnerkar's mother had been staying here.
She will be coming again. Mahadev's mother comes and goes.
She is his step-mother. Why should not Pyarelal's mother live
with Pyarelal? I am prepared to provide a separate kitchen for
her. Thereby, the question of expenses will be solved. Argu-
ments will come to an end. And the meanness resulting from
lack of money will disappear. This is a natural arrangement.
Mother will be able to pay occasional visits to Mohanlal as a
guest. You will be relieved of a heavy burden. If you become
calm, everything will be well soon. If I remain alive, in
course of time you are bound to become one with me. I am
in no hurry about it. You should not be in a hurry either.
Enclosed is a list of mistakes in Harijan Sevak prepared
349
by Munnalal. The first mistake is obvious and it is bad. I
have hurriedly glanced through other errors. Some of them
may not be errors. The rest are insignificant.
Harijan Sevak will probably be shifted to Poona next week.
Chandrashankar will arrive there on Saturday to make arrange-
ments. Rest assured that my decisions are likely to have more
knowledge behind them than yours. You will feel calm if you
have such confidence. This does not mean that you should
rush here. But it means that you should become humble.
If you have humility in you, you should never have any doubts
concerning my decisions. You are free to ask questions. But
you must have trust in my answers. Think over this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
