6. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS P. GANDHI
March 3, 1930
BHAISHRI MANMOHANDAS,
I got both the books sent by you. You already see that I
have been using the book on the subject of salt. If you have this
further information, send it to me; if you don't have it, please
get it for me. What is the expenditure incurred on the collection
of the salt tax? Some say it is eight per cent and some that it is
1 The date is inferred from the reference to the letter to Lord Irwin,
which was delivered by Reginald Reynolds.
twenty per cent. Compare the percentage of expenditure on this
tax with the percentage of expenditure on other taxes.
If you have a copy of the latest Administration Report on
salt, send it to me. If you have no spare copy, I will return it
to you.
Send me any other information which you think will be use-
ful to me.
Now about your book on cotton. I have been reading it.
But I may point out two errors just now. You say that formerly
weaving and spinning were probably independent professions and
not subsidiary occupations. Weaving and spinning are two inde-
pendent activities. Weaving was (chiefly) an independent pro-
fession and is so even today. That spinning, on the other hand,
has always been (chiefly) a subsidiary occupation we can prove
with thousands of instances even today. The individuals were
alive when the movement for the revival of spinning started
in 1919. This is an important distinction, and so you must
have seen that your error is a serious one. This error will
continue to be made in the absence of personal knowledge of the
facts. Even writers who have gone deeper than you have com-
mitted it. But that defence will not serve an humble student. The
second error is this. Writing about the Mogul period you say
that there were then such frequent and widespread massacres that
no profession could flourish. There are two errors in this view.
Such massacres were never widespread. Before Akbar, no Muslim
ruler had entered villages. The massacres always took place in
cities and there, too, they had little effect on the artisan classes.
Even today we see these classes going on with their occupations
under this anarchical rule. Formerly, the government touched
the lives of only those who were connected with the adminis-
trative machinery. It is only in the present age that govern-
ments have become eager to extend their grip over entire popu-
lations. And, among them all, the British Government has acquired
the utmost efficiency in this. It is this efficiency which is ruining
us, for British rule is inspired by no philanthropic motives.
I found some time in the morning to write this, for I expect
you to make a valuable contribution to the cause.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6
