61. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
April 28, 1933
I have your letter.
I understand and appreciate all you say. I shall look forward
to the report of your impressions. Let it be as critical and ex-
haustive as you can make it. So far as I am concerned there is
no limit to your stay there. Indeed the longer you stay the better
for the work that I would have from you whether under my
direct guidance or in association with me.
I do not mind that you are not likely to go to Madanapalli.
As you have reduced your wants to uttermost simplicity, there
can be no dearth of work for you to your liking.
I am glad you visited the Harijan quarters with Bhagwanji.
I have seen many. No description, therefore, staggers me.
I
know how Herculean the task is before me but then I have an
excuse because I am one of the many tools in the hands of God.
My concern is, therefore, to keep myself a fit instrument to be
found ready to do His command at a moment's call. Dr.
Sharma's idea always has been mine and that is why I took
charge of Lakshmi so many years ago, almost inside of an
year of my arrival here, and I have been teaching as many
Harijans as I could lay my hands on. Several have been already
fixed up in life but that too is a big job. It is so difficult to keep
them even though they are given to you by their parents. I am
not surprised at all these untoward results in several cases and,
as you very properly say, it is all due to the sin of the caste
Hindus.
Of course it does not do to go for the dirty boys. Neither
they nor their parents know any better and those that have
some notion of hygiene and cleanliness have no convenience for
conforming to the laws of hygiene. I am glad you are there
during Dr. Sharma's visit. I would like you to know him and
his message. If it is substantial it would be a great thing for
serving public institutions. I am a fanatical believer in nature's
methods and I never missed an opportunity of having a training.
Whatever I know has been picked up from books. I was never
able to read from page to page but I made copious experi-
ments on myself and my companions, and have very much bene-
fited from those methods. I have been always anxious to secure
someone who would share my idea and develop the method in
the interest of the poor. Dr. Sharma is reported to be the man
and so he is at the Ashram. I would therefore like you to study
the method in so far as he would let you do so.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 21078
