164. LETTER TO CHANDAN PAREKH
WARDHA,
November 27, 1935
CHI. CHANDU,
I got your letter. When I say that one per cent doubt re-
mains, what I mean is that I am ready to listen to and think over
what Father or you may say. If I didn't have even this one
per cent doubt, there would be no need at all for me to hear any-
body. Please don't forget this, that before I discussed the matter
with you I used to doubt the truth of what . . . and his
friends said. After my long and patient talk with you, my atti-
tude towards . . . became more favourable. Your story is
something like this: you were bitten by a snake, but you did not
feel the effect of poison although you already knew from experience
the nature of the poison. Just as this wouldn't be a plausible
story, so is your story of [the effect of] . . .'s touch not plausi-
ble. The poison of a lustful man's touch is far more than that of
a snake. And if a snake, while lifting its young one with its teeth,
accidentally bites it with its fangs, the young one also would feel
the effect of poison. Since a child is easily influenced by its
parents, if they pour poison into it the child cannot but feel its
effect. Please, therefore, know that It is your own testimony that
proves the innocence of . . . to the extent of 99 per cent.
And that is why I have told you, and I repeat here, that you
should continue to write to me and keep me informed about
everything. If you continue to help me, the remaining one per cent
doubt also can be cleared. After your testimony, I cannot bring
myself to find . . . guilty. Nor can I bring myself to believe
that you are telling a brazen lie. Till, therefore, I get further evi-
dence, the one per cent will remain in your favour. If you are one
hundred per cent truthful and if you continue your effort [to con-
vince me], you will be able to raise the one per cent to 100
per cent.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 940. Courtesy: Satish D. Kalelkar
140
