52. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 17, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
What else am I to believe but that you are a fool? If children
have no interest in asking questions and still write, they waste their
time. If they write with interest, though merely as a formality,
there is some meaning in that. Children may not expect letters
from parents, but are bound to be glad when they get one. There
will be no trace of selfishness in this. In any case, you cannot see in
this evidence of hysteria. I have explained to you in one of my
letters what your hysteria is.
I have not opposed contemplation of a personal form at the
time of prayers, but have given a higher place to the formless.
Perhaps it is not right to make such a distinction. What suits one
person will not suit another. Comparison is out of place in this
matter. For me worship of the formless has greater appeal. Your
explanation regarding Sankara and Ramanuja does not seem cor-
rect. Personal experience is more important than the influence of
external circumstances. The latter should have no effect on a votary
of truth. He ought to see beyond them. We often see that opinions
formed on the basis of external circumstances are afterwards dis-
covered to be wrong. The connection between the atman and the
body is a well-known instance of this. Because the atman is inti-
mately connected with the body in this life, we cannot easily think
of it as distinct from the body. No one has equalled the power of
vision of the person who saw beyond this outward fact and first
uttered: "Not this".
You will be able to think of any number
of such instances. It is not at all proper to take literally the utter-
ances of Tukaram and other saints. Recently I read one such ut-
terance of Tukaram. I quote it for your benefit.
An image of Lord Pashupati is made out of clay: what, then, would
clay be called?
The worship of the Lord reaches unto Him, the clay remains clay.
An image of Vishnu is carved out of stone, yet the stone does not
become Vishnu.
The devotion is offered to Vishnu, the stone remains a stone.
From this, I draw the lesson that we should pay attention
only to the idea behind the words of such saints. They may des-
cribe personal God and yet worship the formless. We ordinary
human beings cannot do that and, therefore, we would come to
grief if we do not try to understand their real meaning and guide
ourselves by it.
If a person who can read Urdu goes to Imam Saheb's house,
he will soon find the books. You have there Mirabehn's Urdu-
English and English-Urdu dictionary. Send that, too, along with
the other books. Does anyone clean Imam Saheb's house periodi-
cally? Every unoccupied house should be cleaned once a week or
a fortnight.
You will find it difficult to keep an account of time only
till it has become a habit with you to do so. Afterwards, it
shouldn't take any time. Such things have a value and bear
fruit only if they are done in the right spirit.
I cite the example of children in South Africa in order to
encourage the children in the Ashram and not to find fault with
them. These children, too, are capable of working, if we have
anyone among us who knows how to take work from them. Aren't
you there?
For the pain in your back, you should sit in warm water.
You should do that for fifteen to twenty minutes. At the same
time you should massage the back with your palm. If you do this,
your pain will be cured and there will also be a beneficial effect
on menstruation. Let me know what the doctor says. Such diseases
should be effectively treated at the very first appearance of their
symptoms.
I carefully examined your daily programme of work. It is
much too heavy. You can easily make a few cuts in it. From
12.30 to 5.40 you run a class and give instruction in crafts. That
comes to five hours and ten minutes. If you reduce this period
by one hour, you will get the free time which you need. You
may retire into privacy and have a nap or simply lie down for
one hour, or do some work which makes you feel that you are
resting. You should not, however, spend the time in talking or
in any serious work. If you do not wish to utilize the free hour
just then, you may advance the time of those items of the prog-
ramme for which it is convenient to do so and get an hour in
the evening. Anyone who feels completely absorbed in his or
her work does not feel it a burden or a strain, but to one who
feels no interest in his work even a small task seems heavy, as a
day seems as long as a year to a prisoner. To a person given
to worldly enjoyments, a year seems as short as a day!
In the past, I used to get bored when listening to European
music. It is only now that I can understand and enjoy it a little.
You are not right when you say that "one should not hope
to do any reading here". It is quite true that you cannot do
much reading. It is equally true that reading is given less impor-
tance in the Ashram. Even so, many persons in the Ashram have
been able to do some reading. I do not like your expressions of
despair. Try to perfect what you find imperfect. If, however,
on the balance you feel that things are unsatisfactory, if, that is,
after weighing the good points against the shortcomings, you feel
that the latter exceed, you should leave the Ashram. Justice to
oneself and to society requires that.
You need not apologize for your long letters. They don't
bore me; on the contrary, I like them. I learn something from
them, for each of them mirrors the state of your heart at the
time of writing it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10290. Also C.W. 6738. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
