235. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
April 1 [1916]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I am at last in Ahmedabad, for some weeks at any rate.
Your things are now being collected. The next mail you should
receive them. I am trying to manufacture biscuits without an oven.
You will like them.
I never previous to the letter under reply received any letter
regarding your things.
I never received the wooden pillow you have referred to in several
letters of yours.
During the week I resolved not to admit to the Ashram for one
year anyone either young or old. Newcomers have taxed me too much
and they have disturbed the even tenor of the life of the Ashram. I
know you would have, had you been here, long ago pushed me to
this decision. However, I have come to it after bitter experience.
We are now exactly 30, young and old. Of these Maganlal and
Jamnadas are in Madras training in Tamil and hand-weaving. Jamnadas's
wife is also learning hand-weaving.
The Pariah member's wife having proved untrustworthy has left
the Ashram.
During the travels just completed, I went to a place called Dehradun.
It is at the base of the Himalayas. You will love the place. The air
is bracing and there are so many walks to the Himalayan hills. Of
course I was there only for a day but was able to know much about
the place. Ramdas, Prabhudas and Devdas were with me.
Have I told you that I have just begun to take cooked food? The
price of fruitarian food is prohibitive here and one cannot get even
dates and monkey-nuts at certain places for love or money. This is
a sad discovery. It tells its own tale. It is there however and one has
to put up with it. This is the 6th day of cooked food. I take rice
and dholl, a vegetable and a lemon. This makes 4 articles. Today I
am going to add oil. I have felt extremely weak during the six days
and not half as satisfied as with the fruitarian meal. I shall see what
1 From the contents
233
the addition of oil does for me. Later on I shall take wheat or some
other corn.
Chhaganlal is due here about the middle of the month. West and
Pragji are in charge at Phoenix.
I have written to Polak about you. Everyone of our company is
just now involved in his own special troubles. This war has naturally
disturbed individuals in all parts of the world.
Ramdas is getting stronger. Devdas has lost in health. He thinks
too much. He has developed a tremendous sense of responsibility. And
he has become such a fine student. I have been trying to wean him
from his studies. I do not know how far I shall succeed.
Budri is due here today. Sivpujan too has become a regular student
but not so accurate as Devdas.
Fakiri's death was a glorious death. I have seen few dying such
a peaceful death. He was conscious to the last moment. He was
screaming with pain. I said, " Fakiri, take the name of God". He began
to utter the sacred syllable and went off to sweet sleep from which
he never awoke. The cremation ceremony was the simplest. We gave
information to nobody. We fasted for half the day. We chanted hymns
before the body was taken to the crematorium.
With love to you from us all,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
