746. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
NAGAPATTAM,
[February 15, 1934]
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,
I have your letter.
I have read Dinshaw's letter and your note. It seems to me
that now there is no point in my giving my opinion in the
matter. Those mill-owners who hold independent views with
regard to artificial silk can follow their own course. Many mills
have not kept the pledge at all. Actually, there is no effective
organization of the mills. I do not find that they are bound by
any moral obligations. Hence, we should be content with what-
ever work can be got out of them through entreaty.
I do not approve of everybody rushing to Britain, though
occasionally I may be of assistance in that. But that even people
like you should go there in search of peace and physical comfort
is too much. Are there not enough number of places in India?
If not Mahabaleshwar, go and stay at Abu or Coonoor. Go to
Mussoorie. Go to Darjeeling. Almora is the best, where, in the
distance, is the beautiful Ramakrishna Math. There is one at
Ooty too. It is a beautiful place. Even a person used to the
western style of living can stay there. Go to the mountain resorts
in Burma. There are beautiful places in Ceylon also. But if you
find comfort only in Britain, what is wrong with the British rule?
You have taken to legal practice out of necessity. I would
expect you to spend the minimum not the maximum of the
money you earn out of the profession. Remember that Britain
means the West.
Moreover, do you know what kind of fire is raging in India?
On the one side is Bihar, on the other side is Bengal and on
the third side is the Frontier Province. When there are such
cataclysmic disturbances, how can you think of going out? Even
if one cannot do anything, one can at least be present here and
write? Once when someone was flogged, Ramdas Swami could
not protect him. But for every weal made by the cane on the
victim's back, Ramdas Swami showed one on his own back. This
may be a legend, but I have seen with my own eyes the father
who collapsed and died on hearing about the death of his only
son. If our love has extended outside, when our own people are
burning why should we also not burn at least a little? I have
said what I wanted to say. What use is showing one's wisdom to
a person who is already wise? After all, you are your own
master. Do what you think is your duty.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 7529. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
