157. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 9, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,
I am grateful for your letter of the 1st inst. If you will
please refer again to my letter of 27th ultimo, you will find that
the sentence referring to deeper conviction has been wholly misun-
derstood. You will see that it does not bear the meaning you
have put upon it. It is clear from the context that if, after deep-
er examination of the solution suggested by the Government, I
should find it acceptable, I would like to convince the prisoners
of the desirability of their acceptance. For deeper examination
I must have more material, which is lacking and which I am
seeking from you and other sources. If, before I or Sarat Babu
or Subhas Babu went to the prisoners, we all three came to the
conclusion that the Government's was a sound offer, I for one
should stand by it, even if I failed to get the prisoners' acquies-
cence, unless they could convince me of the error of my judgment.
I must however inform you that my deeper study is shaking my
belief in the workability of the solution offered by the Govern-
ment. Naturally I must weigh every solution in the scales I have
set up for my guidance, and on the basis of which I submitted
my propositions to you before leaving Calcutta. I do not mind
through what formula or through what machinery the object of
securing the release of every prisoner inside of one year or there-
abouts is attained.
With reference to the detenus and the State prisoners I
remember the paragraph you refer to in your letter of 17th April.
I did not raise any objection to it, although I felt it to be a
new introduction, because I had hoped that an early solu-
tion of the prisoners' question would be reached. I venture to re-
mind you that in the very beginning of the conversations it was
agreed that the detenus and the prisoners who were incarcerated
without trial were to be separately considered from the convicted
prisoners. In my opinion it would be a grave injustice if the
discharge of the detenus and State prisoners is to be made contin-
gent upon an agreed solution of the question affecting convicted
prisoners.
May I also remind you that the policy about detenus has
been already made public by you? It would be a thousand pities,
therefore, if the release of detenus and State prisoners were delayed
or indefinitely postponed because of the possible breakdown of the
negotiations for the release of convicted prisoners.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 9927
