203. LETTER TO "THE ENGLISHMAN"
RAJKOT,
May 20, 1902
[SIR,]
I venture to ask for a short space in your paper to enable
me to draw the attention of the public to the latest attempt
of the Natal Legislature to impose further disabilities on the
British Indian settlers in that Colony.
The Natal Parliament has passed a Bill which makes the
children (males 16, and females 13 years old) of indentured In-
dians liable, like their parents,
(a) to return to India, or
(b) to enter into indentured service, or
(c) to pay the annual poll-tax of £3.
During Lord Elgin's viceroyalty, a deputation came all the
way from Natal to induce His Lordship to sanction legislation
terminating the indentures in India, thus preventing their per-
manent settlement in the Colony, or imposing a poll-tax of
£25 per year on each indentured Indian who may wish to re-
main in the Colony as a free man. Happily, His Lordship would
not listen to any such proposal, but unfortunately, and, I believe,
because His Lordship was probably unaware of certain circum-
stances, reluctantly accepted the principle of taxation as a price
for freedom by sanctioning the imposition of the £3 annual tax.
Now if the Bill in question becomes law, the Natal Government
would have very nearly succeeded in attaining what they failed
to get 8 years ago.
Imperialism is on the lips of everybody, more especially in
the Colonies. How to weld the different parts of the British
Dominions into one beautiful unbreakable whole is a problem
which the greatest British politicians of the day are endeavouring
to solve, and yet, here is a Colony which is making invidious
distinctions between one class of British subjects and another in
a most aggravating manner.
The attitude of the Natal Government towards the inden-
tured Indians is indefensible from every point of view.
These
men go to Natal at the invitation of the Colony to materially
help forward its advancement. Only last month you published
a cablegram stating that the Premier of the Colony, in reply to
the proposal to stop indentured emigration from India to the
Colony, said that such a thing would paralyse its industries. It
was, "when", in the words of a Natal Legislator, "the fate of
the Colony hung in the balance," that "Indian labourers were
introduced, up went the prices, and up again went the reve-
nue, wages and salary." It hardly accords with justice and
fairness to tax the people who have thus given the best 5 years
of their lives to the Colony at a rate of wages far below the
market-rate. Even in the Colony, though it was a voice in the
wilderness, there was one gentleman, an ex-Attorney-General, Mr.
Morcom, K.C., who protested against the Bill in the following
terms. He said
that
Indian children who happened to be born in the Colony would
have to be deported, or indentured for life, or pay the licence [fee] of
£3 a year.
The way in which the Colony was flooded with Indians
for labour might induce many undesirable circumstances but it was
utterly impossible for the House, without disregard of justice or constitu-
tional propriety, to deport these children who had had the misfortune
to be born in the Colony.
So long as there are men in Natal who, like Mr. Morcom,
are not blinded by prejudice, so long will there be hope for
justice being ultimately secured, but, until public opinion there
has veered round in favour of justice and fairness, it is very es-
sential that the Indian public should remain on the alert, and
that the Home Government firmly insist on justice being done
to the Indians.
In the words of Mr. Morcom, "the idea seems to be to get all
the advantages out of the system without regard to its draw-
back." Would it not then be "better by far", in the words of
another Natal Legislator, "to stop the further introduction of
Indians altogether than to take what work you can out of them
and then order them away"?
This is a question on which there is, there can be, no divi-
sion of opinion. May I ask you to raise your powerful voice
against the contemplated injustice? I may state that the Bill
has been specially reserved for sanction from the Home Govern-
ment before it can become law of the Colony.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Englishman, 26-5-1902
