376. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE STATE),
May 25, 1927
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I had your letter whilst I was on the sick-list and unable
to do much correspondence. I am still convalescing and am able
to do only a moderate amount of work; but I am making steady
progress.
You have been there a long time now; but I know you have
not wasted it. I hope however that Kamala will become complete-
ly restored when you return. If her health requires a longer
stay, I presume that you will remain there.
I read most carefully your public report as also your private
confidential report about the doings of the Oppressed Nations'
Conference. I myself do not expect much from this league, if
only because its free activity depends upon the goodwill of the
powers that are partners in the exploitation of the oppressed nations
and I feel that the members of the European nations that joined
the league will not be able to sustain the last heat. For, they will
not be able to accommodate themselves to what they would consi-
der to be an injury to their self-interest. On our side there is dan-
ger of our people again looking to external forces and external
aid for salvation instead of seeking to achieve it by evolving inter-
nal strength. But this is mere academic opinion. I am not at all
carefully following European events. You are on the spot and
you may see an altruistic improvement in the atmosphere there
which I miss altogether.
There is some talk of your being chosen as President for the
coming Congress. I am in correspondence with Father about it.
The outlook here is not at all happy in spite of the unanimous re-
solution of the A.I.C.C. on the Hindu-Muslim question. I do not
know whether the process of breaking heads will in any way be
checked. We have lost hold upon the masses, and it seems to me
that if you became President, you will be lost for one year at any
rate to the masses. That, however, does not mean that Congress
work has to be neglected. Someone has got to do it; but there
are many who are willing and eager to do that work, maybe,
due to mixed motives, even selfish motives; but they will keep
the Congress going on somehow or other. The institution will al-
ways be, at their wish, at the disposal of those who may be quali-
fied for mass work and may have gained control over the masses.
The question then is how your services can be best utilized. What
you yourself think, you should do. I know you are capable of
taking a detached view and you will say quite unselfishly like
Dadabhai or MacSwiney "put the crown on my head", and I
have no doubt that it will be so put. I do not myself see the
way so clear as to make me force the crown on you and plead
with you to wear it. Father will be writing to you also by this
mail, if he has not done so already. I am sending a copy of this
to him.
It might be as well for you to cable your wishes. I am likely
to be in Bangalore till the end of July. You may therefore send
your cable directly to Bangalore, or to be absolutely certain send
it to the Ashram and it will be repeated to me wherever I may be.
With love to you all,
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12572; also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 54-
