382. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
AHMEDABAD,
August 21, 1931
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter.
I am suffering from writer's cramp and so the right hand is
resting.
There was a telegraphic appeal by Dr. Roy regarding Bengal
floods in reply to which I wrote to him day before yesterday.
I do not repeat what I have written as I have no doubt you
will see this letter. If I could possibly have done it I would have
made an appeal to the generosity of Bombay. But knowing the
condition of Bombay as I do and knowing also that there have
been several calls upon Bombay's purse regarding local matters,
I have not had the courage to make any appeal and if I did, I
would have to make a fourfold appeal, that is, on behalf of Ratna-
giri, Bihar, Assam and Bengal because there are equally piteous
appeals from the other three places as from Bengal. The Bihar
appeal came whilst the Working Committee was sitting. I sent
1 Vide "Letter to Dr. B. C. Roy", p. 309.
Jamnalalji to a friend who could not pay a single pie, and so out
of an earmarked fund I asked Jamnalalji to send Rs. 2,000 to
Champaran. Of course they want much more and they
have no Roy or Satis Babu to organize relief. I would, therefore,
say that you should concentrate upon Calcutta, and I do not think
you will be disappointed. All the same, if you think that I can
do anything, you will please tell me.
Your description of Bengal politics makes very sad reading.
I do not know what is to be done except that we must live cor-
rectly and not bend before the storm.
Is your paper becoming popular? And is it producing any
effect on the people?
Whilst I like the idea of your doing relief work, the fact that
you have just risen from sick-bed makes me anxious. I suppose you
will have to tour the distressed areas. I do not know how you
will fare there. You will remember that you have not today the
same robust constitution that you had during the last period of
distress when you built that great embankment. You must now
recognize your limitation. You will therefore please go slowly.
Charu sent me yesterday some black and coloured blocks. He
has given me no description. I could see from letterpress that they
were meant in connection with the Autobiography. In the three or
four lines that he sent he referred to the different inks. Pro-
bably these blocks were sent to me to show what inks were pro-
duced by Satis Babu.
Are the Autobiography and the Gita translation still in demand?
Please keep me fully informed of all your movements. I am
here at least up to the 8th September, i.e., barring accidents. That
is the time when the Working Committee meets.
You need not attach any importance to the talks of the pos-
sibility of my still going to London. I know that some friends are
trying, but I expect no result from their attempt, for as I have
said in my article in Young India the issue is far more important
and wider than the giving of satisfaction to Bardoli. Bardoli was
the last straw. If the unexpected happens and they give real relief,
it would be certainly a sign to me of a great change. Let us see
what happens.
SYT. SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KHADI PRATISHTHAN
SODEPUR (BENGAL)
From a photostat: S.N. 17545
