301. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
December 17, 1928
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. Why should you get upset because of
children's illness? These things come and go. Sometimes we
may even lose one of the children. God gave them and He may
take them back; there is nothing strange in this. Besides, every-
one in the world has to go along the royal road sooner or later;
why, then, should we grieve if anyone leaves early? And rejoice
if someone leaves late? There is no difference between Umi's
soul and that of a calf. Both are diamonds from the same
mine, drops from the same ocean, leaves of the same tree. One
need not be afraid of whooping cough. It always disappears in
due time. If we do not harass the child with too many medicines
while the attack lasts, he or she lives through the attack all right.
Hot water and hot milk—everything hot. The bowels should move
regularly. [Give her] light massage with oil on the chest and put
her in sunshine early in the morning.
Do not be sure of Chhotelal arriving there till you actually
see him. Of course he will arrive.
Gangabehn should put her feet in hot water with soda bicarb
mixed in it and massage them long with vaseline before going to
sleep. Besides this, she must put on shoes, of any type, during
day time. Since we now look upon the hide of a dead cow as
sacred, there will be no harm even if she wears light slippers—not
chappals — made of it. It will be enough if the slippers meant for
use in the kitchen always remain in the kitchen. Slippers of rubber
are also available. Slippers of hessian get wet and dirty, and they
cannot be washed. Slippers made from leather can be washed.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I do not consider the last issue, too, of "Ashram Samachar"
as properly cyclostyled. I leave this place on the evening of
Thursday, the 20th. On 21-22 in Sambalpur and on 23 in Calcutta,
at Jiwanlal's place. Address the letter to Sambalpur only once,
or not at all.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 30-
