402. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 25, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
You must have received my letter of yesterday. Mathurababu
brought your letter today. It was good that he came. I have
sent an emphatic message with him to the effect that they should
fight the elections only if the Parliamentary Board provides the
money, otherwise they should abandon the idea. They should
expect no help from you or me. Of course, if they have the
courage to fight without spending money they should certainly do
so. If, however, that is not possible, they should think twice be-
fore deciding to fight. If it is possible anywhere in the country to
fight elections without money and solely on the prestige of the
Congress, it is in Bihar. However, this problem is outside my
sphere. I haven't the slightest idea how elections are fought. If
indeed they can be fought without money or with very little money
solely in the name of the Congress, there can be nothing more
creditable than that.
I have a wire from Bhulabhai saying that he is coming today
between 3 and 4. Mahadev is arriving in the evening.
Did I write to you that I had received three wires regarding
the Working Committee? I have merely wired back in reply that
they should ask you about it.
It will not matter if you find it impossible to come. We shall
meet through letters and be satisfied with that.
I will keep you
informed about anything new which I come to know about.
Mirabehn seems to be doing good work. Probably it will
bear no result just now, but her trip [to England] will not have
been in vain. If you have not been getting letters regarding such
matters, I will arrange, after Mahadev's return, that they are for-
warded to you. Muriel met Lloyd George. She talked with him
for hours. Thus these few friends have been doing the best they
can. Mirabai and Agatha have clashed with each other a bit.
Partly Mirabai's impatience and partly her suspicious nature were
responsible for this. Mahadev or Pyarelal will give you the details
of the incident.
You do not seem to have fully regained your strength.
Bhulabhai has arrived. Call the meeting in Bombay. That will
drag me there. Bhulabhai will be able to manage the A. I. C. C.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
89 WARDEN ROAD, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro -2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 127-
