179. LETTER TO SIR HAROLD MANN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 20, 1926
MY DEAR SIR HAROLD MANN,
I thank you for your letter inviting me to demonstrate hand-
spinning at the forthcoming exhibition in Poona. I should love
to do so, but for two reasons. Up to the 20th of December, I
1 Writing on July 14, Mann had considered a spinning demonstration
by Gandhiji "the most effective means of pushing the use of hand-spinning by
the rural classes that could be devised" (S.N. 11200).
am under a vow not to leave Ahmedabad except upon some
pressing unforeseen public call or for reasons of health. Secondly,
I want to move slowly and, therefore, I do not want to identify
myself so much with functions which, though they may be un-
official, may have an official colouring or patronage. It is more
truthful for me to do so so long as I suspect the existing system
as an evil. I know I can write thus freely and frankly to you
without being considered in any way discourteous.
You will find, however, that the party of demonstrators that
will be sent to you will be thoroughly effective and the demon-
stration itself will be given in a scientific manner. Because we are
experimenting upon this in a scientific manner, not one of the
principal workers has any preconceived notions or prejudice one
way or the other. It is because we feel that the charkha is the
one thing that can save the sinking peasantry from extinction that
we are devoting all our energy to its improvement and success.
I have been brooding over the Dairy scheme that you have
kindly sent me. There seems to be no land near Ahmedabad that
I can get, but if you could send the expert you have in view, he
will see the land near the Ashram that we have got and, if he
thinks that a Dairy could be established here on an unambitious
scale, a portion of the land can be set apart for the purpose.
And, if that proves unsatisfactory, I must confer with him about
securing a plot of land some distance from Ahmedabad. I am
running a little Dairy here myself. Perhaps, it may be extended.
Nothing, however, can be done without a personal conversa-
tion with one who knows all about dairying.
Yours sincerely,
SIR HAROLD MANN
DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE
B. P., POONA
From a microfilm: S.N. 11205
