264. LETTER TO PANCHANAN TARKARATNA
March 29, 1933
DEAR PANDITJI,
I thank you for your letter which Motibabu has kindly trans-
lated for me.
On the one hand I see that you consider the matter of un-
touchability supersensuous and on the other you are applying
mere mundane situations to the matter. Personally, I do not re-
gard untouchability as a supersensuous matter. I regard nothing
as supersensuous which is capable of being proved through the
senses. Thus, I would consider the question of the existence of
God as supersensuous but not so the shape of the earth, and as
our Shastras teach us, it would be a misuse of spiritual gifts to apply
them for the discovery or for proving the properties of material
objects. Untouchability as described in the Shastras is a purely
material thing. There is nothing supersensuous in it. Therefore
if I apply the ordinary laws governing the examination of ordi-
nary things I am doing no violence to the Shastras.
Thus examined, in spite of what may be said in the Shastras,
hereditary untouchability has no basis, and if a Chandala, so des-
cribed, did not disclose his birth, there is no test whereby he could
be distinguished from the rest. What applies to him applies with
much greater force to his progeny.
I am afraid that your analogy of the Red Indians, the Austra-
lian Indians and other such races has no application whatsoever
to Indian conditions, and it is historically untrue to say that in
India there has been no mixture of races. On the contrary, there
is incontestable proof that mixture of blood has been constantly
going on in India since the known beginnings of time.
As to the pandits whose testimony I have cited, several who
have upheld my interpretation I have not even had the pleasure of
knowing. They have accepted the same authority that you are
quoting, only they have given a different interpretation to yours.
With due humility I claim that though I can make no preten-
sion to Sanskrit learning, I know enough of Sanskrit and have read
enough of the scriptures to be able to form my own judgment on
conflicting interpretations being presented to me of the Shastras.
With reference to your son, my own recollection is distinct
239
that he was to have come as your representative, not in order to
have a religious disputation but to hold a discourse with me in
order to present your viewpoint and in order that I could under-
stand it, so that if it was at all possible we might find ourselves
on the same platform.
Surely, that was an object wholly different from that of the
pandits who came to engage in a set debate between rival schools
of thoughts with judges to regulate the debate. Your son coming
as one of these disputants was not the same as his coming as your
deputy without the conditions that governed the pandits. Of course
there was nothing wrong about his being one of the pandits, but
that could not be a fulfilment of your promise. If he had the
intention of engaging in a friendly and personal conversation with
me after the debate, he could still do so. I shall be pleased to
meet him any time he comes and patiently listen to all he might
have to say. I can give you my assurance that I have not shut my
ears to anything that might have still to be said on behalf of the
party that upholds modern untouchability as an integral part of
Hinduism.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20744
