341. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SRIRAMPUR,
December 25, 1946
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,
Your letter addressed to Pyarelal reached me direct yes-
terday. Pyarelal and all the rest are engrossed in their own
duties and are staking their lives. He could, when we were to-
gether at one place, write or send you something. He can-
not do so now. Your letter went to Kazirkhil; so Satis Babu
forwarded it to me here. Pyarelal does not know about your
letter. He comes to see me occasionally and will read it when
he comes here next.
I am dictating this at 3 a. m. I shall have a wash at 4 a. m.
and prayers after that. This is the present routine. I shall
carry on only if such is God's will. However, there is no need
to worry about my health. The body responds to the demands
made upon it, but I am being tested. My truth and non-
violence are being weighed in a balance which is much more
accurate than any pearl merchant ever used. It is so sensi-
tive as to register the difference of even a hundredth frac-
tion of a hair. Truth and non-violence themselves can never
be imperfect. If anything is to be found wanting, it may be I
1& The message was sent "in connection with the temple-entry move-
ment that has been launched" by Andhra Harijan Sevak Sangh, of which
the addressee was Secretary. The Report appeared under the date-line
Srirampur, December 25.
who have constituted myself their representative; if so, I at
least hope that God will take me away and work through some
other agent. I am sorry that I cannot myself do the work
which Pyarelal used to do for me and I have not yet been
able to arrange with the two men who are with me to do it.
But both are intelligent. I therefore hope to be able to arrange
it. In this, your letter will afford me encouragement. Jai-
sukhlal left Manu here at her own wish three or four days ago.
I allowed her to come and stay with me on her terms, as she
was prepared to live and die with me if necessary. And now
I am dictating this to her, lying with my eyes closed so as to
avoid strain. Sucheta is also in the room. She is still asleep
and I am dictating this letter in a low voice, lying on the
wooden bedstead. The bedstead is of a size on which three
persons can easily sleep. I do all my work on it. The telegram
you have forwarded to me has no substance. There is no limit
to exaggeration here. Not that people exaggerate intentionally;
they simply do not know what exaggeration means. The imag-
ination of the people runs riot like the local vegetation which
grows like grass on all sides. All around us I find huge coconut
and betel-nut palms, and a large variety of greens grow in their
shade. The rivers are all [big] like the Indus, the Ganges, the
Jumna and the Brahmaputra. They empty their waters into the
Bay of Bengal. My advice is that if you have not already
replied to the correspondent who sent you the telegram, you
should ask him to furnish proof for his statements so that the
Central Government may try to do something about it though
they have no power to interfere in terms of the Constitution.
And add: 'Gandhi is there in your midst and it is impossible
that he would not listen to you. But he is an apostle of truth
and non-violence and it is therefore likely that you are disap-
pointed with him. But if he disappoints you, how can we, who
were trained under him, hope to satisfy you? But we shall do
what we can.' Don't tell anyone that since I am here, he need
not bring his problems to you. Tell him that he may write to
you nevertheless and that it will be your duty to afford relief
to him even by going against me, for that is what I have
taught you.
The situation here poses many difficulties and problems.
Truth is nowhere to be found. Violence masquerades as non-
violence and heinous crimes are committed in the name of
religion. But truth and non-violence can be tested only in such
conditions. I know this and that is why I am here. Do not
send for me. If I run away from cowardice that will be my
own misfortune; but I do not yet see such a misfortune befalling
the country. I am here to do or die. News came over the
radio yesterday that Jawaharlal, Kripalani and Deo are coming
to have consultations with me. That is good. What is the use
of my meeting everyone? However, if anyone among you wants
to ask me anything, he is welcome. What I wrote about
Assam was not meant for immediate publication. If you know
how it came to be published, please let me know. But rest
assured that I am right on that point. I am in the furnace here.
I, therefore, am in a good enough position to testify what is
happening in it and what the truth is. [Sardar Jivan Singh]
often comes to me, asks for suggestions and assures me that he
will implement them to the letter. I think I can trust him.
I had a wire from [Sardar Niranjan Singh] saying that he had
not been able to win you over. But I did not understand what
he actually meant. Tell him this if he is there and if you
happen to meet him. And if you have been able to under-
stand what he wants to ask me, let me know.
You will have seen the report of the Bihar [Muslim] Lea-
gue. I have written to Rajendra Babu about it and have
asked him to acquaint all of you with my views. I have
written to the Chief Minister also. It is dreadful even if half
of it is true. I have no doubt at all that an impartial com-
mission of inquiry, which is above reproach, should be imme-
diately set up. There should not be delay of even a single day.
Whatever is true in the allegations must be admitted straight
away and the rest should be referred to the commission. Discuss
this with your Muslim League colleagues in the Cabinet also.
I am in correspondence with Suhrawardy. It is continuing. I
will send it all to you when it is completed. Jawahar and
others will see what has passed between us so far. If you are
not doing so already, please read the summaries of my post-
prayer speeches which are sent to the newspapers. Or go
through the cuttings which Mani may give you. I know even
from here the great pressure under which you are working, but
there are certain things which have got to be done despite the
pressure. To keep yourself informed of what I say, is one of them.
How can I say you will be well? I will assume that
you are well enough to carry on the work. I am sure you
can improve your health. I would still advise you to send for
Dinshaw . I have no doubt that he is a good and a sincere
man with an altruistic outlook. What if he is not so efficient?
You ask about Sushila. I cannot say that she is in very good
health. She too is in an inhospitable village and is doing good
work. Even a quack is a rarity in these parts; so naturally peo-
ple make much of someone like her. Do not, therefore, be
anxious for any of us here. And when everyone of them is
here, ready to die, their falling ill should be of no great concern.
If one dies, it is as well; only let the death be pure and earn
commendation.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 336-40
