259. LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE
As AT WARDHA, (C.P.),
INDIA,
March 6, 1934
DEAR SIR SAMUEL,
You will recollect that whilst I was returning to India in
December of 1931 you had a cable caused to be sent to me in
regard to an interview alleged to have been given by me to a
journalist in Rome and that I had sent a categorical denial. To
this there was a counter-denial which I had not seen till recently,
being in jail within less than one week of my landing in Bombay.
After my discharge from the last imprisonment in August last,
I was told by Mirabai Slade that an English friend—Prof. Maclean
of Wilson College, Bombay—had thought that although the matter
was stale, it was worth while my clearing it up, as the denial by
the Rome journalist had created a profound impression at the time
of its publication and had probably precipitated the Viceregal ac-
tion against me in 1932. Agreeing with Prof. Maclean, I at once
asked Mirabai to write to Miss Agatha Harrison to procure the
relevant newspaper cuttings. After much search she was able to
get them. The last and the most important I received from her
last month in the midst of my hurricane tour in the cause of the
anti-untouchability campaign. For ready reference, I send you
copies of the three cuttings marked 'A', 'B' and 'C' respectively.
It should be noted that these cuttings were for the first time
seen by me on their being received from Miss Harrison. I have
now read and reread them several times, and I have no hesitation
in saying that 'A' and 'C' are a caricature of what took place.
'A' professes to be a summary of a long statement said to have
been made by me to an Italian journalist. In 'C' The Times
correspondent, on seeing my denial regarding the alleged inter-
view, makes a halting admission that I might be correct in so far
as Signor Gayda did not "request any formal interview and no
such interview was granted," but insists that the statements attrib-
uted to me were substantially correct.
But truth will perhaps
be better served by my simply stating what I do know than by
analysing 'A' and 'C'.
1. I never made any statement, much less a long one, to
Signor Gayda as suggested in 'A'.
2. I was never invited to meet Signor Gayda at any place.
But I was invited by an Italian friend to meet some Italian citizens
at an informal drawing-room meeting at a private house. At this
meeting I was introduced to several friends whose names I cannot
now recall and could not have recalled even the day after the
meeting. The introductions were merely formal.
3. At this meeting the conversation was general, and not
addressed to any particular individual. Questions were put by
several friends and there was a random conversation as at all
drawing-room meetings.
4. It was therefore wrong for Signor Gayda or The Times
correspondent to reproduce my remarks as if they were one
connected statement to one particular person.
5. Signor Gayda never showed to me for verification anything
he might have taken down.
6. The conversation, among other things, referred to the
Round Table Conference, my impression of it and my possible
future action.
Many of the things that have been put into my
mouth in 'A' I had never said. All my hopes, fears and future
intentions were expressed in as precise a language as it was
possible for me to command and use in my speech at the close of
the Round Table Conference. Whatever I said in private con-
versation was but a paraphrase of the sentiments expressed in that
speech. I am not given to saying one thing in public and another
in private, or to saying one thing to one friend and something else
to another. I could not have said that there was a definite rup-
ture between the Indian nation and the British Government, for I
had said to several friends about the same time that I was deter-
mined to strain every nerve to prevent a rupture and to continue
the peaceful relations established by the Irwin-Gandhi Pact. Being
an optimist, I do not believe in a final rupture between human beings.
7. I never said that I was returning to India in order to
restart the struggle against England. Certain possibilities about
which I was questioned at the informal meeting have been so
described in 'A' as if I was actually going to India to bring them
about if I could.
I would add that the public had neither the original notes
supposed to have been made by Signor Gayda nor the latter's own
version wherever published. In 'A' and 'C' they had only the
impressions of The Times correspondent about what Signor Gayda
wrote or said.
I do not know how you were affected by 'C'. If your faith
in my denial was shaken, perhaps in any case I should have
been acquainted with the rejoinder to my denial as you had kindly
brought to my notice the first report. I do not know how you
will take this letter.
If you have any doubt about my bonafides, I
would like to clear it, if it is at all possible for me to do so.
Miss Slade was the "follower" referred to in 'C'. I enclose
herewith her recollections of the conversation.
I am not publishing this letter. I am sending copies to
several friends for their private use. But I would like you, if
you could, to give it publicity, or to ask Prof. C. F. Andrews,-
Woodbrooke, Selly Oak, Birmingham, to make such public use of
the letter as he might wish.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
From a photostat: C.W. 7942. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also In the Shadow of
the Mahatma, pp. 130-
