220. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
July 18, 1908
THE EDITOR,
THE STAR
SIR,
With your informant, who states that the Mahomedans of the
Transvaal will not, in order to revive the Asiatic struggle, follow the
advice that may be tendered to destroy or refrain from using trading
licences already issued, in common with others of their compatriots, the
wish seems to have been father to the thought.
I have the honour to represent the Hamidia Islamic Society of the
Transvaal, and I am not aware of a Mahomedan dissentient. They
hold the honour of India and their educated countrymen just as
dearly as any Indian. In point of fact, my co-religionists have stronger
objections to the Asiatic Act than the other Indians, for the simple reason
that it constitutes a direct attack on Mahomedanism, and offers a deli-
berate insult to the Caliph of the Faithful, His Imperial Majesty the
Sultan of Turkey, who is the spiritual head of Islam, as His Majesty
the King-Emperor is the temporal head of the citizens of the British
Empire.
That three Mahomedans gave thumb-impressions to the Licensing
Officer means nothing, except that they did not know what they were
doing. The Government have not sufficiently appreciated the service
rendered by the Indian community when they gave finger-impressions
voluntarily; and now the people take time before they understand
that the giving of thumb-impressions to the Licensing Officer is not the
same thing as giving finger-impressions under the voluntary arrange-
ment. The act performed before the Licensing Officer is a symbol of
the Act which we have forsworn. And it is because we wish to lodge
a tangible protest against the Government's action in dealing dis-
honestly with us, that I, as well as others of my countrymen, whether
Mahomedans, Hindus, or Christians, have taken up hawking with-
out licences as a privilege, unused though we are to the occupation.
I am, etc.,
IMAM A. K. BAWAZEER
CHAIRMAN,
HAMIDIA ISLAMIC SOCIETY
The Star, 18-7-1908
