609. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
October 10, 1945
CHI. KISHORELAL,
Today just after the prayers I read with care your article on
decimal coinage. I liked it. Why did you take so long in sending
it? Or did you send it and did I miss it by oversight? I was in
Panchgani then and hardly looked at newspapers. At present
also the situation is just the same. To say that I have carefully
gone through the article does not mean that I have also checked
up the calculations or that they are clear to me. Since you are
so good at calculations I take it that the figures are correct.
Suppose your figures are correct and your suggestions are very
useful to the public, you cannot sit quiet after merely writing
an article. If your health permits, pursue the matter yourself or
discuss it with Narahari, Jajuji and Kumarappa. Vinoba also is
an expert at figures. If he agrees, Jajuji or Narahari can go deep
into the matter and correspond with Kodanda Rao. I am my-
self writing to him. I have written to K. T. Shah1, Vaikunth
and Gaganvihari and sent them copies of the article.
Now about Jajuji. I don't think we shall gain anything by
sending him to the Assembly. He would become weak. Ours is
a queer way of working and the people working there are even
more queer. People ask for Jajuji and others but will not listen
to them after placing them on the throne. Jajuji will be much
more useful by remaining out of the Assembly.
Dada's name is worth considering and perhaps he will be
relieved of his family responsibilities when the time comes.
Sardar told me that you had written to him.
I am not convinced by what you say about your health.
And I am helpless because you are insisting exclusively on one
thing. I cannot understand your insistence. But since it is backed
by your peculiar line of thinking how can I counter it? If
you were temperamentally like Sardar I would have sent for
you for treatment here or done some such thing. I just do not
believe that your constitution is collapsing from within and that
it cannot be helped. I believe it can be set right by nature
cure. I have said all this as I could not help it. If any of this
appeals to you, please let me know so that I may think about
the next step.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
