191. LETTER TO SIR GEORGE BARNES
2, MOZANG ROAD,
LAHORE,
[November 7, 1919]
TO
THE HON'BLE SIR GEORGE BARNES, K.C.B.
MEMBER VICEROY'S EXECUTIVE COUNCIL
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
[DELHI]
With reference to our conversation, I enclose herewith my
note as to the minimum to be included in the reference to the
forthcoming South African Commission.
It is assumed for the purpose of this note that General Smuts
contemplates referring to the Commission the question of trading
rights of Indians in the Transvaal only.
If so, it will not in any way settle the most urgent questions.
The new Act deals with and adversely affects the rights of
owning land and trading. It is therefore suggested that the ques-
tion of trading and owning land, i.e., the laws of 1885 and the
Townships Act and the Gold Law in so far as the latter two affect
the rights of Indians to own land and to trade within the townships
or the Gold areas be referred to the Commission.
It should be clearly understood as between the Union Govern-
ment and the Government of India that the new Act in so
far as it diminishes existing rights should be revised and that the
findings of the Commission should not in any way restrict exist-
ing rights. The Commission is likely to prove injurious to the
existing rights, small as they are, if the above two conditions are
not fulfilled.
My proposal should be taken and treated as a whole or rejec-
ted altogether.
In making the proposal, I am going against the most mode-
rate public opinion here and against the demands made by the
South Africa Indians' Conference recently held at Johannesburg.
Public opinion here as expressed by The Times of India requires
the restoration of trading rights and ownership of land throughout
the Union and the inter-provincial migration. This means entry
into the Orange Free State and the rights to trade and own land
there. In the present state of public feeling this may be difficult
for General Smuts to achieve even if he himself is willing.
The demand of the Conference is wider still and includes the
restoration of the political status and the abolition of all legal dis-
abilities. Though this and this alone must be the goal to be aimed
at, I recognize that it is not practical politics to strive for it as an
immediate aim.
But, if neither the Indian demand nor the lesser one express-
ed by The Times of India is to be urged, it must be clearly under-
stood that there should be no diminution of the existing status.
The Union Government having already opened the question
of trade and ownership of property in the Transvaal, through the
Select Committee and then the recent legislation, the Commission
can well be asked to entertain both these questions without
ruffling the prejudices of the white population. It should be re-
membered that, at the time of the passage of the recent Act, Indians
in the Transvaal had the right to receive licenses to trade practi-
XVI-19
cally on the same footing as the Europeans and could under the
existing law become virtual owners of land by taking mortgages or
forming limited liability companies. I contemplate statutory
recognition of the right to trade under general sanitary control
and the direct ownership of land in the Transvaal. This is not
claiming much or more than they have virtually enjoyed.
So far regarding the reference.
There is the unsatisfactory administration of the Immigrants'
Restriction Act which can be improved by diplomatic action without
troubling the Commission. The points requiring attention are:
(1) The movement of the Indian settlers from one province
to another not for residing but for ceremonial or business visits or
for mere passage to the province of domicile. Full facilities without
fee should be granted.
(2) The entry of fresh Indians for supplying the needs of
the resident population should be placed on a better and more
liberal basis.
(3) There should be greater liberality in permitting plural
wives to visit their husbands without creating any legal rights for
them or their issue.
(4) Restrictions on passports from India or from the Union
require complete overhauling whether regarding identification or
otherwise.
(5) Men and women of status and students should have
freedom to travel to South Africa.
These matters, if they cannot be dealt with diplomatically,
should be included in the reference to the forthcoming Commission.
M. K. GANDHI
India Office: Judicial and Public Records: 6140/19
