192. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
RAJKOT,
April 22, 1902
THE EDITOR
"THE TIMES OF INDIA"
SIR,
Your issue of the 10th instant contains a cablegram to the
effect that a Bill, which imposes on the children of indentured
Indians in Natal the same disabilities as the parents themselves,
has been read a second time in the Legislative Assembly of the
Colony.
In the absence of the full text, it is rather difficult to com-
ment upon the measure; but as the delivery of letters from
South Africa is so very uncertain, and as I know with what
swiftness Bills can become the law of the Colony, I venture to
offer a few remarks.
It was, I think, in the year 1893 that delegates appointed
by the Natal Government came to India to persuade the Indian
Government to sanction legislation requiring indentured Indians
to return to India after the completion of their indentures or to
pay a poll-tax of £25 per year. There is a long history behind
this delegation which, although painfully interesting, I am obliged
to omit, in order to be brief. The then Viceroy, His Excellency
Lord Elgin, while he absolutely refused to impose a poll-tax of
£25, unfortunately accepted the principle by consenting to a
reduced tax of £3. Had His Lordship known, as I fear he did
not do then, that a similar attempt was made some twenty years
back without avail, probably he would not have yielded.
Now the present Bill is, I fear, in a measure intended to
accomplish what the delegation failed to do in 1893. For under
it all children of indentured parents (even infants in arms!) would
be liable to pay the £3 tax, and if an indentured Indian hap-
pens to have seven children, by no means an unlikely event,
between him and his children he would have to pay £24 per
year, a thing that would be absolutely beyond his capacity. I
shudder to contemplate the evil effects of such a measure on
the moral tone of the community which is called upon to pay
284
such heavy penalties for the mere permission to exist in the
country to which they have been actually invited or, shall I say,
allured.
The iniquity of the measure sanctioned by Lord Elgin in
1893 was graphically described by you, as well as the late Sir
W. W. Hunter, who called the state of indenture one of semi-
slavery. I would beg to quote the opinions also of the Natal
legislators, given when the proposal to compel return of the
labourers was first made.
The late Mr. Saunders, a distinguished Colonist, sometime
member of the Natal Legislative Council, made the following
remarks on the proposal:
Though the Commission has made no recommendation on the
subject of passing a law to force Indians back to India at the expiration
of their term of service unless they renew their indentures, I wish to ex-
press my strong condemnation of any such idea, and I feel convinced that
many, who now advocate the plan, when they realize what it means
will reject it as energetically as I do. Stop Indian immigration and face
results, but don't try to do what I can show is a great wrong.
What is it but taking the best out of servants (the good as well
as the bad), and then refusing them the enjoyment of the reward! For-
cing them back (if we could, but we cannot) when their best days have
been spent for our benefit. Where to? Why, back to face a prospect
of starvation from which they sought to escape when they were young.
Shylock-like, taking the pound of flesh, and Shylock-like we may rely on
meeting Shylock's reward.
The late Mr. Escombe, sometime Prime Minister of the
Colony, at the time of giving his evidence before a Commission
appointed to inquire into Indian matters, deposed as follows:
With reference to time-expired Indians, I do not think that it
ought to be compulsory on any man to go to any part of the world
save for a crime for which he is transported. I hear a great deal of this
question; I have been asked again and again to take a different view,
but I have not been able to do it.
A man is brought here, in theory
with his own consent, in practice very often without his consent. He
gives the best five years of his life, he forms new ties, forgets the old
ones, perhaps establishes a home here, and he cannot, according to my
view of right and wrong, be sent back. Better by far to stop the further
introduction of Indians altogether than to take what work you can out
of them and order them away. The Colony, or part of the Colony,
seems to want Indians but also wishes to avoid the consequences of
Indian immigration. The Indian people do no harm as far as I know;
in certain respects they do a great deal of good. I have never heard a
reason to justify the extradition of a man who has behaved well for five
years. I do not think that the Indian, at the expiration of his five years'
service, should be placed under police supervision unless he is a criminal.
I know not why Arabs should be placed under police supervision more
than Europeans. In cases of some Arabs the thing is simply ridiculous.
They are men of large means, large connections, who are always used in
trade if they can be dealt with more profitably than others.
I am aware that the honourable gentleman, after all, under
pressure of electioneering circumstances, later on did "take a
different view". The above extracts deal with compulsory re-
turn, but seeing that the poll-tax is meant to secure such a
return of the indentured Indians they are applicable to it also,
and the Bill under discussion would necessarily imply the re-
turn of the children, should they choose not to pay the tax.
You as well as your other contemporaries have laid the
Indian settlers under deep obligation by frequently ventilating
their grievances. It, however, appears that European Colonists
in Natal will not be happy until every Indian is driven out of
Natal. It is, therefore, with the Indian a life-and-death strug-
gle. His cause is admittedly absolutely just. There are many
other circumstances favourable to justice being done. We have
a very strong Viceroy. The Colonial Secretary has often expres-
sed his sympathy. Will you kindly put all these forces in mo-
tion? It would not be premature to move now. Probably, by
the time papers are received from Natal, the Bill, too, would
have been received at the Colonial Office for sanction. There
is, therefore, hardly time to wait. I may state that the Colo-
nial constitution requires sanction from the Home Government
for all Colour legislation.
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 1-5-1902
