42. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 22, 1927
MY DEAR DEVADHAR,
I thank you for your letter. I did read about your election
in the papers. It was a foregone conclusion. I therefore did
not send you my congratulations. And though in the opinion of
the outside world, it is an honour conferred upon you, I know
as well as you do that for you it is a matter of greater res-
ponsibility and greater opportunity for service. You call me a
friend and supporter of the Society. I regard myself as some-
thing much more. I have never considered myself as anything
but a member of the Society. Though I am not officially a mem-
ber [and] am not taking any active part in its activities, [this]
does not cause me the slightest worry. My abstention is my
quota of service. When a member of a numerous family cannot
see eye to eye with the rest although his heart is with them, he
serves the family best by non-interference, always wishing that
his head may be where his heart is so that he can render active
service. Has it not been said that those also serve who wait and
pray? You have therefore a right to command my service when-
ever you think that with my limitations it can be of any use to
you.
I do not expect to be at Sabarmati before the end of August,
for doctors here tell me I shall be able to do a certain amount of
1 In his letter dated July 12 Harcourt wrote: "The challenge I referred to
was yours and addressed to my countrymen in general. I tried to reply but I
have no copy now" (S.N. 12531).
touring from next month, and if I can do so, I shall want to
finish as far as I can the Southern tour that was mapped out and
over which immense trouble was taken by Rajagopalachari and
Gangadharrao Deshpande. If I must regard your headquarters
as Poona, it is just as easy for you if not easier to come to
Bangalore as to go to Sabarmati. And I am here till about 10th
of July. You can come here therefore if you at all can and
will. I shall always have my grievance against Mrs. Devadhar,
for she is under promise to come to Sabarmati and stay there a
few days, a promise she has never yet fulfilled.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. G. K. DEVADHAR
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
POONA
From a photostat: S.N. 14169
