309. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
BETTIAH,
Vaishakh Vad 11, May 17, 1917
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
There is no harm in sending the report of the Benares speech
as revised by me.
You need not henceforth send Jamnadas's letters here for he
has resumed writing to me. The one you sent this time, I am
forwarding to Narandas. He doesn't seem to have seen it. You
may inform me if there is anything particular in his letter.
You need not send a puggree for me here. I am carrying
on with what I have. If you have not made the dhotis, get them
ready. I see that I shall need them. I hope you have supplied
more yarn to Umreth. See that you don't drop that work. I am
of the opinion that, if Saiyad Mahomed and others agree to come
on the same terms as Lalji, they should be admitted. I see that
we shall have to produce plenty of cloth. We should also not take
upon ourselves the responsibility for winding the bobbins. Let
them bring along their children. If any poor people send their
children to learn, these should be paid. We may engage them in
work only for some time; during the rest of the time we should
teach them. In short, I feel it is necessary that we should start a
workshop. By and by, we shall see our way. In this con-
nection, I also think sometimes that, if we can get some honest,
paid men, it would be advisable to engage them. They can be set
to domestic chores and those [of us] who are at present occupied
with this work can be released. I think of this again and again.
But the idea will have to be carefully weighed. It will perhaps be
convenient, for our purpose, to engage an elderly widow, if we
know of any. I keep thinking along these lines during moments of
leisure; however, since I think of these things so far away from
you, you need not attach much weight to them. If you carry them
out, it will be on your own responsibility. Seek all possible help
from Vrajlal on this question. He will be especially in a position
to say something about it since the responsibility is his.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5704. Courtesy:
Chhaganlal Gandhi
