511. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 4/9, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. Both the letter and the accompanying com-
ments of Premabehn I found very useful. I think you have be-
come somewhat impatient. The one virtue of your character
which I value most is that you never undertake any work beyond
your strength, do thoroughly whatever you take up and never
lose your peace of mind. We see a combination of these three vir-
tues in very few persons. I think you have shown it in your chara-
cter. It is now very necessary to take care that you do not
lose this precious asset through impatience. Everybody is not capa-
ble of doing everything. We see a few persons who do many
things but most people can do only a few things. It is enough
that you belong to the former class. Provided you take care of
your health and preserve your peace of mind and remain cheerful,
I will say nothing against your taking upon yourself as much
responsibility as you wish. But one forgets this condition when one
becomes impatient. Maganlal forgot it and he paid a heavy price
for it. We should learn from his mistake. Premabehn believes
that you have taken upon yourself such a heavy burden that your
body cannot bear the strain for long. Kusum also seems to agree
with her. Think over this and make whatever changes may be neces-
sary. If you have been hasty about anybody else, too, in any
matter, you should rectify your mistake.
I think the following
rules should be observed.
1. Everyone should get one hour which he may spend as he
likes. Nobody should spend it in any work or activity which is
part of his daily routine.
2. The period of silence at prayer-time should be increased
from one minute to five minutes.
One person should keep his
eyes open and, when the five minutes are over, give a mild stroke
on the bell.
3. Spinning, etc., should be done only during the time left
out of compulsory bodily labour like cooking, cleaning lavatories,
helping in the dairy, working on the farm, washing and bathing,
etc. All these are essential activities. We should so arrange our
daily programme that we are able to do full justice to them.
4. Sufficient time should be allowed to a person to leave
one duty and take up another.
5. If, as a result of arranging the work in this manner, it
becomes necessary to engage paid labourers, you must engage a
sufficient number of them. But we should not treat them as labou-
rers. We should see to it that they get proper accommodation and
clothes to wear and gradually we should draw them towards the
Ashram rules.
These rules should be explained to them before
they are engaged.
6. If you can reduce the activities and do without paid
labourers, that would certainly be the best course.
7. Everybody, whether grown-up or young, must go to bed
as soon as it is nine. Children under 12 should go to bed at eight.
You may revise these rules from time to time in the light of
your experience there. Though I think about these matters from
here and raise issues for you to think over, you should carry out
my suggestions only to the extent practicable. I hope you do
not discharge any labourers who are prepared to observe our
conditions. Though they work for wages, I regard them as in-
mates of the Ashram.
I had a long talk with Kusum, and so I do not say anything
about the matter here. Giridhari came and saw me recently.
Manibehn Parikh also was one of the party. I cannot describe
Dhiru's health as satisfactory. I got Dr. Sharma's books. I also
got Jodanikosh1, etc. The yarn spun by Chhakkaddas appears
very clean and even in texture like silk. I see that he has taken
great care in spinning it. Mahadev thinks that the count pro-
bably does not exceed 20. I have not examined the yarn care-
fully from that point of view. But even if Mahadev is right, I
would rate yarn of 20 counts which is strong and even in texture
much higher than yarn of 40 counts which is weak and uneven
in texture.
I am glad that Nimu has returned. Will her mother stay
there? I should be happy if she does. Ask Nimu to write to me
every week without fail. If she does, she will also be able to give
some news which I may convey to Ramdas.
Jamna must run away to Bombay. What is the name of the
doctor who extracted Mathew's tooth? I think Mathew should
be permitted to go and visit his father. It seems to me that by
and by he will become a fine worker. He is good-natured and
gentle and his intentions are always good.
I have already written to you that Gangabehn again requires
asafoetida powder and chaiarj, the same quantity as you sent
before. Mahadev got the parcel addressed to him. It seems cer-
tain now that the packet received from Jethalal has been lost.
What did it contain? Who has signed the receipt?
If it is the rule in a jail to handcuff a prisoner when he is taken
out and if a prisoner is so handcuffed he should not protest but,
on the contrary, should cheerfully submit to being handcuffed.
This has been my view from the very beginning. When I was
taken out of jail in Pretoria and brought to a court to give evi-
dence in a case, I was handcuffed. I welcomed that, for I did
not regard myself as different from other prisoners and never desir-
ed treatment different from theirs. Today also I do not desire
such treatment. That there should be improvement in the treat-
ment of prisoners is a separate issue, and the change should be
brought about mostly by the efforts of people outside. Prisoners
can bring about a change only by obeying the harshest prison
rules. There is only one exception to this, which is really not
an exception, namely, that a prisoner ought not to submit to
anything which is humiliating. The law does not permit humi-
liation of prisoners. This may be taken as my general view. Only
those who had taken a vow to spin regularly before the struggle
started may insist on being permitted to spin in jail. There are
very few such persons. I cannot write more than this on this sub-
ject. I have already written to you about Parvati. You did all
right in giving one hundred and fifty rupees to Champa. We
cannot be very rigid in such matters. I have not received the cot-
ton yet. There is no hurry, of course, since I have already receiv-
ed four pounds from Lady Vithaldas.
May 9, 1932
I got the cotton. The papayas were excellent. The bread
also was very good. The cotton parcel cost a little too much. But
that is bound to happen sometimes. The machine for crushing
almonds was used the very next day after it arrived. It saved
much labour. I have written about cleanliness this time and
what I have said should be carefully borne in mind. Why did
Dhiru bring the spinning-wheel in such dirty condition? Try and
find out if Gangadevi gave any personal service to Totaram which
some other woman also can give, and appoint someone for the
purpose. Are his requirements of food being looked after? Jamna
should leave and go away to Bombay without delay. A list of
38 letters accompanies.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8225. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
