162. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG,
April 25, 1910
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
In answer to my cable of the 6th December last, you cabled inquir-
ing what funds were required, and in my replying cable I stated as
follows:
Present requirements thousand pounds. Expect imprisonment before end
month. Much more required later.
On the same day, I wrote to you how the funds are being dealt
with. In that letter, I told you that the debt incurred in conducting
Phoenix by me personally was paid out of the amount received from you.
This covers over £ 1,200. I gave you also the following approximate
summary of monthly expenses:
Office here
£50
Office London
£40
Indian Opinion
£50
Distressed families
£25
In your letter replying to mine, you were good enough to inform
me that the expenses were in order.
In view of the certainty of prolongation of the struggle yet for
some considerable time, it is necessary for me to give you a resume of
receipts and expenditure, and of the events to date. The monies ob-
tained to date since December last are as follows:
£
s. d.
From Bombay
4,253 3 4
From Rangoon
750 0 0
From London
135 8 2
From Mozambique
50 0 0
From Zanzibar
59 3 6
From Lourenco Marques
11 12 0
From Natal
8 16 0
Local
1 7 7
5,269 10 7
The Bombay fund is divided into two parts—£3,914-10- has been
sent to be used for carrying on the struggle generally, and £338-13-
has been earmarked for relief of distress among the passive resisters or
their dependants. These instructions have been closely followed. The
remittances from Rangoon as also from London have, like the earmarked
fund from Bombay, been devoted to the relief of distress only.
Your letter, as also Mr. Petit's, has left the expenditure to my dis-
cretion, and I have considered it best to avail myself of that latitude. The
funds are banked to a separate account, called the Passive Resistance
Fund Account, in the Natal Bank, Johannesburg. So far as the Bank is
concerned, I alone operate upon them. No special and formal com-
mittee has been organized, nor are the funds treated as part of the
British Indian Association Account. The British Indian Association
covers a wider range than that of passive resistance. Disbursements are
made in consultation with or subject to the approval of Mr. Cachalia,
who is the President of the British Indian Association, and other passive
resisters.
The Phoenix debt represented a personal debt incurred by me from
European friends and clients by reason of the necessity of having to
continue Indian Opinion under somewhat adverse circumstances and at
a loss in the interests of the struggle. I have devoted to the continuance
of Indian Opinion and the establishment of Phoenix all my earnings dur-
ing my last stay in South Africa, that is, nearly £5,000. I derive no
pecuniary benefit from Phoenix, the support of my family and myself
being found by a European friend. Those Europeans and Indians who
are my co-workers at Phoenix receive as a rule only what they need,
and are practically under a vow of poverty. Certain alterations have
been made in the management of Phoenix, which I am glad to be able
to say have so far enabled the continuance of the paper without the
monthly assistance referred to in my letter. The Committee in London
is being financed on a most economic basis. I have to make the same
remark in connection with the offices here. The expenditure [up] to
the 20th instant is as follows:
Local Expenses
374 11
8
London Office
175 15
0
Relief of Distress
449 11 11
Relief apart from Distress Fund
50
0
0
Indian Opinion Debt
1,200
0
0
Total £2,249 18
7
This leaves a balance of £3,019/12/-. The monthly expenses for reliev-
ing distress have, however, as you see, gone forward, and, whereas, in
the month of December only £25 was paid, on the present basis it
comes to nearly £160 per month, over fifty families receiving support.
Local expenses, besides the carrying on of the office here, include travel-
ling expenses of passive resisters from Durban, etc., as also cables and
such other disbursements. The above expenditure covers a period of
four months and a half. Excluding relief expenditure and the item for
the Indian Opinion debt, the average monthly expense is nearly £133. The
expenses for supporting distressed families are bound to increase as time
passes. I, therefore, put them down at £200 per month. The average
monthly expense then may be put down at £333. The balance of
£3,019/12/- may thus be exhausted about the month of January next.
Nearly £50 is being paid towards rent due by the families in dis-
tress. We have, therefore, been considering the advisability of remov-
ing them to a farm, where women as well as men could do something
to earn a living, and where we should probably be able to save half of
what is now being paid for relief. There was the difficulty about a capi-
tal outlay on a farm. Mr. Cachalia, others who were out of gaol and
I were even prepared to risk that outlay in the hope of being able to
sell the farm, if necessary, at the close of the struggle, but a large out-
lay will probably not be required, as a European friend has offered to
buy a farm and place it at the disposal of the passive resisters during
the continuance of the struggle, free of charge. This very generous
offer has been almost accepted and by the time this letter is in your
hands, he may have secured a suitable farm, in which [case] all the
distressed families and I should be living together on the farm.
The expenses detailed above take no note of relief that is being
granted privately by individuals.
The estimate I gave you of active passive resisters I now see was an
under-estimate, and many whom I did not consider would come for-
ward are now either serving imprisonment or have been deported.
The Authorities have been of late very active in effecting arrests, parti-
cularly of the brave Tamils, than whom no [other] Indians have done
better in connection with the struggle. These brave men have time
after time courted imprisonment. There are over thirty at present at
the Diepkloof Gaol, which is a penal settlement, in which the regula-
tions are more severe than in the other prisons of the Transvaal. Nearly
sixty have been deported by the Umhloti and over thirty may be depor-
ted any day, orders for deportation having been already made. I can-
not write about these deportations with sufficient restraint. All these
men are domiciled in the Transvaal; some of them are domiciled also
in Natal; some, again, have a right to enter Natal, being able to pass
the education test imposed under the immigration law of that Colony.
Some are mere lads born in the Transvaal or other parts of South Africa,
and many have left behind them families that have been reared in this
country. I come into constant touch with the brave wives, sisters or
mothers of the deported men. I once asked them whether they would
like to go with the deported to India, and they indignantly remarked:
"How can we? We were brought to this country as children, and we
do not know anybody in India. We would rather perish here than go to
India, which is a foreign land to us." However regrettable this attitude
of mind may be from a national standpoint, the fact remains that
these men and women are rooted to the South African soil. Many of
these men before the struggle commenced earned a decent living. Some
of them had stores, some were trolley-contractors, and others were haw-
kers, cigar-makers, waiters, etc., the employees earning a minimum
wage of £6 and a maximum of £15, whereas the trolley-contractors
and others who followed an independent calling earned as much as
1 Vide "Letter to H. Kallenbach", p. 262.
from £20 to £30 per month. All these are now reduced to poverty,
and their families receive from the Passive Resistance Fund the barest
sustenance money.
I may mention for your information that it was stated at one time
by the Government that those who were voluntarily registered in the
Transvaal, as many of these deported men are, were not deported at
all, and that those who were domiciled in parts of South Africa other
than the Transvaal were deported to such parts and not to India.
Both these declarations have been falsified, the excuse given being that
these men refuse to supply identification particulars and to prove domi-
cile. The first excuse is invalid, because the refusal to supply identi-
fication particulars is itself a criminal offence, and these men, seeing that
they were voluntarily registered, could have been proceeded against
under the special section that deals with refusal to supply identification
particulars. There was no occasion to treat them as unregistered Indians
and thus deport them. The second excuse is equally invalid, in that
those who were entitled to enter Natal stated that they were domi-
ciled there and those who had a knowledge of a European language did
not need to bring forward any proof. In my opinion, the fact is that,
having failed to break the proud spirit of the brave Tamils, the Asiatic
Department has now embarked upon a plan of extermination, and of
taxing our pecuniary resources to the uttermost. Be that as it may, I
think that I am quite correct in assuring you and, through you, the pub-
lic in India, that neither these men, nor their wives, mothers nor sisters,
as the case may be, are likely to succumb in any appreciable measure.
I hope that the Motherland will not rest so long as the insult offer-
ed to her in the Transvaal legislation that we are fighting has not been
removed, and that we shall continue to receive the support that has been
hitherto extended to us.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten original signed by Gandhiji: G. N. 3799; also
Indian Opinion, 7-5-1910
