519. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
September 17, 1938
CHI. SUSHILA,
Where did you learn all this cunning?
There are
criticisms on three heads and still you say it was only for my
information. What a way of putting things! But you have the
right to write whatever you like. Chimanlal had asked me
whether or not to give you the figure. The expenses here are
certainly on a royal scale. I could not preserve my health without
that. The experiments in ghee, etc., also mean some expense. So
the expenses here are not a standard for anybody to follow. If
anyone were to tell me that friends give me money and I squan-
der it I would listen and laugh. No doubt there is scope for
improvement but it can be effected only if I get a wise manager
like you. But you are not going to stay here for ever. The figure
was not given you so that you might pay the amount. You may
pay only according to your capacity. I have already told you
that I will not mind even if you do not pay. It would be better,
however, to pay as long as you can afford.
It would be more accurate if you described me as lazy.
Would you consider Chimanlal, Munnalal, Nanavati, Balwantsinha,
354
Parnerkar, Kanu, Sharda and Shakaribehn lazy? The others are
only staying there. Bhansalibhai certainly cannot be considered
lazy. Krishnachandra is ill but otherwise he is a saintly person.
Shankaran has to be trained up. I make do with whatever work
Anand does. Even so, because of my incapacity I put up with
some laxity. I have only mentioned the names that occurred to me.
You may explain to me in greater detail giving particular names.
You did not reply to me. There is no question of your
forcing anything on me. In spite of my being not free from pas-
sion, do you and Manudi desire that I should let myself be minis-
tered to by and should touch women? This question is an important
one. Manudi will not understand it but you can. All of you can
say: 'So long as Bapu is not free from passion, let him be served
only by Sushila and Ba.' Or you can say: 'When he puts the
burden on us, we do wish that he would let us touch him. What
effect can his passion have on us?' Either stand can be justified.
The first is safer from all points of view. In fine, the experiment
which I had commenced with a particular aim can be said to
have ended, and I invite the views of you all regarding any new
step I may take. I do not want to act in haste. I will do only
what I can with objective detachment.
I believe you to be
wise. You are thoughtful. In such matters you can guide me as
a woman. Please, therefore, give me your independent opinion.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: G.N. 4883. Also C.W. 7042. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah
