234. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,
November 11, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have just returned from a heavy tour programme and hav-
ing read your letter telegraphed as follows:
It is impossible to give more than one day and more than three
hours. It is difficult enough even to give three hours. The pro-
gramme is so packed that hardly any time is given for rest.
Four hours for rest, bath and dinner, have hitherto dwindled
down to two. A programme in which tens of thousands of
people are concerned cannot easily be postponed or disturbed.
The enclosed copy will give you an idea of the work, and where
you find hours of rest, except for Friday afternoon, they have
been encroached upon, changing the time from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
to 12 o'clock to 2 p.m.
I entirely agree with you that the proposed conversation
will not clarify matters to any satisfactory extent. If the A.I.C.C.
meeting is held, I do not know how I shall be able to attend
the sittings. Will it not be better for me to abstain from at-
tending? If it is desirable, I will send my views in writing.
The opinion I have expressed in my public letter to you is be-
coming more and more confirmed.
You must have seen Lahiri's statement about the Hijli Prison.
It more than confirms Satisbabu's letter.
I have heard from
the Governor. His Secretary says that "His Excellency will look
into the matter to which you refer".
I have read the appeal for the Hospital. I hope it will
have the response it deserves.
I carefully read your letter about the Government demand.
In anything you do about Swaraj Bhawan, do you not think that
you should consult the trustees and not merely inform them?
I have not been able even to show your letter to Jamnalalji for
sheer want of time. He twits me by saying that as I am in
Wardha you are ignoring him entirely, not even acknowledging
his letters. I told him that your letters to me are as much for
him as for me and that just now the few of us who are out have
little time for performing acts of mere courtesy.
You cannot expect rapid progress for an old patient like
Mother. The wonder to me is that she has survived the attack
she had. I hope the progress though slow continues.
Love.
BAPU
Encl. 1
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
