183. LETTER TO CHAIRMAN, A.I.C.C.
BARDOLI,
February 22, 1922
TO
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE
OF THE ALL-INDIA CONGRESS COMMITTEE, DELHI
SIR,
At the meeting of the Working Committee held at Surat
on 31 st January last, the following resolution was passed:
The Working Committee records its firm conviction that dissemi-
nation of correct news about Indian political situation in foreign countries
is absolutely essential and refers to Mahatma Gandhi all the correspondence
on the subject of foreign propaganda now with the Working Secretary,
with a request that he should prepare a definite scheme in that behalf at
an early date so as to enable the next meeting of the Working Committee
to consider it.
Having considered the resolution and the papers forwarded
to me by the Secretary, I beg to report as follows:
In my opinion it is not only undesirable but it may prove
even harmful to establish at the present stage any agency in any
foreign country for the dissemination of correct news in such
country about the political situation in India, for the following
reasons:
First, because it would distract public attention and instead
of making the people feel that they have to rely purely on their
own strength, it will make them think of the effect of their actions
on foreign countries and the support latter can render to the
national cause. This does not mean that we do not care for the
world's support, but the way to gain that support is to insist
upon the correctness of everyone of our actions and rely upon the
automatic capacity of Truth to spread itself.
Secondly, it is my experience that when an agency is established
for any special purpose, independent interest ceases to a certain
extent and what is distributed by the agency is previously dis-
counted as coming from interested quarters.
Thirdly, the Congress will not be able to exercise effective
check over such agencies, and there is great danger of authori-
tative distribution of wrong information and wrong ideas about
the struggle.
Fourthly, it is not possible at the present moment to send out
of India any person of importance for the sole purpose of dissemi-
nating news in foreign countries, for such men are too few for the
internal work.
I am therefore of opinion that the work of publishing the
Congress Bulletin should be better organized, if necessary, by en-
gaging a special editor for the purpose and by sending the Con-
gress Bulletin regularly to the chief news agencies of the world. The
editor should be instructed to enter into correspondence with these
newspapers or news agencies which may be found to interest
themselves in Indian questions.
It is my firm opinion based upon experience gained through the
conduct of the journals I have edited in South Africa and here that
the more solid the Congress work and the sufferings of the Con-
gress men and women, the greater the publicity will the cause attain
without special effort. From the exchanges of letters and corres-
pondence that I receive day by day from all parts of the world
in connection with the conduct of Young India, I observe that
never was so much interest taken in Indian affairs throughout the
world as it is today. It follows that the interest will increase in the
same proportion as the volume of our sufferings. The very best
method of disseminating correct information about the political
situation, therefore, is to make the Congress work purer, better
organized and to evoke a greater spirit of suffering. Not only is
curiosity thereby intensified, but people become more eager to
understand the inwardness and the exact truth about the situation.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 9-3-1922
