294. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
July 30, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your letter of the 22nd instant. I have gone through
all the books on economics available with me. But that does not
mean that I have quite understood them. Still my understanding
has been enriched to some extent. I had expected to receive some
more books from you before I had finished reading the last of
these. But you did not receive that letter of mine. Now this one
is yet another letter gone astray. I want the reports of the Fowler
Committee, Chamberlain Committee, Babington Smith and Hil-
ton Young Committee along with the dissenting reports, Dada-
chanji's book on currency or exchange and the one recently written
by Findlay Shirras.
I am a bit afraid that almonds will not suit you. I can digest
almonds, ground-nuts and such oily nuts as I have subsisted on
them for years. For you milk and curds are the main food, very
little of starch and of the dal proteins none. I have found by
experience that wheat, milk, curds, salads and non-starchy fruits
like grape, pomegranate, orange, apple, pineapple and papaya,
these form the necessary and suitable diet for people like you.
Almonds can supplant milk only when a vegetable is found
equivalent to milk. Chemical tests prove that almonds and milk
have common properties excepting a certain specific property
which is found in milk but not in almonds and which is present in
animal proteins only. I have full faith that among millions of
vegetables there must be one possessing that specific property but
our vaidyas have done no research in this matter owing to sheer
lethargy. Hence almonds are not as useful to us as milk.
The condition of my arm is the same as before but it does
not interfere with my work. Therefore there is absolutely no cause
for anxiety.
All three of us are well. You will be glad to know that
Sardar has started learning Sanskrit and he is making very
rapid progress.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 7902. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
