227. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
October 23 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Mrs. Gandhi has become a little better but before
she could regain her sanity I had to undertake partial starvation. I lived
without nuts for a few days.
Just now we have about 40 guests. Of these 37 are from an
institution about 150 miles from here. So we have been obliged for
the last 4 days to cook for about 80 people. Fortunately there are some
fine workers and the guests themselves do their share of the work.
They assist in the kitchen, in water-carrying and grinding.
Carpentry is going strong. We are making sectional book-cases.
I think I mentioned this to you. Your books will be housed in one of
them. When you see these you will like them. There will be five sections
to each. The cost will come to about £ 6 each. Cheap enough you
will say. But according to the measure here £ 6 for a book-case is
rather a heavy charge.
I wish I could give you a sketch of the handlooms but I cannot.
It is an intricate affair. You cannot have any notion from my description
because I cannot give you a technical description. Suffice it to say
that it has as much string-work as wood-work. The cost of the simplest
loom is under £ 7.
Maganlal is to leave for Madras in a day or two in order to finish
his Tamil study and his handloom experience. There is a big and rather
good handloom business in Madras.
Did I tell you that we all remain in the house bare-bodied ? All
we wear is dhotar - the cloth round the waist. It is the sanest thing
we could have done. I receive visitors, both English and Indian, in that
condition. So you will see that the cost of clothing will be very little.
We shall confine ourselves to our own production.
And now good-bye. The bell has gone to serve the boys. Do come
soon and take your share in the serving.
Yours always,
OLD FRIEND
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 From the reference to Maganlal's Tamil studies; vide also Vol. XIII, p. 138.
227
