217. LETTER TO T. T. KOTHAWALA
Strictly Confidential
BARDOLI,
July 24, 1931
DEAR MR. KOTHAWALA,
Though after our talk at Surat on 13th inst. I had expected
some action, I was unprepared for the terrible events of the past
ten days. You or your subordinates have used not only coercive
but repressive measures against the poor villagers and practically
forced payments from them. In my opinion this is a breach of
faith, if not of the Settlement. The Government knew that
Congressmen were telling the people to pay all they could whether
on account of current dues or arrears. We found also that it was
all the people could do to pay the current dues without having
to borrow. We made an enquiry into the losses they had sustain-
ed. I sent you too a note showing the losses suffered by the
people.
Our workers threw themselves heart and soul into the work
of collection. As you know I was in Bardoli myself for some
time doing the work and then it was that Sardar Vallabhbhai
took the sole charge here and I went to Borsad. Your subordi-
nates knew what we were telling the people. For some time
payment from Siadla was not accepted until arrears were also paid.
We could not collect the arrears and ultimately payment was
accepted against receipt for current dues without any reservation.
During all this time it was assumed that there would be no
coercive processes and certainly no show of force or police raids
to threaten poor people. The payment made under these cir-
cumstances I regard as payments made under duress and forced
in violation of the implied understanding that no processes would
be issued except in cases where the Congress workers had no
influence and where the people had not taken part in the civil
disobedience campaign. I do not bring herein the conversations
I had with the Commissioner and with you and the impression left
on my mind, but I do suggest that it was within your knowledge
that we were telling the people that no coercion would be used
against them if they paid at least the current dues or unless they
could not conclusively show that they were unable to pay even
these.
198
But in precipitating the crisis and using the extraordinary
measures of the past ten days, without the Congressmen having
been even given the opportunity of re-examining the cases of the
villagers concerned there is a distinct breach of faith.
In the circumstances I must ask you to refund the monies
thus collected and withdraw all attachment notices and stop fur-
ther coercion and repression.
I must mention herein the case of the present Patel of Varad
whose removal has been demanded for a long time and in whose
case no open enquiry has still been held.
There is also the matter of confiscated lands in five villages
in Bulsar taluqa, in respect of which fines are being demanded
for non-agricultural use before they are restored. This is in
breach of the Settlement.
There are other matters which I don't propose to mention just
now. Unless satisfaction is given in the matters herein mentioned or
an impartial open tribunal is appointed by the Government to
examine the complaints herein made and all processes stopped mean-
while, I must regard the Settlement and the implied faith having
been broken by the Government and regard myself as free to take
such action as may be necessary to protect the interests of the
people whom the Congress represents. I would ask you please to
let me have a reply by Sunday next noon.
Copies of this letter are being sent to Mr. Garrett, the Govern-
ment of Bombay and purport telegraphed to H. E. the Viceroy.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
T. T. KOTHAWALA, ESQ.
COLLECTOR OF SURAT DT.
SURAT
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta.
Also Young India, 20-8-1931
