416. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
ON THE TRAIN,
July 6, 1939
MY DEAR DECEIVER,
I have simply not been able to write to you as regularly
as I had liked. Even the 'library' claimed other work. You
tell me you asked me a question about non-violence. I have
forgotten all about it. Please repeat. I have assumed that Mahadev
deals with the questions he can, for your letters are given to
him as soon as I have done with them. If you permit me to
retain them with the note at the top 'Not to be read' and trust
that then they will not be, I would be better able to cope with
your questions.
I hope all the patients are better if not well and that your
flu was a passing affair.
I am writing to Datar Singh. I should have written earlier.
But as you were protecting me, I did not hurry.
You should have sent me copy of your letter to Jawaharlal.
I do not like your repeating you are dead. You are not dead.
You have to give me much work. Any time I might have to send
you to Travancore or some such place. As it is you are doing
khadi and Harijan work there. Your contribution to the Educa-
tion Board is quite effective. And if you have better perception
of things and do not feel any conscious injustice on my part,
surely there is no occasion for this deadness!
We are only four travelling—Mahadev, Bablo2, Kanu and 1.
Pyarelal had a little throat operation which will detain him for
three or four days. Ba won't come without Sushila and the latter
could not come leaving Pyarelal to his fate. They three will follow
later if I find that my stay in Frontier Province will be prolonged.
Nothing is certain about my movement. Ordinarily I should
return to Segaon when you will join me. Nothing is certain about
Talcher. The latest from the Viceroy means cutting off all con-
tact with me. Mahadev should send you a copy of his letter
and of my reply5, if I draft it today.
The question of my retirement has been exploded for the time
being at any rate.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3923. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7232
