262. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
148 RussA ROAD,
CALCUTTA,
July 24, 1925
MY DEAR VENKATAPPAYYA,
I like your letter for its fullness and frankness and for your
determination to keep as healthy as it is possible for you to do.
My own position is clear. The Congress has appointed the
Swarajist Party its agents for conducting the political campaign;
therefore, every individual Congressman can say that the Swa-
rajist Party is its agent for the political work. When he finds that
he cannot endorse the sum total of the Swarajist activity, he can
secede from the Congress or he can resist in the Congress. My own
individual position is neither the one nor the other. If I must
have any political representative on behalf of the Congress in the
Councils, I can only appoint the Swarajist Party because of its
fighting capacity and this I can say in spite of my being against
Council-entry on principle. As an Indian I have to make a choice
between thieves and the police, and though both are alike un-
acceptable to me as a believer in ahimsa, I cannot divest myself
of responsibility as a social bein[g] and, therefore, must conti-
nually make my choice. It is because of this difficulty that our
sages have made room for the cave-dwellers who do not want to
share the responsibility for the actions of their fellow-men. They
not only shun the haunts of men, but refuse to eat the corn grown
by human labour. They only eat the fruits and root[s] which
grow without human agency.
I do not consider my-
se[lf] fit for that state. I remain in human society and, therefore,
consistently with my individual views make myself responsible,
where it is inevitable, for many acts which I cannot otherwise
approve. Similarly, I have not yet bee[n] brought to the pitch of
saying I do not want to [be] in the Congress. The agency of the
Swarajist Party is strictly limited in its scope. I recognize its
agency so far as the general political work is concerned. I do not
make myself responsible for the character or the conduct of indi-
vidual Swarajists. I wonder if I have made myself intelligible.
You know the further step I have taken in view of Lord Birken-
head's speech and, of course, Deshbandhu's death.
I must no
longer prevent the Congress from becoming a predominantly poli-
tical body by the force of my person; hence the letter to Punditji.
But my decision need not affect that of a single Congressman un-
less it commends itself to his reason. I have simply stated my own
personal opinion and, as I do not consider it to be binding on
anybody in any shape or form and as I though[t] that an an-
nouncement of that character at the present moment would
strengthen the Swarajist Party, I wrote the letter without any
hesitation. For yourself, you know the local circumstances, and
if you find that your indirect endorsement of the Swarajist Party
will be to me your endorsement of the views and character of
individual Swarajists, you will not hesitate to sever your connec-
tion with the Congress, while still retaining the resolute deter-
mination not to say anything against the Swarajist Party. More
from the pages of Young India.
I expect you to be in Bombay on the 1st October; meanwhile,
by all means write whatever you feel. My right hand requires rest;
hence, for the last three days I am falling back upon shorthand
assistance.
From a photostat: S. N. 19340
