40. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[BOMBAY,]
Phagan Vad 3, Thursday [March 4, 1915]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I am writing this letter from Bombay. Very likely I shall
have to stop here, too, for a day. I got three letters from you at
Poona, at the same time. We want to run our institution for the
whole of India and so we will beg from the entire country. From
Ahmedabad, however, we want the land and the required buildings.
That will be the foundation.
We will do without machinery as far as possible. We need not
concern ourselves whether this will lead to the stopping of the mills.
It will be no bad thing even if the millowners stop erecting addition-
al mills. And if indeed they do not, we will still keep to the path
which we think will make for our happiness.
You have not understood the [true] significance of brahmacharya.
Will you be unhappy if Keshu were to attain moksha today? If
yes, how profound is your condition of moha ! To believe that pro-
creation by good persons is conducive to the happiness of the world
seems to argue great conceit and ignorance. Good men have no
desire for worldly pursuits. They desire withdrawal from them,
that is, moksha. Those who keep them company [on the path] are
their children. Not to admit even this bespeaks a state of utter
ignorance. All this does not mean that Keshu will never marry.
His inclination will be determined by the influences under which he
grows up. Your duty is to place the highest ideal before him. It will
not matter if he falls short of it. The children of one who so falls
will be able to do good to the world. But please ponder deeply over
the difference between this position and the other, namely, that the
man who violates brahmacharya for the purpose of procreation is likely
to have good progeny. Ponder deeply over this fine distinction between
the two conditions. In one of them, we deliberately commit sin. In
the other, though knowing better, we fall through weakness. In
this latter, there is scope for rising yet. In the former, one has set
one's face against rising. Rising is looked upon rather as falling.
If, in spite of our giving the right education to Keshu, he does marry,
there will be no harm. If he does not, he will acquire a light that
will shine over all the world, such is the strength he will gain.
Parents should desire the best for their children. The latter will
then acquire what they are capable of. There is no error in my
thinking. Be sure of that. I want you to understand my thoughts
very carefully. Do not take weakness to be strength. Do not re-
gard moha as knowledge. Think over this very carefully. Preserve
this letter and send it to Maganbhai at Shantiniketan.
I have wired to Raojibhai to come here. If you think it proper
to show this letter to anyone there, you may.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
If it should become necessary for me to go there, I think it will
be better that I go after I have finished my work at Bolpur, etc.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 110. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
