409. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
February 15, 1933
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,
There are two matters that I have discussed with you, with
which you have told me you have no authority to deal.
The first matter relates to the supply of newspapers to me in
terms of the orders of the Government of India, giving me special
facilities about untouchability propaganda. Somehow or other
hitherto I have managed to cope with my work in spite of restric-
tions that you have been exercising about newspapers addressed
to me. I have already drawn your attention to very important
matters escaping my notice owing to the non-delivery of these
papers. However careful your staff may be, they cannot always
be sure of having all the cuttings relating to untouchability in the
papers received. Some papers such as Dr. Ambedkar's I have to
look through fully and carefully. So far as I read the Government
of India orders they contemplate no restrictions on the prompt
receipt by me of correspondence and newspapers. It is obvious
that I cannot carry on propaganda if I do not get such things in
proper time. I therefore ask that all the newspapers received for
me and which do not come under the heading of "prohibited
literature" should be delivered to me as they arrive. Of course
they may be taken away from me as soon as I have used them.
I need hardly repeat the assurance that I have no use for them
save for the one purpose to which all my energy and attention are
being exclusively directed. I shall therefore thank you to obtain
necessary and early instructions in the matter.
The second matter is about the new weekly Harijan which is
being published in Poona in the interest of the Servants of
Untouchables Society. Its policy is naturally being controlled by
me as it has been published at my instance. It has therefore to
deal exclusively with questions relating to untouchability only
and therefore it is a purely socio-religious weekly. I ask you
whether copies could be sent to my associates and fellow-prisoners
whether belonging to 'B' class or 'C' class. I would thank you
if you will kindly ask for Government's instructions on my request.
I may draw the attention of the Government to the fact that in
1922 when I was admitted into this Prison as a convicted prisoner
and when in all other matters except food and sanitary conveni-
ences I had no facilities given to me except what were permitted
to other prisoners, there never was any difficulty about my
getting newspapers of a purely socio-religious character. I hope,
therefore, there will be none this time about the giving of Harijan
to my friends, the fellow-prisoners.
Lastly, will you please convey my thanks to the Government
for their very prompt attention to my letters about Shrimati
Mirabehn (Slade) and Appasaheb Patwardhan.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800 (40) (4), Pt. I I , p. 123
