284. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 17, 1920
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letter as also Millie's. As for your letter, we must
for the time being agree to differ. You cannot understand the religious
viewpoint which guides me in the matter. I am satisfied that the Muslim
cause is strictly just. I am not supporting and will not support an unjust
demand on their part. But assume that their demand is just and you
give me an unanswerable clause compelling me to throw in my lot with
the Mussalmans. On the South African, Fiji and the East African
question, we have a common platform and I know that you are putting
forth your best energy in these matters. I do not know your views
on the Punjab. There again we may differ. I hope you got the Congress
Sub committee's report. I wonder whether you agree with its findings.
For me the Hunter Committee's Majority Report is a piece of shameless
jobbery.
Millie's letter is a human document, which I was pleased to receive
after so many months. The cheerful character of the news she has
given me about the family has pleased me much and I was delighted
to find that my bed-companion Waldo was much healthier than he used
1 Vide also Vol. XVII, pp. 480- and 544-76.
to be. I was glad too to have news about Agnes. Please tell her when
you see her that I would prize a few lines from her now and then
provided that she does not bind me to a reply. I was sorry to have
the bad news about Sally. I do not suppose any of us ever thought
much of the match. But I have considered Sally to be a brave girl
and I hope that she is bearing bravely the failure of her experiment.
My family is ever increasing. If you now visited the Ashram you would
be surprised at its bigness and I think the solidity of the work would
please you. There we are concentrating on education, weaving industry
and heart-culture. The family has outgrown the buildings you saw. We
are living in a cramped condition. Devdas is growing wonderfully. He
continues to answer the true description that once Ceilia gave when
I saw them all in Poona. She said - "When Devdas enters a room,
he seems to fill it." I am dictating this letter to Sarala Devi in Bombay.
Much of my work is done whilst I am lying down in bed. Devdas
is with me and so is Mahadev Desai. He has just gone to Surat to
pay a visit of condolence and so you find Sarala Devi helping me.
You will be glad to learn that I have at last got good news of
Kallenbach. He is in Berlin. He sent me messages through Miss Anna
Kirby. Unfortunately, I have not his address or I would have sent it
to you. Miss Kirby wrote to me from Y.W.C.A., Johannesburg. She
might have come back to London. If people are allowed to go to Berlin
and if you succeed in tracing his address, please send Jamnadas there
to see him.
With love,
Yours,
BHAT
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
