530. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
SARANIA ASHRAM,
January 11, 1946
CHI. DINSHAW,
Chi. Munnalal's wife Kanchanbehn has been very ill, so I
sent a wire saying that he should be relieved if he wanted to
come away. I assumed that someone would have to replace him
there and so telegraphed to Sevagram also asking them to send
M[anibhai], whom I regard as very competent. He has promptly
left for Poona. I am glad I have been told that Manibhai is a
very good worker. I believe it. I have hardly any personal ex-
perience of him. You will have some.
I hope you received the Rs. 10,000 I sent you, so the new
account will not suffer from paucity of funds.
The patients who were already there should adapt themselves
to the new pattern. They should mix with the poor. Everyone
should be punctual to the minute. Over and above this, you
394
should accommodate them only if they pay or else let them leave.
This alone will be true comradeship. We cannot any more allot
separate rooms to the patients according to their wishes. In fact
for the present we cannot accommodate patients who need sepa-
rate rooms. I have already written to you to allow as much
privacy as the patients may need. I hope you remember it. If
you haven't had such instructions from me so far, please make a
note now.
Munnalal suggests that the English method of book-keeping
is more expensive. I believe it is true. How would it matter
if we maintained accounts in the Indian style? The Indian
method can also ensure accurate account-keeping. Indian firms
maintain accounts in the Indian way and carry on business in
millions involving dealings with English banks. And since our
little affair is going to be and should be worthy of an Indian
we ought to infuse into it the swadeshi atmosphere as far as
possible right from the beginning. Please show this letter to
Jehangirji. It was at his instance that we had agreed to main-
tain accounts in the English way. But I believe, if opting for
the English method is likely to cause an expenditure of Rs. 40
to 50 per month, Jehangirji would be in favour of saving the
amount. The money that I shall contribute must be regarded as
belonging to the poor.
I may be getting it from the rich, but
once it comes into my hands it becomes the poor man's pie, to
be spent solely for the poor. All my dealings are carried on in
the same old way and it pains me that now because of my old
age I cannot fully follow that way, and I also put up with the
situation because I cannot get on otherwise. But I must not
burden others with my foibles.
I hope you got my earlier letters, and have replied to them.
For the present save all avoidable expenditure. I shall try
my best to reach there on the 20th or the 21st of February. It
is in God's hands whether I shall succeed.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
