366. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
May 22, 1927
DEAR MISS SCHLESIN,
As you know I am just now bed-ridden and I must there-
fore dictate my reply to your letter of the 20th April just received.
It is difficult to recall what I wrote in all my letters to you. So
far as my memory serves me, there is not a single letter of yours
which has gone by without an acknowledgement. There are many
compliments which I do not and cannot appropriate; but the one
about my being a prompt correspondent, I can ever claim in spite
of your different experience. For, everybody else of my acquain-
tance has paid me the compliment of being a prompt correspondent,
that is of course comparatively to many others.
I have no letter of yours dated 4th January. But I have
one dated 3rd January in my file. I do not think that I gave
you, if I did at all, a detailed reply to that letter. It was re-
ceived at the Ashram on the 3rd February. It was then redirected
to me during my tour. Soon after, I became incapacitated.
Mr. Stanley Jones's book I read but only cursorily as during
the tour I was able to do very little of reading. Indeed, it was
not even possible for me to look at the many books that came to
me. This I did as it was accompanied by a letter from Mr.
Stanley Jones whom I knew very well. I do not remember his
suggestion and I have not his book by me.
I quite agree with you that karma and the cross may well go
together. If you have followed the pages of Young India, you must
have noticed that last year I read the New Testament every Satur-
day to the students of our National College. I did stumble over
the words "without a cause"2, and in explaining it I simply reject-
ed the thing as redundant. But I was agreeably surprised on
turning to Moffat's and Weymouth's translations which I had by
me to make the discovery that you made. In reading all religious
works, I have learnt one thing. Never to take them literally, but
understand the drift and catch the drift also by means of what is
to me an infallible canon of interpretation, and reject those which
cannot stand the test of Truth and Ahimsa. I know that even
in spite of this canon of interpretation difficulties do arise; but they
are solved if one has patience and if one has a living faith in God.
I am sending your letter to Mr. Jones as I have no doubt he
will like to see your argument. I am not likely to meet him in
the near future as I shall be for some months still in the South.
Your letters should be addressed to the Ashram as usual.
The autobiography is not yet complete. Ganesan cannot
send you a copy of the autobiography. The three parts that
have been completed are in course of publication in book form.
But for the present, you have to rely upon the numbers of Young
India which contain the chapters to date. You may borrow the
volumes from Manilal or you should wait till the three parts are
published in book form. You may know that before I commenced
the autobiography I finished the history of the South African
Passive Resistance. The original is in Gujarati. Its translation is
now being published in instalments by Ganesan. I am afraid it
will be some time before the whole history is available in English.
Do see Mr. Sastri, India's first Agent for South Africa. He is
an extremely fine man. As you know he is Gokhale's successor.
He knows all about you and is himself eager to see you.
I am getting better. Of those you know Mrs. Gandhi and
Devdas are with me.
Yours sincerely,
MISS SCHLESIN
Box 2284
JOHANNESBURG
(SOUTH AFRICA)
From a photostat: S.N. 12353
