343. LETTER TO E. M. GORGES
CAPE TOWN,
June 30, 1914
DEAR MR. GORGES,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of even date
herewith setting forth the substance of the interview that General
Smuts was pleased, notwithstanding many other pressing calls upon
his time, to grant me on Saturday last. I feel deeply grateful for
the patience and courtesy which the Minister showed during the
discussion of the several points submitted by me.
The passing of the Indians' Relief Bill and this correspondence
finally closes the passive resistance struggle which commenced in
the September of 1906 and which to the Indian community cost
much physical suffering and pecuniary loss and to the Government
much anxious thought and consideration.
As the Minister is aware, some of my countrymen have wished
me to go further. They are dissatisfied that the trade licences
properly wielded, it required an infinitely stronger weapon than violence. If
the spirit which had guided the deliberations of both Houses in the passage of
that Bill, and of all their individual friends, was the spirit which would be
applied to several other problems, there need be no fear of a recrudescence of
passive resistance. After a struggle lasting eight years, the Indians needed a
period of peace, and it was for the Europeans not to be sparing of sympathies."
laws of the different provinces, the Transvaal Gold Law, the Trans-
vaal Townships Act1, the Transvaal Law 3 of 1885 have not been
altered, so as to give them full rights of residence, trade and own-
ership of land. Some of them are dissatisfied that full inter-pro-
vincial migration is not permitted, and some are dissatisfied that,
on the marriage question, the Relief Bill goes no further than it
does. They have asked me that all the above matters might be
included in the passive resistance struggle. I have been unable
to comply with their wishes. Whilst, therefore, they have not been
included in the programme of passive resistance, it will not be
denied that some day or other these matters will require further
and sympathetic consideration by the Government.
Complete
satisfaction cannot be expected until full civic rights have been
conceded to the resident Indian population. I have told my
countrymen that they will have to exercise patience and by all
honourable means at their disposal educate public opinion so as
to enable the Government of the day to go further than the pre-
sent correspondence does. I shall hope that, when the Europeans
of South Africa fully appreciate the fact that now, as the impor-
tation of indentured labour from India is prohibited and as the
Immigrants Regulation Act of last year has in practice all but
stopped further free Indian immigration and that my countrymen
do not aspire to any political ambition, they, the Europeans, will
see the justice and, indeed, the necessity of my countrymen being
granted the rights I have just referred to.
Meanwhile, if the generous spirit that the Government have
applied to the treatment of the problem during the past few months
continues to be applied, as promised in your letter, in the adminis-
tration of the existing laws, I am quite certain that the Indian
community throughout the Union will be able to enjoy some
measure of peace and never be a source of trouble to the Gov-
ernment.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5999
