494. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA, C.P.,
September 7, 1940
CHI. MIRA,
I have your long letter. It enables me to follow the strug-
gle that is going on within you. You have not yet acquired
the art of looking within for everything. Carding should soothe
just as much as spinning once you connect the process with
God. Farhad saw his God through breaking a mountain. He
is represented as one incessantly delivering heavy blows with
God-given strength.
He broke the mountain and found his
God who is represented as a fair bride. It will be an indulgence
if you spin with slivers supplied from Sabarmati or elsewhere.
But your arms may be too weak to card heavily.
The body
may be too weak to respond to the routine involved in all the
processes involved in attaining speed and quantity. But, for you
neither of these two things is essential. What is essential is the
spirit of dedication to God. Whatever your outward activity it
must be all for God. In order to avoid self-deception we have
devised spinning including all the anterior processes. If this
much is clear to you, you should have a small quantity of un-
ginned cotton.
This you will gin with the hand-roller.
You
know the process. You can devise these there. Instead of an
iron rod you can have a wooden roller. You will gin enough
for your purpose. To card this cotton would be child's play.
You will employ the Andhra method. The slivers thus made
will be flawless—no sound, no exertion, no untidiness, no dust.
You will draw the finest thread and every draw will bring you
nearer to God. It may be difficult for me to find unginned
cotton at this time of the year. But as soon as I know your
mind I shall find out what can be done. Till I hear from
you I shall be doing nothing.
I shall have to go to Bombay for the Congress meeting for
a few days from 12th.
The weather here is dry.
Presently we shall want some
showers, if the crops are to be saved.
God be with you.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6458. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 10053
