114. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Shravan Sud 13 [August 7,1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
Your letter. I certainly did not conclude from what you
wrote about Sorabji that you are against sending him to England.
Please do not press Harilal to live in Rangoon. It is in his
best interest that he should be allowed to live in freedom. It will be
a different matter, of course, if he goes to Rangoon or comes over
here of his own accord, having failed in his plans. Moreover, I see
little chance of his Gujarati improving in Rangoon. If he can
be by himself in Ahmedabad and study, his eager desire for edu-
cation will be satisfied in some measure. I will let him know your
1 Indian interpreter and clerk in the Magistrate's Court, Durban
2 Indian Educational Institute, Durban
3 Daughter of H. L. Paul. Gandhiji was her godfather and she undertook
to train in Phoenix and work in the service of the Indian community after
finishing her education; vide Vol. VIII, pp. 286 & 328.
4 Although the Indian date does not mention the year, two references
in the course of the letter serve to fix the Gregorian year. It was during 1911 that
a Gujarati translation of The Indian Nation-builders alluded to in paragraph 6 of
this letter was serialized in the Gujarati section of Indian Opinion. A copy of
the book was presumably sent to Gandhiji by Natesan. It was about this time,
too, that Gandhiji was much taken up with "The Enchanted Lake" from the
Mahabharata; vide "Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi", pp. 133-. In that year Shravan
Sud 13 corresponds to August 7.
views, however. Revashankerbhai's idea is that he should learn
shorthand, an idea which does not appeal to me in the least. It
is contrary to all my thinking.
I am not surprised at your views about Amsterdam. To me
at least, all those who are entrapped in the net of civilization
seem like cripples.
Nowadays I read story-poems from the Mahabharata to the boys
of my school for an hour every evening. I have no option but to
read from an English book, as half the boys are Tamils. The one
being read at present is Arnold's Indian Idylls. Last night I read
"The Enchanted Lake" from it. I liked its thoughts so much that
I feel like reading it over and over again. If you haven't seen
the book, please get it and read this [story]. What has a nation,
which has produced men capable of such grand ideas, to learn
from the cowardly present-day civilization?
I have not been able to take the Mauritius report in hand.
Though Natesan has omitted [certain portions], I propose to
start printing in Indian Opinion a translation of the article as published
now.
It is not quite true that I take upon myself too heavy a burden.
Your caution is right, nevertheless. It is moha to want to do too
much, and moha is a great fault. I know this and yet I cannot aban-
don what I have taken up; it must not be—that is the teaching
of our religion. We should, of course, make sure that it is not an
unworthy task we have undertaken. Please do not imagine that
I am harming my health because of the heavy burden. I eat like
a bull. I take exactly an hour and a half for my two meals. I see
that some of those around me do not spend as much time on three
meals. It is not true that I keep indifferent health. However, I
am always on the alert to see that nothing is done through moha.
There is nothing, of course, I wish to gain for myself. But one
must keep oneself busy. I go on doing what, on reflection, seems
best to me.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5093. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
