244. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 3, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letter and cuttings. The work you are doing is most
admirable and I am delighted that you are receiving splendid support
from all sides and that Mr. Jehangir Petit has been treating you so
nicely.
I noticed from the papers that you published the cablegram that I
sent you regarding the offer to repeal the Act. I was surprised. I felt
that you would understand that the negotiations would be quite private
and that you could not publish the information. Lord Ampthill has been
very strict in the matter. Happily, no ill result has followed. However,
in order to guard myself, in my last cablegram I have asked you not to
publish any of the cables that may be sent from here.
The cancellation of the Sheriff's meeting is a disgraceful affair. A
cablegram appeared in The Times in connection with it. I take it that
you keep yourself in touch with India. You will see the cable reproduced
in it. Sir Henry Cotton, as also Mr. Q'Grady, are asking questions
in the matter. I wish there had been from the Presidency Association
a private cable to the British Committee of the Congress. It is some-
what difficult for us to move effectively. It is primarily Bombay that
should resent action of the Bombay Government, and not we. How-
ever, whatever was possible has been done. I now expect from you a
cablegram any time, informing me of the date of a public meeting in-
dependently of the Sheriff.
Mr. Hajee Habib is anxious that you should ask Mr. Hajee Mahomed,
his brother, who is at present in Porbunder, to co-operate with you.
He says that if he were invited, he would gladly join you. Please corres-
pond with him. Mr. Omar knows him well. I may even cable in the
matter.
From copies of correspondence with Lord Ampthill you will see that,
now, there is little chance of an acceptable settlement. I send you a
cutting giving General Smuts' statement to Reuter, before he sailed from
Southampton. It, however, now appears that what he wants to do is
to repeal the Act and to give permanent certificates of residence to a
limited number of educated Indians; thus, he does not want to recognise
the "right" of entry. I am rather glad if he does this and makes a public
declaration. The issue again narrows down to the one and only point,
namely, the status of educated Indians and the self-respect of India. We
then approach England and India on a clear cut proposition, and ask
the Indians in the Transvaal also to continue the battle until that point
is decided. You will see from my letter to Lord Ampthill how I view
it. I almost feel, before we return to South Africa, we may visit India
and then pay another visit to London and retrace our steps. I know,
if General Smuts makes the public declaration in accordance with
Lord Ampthill's letter, the fight here will be most difficult. However,
that does not dismay me, though I question very much whether any
useful purpose will be served by public meetings if any could be held,
and canvassing of Members of Parliament, until further suffering has
been gone through. I would far rather be in gaol than carry on what
may prove to be almost a useless agitation. There may be in this desire
to avoid it a touch of laziness; I hope not. I do not wish to shirk
having to see people and address meetings, in so far as that may be
necessary, but whenever I have a quiet moment to myself, I do con-
tinually ask myself as to whether I should be doing right in remain-
ing here for the purpose of canvassing.
Wherever your meeting is held, I hope you will have succeeded in
getting Mr. Armstrong and other Anglo-Indians to attend it. I hope
you have been sending the Gujarati and English cuttings to Johannes-
burg also. In order not to disappoint people there, I have been, by
way of double precaution, sending to them the cuttings received by you.
You do not mind my not replying to your cables immediately, when
you do not get one from me as early as you may expect it. Please under-
stand that there is good reason for my not having replied. For instance,
you have asked me whether there is any hope. I am delaying the reply,
as I am waiting for a call from Lord Crewe. I should then be able,
somewhat definitely, to tell you whether there is or not. Just now,
I should say there is none.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5049
