498. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
January 5, 1933
SUJNA BHAISHRI,
I got your letter. I am satisfied. I also have full confidence
that you will do your best. By contribution I did not mean
money. Even an unknown child who approaches you for money
will get it. Don't think I am so simple-minded as to ask you for
money. For that, I would simply sign a hundi on you. I want
from you a much bigger contribution than that. You can make
it and I believe that you will.
I would not use coercion even to save a cow from the hands
of a butcher. I certainly don't wish to use it to secure freedom
for Harijans to enter temples, nor to make the Harijans give up
beef, meat, etc.
But the latter tell me: 'You force us to remove dead cattle
and charge us for their flesh. We, therefore, eat it and through
long habit we have come to relish it. So in the first place you
should not charge us for the flesh, and secondly, should make some
other arrangement for the removal of the dead cattle so that we
may have no opportunity to remove their flesh.'
There is some cunning in this. They know that we cannot
make any other arrangement for the removal of dead cattle
1
The name has been omitted.
in the immediate future, and some of them wish to exploit the
situation. They have a right to do so. This is what anyone
would do.
I suggest this step to the States. The carcass of a dead cattle
belongs, or should be considered as belonging, to the owner of
the cattle. Since he does not arrange for the proper disposal of
the carcass, it means that he renounces his right over it. It,
therefore, becomes the property of the State, and the State should
arrange for its disposal through Harijans by paying them suitably.
The State should also use every part of the body for public good.
If it does not do that, for the present it may utilize only the hide.
It may fix a reasonable price for the hide, and the Chamar or
the Harijan concerned should pay it, deducting from it the
charge for his labour. Or, if separate cash payment is fixed for
labour, he may have that and hand over the hide to the State.
The State should instruct its officer to see that at the time of the
skinning of the carcass, the flesh and the bones which cannot be
sold or utilized in any way are buried deep at a spot fixed for
the purpose. This will of course show the ignorance of the State.
A prudent State can make profitable use of the flesh and the
bones. If you wish to know how this can be done, I will ex-
plain that in another letter. Just now, I have only suggested the
easiest and simplest way, one which can be immediately adopted,
of making the Chamars give up the practice of eating beef and
carrion. At present, besides the hide and the flesh, the other
parts of the carcass are not utilized at all. They can be easily
utilized. But since that is not relevant to my purpose in writing
this letter, I have saved your time and mine by not entering into
a discussion of it.
I hope you will be able to read my handwriting and will
get my point. I am quite well.
Why do you feel that you have grown old? Why do you
believe that the body has become old, even though you continue
to work? You enforce laws on others, but yourself do not obey
the laws of good health. Who should punish you for that?
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5924. Also C.W. 3239. Courtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani
