95. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
SANTINIKETAN,
Jeth Sud 7 [May 30, 1925]
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I have your letter. I had put off writing to you as I thought
you would be coming for the Committee meeting and we would
then talk about everything personally. I was not at all worried
that you did not come. I had inferred from Girdhari's letter
that you would definitely come.
I am constantly on the look-out for someone or other for
the College but none has appealed to me. If Jugalkishore
comes, it would in a way solve the problem. He is without doubt
a man of character. From his letters to Gidwani, I am not fully
satisfied. If Gidwani thinks of coming and can come, it would
be all right. For the present there is none else I can think of.
I always think that it would be better if we found someone
from the South.
Is it necessary to have the inaugural function of the
College performed in June itself? I will be in Assam in the
later part of June. Then immediately I must go to Bihar; but
if it is necessary to go to Wardha directly from Assam, I shall
first go there and then proceed thence to Bihar. I shall spend
one month in Bihar. Ever since people have come to know
about my visit to Wardha they have been asking me to visit
other places also. There are letters from Nagpur, Amravati and
Akola.
I think it advisable to visit those places from which
there are invitations. I consider it my duty to tour all the
places where I am wanted during this year. If I do so, please
draw up the programme for my C.P. tour and, if it is possible
and convenient to you, it will be better if you accompany me.
Please let me know
1. when I should go to Wardha;
2. whether or not I should tour C.P. and
3. if I tour C.P., whether you would draw up my itine-
rary and accompany me.
I do not think I shall be able to go to the Ashram for
several days to come. After Bengal, I have to go immediately
to Bihar, C.P. and other places. I can return only after these tours
are over. This means it would probably be in September.
The Working Committee did not meet as there were only
three members present—Jawaharlal, Dr. Naidu and myself. Though
Aney was to come, he did not. Hence we could not decide
anything about Ajmer. However, if you think it advisable to
come and see me in that connection, do so. We need not be
perturbed about it. I am myself going to write to Arjunlalji
saying that whatever he has to say, he should tell me.
I hope all of you there are in good health. I am keeping
well. Today, Saturday, I am in Bolpur. I shall stay here till
Monday. On Tuesday I shall go to Calcutta and from there I
shall go to Darjeeling for three days. I shall send you my further
programme which will be fixed today or tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the photostat of the Gujarati original: G.N. 2852
