186. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
Maha Vad 2 [February 4, 1912]
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,
I have your letter. I have not changed my mind but, in
view of your father's refusal to permit you to go to Phoenix, it is
my duty to say 'No' to you. You have a like duty.
If, however,
your father wants you to do something that is positively wrong,
I can take you into Phoenix to help you escape that. When
placed in a moral dilemma, one is bound to hold one's peace if
parents forbid one to follow a certain line of action; if pressed, how-
ever, to do something sinful, one should refuse to obey. Prahladji's
is the only example that can be cited in this connection. One may,
moreover, submit to any amount of physical suffering at the bid-
ding of one's father. As for suffering to the self, there can be none.
You can conform to [the requirements of] morality while
engaged in business. That will be education for you and a pre-
paration for the kind of life that you wish to live. You will be,
moreover, rendering a service to others through your business if
you can practise absolute honesty in your dealings. You should
accept a fixed price from every customer, one which would permit
a reasonable margin of profit. You ought not to sell articles which
you would not use yourself. You should be civil to the cus-
tomers, [though] you need not flatter them in order to promote
sales. If you have any assistants, you should treat them as if they
were your brothers. All this should be easy enough. You should
not feel that, by being in business, you will be exposing yourself to
temptations; it is not as if you took to business in order to make
dishonest gains. You will be joining business merely in deference
to your father's order, so that you should find it quite easy to main-
tain uprightness. You say that you are not in love with money.
One may feel unhappy in a situation which one dislikes, but one
will not be corrupted. I do not think Prahladji found it in any
way difficult to live as a devotee of Vishnu in the midst of rakshasas1;
for he utterly disliked the rakshasa way of life.
One can be true to one's pledge even when made to sit on the
shuli A true pledge is the one that is kept even at such a moment.
If uprightness has become natural to us, has become a part of
our being, it can certainly be kept, and it is the duty of us all to
cultivate it to that extent. I pray that you may succeed in your
noble aspiration.
With due regards from
MOHANDAS
From Gandhijini Sadhana (Gujarati); Raojibhai Patel; Navajivan Publi-
shing House, Ahmedabad; 1939
