230. LETTER TO SIR J. G. LAITHWAITE
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
November 27, 1940
DEAR MR. LAITHWAITE,
I would like you to place this before His Excellency and the
contents to be telegraphed, if possible, to the Secretary of State
for India or to be brought to his notice in such manner as His
Excellency may wish.
The Secretary of State is reported by the Press as follows:
The Congress under Mr. Gandhi's leadership has decided to ex-
press its dissatisfaction by a campaign of defiance of law by instalments.
What they (my colleagues) have demanded is the right to urge Indians
not to recruit, not to work in munition factories or to contribute vol-
untary contributions to the War Committee.
While it is not possible in theory to deny the truth of the
statement, Mr. Amery should have known that he was giving his
uninformed audience a view which was not warranted by the follow-
ing from my Press statement of October 15 2, 1940:
I know that India has not one mind. There is a part of India
that is war-minded and will learn the art of war through helping the
British. The Congress has no desire, therefore, to surround ammunition
factories or barracks and prevent people from doing what they like.
And add to the above the following slogan which I have stan-
dardized, and on the strength of which civil resisters are being
imprisoned: "It is wrong to help the British war effort with either
men or money. The only worthy effort is to resist all war by non-
violent resistance."
It is wholly wrong to say that we have demanded the right
to urge voluntary contributors not to pay voluntary contributions.
The truth is that undue pressure and even force is being used on
behalf of the British Government to extract money from unwilling
parties who in several cases are even too poor to pay.
Then I take the following from the Secretary of State's speech
about Pandit Nehru:
Vinoba Bhave was to have been followed by Pandit Nehru who,
however, outstripped Mr. Gandhi both in time and I believe in the
character of the speeches he made. The speeches were violent and deli-
berately provocative and were deliberately aimed at hampering the
war effort and did so in effect as well as in intention. In any case Pan-
dit Nehru's sentence was a matter not for the executive but for the
law. If the sentence is judged by him to be excessive, he has the right
to appeal.
I regard this as a cruel libel uttered against a man who has
been put behind prison bars. There is nothing in his speeches
having the slightest odour of violence. I must deny that Pandit
Nehru outstripped me. Indeed the Provincial Government outstrip-
ped me. They knew that he had come to me to fix up when,
where and how he was to offer civil disobedience. In my letter of
October 30, 1940, I had informed His Excellency that the Pandit
was the next to offer civil disobedience and that, as soon as the date
and place were finally fixed, I would inform him. And yet before
he could arrange affairs, his journey was interrupted and he was
taken to Gorakhpur for trial. It is worse than a cruel mockery
to suggest against the charge of a vindictive sentence that Pandit
Nehru could have appealed against the sentence, if he had so chosen.
The Rt. Hon. the Secretary of State surely knew that Pandit Nehru
would not appeal against the sentence.
I write this because I feel grieved that one who has the charge
of the affairs of a sub-continent should have dealt with friendly oppo-
nents in a manner ill befitting his charge. British statesmen seem
to go out of their way to court the doubtful friendship of powers
1 Vide p. 139.
who have no friendly feeling for Britain and to lose no opportunity
of estranging those who would gladly befriend them.
I have written all this in sorrow, not in anger, certainly not for
publication.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7857. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
