570. LETTER TO HANUMANPRASAD PODDAR
November 5, 1932 1
BHAI HANUMANPRASAD,
I have your letter. It does not matter that it is long. I shall
make good use of it. What you write about Devdas becomes you.
I still stand by my statements which you have quoted from Nava-
jivan. To understand what I say one needs to understand my
conduct for I try to avoid saying anything that contradicts my
conduct and doing anything contrary to what I say. And I admit
my own weakness whenever my conduct is inconsistent with the
opinion I express. Here I do not see any inconsistency between
my profession and my conduct.
Those who taunt and slander sanatanists commit himsa and
undoubtedly injure the cause of the removal of untouchability.
1 The date is from Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II.
51-23
This whole work is purely religious and should be performed
in a religious spirit. Those sanatanists who see untouchability as
a part of religion should not be subjected to attacks of any kind.
They have as much right to stand firm on their belief as we have
to stand on ours. Even in inter-dining, cleanliness and some code
of conduct are always desirable. It is a sin to use coercion in
this matter or to despise those who refuse to inter-dine. Similarly
to force one's way into the temples against the wishes of the
trustees is an act of sin. And even if the Harijans should manage
to enter the temples in this manner and some Hindus should
inter-dine with them, I would never accept it as removal of un-
touchability. Rather than be a witness to such reform I would
prefer death, because I am convinced that compulsion can neither
remove untouchability nor safeguard Hinduism.
Let me make myself clear: I am not opposed to inter-dining
in any way and I consider it adharma for anyone to refuse to eat
in the company of a person out of contempt for him or on account
of his birth. Assuredly it would be an exaggeration to assert that
dining together necessarily promotes friendly feeling. But to re-
fuse to dine with someone who is clean and is a vegetarian be-
cause he follows another religion or he belongs to another pro-
vince or is an untouchable, would be adharma. It cannot be consi-
dered proper to attribute to the untouchables as such insanita-
tion and such other defects and to refuse to dine with them. We
must bear in mind one thing if we are to consider the question
in a religious spirit. The caste Hindus, having created a class of
outcastes, have up to the present day been treating them in a most
irreligious and brutal manner. This has caused uncleanliness and
other vices to creep in among them. Sooner or later the Hindus
have to atone for it. The time has now come when we can no long-
er deprive them of temple-entry, etc., by attributing to them vices
of which we ourselves were the cause. Our atonement consists in
meeting them as they are, allowing them to enter the temples and
behaving decently with them. We must have the faith that our
contact will exercise a purifying influence on their habits and
that they too will make an effort to that end. There is no other
way of reforming them and of the caste Hindus doing atonement.
It is essential to remember that uncleanliness and similar short-
comings found in Harijans are common to lacs of other Hindus
who are not prevented on that account from entering the temples
or joining other public institutions. Why should we sit in judg-
ment on the Harijans? Ultimately to whom does God belong?
Does He belong to the meritorious and the rich or to the sinners
who can hardly lisp His name. We must not judge others. Our
duty is to judge ourselves. Read and ponder calmly over what I
have written and if still there is anything to ask, do not hesitate
to ask me. I want to satisfy you, and that from self-interest for I
expect a great deal of work from you in this cause. To me the
question is purely a religious one and I want full co-operation
from religious-minded people like you.
How long will you be in Ratangarh?
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 18598
