219. LETTER TO NARGIS CAPTAIN
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 27, 1927
I know why you have not written to me all these long long
days. But all the same I have got to write to you. I saw your
letters both to Jamnabehn and Mithubehn. I had long chats with
the latter, and I see that whilst she is most lovable and a woman
having immense capacity for work and service, she has an awful
temper and a highly suspicious nature. She has developed, what
seems to me to be utterly groundless, suspicion of Yashwantprasad
whom she has come to regard as her determined enemy. This
makes it practically impossible for Jamnabehn to work with her.
On the whole, therefore, it seems to me that it would be better
to leave her alone in the development of fashionable khadi which
she has made her speciality and to which she gives the whole of
her time. After all her accounts are perfect in the sense that every
penny received and spent is accounted for. The account-keeping is
not in the orthodox style. That I suppose is now being done.
The accounts can also be regularly audited. And so long as she
does that, there is no reason why her work should not be treated
as an independent branch of the Stree Sabha. You may all still
hold yourselves ready for services whenever she wants them. I say
you all because Mithubehn does not want interference from any-
body except when she requires it. I sympathize with her in this
attitude because with her highly suspicious nature of which she
has no knowledge, she cannot take up any other attitude if she is
to work in peace. I endeavoured to show her that Yeshwant-
prasad had no axe to grind and that he was interested in her work
because Jamnabehn was in it, and everyone of you appreciated his
help. But I could not remove her suspicion. On the contrary, she
reiterated it and said that like hers my eyes would in course of
time be opened to Yeshwantprasad's intriguing nature as she
called it. This is unfortunate. But we have to make the best of
it. Unfortunately the women of India have not before now worked
in an organized fashion. It will therefore be some time before they
can do so. As a matter of fact even the men of India are not yet
able to run many successful organizations without friction and
without mutual suspicion. I do not want you to overtax yourself
about this matter. But if you can send for Mithubehn and others
and, seeing that they accept you as their commander-in-chief, pull
them all by the ear and make them work together, it would be very
nice.
I see that since your return home, you have not kept first
class health. But you must really be strong. I shan't be satisfied
till you have gone to Kashmir. Though I have never seen it, I
have heard a lot about it. It is highly likely that the bracing
air of Kashmir will suit you admirably.
Do write to me and tell me all about your health. How I
wish you could have come here. The weather is really superb
and quite cool for us, but of course it may not be for you.
MRS. NARGIS CAPTAIN
OOMRA HALL
PANCHGANI
From a photostat: S.N. 14199
