213. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
AHMEDABAD,
June 15 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. The omission of your dairy altogether is, I feel,
a retrogression. It was a good measure of discipline. Your diary gave
me an insight into yourself for that particular week as nothing else
could. Do please therefore resume your diary if you can.
1 Vide p. 191.
2 From the contents
214
This has been a sad week. Bombay has so weighed me down that
I am in a most melancholy mood. If I had to live in Bombay for one
year, I would die. I am glad just now you are not with me. I go about
barefoot. There is hardly a road clean enough to make you feel safe
about your tread. This has not got on my nerves so much hitherto
because I have not had the opportunity of walking much. And the
closets! I know you would vomit eternally if you merely looked at them.
Now what is the duty of a reformer in this position? Can the city
life be mended? If not, can he by working in a city perpetuate the
life? Suppose he succeeded in getting clean roads and clean closets,
not by any means an easy task, what will he have gained? How is
he to deal with the filth within? How will he regulate the morality of
the people? These are awful questions and I have to answer them,
you have to answer them.
The enclosed is a partial or complete answer. Read it carefully
and criticize freely and fully. I will send you more copies later. I have
a limited number by me here.
The life at Ahmedabad is good. There you would be perfectly at
home. The boys are making progress. Only Mrs. Gandhi causes trouble
sometimes by her temper and sometimes by her sickness. You have
known her in all her temperaments. So I do not need to describe her
to you.
Andrews had a severe attack of cholera. He has survived it. He
will take care of his health.
I can understand your liking for carpentry. You can be at home
with your tools if you have full time given to you for your work. I
envy you your occupation - it would be perfect if only you could
add some studies. Will you? Do please.
With love,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 The enclosure probably was a copy of the draft constitution for the
Satyagrahashram; vide Vol. XIII, pp. 91-.
