356. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
March 3, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
I have your two letters. Yes, the Khan Brothers are truly
servants of God. I am glad you were able to go through the
book at a single sitting. You should get some copies from Devdas,
free if you like, and send them to your English friends.
The paper that Jugulkishore has sent you has the defect you
point out. I am making investigations to see if improvement
can be made. Envelopes should present no difficulty. They can
be neatly prepared by hand. The making of them may by itself
become an occupation. Do the ones I have sent you lack the
finish?
You may not wait for adopting khaddar till you have used
up all your mill-made saris. There is any amount of beauty to
be found among hand-spun stuffs. Of course hand-spun silk is
khadi.
Please give my love to Maharaj Singh and his wife. You may
not know that my second son is editor of a S. A. paper called
Indian Opinion. He is a good young man. He did not like Maharaj
Singh's policy and attacked him fiercely in his paper. Andrews
and I reasoned with the boy for the manner of his attack but we
failed to convince him of the error of his method. He is an
obstinate boy. I told him I did not mind his criticism where he
disapproved of a policy but I reasoned with him as to the manner
of his approach. I am still trying.
I remain unconvinced by Mrs. B. Nehru's argument. My
point is that we as reformers may not do the work of prosecution.
The sanatanists will pay the fines and put up the Harijans against
us. I am quite clear in my mind that we have to begin with
the so-called higher classes who are the real culprits. That Harijans
know sometimes that they are contravening the Sarda Act does
not affect my argument. They are still ignorant of the wrong-
doing. Mere defiance of law has ceased to be a wrong in itself.
My argument holds good even for the women's organization.
You may show this to Mrs. B. N. Naturally, if my reasoning does
not convince you, you will ignore it.
I must inquire about linen.
272
You will come whenever you can. The earlier the better.
Love.
[PS.]
This paper is especially bad. I hope you can decipher the
writing.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3523. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6332
