647. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 28, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I have no option today but to dictate. I use the right hand
only on Monday to write for Harijan. On the other days I write
with the left hand. That takes more time. Besides, your letter
calls for immediate reply. Do come some time about the 16th.
By bits I will give you as much time as you need. Will it be
all right if I do so during my walks? It would be better if you
do not fix in advance the time of your stay here. You shouldn't
mind if you have to stay on for a day or two longer. It would
be better to see all the scattered activities at leisure and also if
our conversations were spread over. Prabhavati has collected
the yarn spun by me. And I have entrusted its dispatch also
to her. I read the book about Hitler at your suggestion. I read
Maxton's book on Lenin, too. I also asked them to send me
another book on Hitler and I have got it now. Your description
of the room is interesting. There are many reasons for people to
envy you. I am sure that when you know all the circumstances
of my renunciation, you also will agree with me.
Most probably Jamnalalji will return by the 2nd or the
3rd. So far as I remember, I had replied to both your questions
in my previous letter. I see no acknowledgement of that letter in
your present letter. I, therefore, briefly reply to your questions
again.
There are many objections against approving of compulsory
sterilization of people suffering from leprosy. The practice is likely
to lead to numerous evils. It is also not right to assume any
disease to be incurable. It seems safer to me to propagate the
method of self-control and be content with whatever results
can be achieved in that way. I sense cowardice at every step.
A spinner who was a coward would cut apart tangled yarn. A
good spinner, on the other hand, would undo the tangle with
patience and skill and keep the thread whole. A follower of
ahimsa would adopt some such method with persons suffering
from supposedly incurable diseases.
Systematic foreign propaganda by us seems to me to be
like a bullock-cart competing with a railway train. If we can
spend a thousand for propaganda in the cause of truth, the ad-
versary is in a position to spend a crore. I am, therefore, con-
vinced that we should be satisfied with whatever propaganda
takes place in the normal course through the work of individuals.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10377. Also C.W. 6817. Cour-
tesy: Premabehn Kantak
