449. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 19, 1906
[SIR,]
I trust for the sake of elementary justice you will give publicity to
the following facts, and even comment, if you think, as I do, that those
facts bring to light a shocking state of affairs in the Colony.
An Indian woman named Punia was travelling with her husband
from Durban to Johannesburg on the 14th inst. by the Kaffir mail. Her
husband held a permit and registration certificate, which mentioned his
wife. The wife was, however, arrested and detained at Volksrust for
being without a permit. The poor husband had also, therefore, to stay.
Both passed the night in the lock-up. Next morning the wife was tried.
She had to stand in the dock like a common felon. The arresting cons-
table gave the following evidence :
My instructions are to arrest all Indians entering this Colony without permits
— no matter whether male or female, minors or adults. There is no age
limit. These instructions apply even when women and children accompany
their husbands and parents. It is of no account for the registration certificate
to mention a wife.
It transpired, in the course of evidence, that, according to the hus-
band's testimony, the wife was with him during and after the war in the
Transvaal. The Magistrate held that he had no option but to order the
wife to leave the Colony before 7 p.m. the same day, as she held no permit.
The wife, however, under counsel's advice, proceeded to Johannesburg
in defiance of the order of expulsion. She was, therefore, arrested at Ger-
miston. The last has not yet been heard of the case.
1 This letter was addressed by Gandhiji to the three local dailies of Johannesburg, and
reproduced in Indian Opinion under the title, "A Shocking Permit Case".
2 The letter, without the first paragraph, was published in The Natal Mercury, 20-9-1906,
as a special despatch, dated September 19, from its Johannesburg Correspondent.
But the future development has nothing to do with the point I wish
to make. It is this : May the Government, in the name of the people of
the Transvaal, thus set up a reign of terror for British Indian women and
children? It was admitted at the trial that this was not an isolated case.
Remember that, according to the authorised and printed permit regu-
lations, wives and children under 16 years accompanying their husbands
or parents are not required to take out permits. Are Indian women
now to go to the Permit Office, and, after a process of exhausting and
exasperating examination, to take out their permits? And what of babes
in arms? This is no tale from the Arabian Nights. Infants hardly able
to crawl have been detained at Volksrust. Do even Messrs Loveday and
Company require all this? Do you?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 19-9-1906
