151. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[September 8, 1937]
CHI. MAHADEV,
Send half a maund, or even one maund, of dates with any-
body who is available. We should get three dozen mosambis and
two dozen bananas daily.
I send with this a wire for Rajkumari. The one to Andrews
must have been dispatched.
The wire received from the seven prisoners does not seem
to have been given to the Press. If possible give it now together
with my reply to it. I am afraid we have delayed it rather too
long. I have kept copies of the wires. Have the wire of these
seven prisoners and my reply been released?
A painful incident took place this morning. Lilavati has
always been a lazy girl. She is careless, suffers from no end of
pride and can bear nothing. The incident was trivial. Nanavati
drew her attention to her carelessness, which she couldn't bear.
Nanavati reported the incident to me. I was busy with my own
work and was trying to avoid having to take notice of it. I had
said a few words half-jokingly, when the lady sailed in. She
emphasized each sentence as she spoke, and that at the top of her
voice. I asked her to speak calmly. But she wouldn't listen.
She then started saying silly things. And so I said, raising my voice,
"There is no door here—the only one there is open. If you can't
stand it, you may leave." I had lost my senses while I said
this and so barked even louder than she. She has now left.
Where else would she go, except to the temple of Mahadev? She
must have, therefore, come to you. If she realizes that she has
been cruel to me, shame her into returning here. If she doesn't
realize the gravity of her misbehaviour, she may do as she pleases.
She has no place in the Harijan Ashram. She shouldn't be sent
there. You may, if you wish, take her under your charge. . . .2
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11567
1 From the reference to "a wire for Rajkumari", vide p. 110, and
Lilavati's departure "in a huff", vide the preceding item. Vide also "Letter
to Lilavati Asar", p. 113.
2 The letter is incomplete.
116
