165. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 26, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I must dictate in English In answer to your letter written In
Hindi.
It was not necessary to write more about the constitution of
the Harijan Seva Sangh. Whether we should immediately bring
into being a semi-democratic organization is a question for
consideration. I do not know whether under the appointment there
is the power, but the plan that I have suggested is feasible and can
be enforced immediately, that is, to register the Ashram in the
names of the trustees that I have suggested. You should discuss
your idea with Thakkar Bapa and Hariji.
As to the Spinners' Association, I had an absolutely free
hand, and I evolved a plan which enabled it to become an easily
operating and sound organization with immense possibility for
democratization. I wanted to write to you as soon as the deci-
sion for the transfer of the Ashram was taken, that, in view of that
acquisition, the ambitious plan for Delhi should be abandoned.
But the hostel scheme is quite sound. Of course, we shall want
many such hostels; and I can see immense possibilities emerging
from them, if they are properly managed. When I am in Delhi you
may take any work you like from me.
So far as Biharilal is concerned, if he will serve in connection
with the hostel schemes and so on, we can utilize his services. But
I am very much against engaging paid preachers, Harijans or other-
wise. And in this matter we cannot be too firm.
As to my stay in Delhi, of course, it is to be regulated by you.
My own inclination would be to stay at Lakshminarayan's place.
I believe in sticking to old places, except on sound reasons for a
departure. For my health Parmeshwari's place would be ideal.
But I must not be made inaccessible. To do so would defeat the
purpose of the tour. My stay should depend upon the work to be
taken from me. You will come to wrong decisions, if you always
think of my convenience. You can depend upon it that I shall
make my own convenience, no matter where you put me. For my
stay in Calcutta, you should consult Dr. Bidhan, Satish Babu, etc.
I understand what you say about Mrs. Lahiri. I did not give
any opinion, because I had none. As she had mentioned your name
and as you know almost everybody in Calcutta, I thought I would
forward that letter to you and have your opinion. I have written
to Dr. Bidhan also who has issued the certificate. You may dismiss
the matter from your mind for the time being at least. If I form
any opinion in the execution of which I need your assistance, I
shall immediately let you know.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU 2
[PS.]
Gopi is doing well. She is certainly happy. How is your
health?
C.W. 7938. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
