339. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
MUZAFFARPUR,
March 29, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Please don't get angry with me.
I am writing this letter at
2.45 a.m. I had set the alarm for 3 a.m. It went off before 12 and
I got up. I cleaned my teeth and sat down to write. After a
while my eyes fell on the clock and I saw that it was only twelve.
So much work had accumulated that I didn't have the courage to
go back to sleep, and so I decided to finish as much as I could. I
have almost finished the articles for Harijan and am writing this
letter to you. After finishing this I will write a letter to Ba. I
will send you her letter the next time.
I have yet to get a copy
made.
You made me wait a long time for your last letter.
I hope
you will write regularly now. Miss Harrison is a strong-willed
woman, and so is Miss Lester. The former is maturer. Her sin-
cerity and humility are boundless.
Miss Lester is slightly ill and
has stayed on in Patna. Miss Harrison has come along with me.
We are in Muzaffarpur just now.
In the morning we shall leave
for Belsand.
Some Ashram workers are camping there. Pyarelal
is with me. He will remain with me for a few days only.
I shall
see. Valji and Himmatlal are attending on Miss Lester. We were
in Chapra yesterday. We stayed there with Dr. Mahmud. We
find everywhere houses which have been completely destroyed.
Dr. Mahmud is doing good relief work in co-operation with the
Collector. I met the head of the Relief Department. What you
were able to do (at the time of the Gujarat floods) is not possible
here at all. Even so, the work will be done well. Whatever money
is given will reach the right people.
Jamnalal will remain in Bihar for the present.
Lakshmidas
has practically recovered. He also will remain here and look after
the manufacture of khadi.
Jamnalal will fix up the others, too,
in suitable work.
Bhulabhai came and saw me. He had gone to
Gaya in connection with some case.
From there he came to see
me. He could discuss a few things only.
It seems Mani is being tested fairly severely (in the Belgaum
jail). That is as it should be. God will protect her.
Ba will be released in May.
I shall be able to go to Gujarat only in July.
Chandrashankar
will come on the 3rd or the 4th.
Don't worry about me or about
the developments outside.
Our faith in God is not merely an
intellectual pastime. He really exists. Rather, He alone exists.
We think of Him before taking any step.
We should, therefore,
let Him lead us as He wills.
I hope I am not assuming too much
in thus including you also.
Have you got any company?
I will not write more now.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 88-
1 Dr. Syed Mahmud
2 The addressee's jail companion Dr. Chandulal Desai had been released.
