373. LETTER TO PYARELAL
November 22, 1937
CHI. PYARELAL,
What have you done? Leaving me ill and Sushila weeping,
you went away! But, then, didn't I let you? Yes, I did,
but I made a condition, too. I shall know in time whether I
did well or ill in giving even such conditional permission. At
present my worries have increased and Sushila is completely upset.
You have shouted down your mother and your brother,
crushed your sister, shouted down Ba yesterday and didn't spare
me, either, when leaving. Do you realize all this?
Do you remember what you said? If I let you go, you
said, you would probably not be able to bear the separation
and would return and lay your head in my lap. Hasn't that
time come? Don't you feel these two days of separation as if
they were two years? If you feel so, come back in response
to this letter and send a wire. Only then can Sushila serve
me and I can accept her services.
Do you know that I would consent even to your dreadful
step if I could understand your arguments? Won't you wait
till I have recovered or till I am dead? I will seize the first
opportunity to discuss the matter with you if I recover from this
illness. If you say that now there is nothing to be discussed,
it will be like branding a man who has already sustained burns.
Your letter to Ramdas after the death of Chhotelal was not
proper. It was unjust. You did not have the patience to read
Kishorelal's letter. You have done him a terrible injustice.
You failed in your duty by only reading the introductory part and
leaving the rest of the material. Even if the whole world fails to
understand you and does you injustice, your dharma is to bear
it. "My honour is in your hands, O Lord, protect it." If you
take the unworthy step, you will darken my life for ever. Don't
let this happen to me. Return soon, or if you decide not to
return send a wire reassuring me and Sushila. Write a letter, too.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
307
