236. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
March 9, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter to hand. I follow what you say about Mr. Bean. You
have done the right thing in not passing on the letter to Sam. I always
want to know your views on such matters. I do not wish to importune
Mr. Bean overmuch. I wrote my last letter to him yesterday and I will
write no more. To Mr. Kitchin also I have written clearly. I feel for
him somewhat because he will have, as he says, to upset all his arrange-
ments. He has spent a lot and I rather felt that he would not go away
from Phoenix. Hence the feeling that it will be good if he stays. Never-
theless, I have no intention of pressing him overmuch. You had better
give up trying to persuade Mr. Bean now. You should act only on those
among my suggestions which appeal to you as reasonable. I always
assume this, when I communicate to you, without reservation, my
thoughts as they occur to me.
Now that you are keeping all the account books yourself, I should
like to know how it has affected the work. I desire that the accounts
be got ready immediately.
Brian Gabriel writes that he will arrive there by the end of this
month.
I think it will be difficult to send Kalyandas there at present. I
already carry a big burden and it will become heavier, if I send him
away. It is, moreover, doubtful whether he will stay there cheerfully
or not. I shall, however, send him, if possible, during the winter for a
time.
Please send me the file of the Opinion.
Make as much use of Mr. Isaac as you can.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have received the papers. None of them is worth publishing. Please
write to both the Patels directly as follows: "Received your letter. We
receive plenty of such material, which we do not think it necessary to
publish in the Opinion. It leads to counter-allegations and adds to the
bitterness. The Opinion being chiefly meant for discussing political and
social matters, it seems improper to introduce too many topics pertaining
to religion." It is not necessary to reply to them through the journal.
Inform Osman Amod that I have written to him directly.
The enclosed is the name of a new subscriber: his subscription
has not been received.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the original Gujarati in Gandhiji's hand : S.N. 4320
