3. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
KARACHI,
February 4, 1929
SISTERS,
I hope your classes are working regularly. I believe that no
better arrangements could have been made than what has come
about without any special planning. Take full advantage of these
arrangements.
Rasik's condition can be described as really very serious. I
do not know whether he will be alive when this letter reaches you.
But we try to learn every day that birth and death are two facets
of the same thing. He who is born dies, and he who dies is born
again. Some do escape this cycle, but neither they nor the others
need rejoice at birth or grieve over death. I realize this and,
therefore, remain unconcerned. Rasik has recently become a
votary of the Ramayana, and we feel, therefore, that he enjoys
complete peace inwardly.
I should like you women to make the kitchen and the infant
school a shining success. Do not tempt the children to eat spiced
food. You will see in future that such restraint has benefited them.
You must have discovered by now that abstaining from spices
ordinarily does the body no harm. It is a different matter, of
course, if some persons who have become addicted to spiced food
cannot change their habit. Think over this matter. It is entirely
in your hands to stop the children from making noise. You
should try and lighten Gangabehn's burden. You may get from her
other services too. You should fix her hours of work and, during
certain hours, should not permit her to enter the kitchen at all.
You should give up the idea of getting ghee from anywhere
except Chharodi. If you can get no ghee from there, you should
learn to do without it. It has practically been proved now that
linseed oil does no harm whatever. So long as we get milk and
curds, it does not matter too much if we do not get ghee.
Do set a limit to the quantity of vegetables cooked. Make it
a rule that not more than ten tolas of cleaned vegetables are cook-
ed for each person.
These changes require your mental co-operation. That is, you
should accept them with your heart and mind.
You have got to train yourselves for work in the Bal Mandir.
Now that a teacher has been appointed specially for this—and he
is an able person—you can get all the training you need.
I shall reach there on the 16th evening instead of the 15th.
Since I arrived here a day late, one day will be wasted.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro – 1: Ashramni Behnone
