103. LETTER TO TOWN CLERK, DURBAN
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN, NATAL,
September 24, 1900
TO
WM. COOLEY, ESQ.
TOWN CLERK
DURBAN
SIR,
As soon as the intention of the Council to introduce a bye-
law making it an offence for a riksha-hauler to take up a col-
oured passenger in a riksha labelled for "Europeans only" was
known, many Indians asked me to draw up a protest, but I felt
189
at the time that it would not be proper to do so. I thought it
would be inconsistent with the self-respect of the Indian com-
munity to wish to insist on having the right to use the same riksha
used by the Europeans if the latter objected to share it with the
Indians, so long as the same kind of vehicle was available to the
Indians also. But I have now begun to feel that I committed
a grave error in proffering the above advice.
The practical working of the bye-law has created and is cre-
ating an irritation among the Indians of all classes which it would
be folly on my part not to bring to the notice of the Council.
I freely confess that the problem is not easy of solution. Yet
it may not be altogether insoluble. In this communication it is
not my intention to raise the legal question though I humbly
believe that the bye-law is illegal. I wish, if possible, to obtain
partial relief by appealing to the good sense of the Council.
I trust that what is objected to is not so much the colour of
a fare as his dirty clothes or appearance. If so, might it not be
possible to give instructions to the haulers not to take such fares?
I am told that the haulers are shrewd enough to understand and
carry out such instructions. The suggestion is obviously difficult,
and will by no means be free from hardships and injustice but it
is likely to allay the present acute soreness.
The very rigorous working of the bye-law may defeat its own
object and, in my humble opinion, it can only be worked with-
out friction if its application is very largely tempered with dis-
cretion. It is, I submit, no small thing that hundreds of coloured
people, who have hitherto freely used the rikshas as a mode
of conveyance, suddenly find themselves debarred from its use;
for I understand that there are very few rikshas without the label
above referred to.
May I ask you to place this before His Worship the Mayor
and the Council Committee at the earliest possible opportunity
and hope that it will receive the consideration that its subject
matter deserves? I trust also that it will be considered in the
spirit in which it is written.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original : Durban Town Council Records
