479. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
Unrevised
November 27, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,
Your letter. You have again been hasty. How did you
conclude that Mogheji wanted you to go away for good or that
he was happy at your leaving thus. This too is mere suspicion.
If people are afraid of you it is because you lose no time in
making allegations and entertaining all sorts of fanciful ideas. If
I were to ask Kamalnayan, he will, I am sure, have a different
story to tell. To the best of my knowledge no one doubts your
honest desire to serve. But I am myself observing that you are
misunderstood. You should stick to your resolution. You belong
to the Ashram, you have to return to it and must prepare your-
self to do so. Forget about the incident at the station and all
that you have written to me.
Dr. Shirlekar has sent nothing. I shall send for [your books].
I shall write to Dr. Ansari and send you a copy of the letter. I
am trying to send you the books.
The account of Krishna's health pains me. Now you have
to concentrate on her recovery. By all means take a separate
house. Do write to me if your brothers are in any way mcon-
venienced in meeting your expenses.
It cannot be said that Ramdas is all right but he has pro-
gressed to the point of taking three eggs. If you have anything
to say about him do say it.
My weight is 108 lb. which is good but it may not go up
further. I feel I have gained some strength as a result of fresh
milk and raw vegetables. A reduced diet [uncooked food] is giving
me as much strength as I derived from a larger quantity of milk
and vegetables. Obviously, the expenditure has considerably gone
down and time is saved. I must have more experience to say
anything further.
Amtussalaam seems to be well enough but she cannot digest
milk.
Mirabehn has written to you. A bundle belonging to the
office containing some of my very important papers, my specta-
cles and such other things was placed in the room where your
luggage was stored. Some things from it were sent there earlier.
Did this bundle reach [you] along with those things? Can it be
located? The bundle was tied in a white khadi sheet. Find out
and if you can lay your hands on it, send me a Wire. I am
anxious about the papers.
Draupadi's weight must surely increase.
I shall not worry about you as you have given me an
assurance.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Your notice can appear in the coming issue of Harijan;
your letter was received too late.
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
between pp. 122 and 123
