31. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,
Paush Sud 15 [January 16, 1919]
CHI. RAMDAS 3 ,
After some days I am again trying to write you. I am still unable to
write, but I feel like writing to you and so am writing this. You complain
about absence of letters from me, but I have been regular in dictating letters
to you. There is so much confusion on the steamship that sometimes letters
even get lost in transit. Just as some others did not get the letters I wrote to
them, you also may not have got them. It is not right, whenever you fail to
get a letter from me, to assume that I must have been displeased by something
you did or wrote. It is not in my nature to get hurt over such things. Moreover,
you have done or said nothing which might have displeased me.
I have no doubt in my mind that Manilal has been working hard, and
for the present you should continue to help him. He will be able to raise the
level of I. O. gradually. If you have confidence in your ability to write on
your own, you may do so. Only one thing is required for it, and that is
knowledge of facts. If you know anything about agriculture, do write a good
article on that subject. Many aspiring writers who have no grasp of the subject
they write on, are foolhardy enough to try to write on it and fail in their
attempt. If you master an easy subject and begin writing on it, you are sure
to succeed. You could have written a vivid account of the passing away of
Sheth Cachalia. If you start writing that way, you will get trained and will
be able, by and by, to write very well. When Mr. Polak 6 joined me, his
1 Of the Mahabharata
2 As suggested in the source. Also vide Vol. XV, pp. 72- where the 2nd para of
this letter is already reproduced under the same date.
3 Ramdas was at this time in Natal on the Phoenix Farm with Manila!.
4 Gandhiji had been ailing for a long time and had to finally undergo an operation
for piles on January 20, 1919.
5 Sheth Ahmed Mohomed Cachalia who had died in South Africa on October 20,
1918
6 H.S.L. Polak
30
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
writings were dull and too long. After about four months' experience, he was
able to write better and by the end of the year, had made excellent progress.
Your great misfortune is that you lack confidence in your ability. There is no
reason at all for you to believe that you have no brains. If only you cultivate
interest in reading and writing, you have ability enough to do both.
My health seems to be improving. I have started taking goat's milk That
seems to be doing me much good. I must be daily drinking about four and a
half seers of it. Besides drinking milk, I eat some dry fruits and rice twice
every day. If I can digest the quantity of milk I am taking, my weight is
likely to increase very fast.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
