521. LETTER TO K. F. NARIMAN
July 27, 1937
MY DEAR NARIMAN,
I got your letter yesterday. I write the reply today, but
too late for today's post.
If you trust me, here is my suggestion. Let there be a
definite reference drawn by you. I shall show it to the Sardar;
and, if he approves, I shall ask Sir Govindrao to take evidence
on it and give his decision. The inquiry should be private. I
feel that the charge of Sardar having influenced the voters is in-
evitable. For if he did not use his opinion of you against your
election, there will be nothing for any judge to go upon. So,
whilst Sardar will have to give grounds for his opinion, you will
have to prove that he used his opinion to influence the voters.
As for agitation, I see that you do not disapprove of it.
In my opinion it amounts to coercion. Is there any obligation
on the part of any leader to take a particular colleague into his
Cabinet? Whatever the public may say or do, I tell you that
you are estranging your real friends from you by your per-
mitting the agitation to continue as it is doing. If you have
accepted the Working Committee's judgment, you have to say
so and acquit the Sardar of any complicity.
If you have not,
and I think you have not, you have to prove your charge against
the Sardar. But when he offers to appear before a judge of joint
choice, you are in honour bound to stop the agitation which
hurts you and you only. Please do not think me prejudiced
against you because I write to you frankly. My frankness is a
test of my good wishes.
I daily receive letters asking me to intervene and give my
opinion in public. I am referring my correspondents to you
telling them that so far as I am concerned, they have access to
all my letters to you. But I do not wish to say anything to
the Press at this stage unless you want me.
I hope my letter is clear to you.
You have chosen an unfortunate illustration in Dr. Rajan's
case. He carried on or continued no agitation. He meekly
submitted to the adverse verdict.
Yours, etc.,
A.I.C.C. File No. 747-A, 1937. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
