311. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
[Before December 25, 1940]
Mahatma Gandhi in a letter to me has conveyed that only those per-
sons are eligible to offer satyagraha who strictly conform to the following
conditions:
1. They are habitual and regular spinners.
2. They are habitual khadi-wearers.
1 & 2 The addressee, a Member of the Legislative Assembly, and President,
Punjab Provincial Congress Committee, had quoted the letter in a statement
to the Press in which he had appealed "to all concerned to make a
careful note of the wishes of Mahatma Gandhi and save the good name
of the Punjab". The statement was reported under the date line "Lahore,
December 25".
73-17
3. They believe in the necessity of communal unity and removal of
untouchability in every shape and form.
4. They believe in the necessity of supporting village handicrafts and
swadeshi in everything.
5. They believe that swaraj for the millions is unattainable without
non-violence.
6. They believe in the Bombay resolution of the All-India Congress
Committee.
7. They believe in an inevitable connection between the above mentioned
points and non-violence.
Mahatma Gandhi stresses that nobody is obliged to court imprison-
ment merely as a matter of discipline. Civil disobedience thus becomes a
matter of inviolable faith and not discipline.
Congress does not—at least
Mahatma Gandhi does not—expect anybody to offer civil disobedience who
does not believe in the urgency of it.
Mahatma Gandhi considers it dis-
graceful for any Congressman to say that he offers civil resistance for the
sake of mere discipline.
He has further stressed that lukewarm adherence
to the Congress brings us no nearer to our goal; nor can half-hearted poli-
tical belief in the Congress programme, he says, answer the purpose.
Those who do constructive work are just as good as civil resisters and by
their faith and devotion to service, he says, they are rendering greater service
to the cause of civil resistance than civil resisters of doubtful complexion.
Mahatma Gandhi has stressed that we shall reach our goal if civil
resistance has the backing of the nation in the shape of conformity to the con-
structive programme. Quality is the thing which is required in the fight and
not quantity; of course, both combined would be welcomed.
The Hindu, 26-12-1940
