128. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 5/6, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I had a fairly long discussion with Parashuram. Before ex-
plaining the conclusion to which I have arrived as a result of
it, I will narrate to you a shocking thing which he told me. I
told him that I did not believe him at all, but asked him to
give his story in writing if he wished to do so. He did that.
What he says is that Dr. Sharma is more busy in criticizing the
Ashram than with treating the patients, and that too in talking
unclean things about it. Parashuram says that Dr. Sharma had
come with certain fixed prejudices against the Ashram and that
he had been talking with several people there and trying to induce
them to tell him things by talking to them against other inmates
or coaxing them in other ways. According to Dr. Sharma, slave
mentality prevails in the Ashram and all of you are deceiving
an 'old fool' like me by nodding 'yes' to everything I say.
You are, he says, under Prema's influence and are guided by her
in all things. He calls Prema "Her Excellency" and always uses
that phrase when talking about her in her absence. I didn't have
time to talk more about this with Parashuram, but I have given
you the substance of what he said.
All this has had no effect on me whatsoever. But I have
mentioned it because I thought it necessary that you should know.
Dr. Sharma has not given me the slightest impression of being
a man of this type. In the letters which he wrote to me from
Delhi, I saw his humility and his sincerity, and I have always
believed that he has come to the Ashram prompted by a spirit
of service. I would be very much shocked if what Parashuram
says is found to be true, though of course there is little room
for being more shocked than I have already been. And from Mon-
day in any case I shall be enjoying supreme peace.
About you and Prema, Parashuram has nothing to say except
that there is temperamental incompatibility between him and
you two. At any rate that is what he says just now. The word
in his diary is not rakshasi 1 but rajasi and you seem to have read
it wrongly. Nor has he charged you with wickedness. He keeps
saying that he has got fed up with Prema's temper. However
that may be, I have told him that he should exercise the utmost
control on his pen and tongue and stop writing such a rotten
diary, and that he can return to the Ashram if he is ready to
throw himself on your goodwill and promise unreserved co-
operation with you in future. I have also advised him to write
one letter to you. I have not yet received any such letter.
May 6, 1933
Parashuram says that he does not wish to leave the Ashram
with the stigma of failure. He seems to be coming round com-
pletely now. Moreover, the fast also is approaching and so he
is eager to secure a testimonial from you and return to the
Ashram. I am writing this early in the morning. Parashuram will
see me in the course of the day. If I think it advisable to send
him back, I will do so. Have a talk with him and take him in
again if he satisfies you. You are, of course, not bound to do so
at all. Take him in only if you yourself feel that his heart has
become completely clean. If, moreover, what he says about Dr.
Sharma is nothing but a fabrication by him or a complete mis-
reading of the facts on his part, you may think whether it would
be advisable to take in again a man of such a confused mind.
If, however, what he says about Dr. Sharma is found to
be true, you will have to think a great deal. Whether or not you
take Parashuram back, give him enough time and listen to all that
he has to say. If he is a good man, we should not let him go.
But I also know that, though good, if he is utterly confused in
mind, we cannot keep him in the Ashram. You are, therefore,
completely free not to take him back again. I am permitting
him to come to you only because I don't wish to reject his
eager entreaties to do so. But I have made my condition clear
to him. He can stay only if he satisfies you.
I continue to get letters from Dr. Sharma and see from
them that several people have indeed talked to him and told
him many things. He says that he has found some persons to be
suffering from even venereal diseases. He should give the names
of such persons to you. I also was going to ask for them, but
meanwhile came this fast. Hence I leave that job to you. Read
the letter which I am writing to him.
Panditji is returning there. Narmada does not intend to re-
turn at all. Lakshmibehn has taken a vow, when leaving the
Ashram, that she will not return for one year. Hence she will
not return before that period is over.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8372. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
