551. LETTER TO T. PRAKASAM
SRIRAMPUR,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
December 5, 1946
DEAR PRAKASAM,
I have your letter with enclosures. I have studied all the papers
you have sent to me. Your statement appears to me to be in order
so far as it goes. But I do feel that if the new policy becomes popular
with the masses, the concentrated production of cotton will become
decentralised and distributed like khadi cloth itself and to that extent
the Presidency will be the gainer, as the whole of India will, if it takes
up the Madras policy, as it will, if Madras succeeds, as it ought to
if the villagers take up khadi with zest. They will, if khadi becomes
cheaper than unprotected mill cloth, as Shri Manu Subedar has shown
from the figures, which I have printed in Harijan.
The argument in the cuttings you have been good enough to send
me makes no appeal to me and if I get time from the heavy Noakhali
work before me I shall write in Harijan. But I know nothing about
the legal argument which, of course, you will get properly examined
by the Advocate-General and other lawyers expert in the matter and,
if the legal argument is against you, naturally you will resile from the
1 Madras Khadi Scheme
position taken up by you. But I take it that you had the legal position
carefully examined before you took the plunge.
But apart from the question of establishing new mills or expanding
the old ones, how is the scheme progressing ? Have you already made
the commencement ? How are the people concerned taking it ? Is
the legislature overwhelmingly with you ? I am in such an inaccessible
place that I get very few newspapers and they are local ones. I,
therefore, know very little of what is going on outside Noakhali.
Therefore Noakhali at present is my world and it is large enough for
me.
Please keep me informed of what is going on about the scheme
and do not hesitate to make concrete suggestions if you expect me
to do anything concrete.
Yours,
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
