173. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
April 28, 1914
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You ask me whether it will be inconvenient for me to have you
here. What a question? You still observe the distance. What though
it were inconvenient? You have still a right to come. So come when
you like. Only I may have to leave for Cape Town any day now.
I have been unable to write to you for some days as I have not
been able to get up early for the last few days, the nights having been
disturbed by Mrs. Gandhi. She is getting better but sometimes requires
service during night. The discipline here is becoming more and more
severe. The boys may not now get up late on Sundays. It is the same
hour for all the days, i.e., 4 a.m. Only two meals are served now.
The times are 10 a.m. and 5 p.m. Two days in the week are saltless.
The little ones get two bananas and a naarangi each at 7.30. The
youngsters rise at 6 a.m. The school hours are 4.30 to 7 a.m., 7 to
9.30 physical labour, 9.30 to 10 bathing, 10 to 11.30 dinner, etc., 11.30
to 2 school, 2 to 2.30 recreation, 2.30 to 3.30 Press work, 3.30 to
4.45 agriculture, 5 p.m. supper, 6.30 to 7.30 p.m. service. To bed at
8 p.m. Coffee has now been rejected because I do not want any
makeshifts in India. Please let Manilal see this as I shall not be giving
him a separate account.
Your scale of diet is too extravagant and rich. Here we allow no
more than one ounce of oil per head. You take nearly 6 oz. per head.
The other allowances are also on the same liberal scale and it therefore
makes the body gross. The scales should be fixed with some consideration
for the lives of the poorest of mankind. In any case the scale cannot
be followed in Phoenix without causing very great disturbance. We
are now using gingili oil as I have been able to procure the finest
quality. I commenced the experiment first. The taste has agreed with
all. Whether it will agree with all constitutions here remains to be seen.
As for Polak, could he not buy the property and pay rent and interest
at the same time? I say this without much consideration. The whole
to be paid over in, say, 5 years' time.
I am writing this under too much disturbance. The inscription is
being sent by Jamnadas. I must not perform the opening ceremony.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Gandhiji has spelt the word as "gingelly".
