140. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
PATNA,
Aso Sud 10 [September 27, 1925]
BHAISHRI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
I have your letter. I shall not trouble you much about Lohani
just now.
Jamnalalji told me that the amount of Rs. 25,000 you gave
to the Muslim University was to be considered as part of the
Rs. 60,000 promised by you at Juhu. Such was [not] my under-
standing; and I was planning to spend Rs. 60,000 on other things.
But if what you meant was in fact not what I thought you meant,
I have nothing to say.
There is another thing. You know my views on cow-protec-
tion. Shri Madhusudan Das owns a tannery at Cuttack which he
has developed into a limited company. I feel like acquiring a
majority of its shares with a view to controlling it for public bene-
fit in the interest of cow-protection. The tannery's liabilities
amount to Rs. 1,20,000. It is necessary to rescue it from this dead
weight. The tannery uses only the hides of dead animals, but the
hides of specially-killed patlaghos are also used. In case it is decided
to take over the tannery, three conditions should be insisted on:
1. Only hides of dead animals will be taken;
2. The practice of killing patlaghos for the sake of their
hides must be discontinued;
3. The idea of charging interest must be given up; if there
is any profit, it should be used for the expansion of the
tannery.
I would like you to take over the tannery provided it is avail-
able on these terms; I would also like you to undertake its manage-
ment. If that is not practicable, I shall find someone else who
can manage it. The tannery has a few acres of land which I have
seen myself. Shri Madhusudan Das has spent a considerable
amount on it out of his own pocket.
Thirdly, there is the All-India Spinners' Association. Can
you give your co-operation in this work? I would like you to
contribute a handsome amount to the All-India Deshbandhu
Memorial Fund.
Jamnalalji will have a detailed talk with you on all these three
matters, if he happens to meet you in Delhi.
Is your wife feeling better?
I shall be in Bihar till the 15th.
Yours sincerely,
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 6113; also Gandhijiki Chhatrachhayamen
Courtesy: G. D. Birla
