283. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER, RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522
JOHANNESBURG,
January 13, 1905
TO
THE HONOURABLE PROFESSOR GOKHALE
POONA
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
The existence of Indian Opinion you know. It has now embarked
on a career when I think I may fairly appeal to you for active sympathy.
I propose to write perfectly frankly, as you know me too well to misunder-
stand me. When I saw that Mr. Madanjit could not carry on the paper
without pecuniary assistance and as I knew that he was guided by thoroughly
patriotic motives, I placed at his service the bulk of my savings. That,
however, was not enough. Three months ago I took over the whole res-
ponsibility and management. Mr. Madanjit still remains nominally the
proprietor and publisher, because I believe that he has done much for
the community. My own office is at present being worked in the interests
of Indian Opinion and I have already become responsible to the extent
of nearly £3,500. Some English friends, who knew me intimately and
before whom I placed the scheme as described in the enclosed, took up
the idea and now it is in full working order and, although it does not show
the same measure of self-sacrifice as shown by the founders of the Fergusson
College in Poona, I venture to think that it is not a bad copy. It has been
a most delightful thing to me to see the English friends coming forward
so boldly. They are not literary men but they are sterling, honest, inde-
pendent men. Each of them had his own business or employment where
he was doing well, and yet none of them had the slightest hesitation in
coming forward as a worker for a bare living which means £3 per month,
with a distant prospect of getting profits.
It is also my intention, if my earnings continue, to open a school on
the grounds, which would be second to none in South Africa for the edu-
cation primarily of Indian children who would be resident boarders and,
secondarily, of all who want to join the school but would also reside on
the premises. For this, too, volunteer workers are required. It would
be possible to induce one or two Englishmen and English ladies here to
give their lifetime to this work, but Indian teachers are absolutely neces-
sary. Could you induce any graduates who have an aptitude for teaching,
who bear a blameless character and who would be prepared to work for
a mere living? Those who would come must be well-tried, first-class men.
I would want two or three at least but more could certainly be accom-
modated, and after the school is in working order, it is intended to add a
sanatorium with open-air treatment on hygienic lines. My immediate
purpose, however, is in connection with Indian Opinion. If you approve
of all I have said regarding it, will you kindly send a letter of encourage-
ment to be sent to the editor for publication; also if you could spare a few
moments, occasionally write an article ever so small for it? I am also
anxious to secure either honorary or paid correspondents who would
contribute weekly notes in English, Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil. If it
becomes expensive, I might have to be satisfied with only English corres-
pondence which would lend itself to being translated in the three Indian
languages. Could you recommend any such correspondent or correspon-
dents? The weekly notes should give an idea of what is being done on
your side with reference to the Indian question, giving extracts from notices
of the question in the newspapers, and should contain matters that are
likely to be interesting to the Indians in South Africa. You may at your
discretion disclose partly or wholly the contents of this letter in so far as
such a course may be necessary in the interests of the subject-matter hereof.
I hope you are keeping good health.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
1 Enclosure
Servants of India Society.
