233. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
As AT THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 3, 1930
DEAR SUBHAS BABU,
You are becoming more and more an enigma to me. I
want you to live up to the certificate that Deshbandhu once
gave me for you. He pictured you to me as a young man of
brilliant parts, singleness of purpose, great determination and
above pettiness. Your conduct in Calcutta therefore grieved me,
but I reconciled myself to its strangeness. But in Lahore you
became inscrutable and I smelt petty jealousy. I do not mind
stubborn opposition. I personally thrive on it and learn more
from opponents than from friends. I therefore always welcome
sincere and intelligent opposition. But in Lahore you became
an obstructionist. In connection with the Bengal dispute, in your
writings to the Press you were offensive and the discourteous,
impatient walk-out nearly broke my heart. You should have
bravely recognized the necessity and the propriety of your and
other friends' exclusion. It was not aimed at you, Prakasam or
Srinivasa Iyengar. It was meant merely to strengthen the hands
of the young President by providing him with a cabinet that
would be helpful in carrying forward the national work.
There was no question surely of distributing patronage, of
placating personal interests, however high they may be. The
question was one of devising measures for achieving indepen-
dence in the shortest possible time. How could you, having no
faith in the programme, or Prakasam, with philosophic contempt
for the present programme, or Srinivasa Iyengar, with his unfa-
thomable unbelief in Jawaharlal and Pandit Motilalji, forward the
nation's work? But all the three could help by becoming
sympathetic critics offering sound suggestions along their own
lines. There was certainly no undemocratic procedure. If the
putting of the names en bloc did not commend itself to the
Committee, the Committee could have so expressed its opinion
and that would have been also a fair measure of the strength
of your party. But I do not want to continue the argument. I
simply write this to ask you to retrace your steps and otherwise
also prove to me and those whose co-operation you would seek,
the truth of the certificate issued by Deshbandhu. I do not
want to change your view about anything, but I do want you
to change your conduct in enforcing those views.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S. N. 32579/37
