271. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, ALBUQUERQUE ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
June 30, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I think it will be mutually helpful if I reduce to writing the
substance of the advice I tendered you yesterday as a personal
friend and friend of the British.
I had made it clear at the outset that I had no representative
capacity and that, after the last resolution of the Working Com-
mittee, I could only speak as an individual in any case.
Your first proposal was to advise His Majesty's Government
to let you announce that a status similar to that of the self-govern-
ing dominions would be granted to India within one year of the
termination of the war, subject to an agreed understanding about
British commercial interests, defence, external relations, rights of
minorities and the position of Princes-regard being had to treaty
obligations with them. Granted these reservations, a Constituent
Assembly may draw up the Constitution which, unless there were
unacceptable provisions, will be adopted by His Majesty's Govern-
ment and placed by them before the Parliament for acceptance.
I said as to this that I personally could never accept it and
that so far as I knew, the Congress also would never approve of it.
My strong advice was that it should not be put before the Secre-
tary of State or before India. Any such announcement would fur-
ther embitter the relations between His Majesty's Government and
India. I stressed the point that nothing short of immediate
unequivocal declaration of independence, free of all control by the
British Government, would be accepted by the Congress. (India
free will no doubt have to negotiate a treaty, I hope, of partner-
ship, with Great Britain; will have to make provision for protection
of legitimate foreign interests, guarantee to the full the rights of the
minorities and make adequate arrangements with the Princes
consistently with due protection of the people living within their
jurisdiction. All this is inherent in the non-violent policy of the
Congress. For its predominant sanction will be, not the force of
arms behind it, but its sense of fairness and absolute justice. In
the absence of these two, independence will go as soon as obtained.
The thought thus expressed parenthetically was not put before
you as part of my advice. I see as I am writing this letter that
it was incomplete without it.) The question of drawing up of the
Constitution by a Constituent Assembly might be postponed to a
future suitable date. I suggested too, that it would be a catas-
trophe not to make the aforesaid unequivocal declaration of inde-
pendence, for whilst the Congress was openly pledged to it and
had been fighting for it persistently and consistently for a long
time, all parties whether it be the Muslim League or the Hindu
Mahasabha, or even the Princes, could not but prize indepen-
dence if it could be had. Therefore it passed comprehension
why there should be so much ado about making the overdue
declaration that India was free of all external control.
Your second proposal was that subject to the acceptance
of the proposed declaration, and pending the war, you would
increase the number of the Executive Council[lors] so as to
include representatives of various parties. As to this, I advised
that without the vital declaration of independence the Congress was
not likely to serve on the Council. I added that I adhered to the
view expressed in a recent Harijan article of mine, entitled "Two
Parties". Unless the parties had one mind on the question of fight-
ing for immediate independence and the method thereof no joint
effort was possible.
You had also in mind a proposal to convene a miniature Round
Table Conference composed of representatives of various parties,
groups and interests. I strongly dissuaded you from entertaining
any such proposal as being doomed to failure.
I then enlarged upon my confirmed opinion that time had
arrived for a revision of Britain's war policy. Frank recognition
of German superiority in organization and technique would be no
derogation from British valour and would add to it because of con-
formity to truth. Even if it were otherwise, and Britain could show
her superiority to Germans in every department and defeat them,
given sufficient time, my proposition would still hold. In order to
prove its validity, admission of German superiority was unneces-
sary. As you know, I had made this suggestion before the fall of
France. My proposition was based on purely humanitarian grounds.
I had chosen the present time as being opportune for pressing
it. Assuming that Nazis were as bad as they were said to be,
victory must be unattainable without copying the Nazi methods.
That would mean no deliverance from Nazism. Sufficient had
happened to prove the utter futility of armaments for the protection
of small nations no matter how brave they were. Britain's vic-
tory after the slaughter and ruthlessness which it must involve
could never make the world safe for democracy, nor bring it peace.
Such a victory must mean another preparation for a war more
inhuman than the present, as this one had proved more inhuman
than the last. For this and similar reasons I urged with all the
earnestness and force at my command that if Britain could accept
the non-violent method, it would redound to her eternal glory and
would count for much greater bravery than her proverbial bravery
In war.
I hoped too that it would not be retorted that I had no war-
rant for appealing to Britain suddenly to accept the non-violent
method when I had failed in persuading my colleagues and
co-workers to accept it when the time had come for its enforcement
in its fulness. I said in anticipation of the possibility of such a
retort that my colleagues and I represented a weak and subject
people wholly unarmed and untrained in the use of arms. The
non-violence of my conception was essentially for those who were
conscious of their ability to wield them with effect. Therefore I
suggested that if Britain could be convinced of the superiority of
non-violence over violence, now was the psychological moment for
the full adoption of the non-violent method. Britain with all her
intentions could not protect Abyssinia, Czechoslovakia, Poland,
Finland, Norway, Denmark, Holland, Belgium and France. If Britain
could accept the method presented by me, it would point to all
these countries the way of deliverance and ensure the peace of the
world as no other method ever would or could. It would confound
Nazi wisdom and put all the Nazi armaments out of use.
Lastly, I said that my proposal was based on a practical exper-
ience of non-violence extending over half a century of ceaseless
striving, experiment, research and prayer. I therefore requested
you to present my proposal to His Majesty's Government for accept-
ance as coming from a life-long friend and well-wisher of the
British people.
You were good enough to tell me that I could give the pur-
port of our conversation to the members of the Working Commit-
tee. This I propose to do by showing a copy of this letter to
them. Unless you have any objection I would like also to make a
public appeal to the British people to accept the non-violent
method at this supreme juncture in their life as also the life of
mankind.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a printed copy: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
