517. LETTER TO ZAKIR HUSAIN
May 25, 1936
MY DEAR ZAKIR,
Your letter has just reached me. The same post has brought
a copy of what Agatha Harrison wrote about the Doctor for
Hitavada—Servants of India paper in Nagpur. I send it to show what
he meant to me. I know he had interrupted his journey to Eu-
rope. My pleading for the journey was in vain. He had run to
me without [my] asking. And he had gathered round him all
the best doctors he knew. It was almost worth fasting to have
that extraordinary demonstration of love. It might be taken in
another light. One might well say it was folly to fast if it was to
cost the precious time of so many first-class physicians who during
those three weeks deprived their many patients of the assistance
they badly needed. Who knows how such demonstrations should
really be taken? We can but obey, in all humility, the will as
we can know it of Him who is the Controller-General of every
second of our life.
This long paragraph shows you the state of mind I am in.
Not that I have time enough and to spare here from the daily
tasks. But I am in the position of poor Zohra. If I had not the
peremptory call of duty from moment to moment, I should be as
distracted as she is.
For the last three days I have been framing in my mind a
letter to you alone and then I thought of Shwaib then Khwaja
and then quite forgetfully of Sherwani4, not just then realizing
that the big man was also no more in the flesh with us. There
are other Muslims I know. But for this moment these were the
names vividly before me.
But I know that none of you can become the infallible guide
Dr. Ansari had grown to be. It is not a question of merits. It
is a question of faith.
As I am writing this I feel I must confine myself to you.
The question I wanted to ask was and I still want to ask is, will
you be to me what the Doctor was on the Hindu-Muslim question?
What distracts me is not the absence of the warmth of a gentle-
man-friend, of a God-believing and godfearing doctor. It is the
absence of an unfailing guide in the matter of Hindu-Muslim
unity. My silence at the present time on this question is not a
sign of my apathy, it is a sign of an ever-deepening conviction
that the unity has got to come. Then I ask, will you take Dr.
A[nsari]'s place? In answer, do not think of your status in socie-
ty. If you have self-confidence, you must say 'Yes'. If you have
not, you must say 'No'. I shall not misunderstand you. I know
and love you too well to misunderstand you.
Whether you become my guide or not, please answer the
question I asked, among others, Dr. Ansari in my last letter. Is
this step the Frontier Government has taken, that of practically
refusing the grant to Sikh Hindu girls' schools that teach through
Hindi and Gurumukhi right? I have been asked for months to
express my opinion. I have resisted the invitation till now. But
the question is one of principle and bears in its womb great con-
sequences. I have approached Sahibzada Sir Abdul Qayum in
the matter. He has sent me what is a painful reply. You can
have a copy if you want it, before expressing your opinion.
I do not know whether you share the opinion Mujeeb ex-
pressed in his letter to me on Hindi-Hindustani question. I would
like you, him, Aqil and other friends to read my two articles in
Harijan and if they do not give satisfaction, I would like you all
to argue the thing out with me, if you like through Harijan or
privately. I see no cause for difference of opinion. But if there
is, we must try to remove it.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
