218. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
AHMEDABAD,
July 22 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter, also the cable sent by Mr. Turner to whom
I am writing. I do not know that you expected any cable in reply.
My heart is with you. I have unpacked our goods and as a perpetual
reminder I am using your favourite wooden pillow which you will recall
you did not want to leave behind. In trying to reduce things to order,
I ever think of you, I ever miss you. As it is, I am simply preparing
the house as if I wanted to receive you. That is, you are positively
with me when I am cleaning up the compound and the closets. I ask
myself whether you would approve of my work and the method of
cleaning. Your suggestions and your nose I miss so much.
But for better or for worse we must live for some time in physical
separation. Only we must so act that we should be nearer in spirit
if we have to put up with this enforced physical separation. Your
internment has brought you nearer to me, if it is possible for you to
be nearer than you were.
Your life there must be a model for the others. How I would love
to think that you are there vindicating your German birth, your ancestral
faith and our joint ideals. You vindicate the first two if you realize
the third. And I know you will not fail.
I shall expect from you a full description of the life there.
I hope you will not allow anything there to irritate you and that
you will act with the greatest calmness of mind and sufficient
detachment.
Life here is growing sweeter I think. It is difficult but worth trying.
More and more order is being evolved. Narandas, Maganlal's brother,
is also coming to us. That means that all the boys of this particular
cousin of mine are to devote themselves to this kind of life. It is
wonderful sacrifice. Narandas you will love when you see him. There
is something so good about all the Chhaganlal brothers. My brother's
boys and their wives have disappointed me completely and so has my
sister. This is strange. And yet not quite so strange. Harilal is more
1 The year is evident from the contents, e.g; the references to Narandas Gandhi
and Gandhiji's sister ; vide Vol. XIII, pp. 91, 113 and 127.
2 Gandhiji's elder sister, Raliatbehn, also known as Gokibehn
220
and more going away from me. What was before hard for him to follow
is now not even worth following. He has come to the conclusion that
there is nothing good in the institution. Such is the might of inertia.
I have unpacked all your books. They are somewhat damaged. I
shall take care of what has been spared.
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
