159. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 25, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
Here is a letter from Narasimhan about the Southern
tour. I do not know why Rajagopalachari wants me to tour in
the South as early as possible. You will perhaps know. I am
asking Narasimhan to ascertain the reason.
From your letter about N., I suspect that you think that I don't
want to do anything with her, but that is not the case. I am
anxious to have her. But she is so unhinged that she might not
come at all. Anyway, I am telegraphing today to you and to
the American Mission. I know that The National Call's references
to S. are all unmerited and vicious. He has done no wrong to N.
N. herself does not know why her passions were excited when
she saw him at Sabarmati. In the letter in which she told me
this, she had acquitted S. of all blame. Many women, like
many men, often get excited over seeing some members of the op-
posite sex, and N., having led a life of complete abandon would
naturally get excited. I am asking S. to see you so that you can
make his acquaintance and know him. Now that you are in
this case, it is much better for you to understand all the actors.
It will help me also to have your estimate of these actors, for I
have not seen the last of any of them.
I see that Ramnarayan cannot come for two months as Ram-
nath 'Suman' was asking to be allowed to replace him for two or
three months. And it was a question whether you could agree
and whether Ramnarayan would waive his claim in favour of
Ramnath. I suppose you know him. He is quite capable and he
will do all the work that you expect. Of course, Chandrashankar
cannot possibly cope with the correspondence, editing, and draw-
ing up newspaper reports.
I have a copy of your letter to N egi. You seem to have ex-
pected a reply from me to your letter about Biharilal, but in your
letter enclosing his long letter to you you told me that you
would write further about him. Naturally, therefore, I did not
write, but I can now say generally that we may not create work for
him. If there is work for which he is fitted, it should undoubtedly be
given to him, even though similar work can be done for less
wages than what might have to be given to him.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
Encl. One letter
From a photostat: G.N. 1130
