69. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
February 17, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,
Although I have not had the pleasure of meeting you, I
address you on purpose as "dear friend". I am looked upon
by the representatives of the British Government as a great,
if not the greatest, enemy of the British. Since I regard myself
as a friend and servant of humanity including the British, in
token of my goodwill I call you, the foremost representative
of the British in India, my "friend".
2. I have received in common with some others, a notice in-
forming me, for the first time, why I am detained and conferring on
me the right of representation against my detention. I have duly
sent my reply1, but I have as yet heard nothing from the Gov-
ernment. A reminder too, has gone after a wait of thirteen days.
3. I have said some only have received notices because
out of the six of us in this camp, only three have received them.
I presume that all will receive them in due course. But my
mind is filled with the suspicion that the notices have been
sent as a matter of form only, and not with any intention to
do justice. I do not wish to burden this letter with argument.
I repeat what I said in the correspondence with your prede-
cessor, that the Congress and I are wholly innocent of the
charges brought against us. Nothing but an impartial tribunal
to investigate the Government case, and the Congress case
against the Government, will bring out the truth.
4. The speeches recently made on behalf of the Govern-
ment in the Assembly on the release motion, and on the gag-
ging order on Shri Sarojini Devi, I consider to be playing with
fire. I distinguish between defeat of Japanese arms and Allied
victory. The latter must carry with it the deliverance of India
from the foreign yoke. The spirit of India demands complete
freedom from all foreign dominance and would, therefore, resist
Japanese yoke equally with British or any other. The Congress
represents that spirit in full measure. It has grown to be an
institution whose roots have gone deep down into the Indian soil.
I was, therefore, staggered to read that Government were satisfied
with things as they were going. Had they not got from among
the Indian people the men and money they wanted? Was not the
Government machinery running smooth? This self satisfaction
bodes ill for Britain, India and the world, if it does not quickly
give place to a searching of hearts in British high places.
5. Promises for the future are valueless in the face of the world
struggle in which the fortune of all nations and therefore of the
whole of humanity is involved. Present performance is the
peremptory need of the moment, if the war is to end in world
peace and not be a preparation for another war bloodier than the
present, if indeed there can be a bloodier. Therefore real war
effort must mean satisfaction of India's demand. "Quit India"
only gives vivid expression to that demand and has not the
sinister and poisonous meaning attributed to it without warrant
by the Government of India. The expression is charged with the
friendliest feeling for Britain in terms of the whole of humanity.
6. I have done. I thought that, if I claim to be a friend
of the British, as I do, nothing should deter me from sharing
my deepest thoughts with you. It is no pleasure for me to be
in this camp, where all my creature comforts are supplied
without any effort on my part, when I know that millions
outside are starving for want of food. But I should feel utterly
helpless, if I went out and missed the food by which alone
living becomes worth while.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, p. 118. Also C.W. 10505. Courtesy: India
Office Library
Rules passed on Sarojini Naidu on January 26. Sir Reginald Maxwell who
defended the prohibitory order had, in his speech, argued that it was un-
fair to give freedom of speech to Mrs. Naidu which was denied to her col-
leagues of the Congress Working Committee. (ibid.)
