374. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
April 4, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad writes a long letter from which I
enclose herewith the relevant portion.
I shall be painfully surprised if you can confirm the report re-
ceived by the Maulana Saheb. Mine was a simple inquiry. We had
come so near each other that there was no mental reservation be-
tween us. And if anything was left obscure there was no difficulty
about going straight to the point and clearing obscurities. That
Dominion Status was not acceptable to the Congress had been
cleared at the interview which led to my inquiry. The object was
to know where each party exactly stood. I should be very sorry
indeed to discover that I left on your mind the impression that if
Dominion Status of the Statute of Westminster variety was meant,
the Congress would accept it.
I must refuse to give any credence to the suggestion that you
had lost caste with the Cabinet because you had allowed yourself to
be overreached by me as the report implies. I have not known Brit-
ish statecraft to be so easily moved from its dispositions as suggested
by Maulana Saheb's correspondent. And I shall hope that you
could never consider me guilty of wanting to overreach you.
Whilst I am writing to you, I want to have another thing also
off my mind. I have already told you that in my son Devdas you
have a warm-hearted champion. He has been writing long letters
to me trying to convince me that I did you a gross injustice in
abruptly terminating our last conversation. He discounts my assur-
ance that the conversation ended because both you and I saw that
the gulf between us was found to be too unbridgeable to be handled
at that moment by prolonging conversations. Indeed it was your
expression that it would be more manly for us to end the conversa-
tions the very day we began them and make the confession to the
public. I at once accepted the accuracy of your characterization.
point cleared, a way for further negotiation would be opened. He drew the
attention of the Home Government to this fact with all emphasis, and assured
her that his position would be strengthened if he gets a chance of making
such a statement. He also insisted that so far as that declaration was con-
cerned, it should not be mixed up with the communal problem. The League
may be opposed to it to any extent, but the political destiny of India could
not be now changed. But when the basis of negotiation was clarified, and he
(the Viceroy) made an announcement with the surest hope of your approv-
al, then all of a sudden you changed your attitude and declared quite un-
equivocally that India could not accept it. This weakened the position of Lin-
lithgow, and the Home Government considered him to be incapable of
understanding and dealing with Indian situation. In short, Linlithgow had a
deep grievance against your attitude.
"Here ends the letter. When I was in Delhi last time, I had come to
know of similar things through other sources. . . . "
Devdas says, that was said out of courtesy if not British pride, and
that you were eager to prolong the conversations. He is thus most
disconsolate and thinks that my interpretation of your attitude is
wrong. You alone can help me to settle this domestic dispute.
M. K. G.
From a copy: C.W. 7843. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
