37. LETTER TO LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR'S SECRETARY
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
25 &26, COURT CHAMBERS,
P. O. BOX 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
November 14, 1903
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
The question of the removal for present holders of trading licences
is to them so important and serious that I venture again to trespass upon
His Excellency's attention.
It was submitted to His Excellency by the deputation that Lord
Milner's despatch dated 11th May and addressed to Mr. Chamberlain
strengthened the view held by the British Indians that existing licences
would not be affected by the Notice 356 of this year. In support, I beg
to quote as follows from the despatch.
They (the Government) are anxious, however, to do so in the manner most
considerate to the Indians already settled in the country, and with the greatest
respect for vested interests, even where these have been allowed to spring up
contrary to law....Had we had to deal merely with the Asiatic population as
it existed before war, it might have been possible to remain passive until a new
law could have been framed to the satisfaction of His Majesty's Government.
But with so many new-corners constantly pouring in and applying for licences
to trade, it became impossible to persist in the policy of complete inaction.
. . . As I have already stated, the Government is prepared to recognise the vested
interests of Asiatics resident here before the war. On the other hand, it feels
that it would not be justified in allowing new vested interests to spring up con-
trary to the law. During the war and since the declaration of peace, a large
number of temporary trading licences were issued to new-corners. These licences
have been renewed until December 31st, 1903, but the holders have been
warned that, on that date, they will be required to remove to streets or Bazaars
selected for this purpose.
From the above, it is clear that Lord Milner has been under the im-
pression that trading licences have been graned to new-corners and there-
fore they alone should be removed to streets or Bazaars. But as the depu-
tation has submitted, there are very few new-corners, if any, that have
been granted licences to trade outside Bazaars.
Again Lord Milner states:
We have no wish to subject respectable British Indians or civilised Asiatics
generally to any disabilities....It (the Government) is in the most important
respects showing a consideration for these Asiatics which the late Government
did not show.
One of these respects is exemption of Asiatics of a superior class from
all special legislation. So far, it is meant to be granted in respect of resi-
dents only. I venture to submit that, pending new legislation, those who
conform to the sanitary and other regulations should, according to the
above, be left undisturbed in their trade.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Pretoria Archives: L. G. 2132, Asiatics 1902-1906.
