196. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
July 2, 1908
SIR,
The Supreme Court has decided that Asiatics have no right to re-
call voluntary registration applications. The object of going to Court
was for voluntar[il]y registered Asiatics to place themselves on the same
footing as their unregistered brethren who, they contend, have a right
to be placed on a par with them but who, General Smuts contends,
ought to be banished out of the country or, being absent, should not be
allowed to return to the country of their domicile.
The questionable victory gained by General Smuts on a highly
technical point of law will not thwart the purpose of the Asiatics to be-
come disregistered, provided that they have sufficient courage and spirit
of self-sacrifice.
The application to the Supreme Court had to have a legal as also
a moral basis. The legal basis consisted in the ability on either side to
treat the compromise as a nullity without getting any relief from the
Court. The moral basis consisted in showing that Asiatics wished to
treat it as a nullity, because of its breach by General Smuts.
The breach is twofold. General Smuts will not repeal the Act
without imposing unacceptable conditions, and he will not take volun-
tary registration in terms of the compromise from those who are now
entering the country and who are entitled to enter it. General
Smuts denies having promised to repeal the Act, and interprets the
compromise to mean that those who entered the country after the lapse
of three months after the date of the compromise should register under
the Act. Let the public judge the meaning of the following:
Under these circumstances, we would once more respectfully suggest to the
Government that all Asiatics over the age of 16 should be allowed within a cer-
tain limited period, say three months, to register themselves, and that to all
who so register the Act be not applied, and that the Government take what-
ever steps they deem advisable to legalize such registration. Such mode of
registration should apply to those also who being out of the Colony may return
and otherwise possess the right of re-entry. 1
General Smuts says that the men who were out of the Colony should
have returned within the three months in order to entitle them to
come under the compromise. I ask whether it was possible ever to
inform Asiatics throughout the world of the existence of the compromise,
or for them to return within that period.
As to the promise of repeal, I beg to ask your indulgence for publi-
cation of the enclosed correspondence and to leave it to the public to
judge whether the repeal was promised or not. I would draw atten-
tion to the fact that, in answer to my letter of the 22nd February
detailing the legislation to repeal and replace the Asiatic Act, there is
not one word of repudiation of the promised repeal. Of my allu-
sions to the promise in the correspondence that took place after suspi-
cions were roused, there is no repudiation. My pointed questions are
evaded. I add to this the statement that, immediately after the assault
committed on me, as a result of my acceptance of the compromise,
Mr. Chamney saw me at Mr. Doke's house, and he and I drew up a
notice for publication in Asiatic languages that, the Asiatics complying
with the compromise, the Act would be repealed. This notice
Mr. Chamney said would be taken to General Smuts and then pub-
lished. He returned the next day or the day after and informed me
that Asiatics were registering and inquired whether, in view of that fact,
it was necessary to publish the notice. I, never dreaming of recanta-
tion on General Smuts' part, said it need not be published. I challenge
him to produce the original draft, if it is still in existence. I add, further,
1 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", p. 41.
2 Gandhiji-Smuts correspondence
that Mr. Chamney, not once, but often, told me that General Smuts
would keep his promise and repeal the Act, and that, not much over a
month ago, I met him by appointment at Winchester House, where he
actually discussed the draft submitted by me, and, in the main, approved
of it. He has, on oath, denied that General Smuts promised repeal in
his presence. He may similarly deny the statements I am now making.
But Truth is superior to General Smuts, him, and me.
The path before my countrymen is clear. They must be prepared
again to suffer. Through their sufferings the public will see who was
right.
Let me reiterate the points of dispute. Though promise of repeal
is denied, General Smuts is ready to repeal the Act, if we would submit
to the rights of domiciled Asiatics, and educated Asiatics who are en-
titled under the Immigrants' Restriction Act to enter the country, being
taken away.
I am, etc.,
M. K.
Indian Opinion, 11-7-1908
