151. LETTER TO GIRDHARLAL
ASHRAM,
March 19, 1926
BHAI GIRDHARLAL,
I have your letter. One consolation is that there are at this
very moment quite a few people in the world who are similarly
situated.
(1) It is our environment rather than yourself that is to blame
for your inability to put your spare time to good use. You
must not resign yourself to it thinking it God's will. On the
contrary, you should cultivate the strength to stand against the
environment.
(2) I do not see anything wrong in your being happy with
Ramanama instead of abandoning yourself to futile laments when-
ever you are helpless.
(3) There is nothing to regret if you cannot earn money.
But if you fail to uphold your dharma that is a matter of regret;
whether or not it is upheld is for you to decide.
(4) It is a serious blunder to believe that nocturnal discharge
is more harmful than intercourse. Both cause debility and often
the latter causes more. But we fail to see the harm in intercourse
by reason of conventional approval, and since a night discharge
upsets the mind we tend to magnify the harm. I suppose you
know that in spite of having sexual intercourse one may suffer
from nocturnal discharge. Therefore if you admit the merit of
brahmacharya and intend to practise it, stick to it without grieving
over discharges which occur in spite of your continued efforts to
the contrary. After you have practised brahmacharya for some time
you will gain control over your mind. How long it will take,
one cannot say, because everyone does not take the same time;
one takes more or less time according to one's capacity. Some
never obtain control over their thoughts; yet they get the cer-
tain fruit of brahmacharya observed in practice, so that they come
to possess a physique which can check the mind with ease.
(5) In my opinion husband and wife do not have to obtain
each other's consent for practising brahmacharya. It is desirable if
both co-operate with each other to attain it, it is quite proper also
to seek such co-operation. But whether or not one gets the other's
consent, one who desires it should practise it and benefit from it.
Mutual consent is essential for intercourse, but no consent is neces-
sary for abstention. A man who has intercourse with his wife
without her consent is guilty of rape. He violates the law of God
as well as man.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19874
