364. LETTER TO FULCHAND SHAH
RANCHI,
Sunday [July 8, 1917]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
A letter similar to the one I sent to Punjabhai has been sent or
will be sent to the following persons: Ambalal Sarabhai,
Ranchhodbhai Patwari, Becharlal Kalidas, Kunvarji Anandji,
Govindji Dahyabhai, Barrister Shukla Barrister Devchandbhai4,
Dr. Mehta, Mangaldas Sheth Narottamdas Morarji Lallubhai
Shamaldas Dr. Edul Behram, Revashankarbhai Mansukhlal,
Ramjibhai [of] Madras, Sitaram Pandit Ratilal Sheth, [Mohanlal]
Kameshvar Pandya, Amritlal Thakkar, Gopalji Thakkar Krishna
Rao, Pattani, and Shankarlal Banker11. If you or Maganlal or others
think of any names besides these, let me know. I am thinking of
sending a copy to Mr. Popatlal Chudgar as also to our Popatlal.
I am sending an English version herewith. Copies of it have been
sent to non-Gujaratis at Madras and other places. If any reply
or help is received from them, let me know.
There was a letter in The Pioneer from Mr. Irwin. Having got
a chance of criticising it, I sent a reply which you must have of
course seen there. I have received a good many cuttings, however,
and so I send one to you. That letter has proved more effective
than any number of speeches could have been. I hope all cut-
tings are being preserved. You may not have the cutting from
The Bengalee; I am sending one.
I am here up to Wednesday. I will then go to Motihari.
Your letters should continue to be directed there. There is a
possibility that I may have to go to Bombay before the 29th in
connection with [the internment of] Annie Bai . Do tell me every
time how Muljibhai keeps. Punjabhai was to leave for Marwar.
Has he left? Have the books expected from Bombay arrived?
Has any arrangement been made concerning Shivpujan's box?
Chi. Maganlal knows about this. Are the Ashram inmates able
to utilize the presence of Swamiji for learning Hindi? I suppose
the women are not able to do so.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
Got your letter after I wrote this. Received the statement. I
see that this is a laborious job. You should inform me only when
there is some notable item of expenditure or income. . . . O t h e r w i s e
don't worry. Rs. 20/- is sent [every month] for. . . . ' s mother.
The amount should be debited to the Ashram account.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 6376
