63. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
MUZAFFARNAGAR,
October 27, 1929
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I have not replied to your letter. I hope that Bhai Hem-
shankar is now completely free from his teeth trouble.
In my suggestion to avoid personal criticism I did not think
merely of practical wisdom, but it was and is a matter of princi-
ple also. Just as it would be uncivilized on my part to criticize
you behind your back or outside your home, though it would
be a duty to do so in your face, it is also improper to criticize one
princely State in the territory of another, particularly when the
latter is known to be on friendly terms with the former.
I know that we do not always follow this principle, but that
does not prove that as a principle it is wrong.
Such being my views, I hold it to be the duty of a person,
who believes in the principle I have stated, to dissociate himself
from an organization-in the present instance, the youth move-
ment - which indulges in such criticism as a matter of principle
and makes it its chief aim. It is one's duty to resign from an
institution whose defects carry one in a direction one does not ap-
prove of There may be no objection to remaining, and occa-
sionally it may even be a duty to remain, in the institution whose
defects we hope to remove or remedy, keeping ourselves aloof
from those defects. I think I have fully replied to your letter
from Broach, dated September 29.
Now I turn to your second letter. The problem of Wadhwan
is a complicated one. The chief question is what strength you
have - you, that is, your organization as a whole. How far all
the members of your organization can feel love for the wrong-
doer is for you to examine. If you are satisfied in the matter,
you have the full right to offer satyagraha. Whether you have the
strength to offer it, whether the time for it is ripe, whether you
have acquired the necessary fitness - all these questions should be
considered beforehand. This means that, in deciding the question,
what is first needed is detailed knowledge of the facts; after
1 Vide Vol. XXXV, pp. 483-.
55
that, all that is necessary is application of practical wisdom. You
alone know the facts. If an error from the point of view of
practical wisdom is committed, it can be overlooked.
After this you may act as you think fit. If you wish to con-
sult me in the matter, you may see me in the Ashram after
November 25. But it seems that you will have already taken,
before you get this reply, many of the steps you propose to take.
You know my tour programme. If you so desire, you may write
to me at any of the places included in the programme and ask
me about any matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2836. Courtesy: Fulchand K. Shah
