74. LETTER TO PADMARAJ JAIN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 29, 1928
DEAR PADMARAJ BABU,
I have your letter. My views have been frequently and un-
equivocally expressed in the pages of Young India. I have no notion
of what is being done there at the present moment. But I suggest
your seeking advice from Pandit Malaviyaji who knows more of the
inwardness of the present movement than I do lying on a sick-
bed. As you will notice, therefore, I am simply satisfying myself with
wrong to say that anything had been agreed upon by the Muslim League which
had not yet formally appointed its representatives to the Conference. He added
that he was no doubt personally of the opinions he had expressed, but he
felt that, in the absence of definite authority from his League, he was not com-
petent even to bind himself with those opinions. Thus it was that the long
sittings and elaborate discussions occupying ten days came practically to nothing.
It was also found that the attendance at the Conference was thinning away from
day to day until it came down to 14 on the 21st. The Executive of the Muslim
League is meeting on the 26th and Mr. Jinnah has promised to do his best to
bring them round to his point of view. In all these circumstances, I thought
it was futile to go on with the Conference and suggested that a sub-committee
be appointed to go into the whole question and make its report as soon as
possible to an adjourned sitting of the Conference. This was agreed to and the
Conference was adjourned to the 8th March, a committee of 20 being ap-
pointed to enter upon their work at once. We have a large field to cover, but
will either be able to get on better after the 26th or give up the attempt. I
feel that my presence here is necessary till either of the two contingencies I have
mentioned happens. . . . I shall write or wire as soon as I am free."
an expression of my general views on swadeshi, boycott, and the
like.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. PADMARAJ JAIN
BENGAL PROVINCIAL HINDU SABHA
160 HARRISON ROAD
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 13089
