362. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
November 12, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,
I could understand what you say in your letter. It is writ-
ten in a plain straightforward manner but it is full of your
ignorance. If you go to England you must acquire a degree
and it takes a minimum of seven years to attain a genuine
degree and in no case less than five years. And all that you
will get will be what you could have achieved here itself. You
have made a grave allegation against British-educated as well
as Indian-educated doctors. At present there are doctors of both
the types who perform the work of a Bhangi and feel no shame
in that. Rupees 3,000 is not enough these days for seven years.
You should have at least Rs. 30,000. And Rs. 60,000 if you
take Draupadi along with you. This is the minimum sum needed
for seven years. In spite of my simple living it cost me Rs.
13,000 for three years. And the cost of living has now doubled.
But the consideration of money may be looked upon as secon-
dary. I am strongly opposed to the very idea of going to England.
Going to England might be proper only after one has acquired a
basic knowledge of one's subject. I have no doubt that the basic
knowledge can be easily acquired in India itself. The notion of
going to England is simply mistaken and must be put an end to.
If you think that you are not in error you may rebel against me
and go in dependently without my blessings. You have the right
to rebel as did Prahlad. A revolt is proved right only by its
success. I too had defied my brother, who was like a father to
me, for thirteen years. It was successful because it proved to be
morally correct. You too may take recourse to defiance if you
so wish.
If you would listen to me do as I say. Stay on here for
the time being. Study anatomy and physiology. I can get the
doctor here to help you. Do whatever work I may assign to
you. You may if you wish send for Draupadi. I can arrange
for some accommodation.
I too don't like Draupadi's absence
from your side. You may take it that your knowledge of physio-
logy is very imperfect, almost nil. The love of study needed for
this, I find, is lacking in you.
Tell me if I am mistaken.
If you do not like my proximity you may live at a place
of your own choosing and be content with correspondence. But
if it comes to that I will take it to mean lack of forbearance
in you. I know those who cannot live with me. You are not
one of those nor should you ever be.
Ask me if all this is not clear. Try to understand it well.
I return your letter so that you may not have to prepare
a copy.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
between pp. 132 and 133
