605. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 26/30, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Premabehn, Sushila, Amtulbehn, Sharda, Noorbanu and
Pyare Ali were here before I got your packet. When absolutely
necessary you may increase the size of the party from five to
six or even seven. But ordinarily it would be desirable to stick
to five. Only this time the number was six, not counting Amina's
children. I think it will be safer for you to stick to the limit I
have given, so that you may not displease anybody. Vallabhbhai
had concluded that you had dropped your name because there were
already five names. Whether that is the reason or whether you
did not come because you did not think it necessary to come,
in either case it was all right. Probably, there will be no occasion
for you to bear all this in mind. I have still not received the
Government's decision in regard to Mirabehn. If it is in the
negative, you may take it that I will stop seeing visitors.
Lakshmidevi, who is in the prison here, has left her spectacles
in the Ashram. She has asked me to request you, if you find
them, to send them here with somebody. If no one is coming,
send them by parcel. And also send 20 tolas of asafoetida pills
along with it. When you say that Ba's letters were dispatched
directly, I suppose you mean that they were sent through the
Superintendent. If that is so, please inquire there. In affixing
a stamp on the envelope in which you dispatch letters for me, you
generally affix it at one of the two ends where it is closed. But
unless you affix stamps at both ends, affixing a stamp at one
end only serves no useful purpose. It would be advisable, there-
fore, to affix stamps at both ends. Either do that, or put sealing
wax at both ends. Adopt whichever method you like.
You may certainly discuss with other inmates there my sugges-
tion about calculating the value of work at the rate of one anna
per hour, but I think for your own observation you will find it
very helpful to maintain such a record in an independent book.
The books being kept at present will continue to be maintained.
The one I have suggested will be in addition to them. If, how-
ever, I have been able to explain my idea, you will see that there
is so little to be recorded that the work will not be heavy at all.
497
49-32
Moreover we shall be able to judge whether there is any truth
in what I have been saying. If the summary at the end of a
month reveals a great difference between the actual figure of ex-
penditure and the one arrived at by following the method of
calculation suggested by me, we may assume that we shall never
be able to close the gap and my mind will then start working in
some other direction. I am confident, however, that such a sum-
mary will lead to a conclusion which will surprise us. It is my
experience that very often because of our lethargy we conti-
nue to labour under a mistaken idea, and, if we make proper cal-
culations, we are able to get rid of our preconceived notions and
correct our errors. Personally, at the moment, I see no error at
all in my reasoning and I believe, therefore, that the result will be
excellent. Since for hundreds of years different types of work have
been paid for at different rates, we assume that that is the right
thing to do but I think it is a false notion.
Did you read the latest letter which Harilal wrote to me?
Even the handwriting is not steady. He seems to have written the
letter with a trembling hand. Either he has written it in great ex-
citement, or he was drunk when he wrote it. The language is all
excitement and insolence. No attention is paid to ordinary syn-
tax, words are left incomplete and even the signature is not com-
pleted. I think we should completely forget him now. If God wills,
he will reform himself one day. Even in order to open his eyes,
it is necessary that we should let him know plainly what we
think about him. You say that you got "both" my letters to him.
Does that mean that you also got the one which we thought had
miscarried? If you got it, did you examine the postmark on it?
The electric treatment seems to have had no effect on the
hand. For the first two days, it seemed that it might really do
some good. The real trouble just now is not with the right hand
but with the left elbow, but the doctor does not give electric
treatment for that. He has been thinking of giving radium treat-
ment. Since I spin on the Magan wheel, I do no work at all
with the left hand. But there is no cause for worry. So far it has
been paining only when I work with it. At other times there is
no pain. As for getting Khambhatta here to examine the bone,
I cannot say anything just now. Permission for him has been
received, but it will not be possible for me to avail myself of it
if the reply in regard to Mirabehn is in the negative. I thought
I had sent to you the five names which had already been approved.
You know three of them now. The other two are Trivedi and Lady
Thackersey. It would be fine indeed if you think you can
look after Jayantiprasad's daughter. Jayantiprasad gave me the
impression, during the Dandi March, that he was careful in
observing rules.
I feel rather unhappy that Chimanlal and Sharda do not
improve. I write down here the suggestion which occurs to me
just now as to what they should do. I will not write to them
separately. Let them take this as addressed to them. Shivaji used
to keep indifferent health. He read all the literature on the sub-
ject that he could get, tried the diet changes and exercises recom-
mended in the books which he read and succeeded in improving
his health. Chimanlal should do something like that. I don't mean
that all could try everything that Shivaji did. But Chimanlal has
been in the Ashram for a long time, has thought about the sub-
ject and has observed my experiments too. It is, therefore, pos-
sible that he will hit upon something which his body needs. We
have plenty of books on the subject in the Ashram. There is a
small book even on chromopathy. This remedy is quite easy to
try. The doctor whose treatment helped Amtulbehn employs it
in many cases. Light asana exercises also may help. Chimanlal
should find some time and read about them. According to me, these
remedies are more effective than doctors' medicines, and they are
spiritually harmless. We often see that even the latter fail. Medi-
cal science is altogether imperfect and much of it is based on
hypotheses. Since the body of every person is a unique organism,
we do not at all exaggerate in saying that there are no remedies
which are universally applicable. About Sharda, I think that we
know the remedies but they have not all been tried. She also may
be partly responsible for this. You should gently persuade her to
try them.
I think it was a very good thing that Jamna went to Rana-
vav. Since Purushottam is with her, you will not have to worry
about her at all. Parnerkar's problem is very complicated. Do
what you can. Read my letter to Titus. Compared with the
heat there, the heat here is a joke. Hence our tapascharya, both
outward and inward, is no real tapascharya. Yours deserves to be
envied. I hope and pray that you will survive it.
If all my letters are not translated into Hindi, make it a
strict rule that they must be. Even if there are sometimes only
two or three persons who do not know Gujarati, the letter must
be translated, unless the persons themselves do not wish it.
May 30, 1932
I had written one letter to Savitribehn, that is, Mrs. Stan-
denath, and put on it the address given by her. But the letter
has been returned from the D.L.O. I am now sending it to you,
along with the envelope. If you have more particulars of her
address, use it and send the letter by registered post. She must
be awaiting a letter from me and, having got no reply from me,
must be feeling unhappy. If you find her full address, please
send it to me too.
Father Elwin has suggested that we should recite a Chris-
tian prayer here every Friday, and that his Christian friends will
sing the same prayer on that day and at the same time. They
would thus cultivate a communion of hearts with us. Mahadev
accepted the suggestion as soon as we read his letter last Friday
and we replied to it with Premal Jyoti. Hence we have fixed
upon that hymn as the one we will sing every Friday. Discuss
the matter with Panditji and, if he agrees, sing it every Friday
there too at the time of evening prayers. You will observe that I
have now resumed writing with my right hand. The doctors here
are strongly of the view that the left elbow requires complete rest.
Failing this, they think gradually the pain will increase. I have,
therefore, given up even writing with the left hand. In a day or
two, they will put the whole arm in plaster. Don't get alarmed
on reading this, for the elbow has never pained so far except
when I have been working with the left hand. The arm is to be
put into plaster only as a precaution. The doctors are convinced
that this pain has no connection with my diet. People who play
tennis also get such pain sometimes, and the doctors believe that,
because of my regular spinning for many years, I have strained
the elbow much more than tennis players do. Hence they think
that it requires complete rest for some time.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8829. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
