9. LETTER TO ABDUL AZIZ
BOMBAY,
August 8, 1919
DEAR MR. ABDUL AZIZ,
When Sir Narayan Chandavarkar wrote his open letter to
me and the Government expostulated with me upon the then
proposed renewal of civil—wrongly called passive—resistance, I
respectfully responded by suspension for the time being, and there-
fore did not attempt any other reply. Your open letter however
raises fundamental issues and requires a detailed reply to the
various objections to civil resistance discussed in it.
At the outset, I wish to thank you for your kindness in
thinking of me. You will be interested to know that I had stal-
wart Pathans from your district working with me as civil resisters
during the eight long years of the struggle in South Africa. One
of them was working in a Natal mine. He was severely beaten
by his foreman apparently for no other cause than that he had
joined the civil resistance movement. Being under the pledge not
to resist the wrongdoer and yet to disobey his will, he meekly
suffered the punishment for disobedience. He came to me and
bared his striped back as he was saying, "I have suffered this for
the sake of my pledge and you. I am a Pathan and the man who
laid his cruel hands upon me would not have gone unscathed
any other time." His suffering and that of thousands like him
secured, among other things, repeal of the abominable poll-tax of
£3 which our poor countrymen, their wives and the grown-up
children had to pay annually as the price of freedom for the prin-
cipal member to reside in Natal without indenture.
You ask me to give up "the idea that wrought the freedom
of the dumb labourers of Natal". You wish me to give up the
idea that has made Islam a living faith among the great faiths of
the world. No evil followed my civil disobedience of the order
of expulsion served upon me by the authorities in Champaran in
1917. I claim that my resistance laid the foundation for the partial
awakening of the poor ryots of Champaran and the Government
of Bihar. How shall I give up an idea which I have treasured
for the past forty years and which I have consciously enforced in
my own life with no mean success for the last thirty years?
But you cite the awful experiences of April last. Have you
really analysed the situation? The sixth of April was observed
from Cape Comorin to Peshawar and from Karachi to Calcutta
by millions of men, women and children—an event the like of which
has not occurred within living memory. I do not know what
happened that day in Peshawar. But I do know that it passed off
peacefully in all the chief cities and in thousands of hamlets of
India. I suggest to you that it was a striking demonstration of the
possibilities of civil resistance. On the 6th, there was no civil
resistance actually offered. It was a preparation day. Any other
Government in the world would have recognized this incoming
new force, would have courageously yielded to it and removed the
causa causans—the Rowlatt Act. But the Punjab Government went
mad. They "dictated" terms to the Government of India and the
policy of ruthless repression was commenced. Two leaders were
interned and deported. I was prevented from proceeding to what
they knew was a mission of peace to Delhi and, if necessary, to
the Punjab, arrested and brought under arrest to Bombay and
there set free. And there was a conflagration. I submit that if
the Punjab Government had deliberately and with malice afore-
thought planned an insurrection in the Punjab, they could not
have taken more effective steps to do so. And yet such was the
efficacy of satyagraha that the whole of India outside the Punjab
and three centres in Gujarat remained practically calm in the
midst of the gravest provocation. I have admitted my mistake.
What was it? I miscalculated the capacity of the people to
stand any amount of suffering and provocation. It was possible for
the Punjab people to remain quiet in spite of the provocation offered
by the arrests I have mentioned. But what happened was beyond
endurance. The people of Amritsar could not restrain themselves
and brook the deportation of their leaders. Neither you nor I can
apportion the blame for what followed. Satyagraha apart, the
question will have to be solved whether the people were provoked
into madness by the firing or whether the military were provoked
to action by the mob.
Be that, however, as it may, how can I abandon the idea of
resuming civil resistance because people in April, in some parts
of Hindustan, owing to special causes resorted to violence? Must
I cease to do right because some people are likely at the same
time to do wrong? I admit that the question is not quite so
simple as I have put it. All action is controlled by a complexity
of circumstances some of which are under the doer's control and
the others beyond his control. He can therefore restrain himself
only till he has obtained the maximum of control over the sur-
rounding circumstances, and then trust to the Almighty to see
him through. And that is exactly what I have done in suspending.
I have shown that civil resistance is diametrically opposed to
criminal resistance, that it is perfectly compatible with co-operation
with and respect for the Government.
You cite Peshawar to show, I suppose, that the people un-
thinkingly, or actuated by mischievous people, joined the demon-
stration of the 6th April. They may have done so. My reading
of the events is different from yours. Had there been no Rowlatt
legislation, there would have been no demonstration, and therefore
no handle given to the mischievous elements. The wrong consisted
not in the organizing of the demonstration or civil resistance, but
in the Government so defying public opinion as to produce an
agitation they had little anticipated.
Is not the moral obvious? The Government must bow to the
force of public opinion and retrace their steps. Assuming that
the powers of the Rowlatt Act are necessary, they must patiently
cultivate public opinion and adopt such means and powers that
enlightened public opinion will tolerate. As it is, they have
ignored the advice of their friends and held them up to ridicule
by showing their incapacity for influencing the Government on
matters of moment. In my humble opinion, your letters, open and
private, and those of other leaders, should be addressed to the
Government, asking them to right the wrong, not to me, tempting
me away from the path of duty. I hope it is common cause bet-
ween us that the Rowlatt Act which has roused such opposition
and which has cost treasures of blood must be removed. If
you have a remedy other than civil resistance, by all means
apply it, and if you are successful, civil resistance falls away
automatically. The period of suspension is the period during
which you and all the leaders who dread or disapprove of civil
resistance can work with all your might to bring about the
desired result.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 9-8-1919
