27. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
August 12, 1944
BHAI RAMESRWARDAS,
I have been wanting since long to write to you but just
couldn't find the time. However, now I must. Jinnah Saheb's
letter may arrive any time now. I have written to him to let me
know three or four days in advance. I am under a great deal
of pressure that in no case should I put up at Birla House.
I have plainly said that I cannot give up staying at Birla House
without any reason. The question arises only if for some reason
my stay at Birla House is deemed improper. In that case you
should not hesitate to tell me. This issue arose in Poona also, and
at that time it was agreed that there could be no hesitation from
your side. I do not remember if you were present then. I had
discussed the matter with Ghanshyamdas. By way of caution
and in order to safeguard your interests, it is my duty to ask
you now that I will be leaving for Bombay shortly.
The other matter is more important though it is not as urgent
as the question of where to stay in Bombay. If I am about to be
arrested it will give me some satisfaction if I am able to accom-
plish all that I must before my arrest. I believe that the work
of the Talimi Sangh is quite valuable, and I wish to arrange
for half a lakh of rupees for it.
I wish to return the money that was received as donation for
Mirabehn. It would only be proper to return it to her. Normally
the money for the Talimi Sangh must be drawn from the Satya-
graha Ashram funds. There is some money there but Narandas
has invested it in constructive work. I can draw upon it but
I can only do so at the cost of that work. And as far as possible
I don't want to do that. All told, it may require half a lakh or
one lakh. I do not know the exact amount that has to be paid.
The amounts that have been coming over the years are regis-
tered as charities, and it takes time to trace them out. All the
books of the Ashram are lying here and there. To trace out
such amounts even from well-maintained ledgers is like seeking
a needle in a haystack. Nevertheless I have given instructions
that all such accounts should be examined.
There is some miscellaneous expenditure too. Something
has to be done about that. That will require about half a lakh,
though I have not figured out the exact sum.
Can you easily provide for all this? You can certainly say
'no' without any hesitation. All my undertakings are in the hands
of God. If God does not wish that a particular work should be
held up, He provides me with the means through someone or
another as His agent. Hence, even if I do not get the money
I will not be angry with God or with you. Till now I have never
cut the tree under which I have taken shelter and with God's
grace I shall not do so in future.
I hope all of you are keeping well. I am sending this letter
with Chi. Jagdish. He has come here with Bhai Munshi's letter.
Nowadays it is difficult to decide what should and what should
not be sent by post.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8060. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
