406. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
January 11, 1931
CHI. CHANDRAKANTA,
It is now 5 o'clock in the morning. It is all right that you
wrote a long letter. I think it is your duty to go to your
parents once for a fixed period. It will be better if you go there
236
to improve your health or after you have recovered. It is neces-
sary to take Gangabehn's permission. If there is much pending
work there, it would be better to go after finishing it. That will
also be the way to save Brother from further reproaches. Your
going will appease your parents' anger. After all, are they
not Sumangal's elders too? We should put up with our elders'
anger and even their hostility. As your manner and behaviour
towards them increase in humility, they will gradually calm
down.
As for your expenses, you should accept the money from
them as long as they are willing and in a position to send it.
But you should assure them and yourself that you can earn your
expenses. You should now consider yourself a daughter of the
Ashram. You may rest assured that you will be able to earn
your livelihood even outside should such a necessity arise.
I know that you still have a craving for literary knowledge.
You may increase it as and when you get opportunities for it.
But do not think that those who have more of literary know-
ledge serve better. The capacity for service depends solely on
selflessness and character. How much service Gangabehn renders !
And what is her store of literary knowledge-or Mithubehn's, or
Laxmidas's, or Imam Saheb's? If you go over such examples
from present and ancient times, you will at once see the truth
of what I am saying. On the other hand, there are hundreds
of highly educated persons in the country. They lack either the
ability or the will to make sacrifices, and therefore they live
useless lives, if they are not actually a burden on others. All
this argument certainly does not mean that I am against that
type of knowledge, or that there is nothing more for you to
acquire. Do increase your fund of knowledge when you get an
opportunity. But consider the present as a time to gain experi-
ence, to serve, and therefore, while cherishing the desire to
increase your knowledge, restrain it just now and cheerfully
devote yourself to service.
It was natural that Mother's grief made you feel unhappy
and you cried. But we do wish to train ourselves to control
such crying too. Mother's grief sprang from ignorant attach-
ment.
About your having been tempted to eat chillies it is not so
much that you did something wrong, but that you weakened in
your resolve and were therefore guilty of a lapse. We should
never depart from our resolutions in matters big or small. But
don't worry. Forget the lapse and start again. No point now
remains unanswered.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have destroyed your letter to respect your wish. Pyarelal
has not read it. But you must give up being so sensitive. Let
the world know all about us, good or bad. I have no secrets
from Pyarelal. How can I have any ?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library
