7. LETTER TO HIGH COMMISSIONER'S SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
July 1, 1905
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE HIGH COMMISSIONER
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
I have the honour to enclose herewith copies of communications ex-
changed between the Government of the Orange River Colony and my
Association, in connection with the bye-laws from time to time sanctioned
by His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor of the Colony, regarding
Coloured persons. My Association ventures to draw His Excellency's
attention to the fact that no fresh legislation has been asked for in my
letter. In the humble opinion of my Association, the powers already
possessed by the Lieutenant-Governor enable him to veto bye-laws which
are contrary to British traditions and to the Letters Patent. My Association
is informed that such legislation as the municipalities have been allowed
to pass would have to be reserved for His Majesty's assent, if it were passed
by the Legislative Council. My Association also ventures to think that the
last paragraph of the letter, written by the Acting Colonial Secretary, is a
complete justification for the complaint made by my Association, for, if the
question raised is of no practical importance as there are so few British
Indians, it cannot be of practical importance to pass legislation of the
character referred to in my communication. While it is of no use in the
Colony, it wounds, unnecessarily, the feelings of the British Indian com-
munity in South Africa, and my Association, therefore, ventures to trust
that His Excellency will be graciously pleased to inquire into the bye-laws
that have been passed and sanctioned for the various municipalities in
the Orange River Colony, and grant the necessary relief.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDUL GANI,
CHAIRMAN
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 8-7-1905
1 Vide Vol. IV, p. 403, "Letter to Colonial Secretary" to which the Government had
replied that no legislation for the restriction of the powers of municipalities in the Colony was
contemplated.
