158. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
June 6, 1908
[DEAR MR. SMUTS,]
I hope you will pardon me for writing you about the interview
that took place today between you and me. While I appreciate your
desire to abide by the compromise, I cannot help saying that the
interview was not satisfactory. You still hesitate about repeal of the
Act, and you are emphatic that, if the Act is not repealed, it is under
it that Asiatics who arrived after the 9th ultimo and who had a right
to enter the country should be registered. The repeal of the Act, as I
have always said, was the goal of the Asiatics, and they have done much
and surrendered much, in order to reach the goal. I have gathered
also that you admit the Asiatic Act to be wholly bad, and that amend-
ment of the Immigrants' Restriction Act is not an undesirable way of
solving the problem. I once more remind you of what you told me
at the interviews on the subject: that, if the Asiatics carried out their
part of the compromise, you would repeal the Act. I know you added
also that if there was one recalcitrant Asiatic who obstinately
refused to take out a voluntary registration certificate you would en-
force the Act against that Asiatic. As a matter of fact, within my
knowledge, there is no such recalcitrant Asiatic left. But, if there were,
I have taken the above expression to be purely theatrical to emphasize
the fact that the vast majority of the Asiatics then resident in the Colony
should abide by the compromise. This they have done.
Time is of the essence of the contract at the present moment, and
I do hope that you will let me make a definite statement that the Act
is to be repealed. Otherwise, I shall be reluctantly compelled to fall
back upon my letter 1 to Mr. Chamney as to withdrawal of the applica-
tion form. I am most anxious to avoid a situation of that character,
but it is impossible to wait for the assurance till the first week of the
opening of Parliament. If, therefore, you cannot give the assurance,
and if you cannot return the application forms to those who have written
for their return, an application must be made to the Supreme Court
for an order compelling the return of the documents.
In an amendment of the Immigrants' Restriction Act, I venture to
suggest that it will not at all satisfy the Asiatics if the question of
people to remain in or enter the country is left to the discretion of an
Administrative Officer. That, as in every other Colony, should be
decided judicially.
The right of those who have paid a £3 fee to the old Dutch Govern-
ment, I need hardly say, should be respected. There are many such
already in the Transvaal with vested interests. They have also applied.
These were contemplated, I am sure, by Mr. Patrick Duncan, when
he first introduced his Bill, and their claim, in my opinion, ought not
to be disregarded.
Mr. Lane wrote to me on Friday4, saying that the letters of the
1st and 22nd February last addressed by me to you, being confidential,
should not be published. As they constitute proof positive of my
contention that you promised to repeal the Act, should you withdraw
1 Vide "Letter to M. Chamney", pp. 261-.
2 Bawazeer, Quinn, Naidoo and others; vide "Letter to M. Chamney",
pp. 261-2, 263- & 264 and "Johannesburg Letter", pp. 266-.
3 This was done on June 23, 1908.
4 Lane, in fact, wrote on June 4. 1908, which was a Thursday.
from that position, and should you controvert the statement made by me,
I hope you will not bind me to one-sided confidence.
[Yours etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
[GENERAL J. C. SMUTS
COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA]
Indian Opinion, 4-7-1908
Also India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08
