125. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
JOHANNESBURG,
August 15, 1907
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
14th instant in reply to mine of the 8th instant in connection with the
Asiatic Law Amendment Act. I beg to tender my thanks to General
Smuts for having frankly stated his views about the Act in question.
In my humble opinion, the amendments suggested by me would
carry out the essential spirit of the Asiatic Law Amendment Act, namely,
the identification of every Asiatic entitled to remain in the Colony.
I offer no apology for drawing the General's attention to the solemn
declaration of British Indians with reference to the Act. So far as I am
in a position to advise my countrymen, it is not possible for me, be the
consequences what they may, to tell them to deviate from such a deli-
berate declaration, and, if, even at the eleventh hour, it is possible for
General Smuts to respect that declaration without infringing upon the
scope of the Act, I venture to request his sympathy and assistance. I have
never blinded myself to the probable results of my countrymen's following
the advice given to them by me, namely, that every Indian is liable
to undergo imprisonment, and traders and hawkers are liable to be
deprived of their trade licences, and leaders to be deported, should the
Immigrants' Restriction Bill be placed on the Statute-book of the Colony.
But, with deference, I beg to state that the compliance with the Act
would be far worse than anything that could happen to them by non-
compliance.
This correspondence, on my part, is in the nature of a personal
appeal to General Smuts, and is private, but, as I am anxious that the
intentions of the Government should be as widely and accurately placed
1 The Private Secretary to General Smuts had written, inter alia: " . . . I am
instructed to inform you that Mr. Smuts is unable to entertain the amendments put
forward by you to the Immigrants' Restriction Bill, as such amendments of that Bill
would, if they were possible, altogether nullify the provisions of the Asiatic Law
Amendment Act, 1907, and further because their adoption at this stage of the Bill is
impossible. . . .The Colonial Secretary will carry out in full the provisions of the Asiatic
Law Amendment Act and if the resistance of the Indians residing in this country leads
to results which they do not seriously face at present, they will have only themselves
and their leaders to blame."
before my countrymen as possible, if General Smuts has no objection,
I would like to publish this correspondence.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 24-8-1907
