693. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
SEVAGRAM,
March 15, 1941
CHI. MRIDU,
I have your detailed letter. It is well that you are working
for the Dal, etc. I have your demand in mind. I shall write
when I find the time. Work has piled up considerably. Pad-
silly is not necessarily untruthful. I understand about covert
ways but being in a movement I would consider it improper to
seek new directions.
But all this is my impression from reading your statement.
If it is not correct then I have nothing to say and I will trust
your word.
Now about your health. I am confident that if you adopt
the treatment I have prescribed you will fully recover. For the
first four days you must live entirely on orange juice. You can
have anything up to 16 oranges. During this period and after-
wards, at 2 or 3 p. m. when the stomach is empty, you should sit in
a tub of cold water. In the Kuhne tub the legs remain outside.
You should then rub the part of the stomach that is in water
gently with a small towel. You may remain in the tub for
half an hour. In the morning after the toilet you should have
the whole body massaged. For this you may use the services of
my friend who may be with you or any worker that may be
given you. You should instruct him in this work. You yourself
should be conversant with it. The way to instruct him is to give
him a massage yourself. The oil may be any kind; coconut oil or
mustard oil will be quite good. You should mix a little camphor
in It. Make the camphor into powder and then mix it in the oil.
On heating the camphor melts and mixes better with the oil.
One pound of oil will require an ounce of camphor. Practise
sitting straight in open air for twenty-five minutes and doing
breathing exercises. This is necessary to regulate breathing. After
the massage wash yourself with hot water. In washing use a
small towel to rub the body.
Your food should consist, for one month, of raw and cooked
vegetables and oranges. Boil eight ounces of vegetables and drink
the soup. Take a quarter of the roughage that is left. But if
you feel hungry you may take all of it. You should take 40
grains of soda bicarb daily. It may be added to the vegetables
and to the orange juice. The vegetables may include carrots, tur-
nips, radishes, and leaves such as spinach, mustard, shoots of pea,
lettuce, celery and radish leaves. These should be eaten raw as
also carrots. Or they may be crushed and their juice extracted.
You should take two ounces of raw vegetable and six ounces of
carrots, etc. The quantity may be modified. You should have
clear motions. If there is any difficulty you should take enema
and if that does not work take half an ounce of castor oil. Every
day you should consume altogether five pounds of liquid. In
the morning take hot water with honey or glucose. Clean your
nose every day by taking hot water through both nostrils and
bring out the water from the mouth. After this you should
drink four ounces or more of hot water through the nose. Go
for a walk daily according to your strength.
In the jail your first duty is to build up your body, forget-
ting the world outside. That is what I call satyagrahi jail.
Blessings from
BAPU
[Ps.]
Prabha says I have left out one thing. The statement that
was issued after the Allahabad session tells about the legal
position. My position is clear. If the Poona resolution stays
I go.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
