309. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
WARDHA,
December 19, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I had a letter from Somabhai. Since you have made no refe-
rence to him, I infer that you have not read the letter. Let me
know if what he has stated as facts are such. You will realize that
many questions arise from what he has stated. Ask Surendra to
write to me and tell me what he had said to Somabhai. It is but
proper that I should not discuss anything relating to that letter
till I have heard from you.
Dr. Mehta will probably land in Bombay on the 23rd. Write
to Manilal Kothari about the kitchen and get it vacated and clean-
ed. I do not know where Manilal is at present. In any case I am
sending from here a wire to him at his Wadhwan address. If the key
of the kitchen is with you, make a list of his things and put them
away in a safe place and then get the kitchen swept and cleaned.
Chandrakanta will start tomorrow and reach Ahmedabad on
Sunday morning. She will be accompanied by her parents. Her
father, too, seems to have the spirit of self-sacrifice in him. I
have, therefore, suggested to him that he himself should accom-
pany Chandrakanta to the Ashram, see the place for himself and
live there for a few days, so that I may feel less worried on her
account. The husband and the wife wish to have separate arrange-
ments for their meals for the present. If the mother decides to
stay in the Ashram for some time at least, she will certainly take
her meals in the common kitchen. At present, lodge the husband
and the wife in any vacant rooms in Budhabhai's house. Nani-
behn is not there, nor Parvatibehn. Hence some rooms are bound
to be vacant. The two may stay in them and cook their meals as
they wish. Supply them provisions from the store against their
names. Give them a bill if they ask for it. If they do not, keep the
amount pending in the department's account, and consult me
about it after I return.
Chandrakanta will of course stay in the women's wing. The
parents are thinking of staying there till my return. Do not get
confused because I thus give you new information about this
in every letter. I have no time to narrate the whole case. If
296
I could do that, you would easily understand the indecision of
this couple. I cannot say positively yet when Madhavji will come.
If he decides to come after I have left this place, he himself will
write to you and let you know the date.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4166
