451. LETTER TO "LEADER"
JOHANNESBURG,
September 21, 1906
THE EDITOR
Leader
SIR,
Your own Durban correspondent has sent you what purports to be
an explanation of my letter to the Press 2 regarding Punia, who was recently
arrested at Volksrust for being without a permit, although she was in the
company of her husband. "The reason," your correspondent says, "of
1 This was re-published in Indian Opinion, 29-9-1906.
2 Apropos of Gandhiji's "Letter to the Press", pp. 432-3, The Natal Mercury, 21-9-1906,
published the following explanation of the Punia case:
"The detention of an Indian woman at Volksrust by the Transvaal authorities, which
forms the subject of Mr. M. K. Gandhi's protest in The Rand Daily Mail, and published
in the Natal papers yesterday, is clearly an incident upon which the wrong construction has
been placed. The impression received from Mr. Gandhi's letter is that the intercepting of
an Asiatic female, who presents herself at the border without a permit, is unprecedented,
and the Transvaal Government's instructions to the police have been characterised as 'War
on Women', but this is entirely denied by the immigration authorities in Durban. The Trans-
vaal regulations require, it is explained, that every Asiatic immigrant, whether adult or
child, male or female, shall possess a permit before they are allowed to enter the Colony,
a man bringing his wife with him, having, in addition, to prove that he is married to the
woman. The case is somewhat different in Natal where a woman, accompanying her hus-
band, is not required to produce a separate permit. The man, however, has to furnish con-
vincing evidence as to the woman being actually his wife, and not only has he to bring with
him a certificate to that effect, but the matter is subjected to close individual investigation.
As a rule, a description of the woman is entered upon the man's registration certificate, so
that, as a substitute for her own individual pass, she may be readily identified, but it appears
that this is sometimes omitted in the case of Mohammedan women, whose religion obliges
them to go about with their faces veiled.
It is seldom or never that the local immigration
officials insist upon these women's veils being removed, every consideration being shown,
wherever possible, to the immigrants' religious prejudices.
"The Transvaal, which has for some time been carrying out a policy of vigorous Asiatic
exclusion, makes the entry of coloured immigrants into their territory a matter of much greater
difficulty; and this supplies the reason for women being required to carry permits as well
as the men. At one time women and children were admitted without passes, owing to the
clause in the Ordinance merely specifying 'Asiatics', but this has since been amended to
include females as well as males. It was found that women were being brought in ostensibly
as the wives of Indians already living in the Colony, who were nothing of the kind, but
persons of indifferent character, and the Transvaal authorities now insist upon women taking
out permits, because, without that precaution, they feel that the men could bring in an
indefinite number of women by simply stating they were married to them.
"At any rate, the woman who was stopped at Volksrust was no detached instance of the
Transvaal authorities' activity in restricting unauthorised immigration, and, from the in-
formation which is obtainable locally, it certainly appears that the comment of one of the
Transvaal papers as to the Government making war on women is justified only by the view
that may be taken of the Transvaal's new laws."
altering the Transvaal regulations was that women are being taken in
as wives by Indians already living in the Colony, who were nothing of
the kind, but often of indifferent character". I can only use one expression
to fit the wicked libel on Indian womanhood, namely, that it is an in-
famous lie. You should publish the name of the immigration official who
is said to have given this precious reason. I challenge him to publish
the name of even one such woman. I have no hesitation in saying that
I am not aware during the whole course of the very considerable experience
I have of the administration of the Peace Preservation Ordinance of a
single Indian woman of indifferent character having entered the Colony
in the manner suggested by your correspondent. I have asked for official
information, which shall be placed at the disposal of your readers. In
the meanwhile, is it not somewhat strange that the explanation about
Transvaal regulations should have to travel all the way from Durban?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Transvaal Leader, 22-9-1906
