199. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
December 8, 1932
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ1,
With reference to your letter of the 3rd instant, here are my
answers to your questions
1. If, as a result of the referendum, it is found that the
majority of the temple-going population in the area covered by the
referendum is against temple-entry by Harijans, the fast will
undoubtedly be postponed. The postponement is likely to be in-
definite, and resumption, if there is to be a resumption, can only
be determined by circumstances over which I can have no control
and which I cannot foresee.
2. I think that it is premature to talk of satyagraha about
other temples if and when Guruvayur is opened. We should
always hope that the opening of Guruvayur will clear the way to
the other temples.
3. I should hope that the Zamorin will not influence the
people one way or the other, but even if he does, I should expect
people at least on a religious question such as the one before them
to think independently. In any event, I should consider myself
bound by the opinion of the majority. The referendum will merely
determine the question of the fast, not the question of opening
the temple. If the result is hostile to temple-entry by Harijans,
ways and means will have to be found of educating public opinion
and preparing it for the opening. This is clear to me that there
should be no forcible opening of any single temple. It would be
an unseemly thing to have hostile sections looking daggers at one
another, using the same temple.
4. I am firmly of opinion that there should be no condition
made for the entry of Harijans to temples that are not applicable
to the other Hindu worshippers. There should be therefore one
regulation for all. I personally do feel that beef being forbidden
food in Hinduism, it should be given up by beef-eating Harijans,
whether the temples are opened or not. They should impose that
condition on themselves without any prompting and without any
consideration in the shape of temple-entry or other. There can
be no doubt that every reform voluntarily made by Harijans among
themselves is bound to hasten the removal of the black mark. It
would make the task of caste-Hindu reformers infinitely easier than
it is, and wind will be taken out of the sail of the opponents of
the removal of untouchability. I hope therefore that no Harijan
will say, 'First remove untouchability, and then we shall abstain
from beef or do many other things expected of us.' Such an
attitude will be just as bad as the attitude of those who would
impose conditions on their admission to temples and the like.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. P. N. RAJBHOJ
207 GHORPADE PETH, POONA 2
From a microfilm: S.N. 18672
