81. LETTER TO HARIBHAU
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 4, 1926
DEAR HARIBHAU,
Maganlal has passed on your message to me. If an expert
can be posted in Poona, he will be sent but I want to controvert
your argument. We are not like Dunlops or Singers. We have not
an unlimited capital to lose. We may not exploit in the sense that
they do. We may not add thousand per cent to the cost at
the base. Our methods therefore must be different from theirs.
If we concentrate upon a central factory for turning out wheels
and their parts, the movement is doomed to fail. On the contrary
we must make the people self-reliant and therefore teach them to
make their own wheels. This teaching of decentralization can
only commence with the province and therefore you have to do
what you are expecting Sabarmati to do, that is, the Central
Board.
Maharashtra must train experts who will spread themselves
in different parts and in their turn whilst helping the people
will teach them. Those who believe in the wheel must not be
satisfied with merely spinning yarn but must understand the
mechanism of the wheel themselves, to be able to mend it, to
replace parts, learn all the easy methods of making and adjust-
ing holders, spindle, outfit, etc. What is in its nature easy we
must not make difficult by telling people that they need to come
to us for putting their wheels right when they get out of order.
I therefore suggest to you that you now begin to make an effort to
become self reliant and self contained, getting from here all the
help you need in the process. We have now reached a stage in
the career of khadi when it can go forward in leaps and bounds
if only the few workers that we are would make ourselves experts
in all its various branches-a consummation which really does
not require either much time or extraordinary intelligence or abi-
lity. All that is required is sustained application.
Maganlal is dealing with the rest of your letter.
Yours,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19343
