521. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 11/12, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I asked you about your weight and diet because I felt some
doubt concerning your health. What was your highest weight
in the past? Don't they cook tomatoes or bhaji any time? They
had decided to plant lettuce, what happened to that? You
yourself can plant lettuce or fenugreek in a small bed. They will
sprout in but a few days. You must include some fresh green
leaves in your diet. Since one can eat them uncooked only in
small quantities, growing them is no difficult matter. I don't
know why tomatoes cannot be grown all the year round. Ask
someone.
I met Dhurandhar immediately [after he was brought here]
and visit him from time to time, for I had come to know him closely
during the March. Moreover, since I take interest in your life
I take in his, too, for your sake. This is an instance not of special
love for an individual, but of non-violence. If we bear love for one
person so that we feel aversion to others or cannot love them,
then that would be an instance of special love. I believe that I
bear no such love for any person. I do all that I do for you because
I think you require such attention from me, because you expect
it and because I believe it is in my interest to do so for I ex-
pect much from you. If you see practical shrewdness behind
this attitude, I would not quarrel with you. Personally I think
this is the mark of a non-violent nature.
I hope you have not forgotten about the Urdu books.
If all the people have decided to leave the Ashram at the
same time, I do not approve of that. But now the Ashram has
been in existence for so long that I would not argue about any
matter nor complain against anything connected with it. Realiz-
ing that something is wrong somewhere, I try to get things
right whenever such an occasion arises, and dissuade people from
leaving it if I can do so without much trouble. If the Ashram is
likely to be deserted completely and if you can stay behind
cheerfully, do so, and leave when other workers return. However,
it is for Narandas and you to decide what is the right course for
you to adopt. How can I judge from here?
May 12, 1932
I send with this an article by Montessori in the weekly
Hindu. Mahadev liked it and so I asked him to take out the
cutting. Read it. See if you find anything in it worth accept-
ing. Otherwise throw it away.
Sushila will be permitted to see me. If, therefore, you wish
to bring her along when you come, you may do so.
I did not intentionally leave any of your questions un-
answered. I still cannot recollect which question I left un-
answered. If you ask it again, I will reply to it.
The problem about the type of education imparted in the
Ashram is an old one. I don't think it is proper to make any
comparison with a boarding school. The whole burden is borne
by Narandas, and he may, therefore, act as he thinks best. You
can help him in arriving at a decision. Personally, I would apply
one rule, namely, that the proposal should appeal to the children.
Everything which they do unwillingly will fail in its aim and will
have helped in perpetuating the tradition of compulsion. We can
stop observing holidays if and only if the children welcome the idea.
I will not pass judgment about anything which you did in
the Ashram school. If I were there, I would certainly interfere
from time to time, but I will say nothing from here. As you fol-
low the practice of self-examination, you will correct yourself
whenever you go wrong.
I don't know if I had tried to teach you knowledge of the
Brahman, but in any case you betrayed your ignorance by claiming
that you had it. The arguments which you went on to advance
serve only to prove your ignorance. An intellectual understand-
ing of the concept of the Brahman does not amount to a know-
ledge of It. Knowledge of the Brahman awakens in the heart.
And it is not true that one who has attained to that state re-
nounces all external activity. Outwardly, the spiritually awakened
man and the ignorant may look alike, but the motives which in-
spire their activities are as poles asunder. Ramanama is not
incompatible with knowledge of the Brahman. They may mean
the same thing. Any person claiming knowledge of the Brahman,
who feels polluted by Ramanama has fallen into the well of igno-
rance and is in a desperate condition. He who merely repeats
Ramanama with his lips engages in a fruitless exercise and wastes
his time. Knowledge of the Brahman and being happy in my
presence are certainly not incompatible with each other; if,
however, my absence affects your devotion to duty, you have not
attained knowledge of the Brahman but are in a state of ignorance.
Anyone who claims to have such knowledge will in all probability
be devoid of it. It is a knowledge which does not speak about
itself-its presence is revealed by its own light. The sun does not
have to testify to the fact of its light. We can see that it shines.
We can say the same thing about knowledge of the Brahman.
When I had faith in British rule, I used to believe that it
was for the ultimate good of the country, that it was inspired
by noble motives. But I cannot discuss this question further.
I do not like the literature on sex that is being published in
America.
BAPU
[PS.]
I do intend to write about it. When children ask questions,
we should give them straight answers. I don't know about the
cinema, but stage performances have a place. For realizing God,
the practice of non-attachment seems to me the best method. It
includes everything.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10285. Also C.W. 6733. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
