34. LETTER TO J. KUSARY
148, RUSSA ROAD,
CALCUTTA,
August 15, 1925
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I like your business-like letter. Here is my reply. There
should be no hurry. You will find enough work with the spin-
ning-wheel. You need not think of attracting all classes at once.
I should not start Hindu Sabhas, at least for the time being. Con-
ducting a school and giving medical relief may well form part
of a spinning organization, so far as they help spinning. If
workers engage in paying industries, they cannot give exclusive
attention to spinning. But if to spinning you add weaving, you
make your institution financially self-supporting in the end.
During the interval, you must expect the nation to find liveli-
hood for the workers who give their whole time to the develop-
ment of spinning. You must not think of having property that
will yield a permanent income.
I do not know what you mean by the example of Christian
missionaries. You are yourselves working in villages. To make
people self-reliant, fearless, self-supporting, resourceful and healthy
is to make them keep swaraj always in view. There is nothing
in the name swaraj apart from the qualities I have mentioned.
Philanthropic societies exclude the idea of political freedom. You
do not exclude it, neither do you parade it to raise false notions.
You may seek help from district boards and the like for your
work so long as you are not called upon to sacrifice your freedom.
Villagers' non-co-operation consists in modelling their lives, so far
as practicable, independently of Government. They need not go to
law-courts if they will not quarrel, and if they will submit to
arbitration. They need not send their children to Government
schools.
If the workers have the spirit of real non-violent non-co-opera-
tion, they will infect the villagers with it, not by speech but by their
conduct.
I would not be a party to voluntarily sending any boy to a
Government school. National schools, imperfect though they
may be, must be encouraged, but here again no boy need be pre-
vented by any mechanical contrivance from going to a Govern-
ment school. It is no use his refraining unless he feels the indig-
nity himself.
If by half-educated Indians you mean those who cannot
speak English correctly, I know many such who have got the
highest ideals. There are thousands of graduates who have
no higher ideal than to make as much money as they can, and
disappear from public life altogether.
I wonder if I have answered all your questions.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. JITENDRANATH KUSARY
SATYASHRAM
BAHROK P. O.
DACCA
From a photostat: G.N. 7188
