159. LETTER TO HARJIVAN KOTAK
ON THE BOAT "KAVERIMBA",
November 10, 1927
One should feel worried and ashamed even if there is involun-
tary discharge only once. It is certain that such discharge is the
result of impure desires. I was told recently that a person who
suffers from constipation may also get it. This is true, but consti-
pation is also the result of impure desires. A man or woman who
is free from such desires will not eat even a grain too much of
food. Such persons never suffer from constipation.
But, then, there are two kinds of worry, one necessary and
uplifting and another unnecessary and tending to drag us down.
Despite worry and shame, we would remain cheerful if our
lapse was not intentional or if we did not take pleasure in it.
Such worry may also be called vigilance. The second kind of
worry is the remorse one feels afterwards though one had taken
pleasure in the lapse when it occurred. Such worry preys upon
one's mind and yet one sinks even deeper into the vice. A person
who worries in this sense gets involuntary discharges more and
more frequently, whereas the man who exercises vigilance gets them
less and less frequently. You will perhaps understand now that
a man who gets involuntary discharges cannot afford to remain
unconcerned. He should sincerely strive to overcome his impure
desires. If he can remain free from them during waking hours,
he should not be frightened by involuntary discharges but should
take them as a warning that impure desires are secretly eating
him up from within, and he should ceaselessly struggle to save
himself from them. If, despite his efforts, he cannot stop the dis-
charges, he may have patience but ought not to give up the
struggle. I am myself not completely free from involuntary dis-
charges. There was a period in my life when I remember to have
remained free from them for many years but after I came to
India and started taking milk they became more frequent. There
are other causes besides milk. The atmosphere here revived
memories of early life. There will be a chapter on this in the
Autobiography. Read it.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
