298. LETTER TO KOTWAL
December 18, 1932
BHAI KOTWAL,
I got your letter. The doubt which has occurred to you is
a natural one.
Following the path of dharma would not have been compared
to walking on the razor's edge, if no occasions ever arose when
in doing one's duty one found oneself on the horns of a dilemma.
A thing which is ordinarily forbidden may with a little change
in the circumstances become a duty. The thing is similar to the
manner in which a chemical compound is formed. Appa's demand
was not for a right or privilege, nor for any personal facility. It
was for permission to do his duty. It was my duty-and I have
not the least doubt about this-to join Appa in his fast, as,
when we were all free, I had already given my opinion that Appa
could undertake a fast in the circumstances which actually arose.
As this argument appeals to reason, it is not necessary for you to
go by faith in what I say. As long as your reason is not con-
vinced, you should not accept anything more than what you have
been able to understand about the ethics of fasting. Do not think
too much about the matter and get confused. Ask me again if
my explanation is not clear to you. But you need not, if you do
not wish. The situation in which I found myself was no ordinary
one, and in such situations too much thinking is to be avoided.
It seems to be my clear duty to fast with Kelappan if it be-
comes necessary for him to do so, since it was I who had asked
him to give up his fast. This involves a number of other issues,
and I have no time to explain them in this letter. You will
have no question to ask if you carefully go through all that I
have written on the subject.
It need not be assumed that the fast will start on the 2nd.
There are many complications. The date was not fixed recently,
but was fixed at the very time that Kelappan gave up his fast.
The agitation is not for depriving any people of their right, but
for restoring their rights to those who were deprived of them.
I
think that I have now answered all your questions.
1 Vide Vol. LI, p. 150.
228
What you read in the newspapers about the time limit of
thirty days has no basis in fact. There is no such intention even.
There is no end to the misunderstandings being spread at present
by the men who come to discuss things with me. No one, there-
fore, should believe anything said about me. People should go
by only what I myself say.
There was no need to ask the Zamorin before fixing the 2nd as
the date; he himself had wired suggesting postponement of Kelap-
pan's fast. I fixed the date that seemed to be the most suitable.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3606
