12. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
WESTMINSTER PALACE HOTEL,
4 VICTORIA STREET, S.W.,
July 17, 1909
MY DEAR MR. KALLENBACH,
I am adopting the formal style of addressing, as you might have
to make use of this letter in many ways. I hope to write separately,
if only a few lines, in the household style if I can, but I am preparing
for the mail somewhat against time.
Imagine our surprise when we found ourselves at Waterloo Station
without anybody on the platform. Reuters cablegrams are not necessarily
published by the daily press. We had relied upon this cablegram catching
Mr. Ritch's eye, but it was not published. The result was that he knew
nothing about the departure of the deputation, indeed he had given up
all hope. This is therefore a lesson to us that henceforth when
we want any particular news to reach the Committee, we have
1 Albert H. West. The communication addressed to him, however, is not
available.
2 L. W. Ritch, Secretary, South Africa British Indian Committee, London
to rely upon our own private cable. Several cablegrams from Cape
Town, Germiston, Grahamstown, Kimberley, Laurencomarques, Litchenburg,
Pietersburg, Port Elizabeth, Potchefstroom, Rustenburg, Standerton and
yourself have been received, but we have avoided publicity of these.
They have been forwarded to the India Office and the Colonial Office
by Mr. Ritch in the name of the Committee.
The death of Nagappen is a severe blow; I have not got over
it yet. You can understand my own feelings and yet I am not sorry,
for the sake of the cause. It was what I hope I am personally prepared
for and what I have been preaching all the time for the last two years
and a half Every Indian knows that he has to face death in connection
with the struggle, and to face it with calmness and cheerfulness.
Nagappen has died in the body but he is living in the spirit and I hold
the latter to be everything, the former comparatively to be nothing. I
only hope that the community has taken it in that light, that nobody
on that account has become disheartened and that the parents have
not been unduly affected by the bereavement. At the same time I hope,
too, that every mark of sorrow and sympathy by the whole community
was shown and that his cremation or burial was undertaken by the
community. If his photograph can be secured and if this has not been
done already, do you not think that we should have the photograph
published as a supplement to Indian Opinion ? I take it that a resolution
of sympathy has been sent to his parents and his wife if he was married,
and that due provision has been made for the support of those who
were dependent upon him.
The same cablegram gave us the news about Mr. Dowd Mahomed 2 .
The same remarks that I have made about Nagappen are applicable
in his case. I hope, however, that his illness was not deep-seated, and
that he is now all right working away in Johannesburg for the cause
to which he has devoted his life.
Ever since our arrival, we have not been idle; I have no rest. You
will be agreeably surprised to learn that this letter is being taken down
by Miss Polak 3 . She has been having very little rest. The day before
yesterday she was working until 11 o'clock in the evening. The work
is all preparatory and it is behind the scenes. We have seen Mr. Ameer
Ali4, Sir Mancherjee 5 , Mr. Surendranath Banerjee 6 and several other
Indian leaders.
1 On July 6, 1909, after he was released from Johannesburg jail in a "dying
condition" on June 30; vide Vol. IX, p. 299.
2 Who had been released from jail on grounds of ill-health
3 Maud, sister of H. S. L. Polak
4 Justice Ameer Ali, eminent judge
5 Sir Mancherjee Merwanjee Bhownaggree, barrister, Member of Parliament
and of British Committee of the Indian National Congress
6 Orator and politician, President of the Indian National Congress, 1895
and 1902
We called on Sir Richard Solomon and had a very long chat with
him. He has quite privately promised to see General Smuts.
Lord Ampthill2, as also Sir William Lee-Warner and Mr. Theodore
Morison were at the hotel. Lord Ampthill is an exceedingly good man;
he will do all he can. He will place himself in correspondence with
Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer 5 . He is going to confer with Lord Curzon,
whom we have asked for an appointment. Lord Ampthill thinks that
just at present we should not publish anything in the papers, not even
the news regarding imprisonments and such other matters, unless the
press publishes them as from their own correspondents. Lord Ampthill
is also of the opinion that it would be no use, in the event of the private
negotiations that are now going on falling through, waiting on the Colonial
Secretary and the Secretary of State for India in a deputation, but he
thinks that it would be advisable for us to seek for a private interview
with both of them. There is a great deal in this. Sir William Lee-Warner
on the other hand is of different opinion. He thinks that too much
publicity could not be given to this matter and that there should be
ceaseless agitation in order to rouse public opinion in England. This
means practically addressing audiences, interesting the House of
Commons members and interviewing them almost every day. I hope
that this will not be necessary, but if it is, it means a long stay and
then it may prove absolutely profitless. The more I look about me in
this country, the more strengthened I become in my conviction that
the deputation is only of secondary importance and that it represents
the measure of our weakness in the Transvaal, and that the only unfailing
remedy is to be sought in unadulterated passive resistance, that is, the
sufferings of the people. If the amount already accumulated is not
enough to touch the humanity of those who are immediately concerned,
it simply means that a great deal more has to be gone through. I feel,
too, that the suffering should, as time progresses, be mute and
undemonstrative. We should have faith enough in it to know that it
will speak for itself. If the private negotiations fail, I do not expect
much to come out of public agitation, though so long as we can stay
here, we shall do that too. At the same time, so far as I can think
at present, I would certainly decline to pass a long time here, because
I believe that our work is really there, not here.
1 Lieut-Governor of the Transvaal, 1905-
2 Governor of Madras, 1899-1906; acted as Viceroy and Governor- General
of India, 1904
3 Anglo-Indian Administrator, additional member of the Viceroy's Council
4 One-time Principal of the Mahomedan College at Aligarh
5 J.W. Sauer, M.L.A., later a member of the Union Cabinet
Mr. Ameer Ali has been trying to secure an appointment with Sir
Richard Solomon.
I have sent a very long letter to Mr. Polak 1 and nearly thirty letters
of introduction, most of them given by the Secretary of the All-India
Muslim League and Major Syed Hussain Bilgrami. I take it that you
are keeping him in touch with what goes on there, even by cable if
necessary.
Mr. Ritch's position is very difficult. In order to save the Committee
expenses, he has been overworking himself in order to establish a
practice here, so that as long as he remains here, the work of the
Committee may be done without much pecuniary assistance from South
Africa. Mrs. Ritch has undergone an operation for the third time. I
have seen her once; she is in a nursing home. The operation has been
performed by a specialist. 2 It has been entirely successful, but she is
skin and bone. However, her vitality is wonderful and the surgeon is
quite hopeful that she will entirely recover. If by the grace of God
she does do so, it will be a very great relief for Mr. Ritch. Sir
Mancherjee speaks of his work and his ability in the most flattering
terms.
Will you please apologize to Mr. Doke on my behalf? I am not
writing him separately. I take it that he will see this letter. I hope
he has benefited by the change.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. KALLENBACH, ESQ.
ARCHITECT
SACKES BUILDING
COMMISSIONER STREET
JOHANNESBURG
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Vide Vol. IX, pp. 284-.
2 Henry Morris, ibid., p.286.
