29. LETTER TO KHWAJA ABDUL MAJID
As AT WARDHA,
June 7, 1936
Wonderful! I was about to write to you today about another
matter when I got your welcome letter. To hear from you is
like meeting a long lost friend or brother whichever you will;
have both.
In my disconsolateness over Ansari's death I thought of you,
Shuaib and Zakir Husain. I decided to write a long letter to Z.
I am daily awaiting his reply.
Asaf Ali wrote to me about some memorial. I told him this
was not an opportune time politically for a national memorial to
so big a man. I gave the same opinion over Motilalji's death. I
have in mind not the financial stringency but the political condi-
tion. If people spontaneously send money and if we get a large
enough sum, we might make some use as a memorial by personal
admirers and obligers (cannot find the right word just now). I
hold on to the cheque till I hear from you or till we meet.
Your exposition of politics is deeply interesting. "Et tu,
Brute!" Do not take this literally in its application. How have
the mighty fallen? Do you remember your remark at the
Ansari Hotel? But I do not blame you. I have nothing but
praise for your downright honesty. Yes, we must meet. Do
come to Wardha any day after 16th June. You know that at
the end of the month the whole Working Committee will be
there. But I know you want to discuss the thing first with me.
Only therefore the earlier you come the better.
Now for what I was to write about. If you have not seen
my public letter about my eldest son's so-called conversion, I
enclose a cutting herewith. Read it and let me know your views.
Is such a conversion permissible and right? Is all this adver-
tisement the poor wreck and rake is receiving a proper thing?
I have no anger against Harilal. He is hardly responsible for
his acts. During the past three months he has gone through
many changes. You must know that it is not loafers who are
responsible for what has happened and is happening. Those who
are accepted as responsible Muslims in society are doing all this.
Do study this phenomenon, interest yourself in it for the sake of
religion and this unhappy land. If you put a different construc-
tion on the event, you will not hesitate to tell me so frankly.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
