425. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 17, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
I begin this at 3.15 a.m. on Friday. It seems that now I
shall get your weekly letter not on Wednesday morning but on
Thursday afternoon. It suits me better. For I have no time
for personal letters on Wednesdays and Thursdays, both the days
being required for Harijan. Everything must go out of my hands
by 6 p.m. on Thursday. Hence though I must write on other
days as well for Harijan, I must devote Wednesdays and Thurs-
days entirely to it. This is almost as before.
The extra note that I thought I might have to write I did
not and could not have written with but extraordinary effort.
I gather from your letter that you are not locked for the
night. You must take the fullest advantage of that liberty. The
best food you want is the freshest air all day and all night. There-
fore you should work outdoor during the day, if, as I learn, you
have many neem trees in your yard. You should sleep all night
directly under the sky-not even the shade of the trees-dew or no
dew. The most direct contact with the stars is absolutely essential.
Dew causes no mischief so long as you are well covered from toe
to neck and the head also if necessary and so long as your lips are
tightly closed and you are sure that you are breathing only
through the nose-to ensure this at the time of retiring you
should take a few deep breaths through the nose whilst you are
lying flat on your back with legs fully stretched. You should set
apart certain fixed time, say, five minutes each time for taking
these breaths. Then you will acquire the habit of always breathing
through the nose. Those who, without practice, think that they
naturally breathe through the nose, are not always right. They do
not know when they breathe through the mouth. Unfortunately
in the majority of cases correct breathing is an acquired habit.
Tuberculosis is an impossibility with one who takes freshest air,
drinks pure water, eats properly the proper quantity of the proper
food and has proper exercise.
I have thanked the Government for removing you from Ar-
thur Road. They have done it promptly and well. It is true
that I had definitely asked for transfer to Yeravda. But they must
have their good reasons for not transferring you there. Sabarmati
is undoubtedly the next best, knowing you as I do-Sabarmati
should be the best if you realized that though my body dwells
in Yeravda, my spirit is to be found in Sabarmati. The body
without the spirit is like the Taj without Shahjehan-a tomb!
You should have reported all about the glands to the Sur-
geon at Arthur Road. We may not ask for transfers but we
are bound to report our condition. For the authorities hold our
bodies in the expectation that we shall report all about their condi-
tion to them. If we do not, we commit at least a technical, if
not a full breach, of prison discipline. You will therefore report
every irregularity to the Superintendent who the Government tell
me is an I. M. S. officer and therefore a fully qualified physi-
cian. You should try to make your body 100 per cent proof
against disease.
It is a great joy to me that you have Ba with you and Ganga-
behn and Kusum. Have you no access to the others?
Tell Gangabehn and Kusum that I wrote to both of them.
I enclose letters for them and Ba. You will hand them, if they
are entitled or permitted to have them. There is nothing in them
but welfare news.
My weight and food continue as usual and so also the elbows.
With love from us all,
BAPU
[PS.]
Have just heard from Verrier that Verrier is to marry Mary
Gillett on Thursday during Easter week, i.e., 13th April.
[PPS.]
Of course all the instructions I have given in this letter are
subject to revision by the Superintendent.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6263. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9729
