148. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
March 19, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
This is in reply to your letter of the 13th instant No. 921.
I am afraid I cannot take shelter under the easy solution you
have suggested for my discharge from your complaint. I did mean
what I said when I dictated the sentence, "I wonder if you read the
English Harijan." I know the kind of worker you are, and ordinarily
I should certainly not expect you to read the papers and maga-
zines that may be issued on behalf of the Society. It would be an
impossible task for any secretary to undertake. As it is, we have
not many newspapers, magazines and literature published under
the auspices of the Society. But even what is being published you
cannot be expected to read, and if you attempted, you could only
do so at the sacrifice of much more valuable work. But I wanted
to single out the English Harijan and the Hindi Harijan, the Eng-
lish, because I write down all my thoughts in that paper, and they
are as much addressed to you as to other Harijan servants, and that
I do, because I am supposed to be guiding and shaping the policy
of the Society; therefore it was that by politely asking the question
I suggested that you should make an exception in favour of the
English Harijan and make time to read it; the Hindi edition you
have to read, because it is being published under your very nose,
and because the latest matter can be supplied to the Hindi Harijan,
but it cannot be to the English because of the distance. The Hindi
Harijan has to be packed with facts and figures which I would have
to copy from it and which I would love to do. You will be speaking
to the innumerable workers and giving them precise instructions
through that paper, or else it has no reason for existence. The
Hindi Harijan need not contain essays. It should simply contain
a translation of my messages and first-class authentic information
from the Central Office, as also definite weekly instructions to
workers. Then and then only will it justify its existence.
Now, as to the other part of your letter. I have told you
already what view I take of the other organizations. We have
to treat them as if they were our own, not in order to dictate, but
in order to serve them and in order to harness their services, if
they will give them to us. But you know best whether to approach
them and how, if at all. Of course, I had and could have nothing
against Lala Mohanlal. Your and my business, however, is, as I
conceive it, to investigate all complaints, good, bad and indiffe-
rent, so that we leave no loopholes for mistakes or complaints so
far as it is humanly possible to do it.
This brings me to the last part of your letter-Overhead
Charges. Both you and I have been lifelong workers and connected
with numerous organizations. I really regard myself as an expert
economist and organizer in my own way. We shall deserve the
curses of posterity, if not also of the present generation, if we do
not show that we have put the bulk of our collections into Hari-
jan pockets. 10% overhead charges, therefore, I regard as a liberal
estimate. Propaganda we must have, and plenty of it, both among
Harijans and caste men. But we have to make the propaganda
practically self-supporting, especially amongst caste men. In my
opinion, the best propaganda is constructive work amongst Hari-
jans. It will tell not only upon the latter but also upon caste men.
For the present you may have two collections, one for constructive
work, that is, for putting directly into Harijan pockets, and the
other for propaganda. As a matter of fact, propaganda work
ought to be paid for out of the sale proceeds of our weeklies and the
sale of our other literature, so that the moneys we may actually
collect otherwise would all find their way into Harijan pockets.
Our caste-Hindu workers should therefore be volunteers or receiv-
ing just maintenance money, and we should find out every avail-
able Harijan worker whom we would pay fairly well. He may
not give just now very efficient work; I would not worry, but
would teach him to do the work. All this can be done only if we
have workers religiously-minded, treating this movement as an
essentially religious one and approaching it in the religious spirit.
Then you will find that we shall have the least opposition to en-
counter, and no matter what opposition we encounter, the move-
ment must flourish. If we cannot get sufficient hands to work the
movement and to work it in that fashion, I, for one, will not hesi-
tate to say that we should cease to be an organization. Without
that organization you had your own great work cut out for you,
and I have mine. The organization was set up in the belief that it
was needed by the people, as I still believe it is, but the test that
I have laid down would be the proof of that need.
I have given you only an outline of what is passing through
my mind. You will share this letter with Sjt. Ghanshyamdas; if
you think it worth while, you may come down here to discuss
the whole thing, or, if you have caught the spirit of my letter and
appreciate it, you need not trouble.
Lastly, I do not want you to reduce to practice anything of
this letter because I have written it. You will only reduce to prac-
tice that which commends itself to you, and never otherwise. My
duty is done when I have passed on my thoughts to you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20633
