281. LETTER TO S. K. DATTA
December 17, 1932
DEAR DR. DATTA,
I was delighted to have your letter, giving me the only thing
you could properly give in my present condition. In discovering
the use of Indian words among the Gypsies, President Masaryk
and you have perhaps made a discovery of great value. How
nice it would be if some painstaking and accurate scholar could
follow up your discovery and ascertain whether the few common
words that you discovered were a mere accident or whether they
are evidence of a recent common origin or of intimate intercourse,
or may it be that the Gypsies are a set of universalists for whom
the whole world is their country? The information you give
about the old President is also very instructive. I wish that we
could emulate his energy and vigour.
Mahadev is with me, Devdas sees me fairly often, and
Pyarelal was able to see me practically only during the fast.
Please send our love to Mrs. Datta and your boy. I can feel
your difficulties in your new post, but God will give you strength
to grapple with them. All this however is preface to the question
I want to ask you: "What are your boys doing for the Harijans?"
Yours sincerely,
SJT. S. K. DATTA
PRINCIPAL, FORMAN CHRISTIAN COLLEGE
LAHORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18733
1 The letter was in reply to the addressee's dated December 9, 1932,
which read: "Last August my son and myself went to spend two days with
President Masaryk. The President talked to me a great deal about you. You
remember that they invited you to stay with them at Prague, but you were
unable at the end to accept the invitation. He is a wonderful old man-85
years of age-who rides his horse every day not like an old man, but athleti-
cally. I must tell you of an experience that I had when staying with him at a
small village in Slovakia. . . . The inhabitants were a colony of Gypsies. . . .
The strangest experience was to hear these folk speak. There were scores
of words which I could understand-almost pure Hindi-such as behn for
sister, pani for water, aag for fire, etc., etc. When I went back to the Presi-
dential House, he and I studied with a little care that evening Bible stories
written in Gypsy language and I recognized in them Hindi words . . ."
216
