158. LETTER TO "THE TIMES"
HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,
November 12, 1906
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES
PRINTING HOUSE SQUARE, E.C.
SIR,
By your leading article in The Times of the 10th instant on the
British Indian question in the Colonies, you have lifted it from the plat-
form of parochialism to that of Imperialism. For the present, how-
ever, we will be thankful if you will allow us to deal with the Asiatic
Law Amendment Ordinance without touching the larger issue discussed
by you.
You say:
It does not seem likely or desirable that a measure, which appears to be
supported generally by the opinion of the people who are shortly to have
power to make their own laws, should be refused the assent of the Crown.
We venture to take exception to your opinion for the following
reasons:
1. You admit that upon the merits of the particular controversy aroused
by the Ordinance there is "at present hardly evidence enough
to form judgment".
2. The Ordinance does not affect the broad question of Asiatic Immig-
ration into the Transvaal, but it very materially alters to their
prejudice the status of British Indians resident in the Colony.
3. It is not "a purely temporary measure"; for, while it is true that
Mr. Duncan stated that it was introduced without prejudice to
further legislation, there was no question of the Ordinance itself
being "a temporary measure". In its very nature it is not capable
of being temporary, because it is intended to carry out once and
for all, so it is said, registration of British Indians in the Transvaal,
and to compel them to carry passes, euphemistically called regis-
tration certificates.
4. Instead of preserving the status quo and relieving the Asiatic resi-
dents from "certain manifest grievances", it reduces their status and
removes not a single grievance.
1 This letter was not published in The Times.
5. While the prejudice on the part of the general portion of the white
community is admitted, the manner of giving effect to it is purely
a creation of the Government and the Transvaal community is
certainly not privy to the framing of the Ordinance. Its plan is
undoubtedly drastic, but honest. If it had its own way, perhaps
that portion of it which represents anti-Asiatic agitation will pass
legislation involving deportation of Indian residents in the Colony.
Such, in effect, it will be remembered, was the resolution passed
by the so-called National Convention.
6. That the Transvaal is on the eve of getting Responsible Government
is an additional reason why, instead of the British Indian position
being prejudiced by the Ordinance in question, it should be so
commended to the incoming Government as to bear the Imperial
stamp; that is to say, the status of British Indians should be levelled
up to that enjoyed by British Indians at the Cape.
7. There is absolutely no proof justifying a dangerous departure
from the traditions of Crown Colony Government in the shape of
invidious class distinctions.
8. Involving, as the question does, Imperial considerations of the
highest order, the Imperial Government should think twice before
sanctioning panic legislation which underlies the Ordinance.
The reasons we have above given for withholding the Royal sanc-
tion are also reasons showing why a commission should be appointed
to go into the question, and to place such evidence before the public
and the Government as is, on your own showing, at present lacking.
You, Sir, have rightly said that every Indian returning from the Trans-
vaal to India returns a missionary to sow discontent. We, who have
the privilege of representing the community, can state that we have given
only the most moderate expression to the sentiments of the thousands
who attended the mass meeting referred to by you. It is not possible
for us to describe in words the bitterness which animated that meeting
regarding the measure. The lower the status of the Indian, the greater
would be his hardship under the Ordinance. The well-to-do Indian
may by reason of his position be able to escape the grossest forms of
oppression which must inevitably flow from the Ordinance. Poor
people were, under the registration effected by Lord Milner's advice,
dragged at four o'clock on a cold winter's morning from their beds in
Johannesburg, Heidelberg and Potchefstroom, and marched to the
police station, or Asiatic Offices, as the case might be. It is they who
under the Ordinance would be hustled by the Kaffir Police at every
turn, and not the better-class Indians. They, therefore, feel the
treatment more than we do, because to them their hardship is an
ever-present reality.
The Indian community has all along contended that there is no
unauthorized influx on a wholesale scale, that there is no attempt by
the community to countenance any such influx, that the present machinery
is absolutely effective to check unauthorized entry and the documents
already held by Indians are sufficient for purposes of identification.
If these statements are challenged, as they have been challenged, is it
not at least in common fairness necessary to appoint a commission of
enquiry [?]
We are, etc.,
[M. K. GANDHI
H. O. ALLY]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4543
