8. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Tuesday, May 31/June 3, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have practically decided that tomorrow, Wednesday, will
be the last day when I will see visitors. If the Government con-
tinue to delay its reply in regard to Mirabehn, I think I should
assume that it will be negative and should stop seeing visitors for
the time being. I can start seeing them again if finally the
decision is favourable.
If Harilal wants to vent his anger on Bali let him do so.
Bali is strong enough to face it, and knows how to deal with
him. Whether or not that is so, if the path of duty is clear
before us we must follow it without regard to consequences. Is
it not because people are concerned about consequences that they
often forsake the path of dharma? The Gita was composed to
drive this one lesson home, and it repeats the idea again and
again in every possible context.
As we gradually understand more clearly the aim behind
the five minutes' silence [at prayer time], we shall feel its gran-
deur with greater and greater force. Vasumati Thakore is being
properly looked after. The doctor said that she must have suffered
from the disease for a long time.
If a labourer willingly agrees to obey the Ashram rules, do
not discharge him even if there is no work for him. If he him-
self wishes to leave, that would of course be another matter.
We should not discharge any person, who is otherwise good, merely
for the sake of economy. A labourer will never be a burden on us.
And the Ashram may engage paid labourers, but we shall be
worthy of its great ideals only if we continue to work with our
own hands or join them in work.
Don't let Dhiru and Kusum return for some time yet. It
will be a great error to suppose that, after their health has im-
proved a little, they will be all right in the Ashram. They should
return only after their health has become quite strong. If they
observe the Ashram rules where they are staying and do what-
1 Balibehn Vora, sister-in-law of Harilal Gandhi
6
ever work their health permits, that would be as good as living in
the Ashram.
Do not waste your time and energy in inquiring about
Ba's letters. I got one postcard written by her. How many
Chharas are there and where do they live? From what part of
the country do they come? What is their language? We should
think what our duty towards them is, irrespective of whether or
not they harass us. See if anything is possible in this matter.
I have nothing more to say about the Magan spinning-wheel.
My hand seems to be fairly well set on it. I could also guess
today from which part the sound comes. I am using just now
the slivers sent by Chhakkaddas.
I am naturally tempted to
spin yarn of fine count from such good slivers. Today I drew
22 rounds from one sliver. Each sliver weighs less than one anna.
The count of the yarn, I guess, must be about 30. I spun today
yarn of that count at the rate of 110 rounds per hour. For
yarn less fine than that I have already reached the speed of 130.
I have preserved Totaramji's letter. I even made two copies.
One I sent to Gangabehn and the other to Chhaganlal Joshi.
If Totaramji has not kept a copy, I may return the original or
send a copy from here. Because of the uncertainty in regard to
visitors, I have not asked for permission for Chitalia and others.
As for Thakkar Bapa, I am afraid I won't be able to write about
him from here in any case. It is enough that Bhansali at least
sends news about him from time to time.
Lakshmidas did get my detailed letter in which I had ex-
plained how the change in the spindle-bearer in the Gandiva
spinning-wheel immediately resulted in improvement in count and
speed, for he has acknowledged it. I, therefore, think that there has
been some misunderstanding. I got a letter from Krishna, but she
does not mention anything in it about Choudhariji, nor have I
received a letter from him. Which Choudhariji did you refer to?
Ba seems to have lost much weight but I hope that she and
Navin are improving now. If you interpreted Mirabehn's letter
to refer to fasting, you were not correct. She spoke about the
mockery of fasting, about eating only one meal on the 6th and
the 13th of the National Week .
The Narayanappa affair is a shameful one. Now that the
guilty party in this theft has been found out, I suppose we must
believe that Bhagwanji's suspicion, too, was correct. If, how-
ever, Narayanappa is sincerely repentant and if all of you think
that he may be permitted to stay on, by all means let him do
so. The spinning yajna will be complete if everybody hands
over the yarn which he or she spun for that yajna. There can be
no doubt at all that such yajna will remain incomplete so long as
those who take part in it wish to keep back the yarn for their
own use. The rule which I have suggested is that everybody
should hand over all the yarn spun by himself to the Ashram,
and he may get from the Ashram the khadi required for clothes.
One should spin yarn of the highest count that one can, and
accept from the Ashram as coarse a cloth as one's body can to-
lerate or as may fall to one's share. All this is implied in the
vow of non-possession and in the ideal of self-dedication. However,
I do not have the courage to make this a compulsory rule for
all. Moreover, I am no more in your midst and, therefore,
since the matter has come up for discussion, I am merely point-
ing out what the Ashram dharma demands. Read this out to
all and explain what I have said, and then leave it to every
individual person to accept from it as much as he or she can.
But we can certainly make this rule, that everyone should wind
yarn into neat hanks at the end of each day or week and hand
them over with details of name, place, number of rounds, etc.,
and, when one wants to get cloth woven from the yarn, one may
ask for the hanks according to the rule which one may have ac-
cepted for oneself. I think this is absolutely essential for a correct
record to be preserved.
What is Rambhau's speed, with one hand, on the Magan
spinning-wheel and what is the count of the yarn?
Mahadev's yarn of 40 counts is piling up for he spins 630
rounds daily. You should get ready rach and fani of the type
necessary for weaving this yarn. We should be able to weave
yarn of 40 counts without the least difficulty.
I am of the view that we should build a regular tomb over
Imam Saheb's grave. But you should consult a trustworthy
Muslim and find out what the proper thing would be. Maulvi
Saheb Gulam Nadvi4, who was a teacher in the Vidyapith for
1 & 2 Weaving tools
3 Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, Gandhiji's associate since South African period
and an Ashram inmate; vide Vol. XLIX, "Imam Saheb-I", 7-3-1932.
4 Abu Zafar Nadvi
some time and had good relations with Imam Saheb and who
was present at the funeral, will most probably be in Ahmedabad
just now. You may consult him. There is no hurry, of course.
If Pyare Ali himself has made any suggestion in this regard, let
me know it.
All the persons whose names you sent to me came and saw
me. Anandlal's Ranchhod also had joined the party, so they
were six in all. But that may be permitted occasionally. Now
send no more names till you hear from me.
June 3, 1932
Send, by parcel, one pound of asafoetida pills for Ganga-
behn. She requires them urgently.
I did not keep a copy of the article sent last time, thinking
that I would get one from you sooner or later, but I have not
received any so far.
I hope I shall get one by and by.
BAPU
[PS.]
This is the 29th letter in today's packet.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C. W. 8230. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
