284. LETTER TO M. M. ANANTA RAU
December 17, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. You will please pardon me for the
frankness with which I propose to discuss it in the hope that it
may open your eyes to the untenability of the position you have
taken up and which you say represents orthodox opinion.
Before I do that, let me ask why your letter-paper is so
grotesque. It cannot add dignity to the sanatan dharma by
having your letter-paper printed with borders as on an address-
paper, still less to have a portrait of the agent surrounded by
other figures. Advertisers do sometimes adopt ornamentation for
their letter-paper, but I have never seen anything so wholly in-
artistic as the paper which you are using. I restrained myself
twice against drawing your attention to the incongruity of a re-
ligious agency using ornamentation, and that, too, utterly inartistic,
but though my claim may be rejected, I am or am trying to
be a humble representative of sanatan dharma, and therefore,
whenever anything unbecoming is done in the name of that
dharma, it pains me deeply. So much by way of preface.
Now, regarding the contents of your letter. Surely, it ought
to be easy for you to see that since you admit that untouchability
is quite contrary to the divine fact of oneness of all life, the
only way to realize that oneness is to have as little differentia-
tion as possible, and wherever it exists, it should be accepted
as an evil to be removed at the first opportunity. There is no
such difficulty or impossibility about the removal of untouchabi-
lity as we practise it today. You say that untouchability is based
on "physical, moral and mental purity", and you have stated as
if it was a self-proved proposition. I find it most difficult to
understand your statement so utterly at variance with daily ex-
perience. To claim permanence for untouchability, as you evi-
dently claim for it, is to indefinitely postpone realization of oneness,
unless you were to postulate that that realization is to come to
humanity from outside sources. But I have never heard anybody
saying so; on the contrary, there is complete agreement that reali-
zation of oneness can only come by incessant striving. In other
words, it can only come when, in a daily increasing ratio, we
obliterate differences and begin with those which are of our own
creation and which have no moral justification.
Nor can we be oblivious to the practices followed in other
religions. If there is oneness of all life, there is oneness of all
religions. It is, therefore, instructive, if not absolutely necessary,
to test our own practice by a reference to that of other religions,
and then we find that untouchability as we know it today does
not exist in any other religion. For justifying our untouchability,
therefore, we have to prove that the other religions are defective
in that they do not practise untouchability and that It is so essen-
tial to the realization of the common goal that those religions
which do not practise it will be driven to it whether they will or
no. I have never heard anybody making such claim.
Those who claim to be sanatanists have put themselves in a
state of rage as if I was about to violate all that is good in
Hinduism, and they have rendered themselves incapable, first,
of understanding what I am after, and then, of knowing what
they are attacking. I can safely say that no two letters from among
the mass of letters I am receiving from sanatanists have agreed
about the definition of untouchability.
They either swear at me
or enter into argument that has no bearing on the subject.
All
this cannot be good for sanatan dharma. The correspondence I
am having is to me a painful sign of decadence of Hinduism.
I invite you to ponder over what I have written, and if you
find any force in my argument, study the whole question dis-
passionately, and if you feel with me that untouchability is an
evil, courageously proclaim the truth and fight the evil.
You refer me to the four Sankaracharyas. What shall I
do by worrying them?
I entertain no doubt about the correct-
ness of my position. It is as clear to me as noon-day light.
If
they think that I am immersed in darkness, it is for them to show
me the light.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. M. M. ANANTA RAU
AGENT, SANATANA DHARMA AGENCY
40 ISHWARDAS LALA STREET, TRIPLICANE, MADRAS
From a copy: C.W. 9565. Courtesy: Government of Mysore. Also S.N. 18736
