202. LETTER TO GOPALRAO KULKARNI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Saturday, Asadha Sud 14, July 24, 1926
BHAISHRI GOPALRAO,
I got a letter from you after a long interval. I was happy.
Your decision to save money and use it as you intend to is worthy
of you. Your diet, too, is the right one. I can suggest no improve-
ment in it. I agree with you that we cannot put more pressure
for the use of khadi than is being done. Tell the students that I
expect the alumni of Dakshinamurti to be perfect devotees of
khadi and set an example to pupils in other schools. Anyone who
fails, through carelessness, to bring his share of yarn should
atone for his lapse by giving twice as much. If anyone refuses to
do this, reason gently with him. I don't think it is necessary to
do more than that. If you feel like travelling, you need not sup-
press the desire, but it is not necessary either to spend money for
that purpose. The man who travels by rail observes, not more,
but less, than the one who travels on foot. The reason which you
have advanced for my undertaking a tour does not justify any
expenditure at all. I am sure you know that Surendra toured on
foot for a whole year, going as far as Uttarkashi. This is not to
suggest that you should never travel by rail. You may certainly
do that. Personally, I think that those who have adopted khadi
as a matter of principle should not wear foreign cloth even when
acting on the stage and even though such cloth might be offered
them as a gift. By wearing such cloth, they increase its impor-
tance. The use of foreign cloth for costumes on the stage implies
that there is one occasion on which its use is absolutely necessary.
Those who go to theatres are generally pleasure-loving people.
More likely than not, they have never heard about khadi. By
using foreign cloth for the purpose of costumes, we miss the only
opportunity of awakening love of khadi in such persons. You may
certainly stay there as long as it suits you. I am glad that you
wrote to me.
SHRI G. KULKARNI
DAKSHINAMURTI
BHAVNAGAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12213
XXXI-13
