4. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
AHMEDABAD,
November 24, 1925
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I have your letter. I hope I would have written you about
three days ago.
I would love the idea of Kamala going to Switzerland for treat-
ment and taking Jawaharlal with her. The cure would be certainly
more permanent than hoped to have here, but I suggest she should
not be sent during winter, but only in April. At the present
moment, therefore, I am quite clear in my mind that she should
be sent to Lucknow and that Jawaharlal should give her as much
time as it is possible for him. My whole heart goes out to you
in your domestic troubles. I hope that Kamala would be soon
restored to health.
Even though it is owing to the domestic trouble, I do not
mind this brief interruption in your toil, you do need some rest from
incessant toil. Political troubles and differences will be always with
us. A brief interruption, therefore, will not matter much. I have
not been reading the reports of all the meetings, but I have been
reading the head lines and a few sentences here and there, and I
was able to gather from this cursory reading that you were having
a very successful time; of this I have no doubt.
You refer me to an interview I am said to have given, but
I have been guilty of no such atrocity. Our friend Sadanand
approached me and I sent a message to him that I had nothing
to say. The Associated Press correspondent had been to me more
than once and I have given him the same reply. I have asked
Devdas to let me know if anything has appeared in the Press.
He too has seen nothing except an extract from some corres-
pondent, which I think has been lifted from Young India.
Mrs. Naidu was in Ahmedabad for one day, but she told me
she broke her journey merely to see how I was looking, after having
dropped some pounds of flesh in Kutch. She told me she was
coming here at the end of the month to discuss the contents of
her address. She is at present in Bombay. I leave for Bombay
Satyagraha Ashram on 7th December. I reach Bombay on 8th.
I leave Bombay on 9th for Wardha reaching there on 10th. If you
think it is not too late we can meet at Wardha, but Mrs. Naidu
may herself find that to be too late. I am free whenever you can
come here and certainly equally free in Wardha. If you hear
that I have been fasting again, pray do not be alarmed, it is only
a week's fast of purification undertaken in connection with mis-
behaviour on the part of youngsters who are undergoing training
in the Ashram School attached to the Ashram. Such fasting has
become part of my need. It does me good and at least temporari-
ly keeps the surroundings clean. Fast breaks on Tuesday morning,
and I shall have no difficulty in regaining my strength almost im-
mediately after. I have written to Dastane already. I have spo-
ken to Gangadharrao personally because he was here.
I hope you will keep good health in spite of extra worry and
pressure that the crisis means for you.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 10664
