8. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON NON-CO-OPERATION
[Before July 7, 1920]
Mr. Gandhi writes to the Press:
Needless to say that I am in entire accord with Lala Lajpat Rai
on the question of the boycott of the reformed councils. For me
it is but one step in the campaign of non-co-operation and as I feel
equally keenly on the Punjab question as on the khilafat, Lala
Lajpat Rai's suggestion is doubly welcome. I have seen the sug-
gestion made in more quarters than one that non-co-operation on
the reforms should commence after the process of election has
been through. I cannot help saying that it is a mistake to go
through the election farce and the expense of it when we clearly
do not intend to take part in the proceedings of these Legislative
councils. Moreover, a great deal of educative work has to be
done among the people. And if I could I would not have the
best attention of the country frittered away in electioneering. The
populace will not understand the beauty of non-co-operation if we
seek election and then resign. But it would be a fine education for
them if the electors are not to elect anybody and unanimously to tell
whosoever may seek their suffrage that he would not represent them
if he so sought election so long as the Punjab and Khilafat questions
were not satisfactorily settled. I hope, however, that Lala Lajpat
Rai does not mean to end with the boycott of the reformed coun-
cils. We must take if necessary everyone of the four stages of
non-co-operation if we are to be regarded as a self-respecting nation.
The issue is clear. Both the Khilafat terms and the Punjab affairs
show that Indian opinion counts for little in the councils of the
Empire. It is a humiliating position, we shall make nothing of the
reforms if we quietly swallow the humiliation. In my humble
opinion therefore the first condition of real progress is the removal
of these difficulties in our path. And unless some better course
of action is devised nolens volens non-co-operation must hold the
field.
Young India, 7-7-1920
