222. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
September 21, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,
I must now unburden myself of my second difficulty. I do
not doubt a word of what you have told me about the charges
of alleged ill-treatment in this prison. Yet I cannot dispel from
my mind all the reports that have appeared in the Press. The
writers could not have deliberately lied about everything. I am
sure that some of the statements are gross exaggerations. I hope
that most are, and I should like to believe that all are false. But
my mind is disturbed. There may be things you do not know;
there must be things which you look at from one angle and the
prisoners concerned from another.
My duty in the circumstances seems to be plain. I must ask
to be allowed to see them occasionally, if I may not be permit-
ted to live with them. I have told you I desire no privileges.
What comforts are allowed to me may be taken away from me.
If I am isolated for the sake of the comforts, they mean little
to me, whereas isolation means everything to me. I desire no com-
forts that may not be allowed to the other prisoners suffering from
the same physical disabilities as I. I do not believe in classifica-
tion which, in my opinion, is degrading. If I permit myself com-
forts which the other prisoners like me do not enjoy, I do so be-
cause of my physical needs. But I would fain sacrifice health if it
has to be purchased by the sacrifice of the privilege of serving my
companions, many of whom I know and none of whom I consi-
der to be in any way inferior to me.
I was able to bear the separation so long as I was under
the impression that all was well. But the knowledge that young
Ratilal is no more, that Pyarelal who is like a son to me has been
suffering, that the elderly Narsinhabhai was near death's door and
the persistent complaints in the Press have awakened me to a
sense of my duty, viz., that I should strive to the utmost of my
ability to establish touch with them.
I know that it is not in your or the I. G. P.'s power to grant
me the permission requested. I would therefore ask you please
to place this letter before the Government and secure an early
reply. I am aware as prisoner I have no rights and no choice as
to the disposal of my body. But I know also that the upkeep
of my body requires my co-operation. I should no longer be inte-
rested [in] the preservation of a body that cannot be used for
the service that the dweller within yearns after. I am human.
Even as a prisoner I cannot divest myself of the human in me.
I need not give the assurance, perhaps you will be able to
give it, if any be required, that my presence among my compa-
nions will not be used to subvert discipline but on the contrary,
it is highly likely to promote it. The moral code of a civil resister
requires him willingly to submit to all prison discipline that is
not in conflict with self-respect.
Lastly I would like to draw the Government's attention to the
fact that when a somewhat similar incident occurred in 1923 in
this very prison, I was allowed to see two prisoners with the result
that what promised to be a grave tragedy was averted. The pre-
sent Inspector General of Police is aware of the facts of the case.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3852; also Bombay Secret Abstract, 750(5)/A, p. 207
