427. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
March 15, 1911
SIR,
There is only one thing in your leading article of today's date on
which you will, perhaps, permit me to say a few words. So far as I can
voice my countrymen's aspirations, there is no question now, and there
was none before, of quietly accepting the existing position governing
British Indians in the different Provinces. All that the present Bill can
do, so far as the Transvaal is concerned, is to stop passive resistance, and
that, too, if it is amended so as to make it clear that the rights at present
enjoyed by the minor children and wives of domiciled Asiatics, whether
they be at present inside the Transvaal or outside the Province, are not
to be taken away by it, and that those few highly educated Asiatics who
will enter under the education test will be able to reside in any part of
the Union without being subject to Provincial registration laws. Apart
from passive resistance, Indians have never ceased, nor have, for that
matter, the Imperial and Indian Governments, to press for repeal of
legislation which prohibits their holding landed property, interferes
with their freedom of movement, etc. I am quite sure that the Cape and
the Natal Indians will certainly never submit to legislation restrictive of
the rights at present enjoyed by them, without making a desperate
effort to avoid such a calamity. In an age which we fondly believe is an
age of progress, there can be no such thing as finality, and my country-
men would be less than human, if they did not make a serious endea-
vour to deserve, at the hands of the European residents in the Union,
better treatment than they have hitherto received. The education
test in the present Bill is not a fraud, unless you are prepared to give that
name to the whole of the British Constitution. The adoption by General
Smuts of the policy enunciated by Lord Crewe is a recognition by him
of the idea of equality. The administration of the measure will be
undoubtedly unequal. There is no secret about it. Administrative in-
equality will be a concession to the prevalent prejudice in South Africa
and to human weakness. Self-respecting Asiatics are bound to make an
honest attempt to remove the prejudice, first, by removing the causes
that have led to the rise of any such prejudice and, secondly, by show-
ing that largely it is based on ignorance.
I am, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5303
