267. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
December 15, 1932
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I got your letter. I understand what you say regarding
Kamalnayan. No arrangement can be made for him to stay in
Poona. I had discussed the matter with Vakil. They do not
accept a young man of his age, for they simply don't have the
necessary facility for that. We shall discuss the matter further
when we meet. Shri Kateli knew that we had a stock of the swa-
deshi ink for fountain pen which you wanted, and, therefore, we
have sent a bottle of it for you. We have quite a large quantity
of it.
The sugar used in the bread made here is probably swa-
deshi, for very little foreign sugar is available in Poona. Even if
it is foreign, I would not consider it wrong to eat the bread for
that reason, for the sugar is used for preparing yeast. That is, it
mixes with the other ingredients of yeast and produces a new
substance altogether-as two gases combine in a certain proportion
and produce water. Hence we cannot say that when eating bread
we consume two different articles, wheat and sugar. Three things
are used for preparing yeast-mahura, sugar and salt. The mahura
is indigenous. According to me, therefore, bread is innocent food
even for a person who has taken a vow not to eat foreign sugar.
However, after knowing all these facts it is for you finally to
decide what you should do. If the chapatis which they prepare
here agree with you, I certainly would not press you to eat bread.
I have received no reply as yet to my request for permis-
sion to see you.
I understand your reason for not going to England just now
for an operation. Personally, I entertain no such fear at all.
Thousands of people get discharge from their ears and suffer from
no other disease. Since the affected parts adjoin the brain, extreme
consequences may follow in some cases. The possibility may
alarm doctors and they, in turn, frighten the patients. I would,
therefore, willingly rest satisfied with whatever help is available
in India. But this discussion is unnecessary just now. After
there is a settlement, we shall know what to do.
There is no change in the condition of my elbow. The weight
is 103 pounds. General health is good on the whole.
I send with this Janakibehn's letter. Please read what she
writes in regard to Kamalnayan. I have told her in my reply that
I would certainly not agree to a tutor and a cook being sent with
him. That will deprive him of the benefits of staying away from
home. I have also told her that we have been discussing the
matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2908
