397. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
VELLORE,
September 1, 1927
MY DEAR VAZE,
It is curious your letter enclosing copy of the Servant of India
came to me the very day that I read your signed article and the
reference myself. The cutting was given to me by Andrews. When
I read that cutting I thought of writing to you to tell you that
whenever you expect me to deal with any question you should
write to me. Much as I should like to, I really do not get much
time to read any papers or books except to see a local newspaper
for a few minutes daily. I remain somewhat posted with current
events only because friends correspond with me on them. Now
about the subject-matter of your letter.
Before it came I had discussed the East African among other
questions with Andrews. It needs very delicate handling. I do
not consider myself to be as competent to pronounce an opinion
on the East African situation as I do on the South African. I
had been given to write views on the East African question also
not because of my being well posted with a knowledge of all the
problems and local conditions but a long course of very serious
study of the South African question has given me, so I fancy, the
capacity for coming to a right decision. My own opinion is that
we would be better without any representation in the East African
legislature. Any representation that we might have will be ex-
ploited by the predominant European element for the purpose
of robbing the sons of the soil of their just rights. I would, there-
fore, resist communal representation. If I can, I would retain
for the Indian settlers the franchise on the same rights as the
Europeans. But that can only be, if an educational qualification
is accepted by the Europeans which they will resist because, they
always in the colonies want the principle of "one man, one
vote" to be established. What I am anxious for and what I
would fight unto death for is our immigration and unrestricted
rights to own landed property unlike as in South Africa and Rho-
desia. We were the pioneers in South Africa. Our peasants, so
far as I know, have done no harm to the Africans. We were,
therefore, in large numbers, solely dependent upon their good-
will. In all fairness, therefore, Europeans have to reconvince us
that having got the might on their side they may ride roughshod
over our rights may be too true [sic] but then I should not com-
promise by a hair's breadth on these two fundamental questions.
At the present moment whilst my opinion is an . . . 1 state so far
as the political part of the question is concerned, I do not feel
inclined to write to say anything in public unless later on it be-
comes absolutely necessary. I know and it grieves me to know
that our people in East Africa are not acting in the correct man-
ner and that their leaders there are not selfless.
Yours sincerely,
S. G. VAZE, ESQ.
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
POONA CITY
From a photostat: S.N. 13276
