211. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
110, FIELD STREET,
DURBAN,
December 23, 1913
SIR,
I venture to suggest that, in your editorial this morning on the
resolutions passed at the mass meeting on Sunday and upon the
letter addressed to the Government by my colleagues and my-
self, you have taken up an attitude that is hardly calculated to
serve the Empire. You see the mote in our eye, but you miss
the beam in that of the Government. I do not admit that the
tone adopted by the speakers at the mass meeting was aggressive
or offensive, unless the mere assertion of rights be so considered. In
my humble opinion, the Government not only refuse to do justice,
to which you consider we are entitled, but the manner of deny-
ing it is also offensive and contemptuous in the highest degree.
Take the inspired telegram published this morning. According
to it, the Commission has been appointed, not to conciliate us
— we are beneath notice— but to conciliate the Imperial and
Indian Governments. We are accused of being tools in the hands
of the Indian extremists, and of nursing a fictitious agitation. Do
you think that, if you were in our place, you would, under any
circumstances whatever, take advantage of a seemingly relieving
measure? I submit that if we have a grain of self-respect left in us,
it is impossible for us, after learning the view of the Govern-
ment— if the telegram does represent it— to recede an inch from
the position which we have taken up. Peace for us is unattain-
able until we dislodge the Government from the attitude of con-
temptuous disregard of our sentiments.
In asking us to revise our prayer, you are asking us to sur-
render a principle, namely, that of the right to be consulted in
matters vitally affecting us, the very thing for which we have
been fighting, and now dying; whereas the Government, if they
granted our prayer, would be only giving what we are entitled to,
and what would justify them in the estimation of the civilized
world.
You say that by its present attitude the Indian community
is alienating the sympathy of its South African friends. This
warning has been given to the community on many an occasion,
and yet the truth of its cause has each time succeeded, not only
in retaining, but in increasing it. It may be that we might,
this time, have relied once too often upon its retention. If so, I
should be very sorry. I value that sympathy, but I value the
cause more, and if, in prosecuting it, we must forfeit the former,
we must be content for the time being, and believe in the ultimate
triumph of truth, which is on our side.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 24-12-1913
