243. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
WARDHA,
December 11, 1928
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
The issues of "Mandir Samachar" which I get are still illegible.
If there is any defect in the machine, please get it repaired. If the
fault lies with the person who takes out copies, find out what it is.
On getting my yarn tested, I find that its count is 30, even-
ness 93 and strength 68. These days the yarn I spin is uniform-
ly of 30 counts. I cannot draw more than 160 lengths an hour.
Are you now taking more cow's milk? Does everyone write his
or her diary regularly?
I wrote this last night.
Tuesday
I have got your letter.
I questioned Keshu and he tells me that he did not write
what you attribute to him. He merely described my condition
and suggested that it would be better if Santok and others left the
Ashram. I believe that in such matters Keshu keeps himself within
limits. Whether or not he does, you should do your duty with firm-
ness. I have stated my views clearly. Give them the facility which
Chi. Narandas has suggested and then let them live as they choose.
Do not attach too much importance to what Shankerlal
says. That is his manner of speaking. We should admit, however,
that there is some truth in what he says and remove our short-
comings.
The members of every institution which has acquired prestige in
society tend to become proud. We are not free from this defect. I
shall not, however, feel hurt if the office of the Spinners' Asso-
ciation is finally removed from the Ashram. Our aim is to carry
a burden, to do our duty, and not to enjoy authority. When one
burden becomes light, we may, if we have the necessary strength,
accept another. If the khadi section of the Spinners' Association
is removed from the Ashram and if we can lend to it the services
of our men, we may do even that. But the position is this: the deci-
sion in the present case is to be arrived at jointly by you and
Narandas. If you two can unite as milk and sugar mix and be-
come one, the department will work and be a success. If there
is a gulf between you, it will never work. In that case, it may as
well be removed from the Ashram. I am neutral in this matter.
There is no harm if the totals of the entries in regard to spin-
ning are read on Friday. None of us understood whom you
meant by Makarani.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not read the letter after finishing it.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 27-
