56. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY FARM,
Vaisakh Sud 10 [May 8, 1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
Your two letters reached me this week.
I have held since 1899 the same views that you do about
Theosophy. They pressed me hard that year to join the Society
but I refused in no uncertain terms, saying that, though the Society's
rule respecting brotherhood appealed to me, I had no sympathy
for its search for occult powers. I do not think that Mrs. Besant
is a hypocrite; she is credulous and is duped by Leadbeater.
When an Englishman suggested to me to read Leadbeater's
The Life after Death, I flatly refused to do so as I had grown
suspicious of him after reading his other writings. As to his
humbug, I came to know of it later. All the same, I have drawn
from Theosophy the lessons which seemed to me worth drawing.
Blavatsky's Key had made a good impression on me. Theosophy
sent many Hindus inquiring into their own religion. It has per-
formed the same service as Christianity has. Moreover, Theoso-
phists believe in the same basic principles as we do and therefore
it is easy enough to come across good persons among them. Though
there is no dearth of crooks at all levels from the highest to the
lowest among the Vaishnav and other sects, we do find gems like
Narasinh Mehta and Bhojo Bhagat amongst them. Ritch was a
Theosophist. He urged me to become a member. Not only did
I not become one, I helped him to be free from that humbug. Polak
is a Theosophist, but he stays miles away from the practices and
writings of Theosophists. The same is true of Kallenbach. When I
was in India, I sent Gokaldas to the College at Benares. Then also
I was disappointed. Even afterwards, as long as I had not come
to see the light, which I have now, that is, as long as I had
not outgrown the fascination for modern education, I used to
inquire about institutions like the Benares College and even
wished to send the boys there, thinking that something was
better than nothing. All that is over now. Cordes, at Phoenix, is
a staunch Theosophist. I have not yet been able to get him
out of the hold of Theosophy. In himself, he appears to be a
sincere man. He has gone to Adyar at present, against all per-
suasion. Being honest, he will see the the fraud that is there and
turn his back on it, unless he is taken in. It is worth ascertaining
what humbug prevails there safe under the cover of Mrs. Besant's
goodness. Her desire to pass off as the "Master" is understandable.
One who runs after occult powers cannot but become so intoxicated.
It is for these reasons that all our shastras have looked upon
occult powers and Yogic attainments as unworthy pursuits. And
that is the reason, I think, why bhaktiyoga is regarded as superior
to hathayoga.
Please read the accompanying letter from Harilal. He
had told Joseph Royeppen everything and asked him to inform
me as well, if necessary. That is how I came to know more
about his movements. He is at present in Delagoa Bay, and has
replied to my telegram from there. He did not like going to
England with your money and under any binding. As Joseph
tells me, he wants to go to the Punjab and study there in peace.
His letter is all ignorance. Even the idea of going to the Pun-
jab, in the absence of more details, seems no better. But I
shall know more in a couple of days. He did a lot of thinking in
gaol. Moreover, he witnessed a great transformation in my life
and saw my will as well. All these things have, it appears, influ-
enced his mind unconsciously. I think his morals are sound.
I have, therefore, no fears on his account. I have told him that
he ought not to have taken the step he has, without my know-
ledge. I shall give more information next week.
Six educated satyagrahis from Natal have been given per-
mission to settle here. I think we might send them for studies in
England for a year at your expense if they would [agree to]
spend the remaining part of their life, or at least ten years, in
such public work as we suggest. There are two or three of them
who would [agree]. Even more might come forward. I want
your consent for sending them [abroad]. If the idea appeals to
you, cable just "Gandhi—Johannesburg Yes" and I shall under-
stand. Not that they will leave immediately. I am discussing the
matter with them. I am inclined to send them if they agree and if
I am satisfied. My idea is that, for the present, such persons
should be trained at Phoenix in agriculture and weaving; they
should learn press work also. When they have been so trained
it may be possible to send then to India. I feel that a similar
programme should be taken up in India, too. It will be, I think,
easier to manage it here, though it might prove a little more
expensive.
Young Indians are able to exert greater force of character here.
The control which Purshottamdas does, and can, exercise over
his senses here would certainly be impossible in India. Likewise,
the freedom his wife enjoys and her unconstrained manner of
living will not, I think, be possible at present among our class
in India. I keep thinking that it would be well if a few per-
sons were trained here thoroughly. Those who bind themselves
to work for ten years will have to be maintained by us. Please
go through the enclosed letter from Purshottamdas. The ideas
mentioned in it are being implemented, independently of me.
West and others have followed their own judgement in putting
these into practice. I worked very hard on Chotabhai's case. He
wanted to give me something in return. I refused to take any-
thing for myself. He has now given me £300 to be spent as I
think best. Having had this amount to start with, I intend to
go begging for more and, if I get some, to have a building put
up for the school at Phoenix. Failing in this, I feel inclined to
use the amount for promoting the cause of satyagraha in some
manner.
Polak has gone to England. We have started a subscription for
him locally and decided to collect as much as £700. With this, he
may stay in England up to October, leave for India in the middle
of that month, accompanied by Mrs. Polak, attend the Congress,
stay on there till the Bill to be enacted here next year is passed
and return soon after. By that time, it should be March next
year. The expenditure on all this, including the passage, is put
at £725. If, while in India, he stays with friends, something will
be saved from this. I expect you will invite them to Rangoon
for some time. You must have noticed that Mrs. Polak's habits
are not as simple as her husband's.
If I can get some time during the next six or eight months,
I propose to give my attention to farming or weaving. Pur-
shottamdas has been to a factory to see a handloom. I have given
him permission to buy one of the same type. If he does I will
ask you to meet the cost. It will be necessary for some time to
spend money on all these ventures. I wish to have a free hand,
so far as you are concerned.
I see that I can make at least £200 if I forget all else and
only practise. But I am resolved not to have anything to do
with that. Most of the work will go to Ritch. I have given him
a seat in my own office and he has already started work. He is
anxious to earn money for the sake of his family. His desire will
be satisfied by this arrangement and the community will save £25
which it gives as a monthly allowance to his family.
The final letter from Smuts has not yet been received. But it
will come. So I believe.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5084. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
