244. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DANDI,
April 13, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,
I have your letter. I have been having a talk with some
women who have arrived. The conference itself will not start
before 3.30. The reason for calling them here was that Janaki-
behn and some other women have arrived from Vile Parle and
Mrs. Tyabji also has come from Baroda.
Consult your own convenience and come on the 16th. There
is no need to reach here on the 15th. At the moment, at any rate,
I cannot think of any additions to your list. I will write if I
have any suggestion to make. Tell Ba that she has been posted
to do picketing of liquor booths at Jalalpur and that she should,
therefore, come after making all necessary preparations. She will
not be in a position to return as Mithubehn is quietly starting the
picketing work right from tomorrow. The idea is to begin with
three booths, of which only one will be taken up tomorrow. The
next will be the one at Olpad and the third at Jalalpur. Kanjibhai
and Dr. Sumant will help and advise Mithubehn. As Olpad has
Muslim residents, Hamida will work there. Kanjibhai's daughter
is also there. Motibehn will have to be posted there. Probably
250
Surajbehn will also be there. But I shall have to consult Swami.
Karsandas, who will be arriving this afternoon, will bring some
more news.
Considering all aspects of the matter, and in order that we
may have a quiet atmosphere, I think it best to have the meeting
of the 16th at Dandi. The women will arrive after breakfast, etc.,
[by the first Mail]. They will spend the whole day here and be
back at their respective places in time for their evening meal. If
they wish to have their meal here, arrangements for that can also
be made; but the arrangement here is bound to be a little un-
satisfactory. Let me know if you have any change to suggest in
this. You and Narandas or the women themselves should decide
who should come from the Ashram. Khurshedbehn at any rate
will not come and do not press her. Only those who have faith
in this programme can carry it out.
Mohanlal Pandya, Nanubhai and Ishwarlal Desai, these three
from Untadi have been arrested. Now it will be the turn of
Kalyanji and others. It seems possible that in the end I shall
remain at Dandi enjoying its air and you will remain there with
no work to do.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11479
