34. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
September 29, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I know I have not been fair to you. You have been pouring
letters on me, and I have been satisfied with merely sending you
a line. The fact is that I have not yet regained all the lost energy,
and what there is of it has to be devoted to the immediate work
1& Omissions as in the source
3 Vide also "Speech at Public Meeting, Calicut", 13-1-1934.
33
56-
at hand. Hence, I have to neglect many things that I would
otherwise have done. Your letters have come under the category
of neglected ones. I have relied upon Andrews and Mira for
writing to you. But your two letters, those of 9th and 16th inst.,
demand a fairly full answer from me.
I understand all that you say and that you have omitted to
say about the Midnapore incident. I hope that you got copies
of all the statements made by me.
I offer no apology for what
I have said about Midnapore. I could say nothing less and no-
thing more; for that statement contained cent per cent truth. But
how is one to overtake the deliberate campaign of misrepresenta-
tion? Every word that I say is distorted. Where distortion is
not possible they do not hesitate to cut out sentences from my
statements, which would make them read differently from what
they would if they were read in conjunction with the sentences cut
out. But I remain unmoved by these tactics. They are not
new to me. I have boundless faith in my mission and in my
own truth. The only thing, therefore, to do is not to enter into
an elaborate explanation, for it means nothing, but on due occa-
sion to repeat the same truth with added emphasis.
The position of friends in England is somewhat different.
They are naturally anxious to show some result. I would, how-
ever, ask friends on such occasions to remain unperturbed, because
at the present moment yours will be a voice in the wilderness, and
if you attempted to be apologetic about what I might have said,
you would be doing an injury to the cause. I am trying a
tremendous experiment. Non-violence regulates every breath of
my life. I do not embellish what I write. I conceal nothing.
Therefore, I would not like friends excusing any action or word
of mine. When they do not understand it they may remain
silent. When they disagree, after having all the facts and after
having weighed them, I would not mind their open disapproval.
It would really serve the cause. Take this Midnapore statement.
I know that terrorism is taking a deeper root owing to the counter-
terrorism of the Government. The counter-terrorism is much more
mischievous in its effect, because it is organized and corrupts a
whole people. Instead of rooting out terrorism it creates an atmos-
phere for the approval of terrorist methods and thus gives them
an artificial stimulus. It may not show immediate results, but
it certainly prepares the future for wider activities along those lines.
Hence, it is necessary to bring out this point forcibly when any
eruption takes place as that of Midnapore, and if the truth can-
not be said forcibly, it is obvious that silence is the only alternative.
A half-hearted operation is much more dangerous than no opera-
tion. I say all this with my knowledge of non-violence and of
ascertained facts.
Then take my fast, or rather all the recent fasts. If friends
over there have not understood them to the extent of being
able to justify them, they could ignore them, or, having procured
all the materials for a judgment, if the judgment went against me,
they should not hesitate to pronounce it, and if they endorse them,
then their approval should be unequivocal. You are there in a
hopeless minority. All I wish, therefore, for you is to be firm
in whatever action you take, that is, if you have faith in your-
selves, in the Indian cause and in me through whom today the
cause is represented to you. I shall never misunderstand you.
I know that whatever you, a mere handful, do you will do whole-
heartedly. More than that I do not expect, no one can or
should.
I do not know whether I have made myself clearly
understood by you. If I have failed, you should dismiss this letter
from your mind and tell me where you have not under-
stood me.
As for my health I am slowly regaining strength. I am supposed
to have quiet and rest at least up to the 23rd October after which,
if all goes well, a touring programme will be fixed up. Andrews
is in Orissa. Mahadev is in the Belgaum Jail, Devdas in Multan
Jail. His wife is here. Pyarelal is in the Nasik Jail. His
mother and brother are here, on their way to Nasik. Mira is
here, of course.
Love.
BAPU
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
2 CRANBOURNE COURT
ALBERT BRIDGE ROAD
LONDON S.W. 11
From a photostat: G.N. 1468
