136. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR,
August 21, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have your letter and the chapter on carding. The oil has
not arrived yet. Have you tried the use of kerosene? It also helps
to keep away mosquitoes. If the spot where they often settle is
be smeared with kerosene, they keep away from it. I did not
know about cotton-seed oil. As we are permitted to sleep in the
open here, we are not harassed.
I like all your articles on carding. In some places the lan-
guage seems to be unduly emphatic. My experience is that there can
be no guarantee that yarn will be evenly drawn if the cotton has
been well carded. Though I am a very careful spinner, the yarn is
not always even, even if the carding has been of the highest qua-
lity. The drawing of even yarn is also an art by itself and depends
on deftness in using one's fingers. Anyone whose fingers have be-
come inert, so to say, will certainly find difficulty in drawing even
yarn. I have seen spinners with quick fingers drawing even yarn
from badly carded cotton. I do not say this to minimize the im-
portance of carding. I only wish to make it clear that good card-
ing does not solve all the difficulties of the spinner. The art of
spinning, as I have said, includes all activities from the plucking
of cotton from the pods to the making of hanks, and a spinner
should have acquired mastery over all of them. If even one of these
processes has not been efficiently carried out, careful spinning by
itself will not compensate for the deficiency. We should not assert
anything if we are not perfectly sure about it. Ask Lakshmidas
to go through your articles before publishing them. It will be good
if you show them to some other person also who is an expert in the
craft. Perhaps Shankerlal will help you. It is desirable that the
book should be as perfect as possible. Once again, I find Motibehn's
letters have stopped coming. How is she now?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3742
