182. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
October 30, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have your letter about the Hospital. You ought to be able
to say without fear of contradiction that the Swaraj Bhawan
Dispensary is a perfect fraud and thoroughly boycotted. Without
absolute proof, I am disinclined to believe that they fabricate
cases. I am anxious to have this evidence, because it is necessary
for framing my opinion about the Congress Hospital, for, I feel
that we should be able to take possession of the Swaraj Bhawan
strictly for Hospital work, if the Government management has
proved to be a fiasco. If you think that the Congress Hospital or
Dispensary should be run in the place where it is now being run
and that no attempt whatsoever should be made to regain
1 A hospital run by the Congress in the Swaraj Bhawan was taken over
by the Government in 1931. After some time the British authorities "more
for show than for anything else" decided to keep a dispensary open for the
public. "But", the addressee wrote, "there is no evidence that even a single
member of the public has ever taken advantage of it. . . . I am told false entries
are made in their books to show that many patients are being treated." After
the seizure of this hospital, the Congress had started another which from
possession of the Swaraj Bhawan, an appeal certainly becomes
necessary and then it should be issued in the names of Mohanlal
Nehru and Kamala.
I am glad that Mother is making steady progress. Evidently
the successful conclusion of the marriage ceremony has also
something to do with easing the mental strain she was having.
Andrews is expected here on Wednesday.
I understand what you say about Jamnalalji. When do you
think it may be safely announced?
Thakkar Bapa writes saying that you have prohibited Cong-
ressmen from working for Harijan cause, even though they may
not be offering civil resistance. Where is the truth! I have known
nothing about any such embargo.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
