351. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
May 11, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I am writing this letter at a station far away from Nellore.
Your letter of the 7th is lying in front of me.
If you think it necessary, you may certainly call a meeting
of all the inmates of the Ashram. I expect to be there between
May 28 and June 10. All of you should consult among yourselves
and fix any date that you like during that period. However, think
carefully about the usefulness of calling a meeting at this junc-
ture. The real thing to consider is where you, the workers, stand
and what you wish; who can help in that? You should, how-
ever, do what seems best to all of you.
I have known for long that Bhagwandas is crazy. I write a
few things to him occasionally.
Do as you suggest about the sum of Rs. 125 belonging to the
Ramashram.
For the time being, write to Jagjivandas and inform him that
we have not been able to trace the amount. Write to Reva-
shankerbhai and inquire of him what happened to it.
It is a fine thing indeed that you supply milk to Ran-
chhodbhai's mill.
I have sent a wire to say that I have taken Sakhi Gopal with
me. If I find that everything is all right, I will write to Vallabh-
bhai and ask him to send money for repairs. For the widows,
send the amount asked for by him. I am returning Jagannath
Rath's letter. Scrutinize the balance-sheet of khadi and keep
your comments ready for my perusal when I arrive there. The
note should be prepared by an expert.
There is no fear at all of Mahadev's strength being taxed be-
cause of his doing routine work. On the contrary, his strength
has increased because he was made to do such work. It gives
clarity and firmness to one's thoughts. Anyone who merely thinks
without putting his ideas into practice will have no real force in
what he writes. An instance of this is provided by the article
on the Charkha by Tikekar of Indore. If you do not know
how, ask me; it is worth knowing.
You were right in writing to Premraj and asking him to go
to Jabalpur.
I take it you have written to Mathuradas for his consent be-
fore sending Radha.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5416
