94. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
September 23, 1905
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter to hand. What you write about Kitchin is astounding.
You have nothing to do with his temperament. He is not your boss. You
can certainly reply to what he says without losing your temper. You
are both equals, and can discuss matters as such. When I say, "You
should tolerate him whatever he might say," it does not mean that you
should not reply; it only means that you should not get excited while
opposing his statements. I know the West incident. There the mistake
was mine. I had asked him to go to Kitchin; but I forgot the fact that
the venerable Mr. Kitchin cannot tolerate anybody's presence. This is his
shortcoming which we should ignore.
I have made it quite clear to you that I do not care in the least
even if Kitchin or any other person goes away. The press will not close
down on that account. My ultimate reliance is on you and West. The
press is not going to close down so long as you two are there. If, in spite
of this, you entertain any doubt, I would call that a weakness in you.
Though the expenditure on the electric lights, etc., in the press
is not going to be incurred without reference to me, you may declare in
the meeting that it cannot be done without reference to me. I have
agreed to sanction £40 for it at the most. I have not given permission
for the construction of an office in Kitchin's house at the expense of the
press. I do not mind giving him a telephone.
You may give money to Mannering.
You should speak to Kalabhai. I have no idea how much money
has been given to him. But he has most probably drawn Rs. 500 from
Revashankarbhai. I shall write again to Kalabhai about the work, if
you want me to do so. You should not be diffident in such matters. I
shall write to Shri Revashankarbhai.
Hemchand is not to be dispensed with. Ramnath also is not to be
relieved without the matter being given serious thought.
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have received the telegram regarding Gokuldas. I wonder if he
has brought his permit with him or left it with Kalyandas. If Suleman
Ismail wants the bill for the money, the receipt of which we have
acknowledged, do send it to him.
From a photostat of the original Gujarati: S. N. 4250
