100. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, NATAL
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
August 18, 1900
TO
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PIETERMARITZBURG
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 14th
instant regarding the application for a certificate of domicile for one
Dosa Desa.
I regret to trouble you in the matter again.
I tried to obtain from the Immigration Restriction Officer
information as to the causes that led to the introduction of the
rule in question, but failed.
It is quite possible that some people have abused the pre-
vious practice and if the abuse, assuming that it exists, was brought
to the notice of the Indians generally, in my humble opinion,
it could be mitigated, if not altogether stopped. If affidavits
have been made falsely, the culprits could be legally punished.
But the rule in question, though it may not be a hard and fast
one, will, it is submitted, be a great hardship, especially to
the poorer. As it is, they are put to considerable expense in get-
ting the certificates, but the new rule would put unnecessary ob-
stacles in their way. In practice, it is hardly possible to expect
men to apply from India for certificates. It takes as a rule 30
days and often longer for a letter to reach India and, if there
was any flaw in an affidavit, it is difficult to say how long it
would take before a certificate could be issued. Moreover, it is
hardly to be expected that the limited number of Indians who
may be known to the Immigration Officer as respectable could know
the persons for whom certificates of domicile may be required.
Under the circumstances, I submit that the rule should be
withdrawn altogether and the ordinary procedure may be adopted
to meet the abuse, if any, of the Immigration Restriction Act,
under the old practice of issuing certificates.
I may mention that my client, the applicant for the certifi-
cate, Dosa Desa, is much inconvenienced owing to the delay in
obtaining the certificate.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Pietermaritzburg Archives: C.S.O. 6063/1900
