303. LETTER TO S. R. HIGNELL
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
May 30, 1919
DEAR MR. HIGNELL1,
It is within His Excellency's knowledge that I have made no
public declaration regarding the events in the Punjab. Even at
the risk of being misunderstood by my countrymen, I have refrained
from saying anything in public because I had no reliable data to
enable me to form an opinion. I was not prepared to condemn
martial law as such; I was unwilling to do anything calculated
needlessly to irritate local authority; and lastly I was not prepared
to infer from Sir Michael O'Dwyer's reported severe administra-
tion during peace period that martial law measures would be
unduly hard.
But the virtual abolition of martial law in the Punjab in so
far as it was the result of mob violence of April last makes it possible
to refer to its administration without any impropriety. I must own
too that the official explanation regarding flogging and the bar
against legal practitioners living outside the Punjab, together
with the inspired justification therefor appearing in the Civil and
Military Gazette, fill me with the greatest misgivings. The official
communiques have not been overfrank. Some of them are remark-
able for omissions and admissions. The secrecy that has surrounded
the events in the Punjab has given rise to much hostile criticism.
The complete gagging of the Indian Press has created the greatest
resentment. And the heavy sentences passed against the accused
persons there have filled the public mind with consternation.
No one can dispute the right of the State to declare martial
law under certain circumstances, but it will be conceded on be-
half of the State that it should justify to the public the measures
adopted under it, specially under circumstances described above.
I therefore venture to associate myself with the request made
by the Press for an impartial and independent committee of
inquiry to examine the causes of disturbances in the Punjab
and the administration of martial law in the Province, including
1 Private Secretary to the Viceroy
2 Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab, 1913-
the sentences passed by the Martial Law Tribunal. I am sure
that if such a committee is appointed, it would calm the public
mind and restore confidence (much shaken by the events in the
Punjab) in the good intentions of the Government. If the prin-
ciple of granting such a committee of inquiry be accepted, as
I hope it will, I trust that the committee to be appointed will be
composed of such official and non-official members as to inspire full
confidence.
May I ask you to place this letter before His Excellency and
to favour me with an early reply.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 6629
