331. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
JABALPUR,
December 7, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I had a very long letter from Gordhanbhai which of course
I didn't preserve.
He had pointed out in it all my short-
comings and contrasted them with Vithalbhai's virtues. I had
returned a very loving reply to that letter. I have received no
acknowledgment. As for the money which is lying with me, he
had sent me an oral message. I told Mathuradas in reply that I
would not let it be used in foreign countries. You must have
seen that he has now made a public appeal to me. We shall know
the whole truth by and by. I hope to be able to manage the
situation well enough. You needn't worry.
I will write regularly to Ba. This time she was not very
willing to go to jail. But God will see that everything is all
right. Thakkar Bapa had shown me your letter. It was not his
fault at all. He tries hard indeed to save me from all inconvenience.
He doesn't let any troublesome people come near me. He saves
me from a great many things, but sometimes he is helpless. I am
sure we shall learn from experience and things will keep improv-
ing. Don't worry about this either. "God's will be done."
Kishorelal is ill. He is a little better now. He is in Bombay.
Write to him.
Jivraj's health seems to have been affected very much. He
is in Hotel Rugby in Matheran.
Mathuradas was in the crowd. He is still with me. He will
remain with me up to Delhi. His health also seems to have been
affected. He suffers from backache. He cannot move freely. If
he takes rest I think he will regain strength. It may be said that,
at the meeting, they talked a little and then left. Maulana Saheb
and the Doctor tried to persuade me not to be uncompro-
mising. On my explaining my conflict of duties, they became silent.
The matter was discussed in minute detail. I felt that Nariman
had no sense. I told them: "If somebody writes 'Whither India?'
and another writes 'Whither Congress?', I hope it wouldn't seem
too much if I write 'Whither Nariman?'. " Jawahar is indeed a
jawahar. About Jamnalalji I needn't write anything. He has put
on weight. His health is all right, more or less. Chikhalda bene-
fited him very much. The condition of his ear is as bad as that
of your nose. One is without nose, and the other is deaf. To whom
may I complain about these difficulties? Please let me know,
however, if the injections help you now. I like your idea of trying
neti . But who will teach you the method? I claim to be
an expert in it. Can I not be called there as one? If you don't
know the correct way, there may be a little bleeding. Generally
a straw is used in the beginning. I would advise you not to do
so. Fine cloth will suffice. If you do it slowly, there will be no
difficulty. Krishnadas Mahadev and Devdas were taught by me.
Devdas used to bleed, but the reason for that was different. He
had, therefore, to give up the practice.
Janakibehn had accompanied Jamnalal. The two left last
evening.
I learnt only from you that Giridhari was placed with Maha-
dev. Surendra and Durbari are at Wardha. Both of them are
well. Madhavji has just been released. He has come here to
see me. He will leave for Karadi today. He is all right.
Chandrashankar is doing full justice to his work. Kaka and Swami
have gone to Matheran for four or five days.
I will reach Delhi on the 10th.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 51-
1 Literally, 'jewel'
2 A yogic practice of cleaning the nasal canal
3 Once Gandhiji's secretary
4 A Parsi prohibition worker of Surat District
5 Madhavji V. Thakkar
