230. LETTER TO MADHAVJI V. THAKKAR
April 14, 1929
BHAISHRI MADHAVJI,
I got your letter, and also the telegram. There was nothing
in the latter which called for a reply.
You have not guessed rightly the reason why I advised you
against the use of soap. The soda which the soap contains is not
good for the body. The grime of perspiration is removed by bath-
ing with hot water and then rubbing the skin hard with a towel.
That way the skin becomes strong. Soda removes from the skin
the oil in it which is essential to its health. Moreover, the skin
becomes weak and a layer of the skin which has a useful function
in the body is also injured. There is no harm in your use of
earth, but I do not consider it necessary. The better thing to use
is gram flour, or even wheat flour. But ordinarily nothing except
hot water is required. Bathe with water and then rub the body
with a small wet towel. After the bath is over, cleanse the body
with a dry towel of khadi. I mention a khadi towel particularly
because its roughness stimulates the skin.
If you gently suck the pulp of raisins or oranges, there is no
harm in taking either. But see that seeds or bits of skin do not
pass into the stomach. Hence, safety lies in sucking the fruit
after removing the seeds, and this will also naturally prolong the
sucking.
I know of Macfadden's method of living on milk diet. I be-
lieve that it helps in increasing fat in the body. If you wish to
try his method, you may certainly do so after you have gained
strength. Macfadden's experiments relate to men only, and to
large-bodied men of a climate different from ours. Bearing this
in mind, we should adapt his method to the needs of bodies like
ours. We should not take milk in the quantities mentioned by
him. In this matter the safe course for you to follow is to proceed
with due regard for the capacity of your body. Even my advice,
if it does not agree with you, should be ignored. You may now
change over to milk diet. Be in no hurry about gaining strength.
It will certainly follow to the extent that you digest your food. I
do not want you to start eating rotli very soon.
I take jaggery in the morning gruel. I do not consider it
essential for me, but I take it only because I wish to have my gruel
from what is prepared for all. As the doctors think honey essen-
tial for me, if I had gruel prepared for me alone I would use
nothing but honey. There are friends who get me good honey.
I do not know the addresses of the suppliers. However, if you are
not in a position to make arrangements for getting good honey
I would get it for you. You will not require much honey. Write
a letter to Satis Babu of Khadi Pratishthan. Perhaps he will get
you good honey.
There will be no harm if you walk a little now. It is certainly
necessary to take enemas. Till you are able to clear your bowels
without the slightest straining it will be necessary for you to take
an enema in the morning. Do not be afraid that taking enemas
will become a habit with you. The intestines of a fasting person
retain their natural strength for a certain period only and, there-
fore, require assistance by way of enema.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6775
