383. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,
May 26, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter and I have one from Kshitish Babu also.
You already have seen my note in Young India. I had assumed
when Jamnalalji who was here told me that I should write a para-
graph in Young India about the new arrangement that all the
members of the Council had agreed to it. The original idea was
to have my resignation in its entirety. The resolution already
passed adopts the middle course. I thought that my ceasing to be
the President of the Association would be too hasty and might
damage the cause, and it was not warranted by anything in my
health. But I thought that it was quite a good idea to relieve
me of the responsibility of routine work and let the Council evolve
independently of me, whilst my advice and guidance were avail-
able wherever necessary.
Personally, I think that the tour had nothing to do with the
collapse. It was the very exacting nature of the work that I my-
self voluntarily undertook. No one pressed me to go through the
hurricane touring. I let the co-workers think and thought myself
that my constitution would somehow or other stand the pressure
that was put upon it, and do you know that the collapse came
upon the very last day of this severe trial? For, I had intended to
turn over a new leaf after finishing the Maharashtra tour and had
given due notice to Rajagopalachariar that I would no longer be
hurried and was looking forward to finishing the rest of the tours
during the year in easy stages. If the collapse had not occurred,
I would have thought in my pride that I could tax my constitution
to any extent. Nature took her vengeance and she did it so
gently that, as Dr. Wanless put it, "it was Nature's first fairly severe
warning". He thinks, many other doctors think and I think also
that, if I regain, as I think it is possible to do, a fair measure of
the strength I lost in the twinkling of an eye, I should be able to
do a moderate amount of touring. Doctors even think that it might
do good, though the condition is imperative that there must be
daily rest; no hurry; no bustle; no working to time and order; only
one meeting per day, and not much speaking even then and so
on. I am trying to adjust my mind to this new mode of life. If
I succeed, it may be possible to prolong the life and still do a
moderate amount of work. Please, therefore, do not worry about
what has happened. Later on, I may even resume the routine
work.
You should regularly give me a weekly letter and tell me how
you and all the others are faring. As for myself, I am making
steady progress daily. In a month's time, I might be able to do
a little of gentle touring in Madras Presidency in order to take
charge of the purses already collected.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1571; also from a microfilm: S.N. 19777
