177. LETTER TO SUBRAHMANIA SHASTRI
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter enclosing your reply to Acharya
Dhruva's opinion in Sanskrit about untouchability.
I do not remember having said whichever side stops corres-
pondence is to be considered to have accepted the other's position.
In my opinion such a thing should not be regarded as conclusive,
because each party may exhaust all points of difference and may
still maintain their respective positions. However, you will not
find me suddenly stopping the correspondence, because I want to
get all the wisdom and all the information that I can from every-
one.
Coming to your reply or rejoinder as you call it, I shall leave
Acharya Dhruva to answer for himself, but you do not carry
conviction even to a layman like myself. You say that the word
api only denotes the unfitness of the Chandala and the height
of the path of devotion. Do you not see the inconsistency of your
statement? If the Chandala is unfit, there is no height (I suppose
you mean 'greatness') about the path of devotion. The path of
devotion is truly great, because it brings peace and joy and salva-
tion even to the Chandala. Instances of the use of api by way of
emphasis can surely be multiplied.
In your second paragraph, emphasis is not on the fact that
here the Chandala was pious but that it was the Chandala who
was speaking. Most of the sanatanists who oppose temple-entry
by Harijans contend that no piety on the part of a Chandala
would cure him of his disability.
In the third clause, your admission that all life as atman is
one rules out the impassable barrier between touchables and un-
touchables. The verse in question itself notes the differentiation
between persons and bodies and yet insists on equality of treat-
ment.
I need not labour the rest of your replies except to say that
they are unconvincing to me. However, without my comments
on your reply, I am forwarding it to Acharya Dhruva, for his
own independent reply which I shall gladly send to you when it
comes to me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18999
