622. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,
September 22, 1935
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Your three welcome letters give us all accurate news about
Kamala. For the time being I expect you to follow up the prac-
tice. I had telegraphed for daily wires because of the public
demand. But you were right in not sending any when there was
no change. You were right also in omitting the sender's name.
Your presence there is a source of great satisfaction to your friends
here as it is an elixir of life to Kamala. I am not writing to her
separately this air mail.
I am going to take up your manuscript presently. I have no
difficulty in agreeing with you in the enunciation of principles.
But when we descend to the concrete, we generally use the lang-
uage I have used. In the huge organization the Congress has
become, no one man can hope to run the show. But some-
one has to shoulder the burden. And people want some guidance.
Hence my inquiry. If you are elected, you will be elected for
the policy and principles you stand for. I would like you therefore
to tell me whether you will allow your name to be proposed for
the crown of thorns.
I suppose Indira will now wait till Kamala's condition is
better known.
I am sending the Congress Constitution. If you can concen-
trate your attention on it, I would like you to send me your
considered criticism on it.
As to the present policy of the Congress, whilst I can in
no way be responsible for the detailed working of it, it is in
the main of my shaping. It is not one of drift. It is founded
upon one central idea—that of consolidating the power of the
people with a view to peaceful action. But in your absence,
we have been literally trekking. Now that you are free you have
to give the guidance and take with you such of your old collea-
gues as would go with you whole-heartedly. So far as I know
they will not resist you, even where they may not be able to
follow you. I must not weary you with more of this kind of thing
whilst you are there nursing Kamala.
Love.
BAPU
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
HEMS WALDECK
BADENWEILER, BADEN, GERMANY
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1935. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also File No. 3001/H, pp. 3-5, Police Commissioner's Office, Bombay
