178. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
WESTMINSTER PALACE HOTEL,
4, VICTORIA STREET,
LONDON, S.W.,
July 14, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
You will be agreeably surprised to know that Maud has been
assisting me and that this letter is being dictated to her. She has been
out of work now for some time and you can easily imagine my surprise
when I was told by Pater that I could have Maud to assist me. Of
course, I was naturally very pleased to avail myself of her assistance;
at the same time, sorry that she was not working. She thinks, and I
agree, that the enforced rest has perhaps done her a little good. It
might have done her greater good, if she had the capacity for passing
the time at her disposal as it might have been, but, as she tells me, she
does not like her own company, which means a great deal. Mater and
Sally are in Belgium; they return, I understand, next Sunday. Millie
will be here on the 24th. A cablegram was received advising about her
departure. I saw your cablegram to Mr. Ritch, but the one I am
referring to was received from Kallenbach yesterday. It also informs
us of your departure for India.
This may anticipate you, but the more I think about it, the more
I feel and realize that your work over there is far more difficult than
our work here. The terrible tragedy about Sir Curzon Wyllie and
Dr. Lalcaca complicates the situation here, but it is nothing compared
with the complications that must arise there. Please, however, do not
worry if you do not see the work prospering there under you. You may
have no meetings and the influential papers there may even boycott
you. I do not anticipate any such dire result, but I am quite prepared
for it and I should reconcile myself to it in time. All I care about is
that you should be able to see most of the leading Anglo-Indians and
1 Polak's father
2 Polak's mother
3 Another sister of Polak
4 Polak's wife
5 Polak had sailed on July 7 on a deputation to India.
6 Sir William Curzon Wyllie, Political ADC to the Secretary of State for India,
was shot dead by an Indian student, Madan Lal Dhingra, at a reception held by the
National Indian Association at the Imperial Institute in South Kensington, London.
Dr. Cawas Lalkaka, a Parsee doctor from Shanghai, was fatally wounded while trying
to save Sir Curzon Wyllie.
Indians; that I know you will be able to do, but I am fully aware of the
difficulties that beset you, even in this mission of having quiet chats
with leaders. You will require all the patience and tact you can command.
However, I am not in the slightest degree anxious. I write in this strain
only to tell you that I realize your difficulties, and that, therefore, I shall
not in any way at all feel disappointed if we do not get much out of the
Indian mission. You should confine your attention for the time being
to those whose names I have specially given to you, that is, the Editor
of The Times of India, Professor Gokhale, Mr. Malbari.
The Aga Khan is in London; I have asked for an appointment.
We have already seen Justice Ameer Ali. The mission commenced
on board. I had a long chat with Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer.
Both of them were very sympathetic; neither of them knew the situation
accurately. Both expressed surprise that our demands, which they
considered so reasonable, were not granted. We are, therefore, moving
with a view to get together the South African statesmen and see whether
they would not influence General Smuts in the right direction. I am
already working under double pressure: have not yet been able to go
to bed before one o'clock in the morning, and you know what that means
to me. The legacy of a swollen leg, which I inherited from the Pretoria
gaol, has not yet left me; this, however, by the way.
We are meeting Sir Richard Solomon who has given an appoint-
ment in response to our letter, as also Lord Ampthill, to-day. In order
to give you detailed information, I am dictating this letter in advance,
but hope to be able to bring it up to date to-morrow evening (Thursday).
Justice Ameer Ali knows Sir Richard personally, and he has also promised
to see him and discuss the situation with him. I sent a statement which
he wanted, copy of which I shall keep among the papers to be sent
to you.
Miss Winterbottom is full of the Indian question; she has studied
it very accurately. She still continues to read Indian Opinion very regularly
and entertains the same high regard as before. She never wrote again
to us, simply because, I fancy, she was too disgusted with the state of
things in the Transvaal to trust herself to write calmly. Both Mr. Hajee
Habib and I passed nearly an hour with her. She had some other mem-
bers of her Society to meet us; among them is a lady journalist who
appeared to be a very brilliant woman; she is married to a Dutchman
who too is a journalist. She told me that she had seen General Botha
very often and that she was making a point this time to tackle him on
the Indian question. Miss Winterbottom had arranged to go to Cornwall
1 Behramji Merwanji Malbari (1854-1912); poet, journalist and social reformer
2 Vide the following item.
3 She had written to Gandhiji earlier in 1907, vide Vol. VII, p. 247.
for a change of air which she needs very badly, but she almost feels
inclined to abandon her journey for the time being. I have implored
her not to cancel her programme and have promised that I would send
for her if I considered her presence in London necessary, but she is a
woman of extremely high ideas and I could notice yesterday that it was
a matter of very prayerful consideration for her whether she would
go to Cornwall or not. The one thought that is supreme with her to-day
is how she can assist in the struggle. She boiled with indignation when
I informed her of poor Nagappen's death. His picture has been before
me ever since the receipt of the cablegram and my work has been more
or less mechanical since then. I cannot get him out of my mind; it
has affected me very much. However, our attitude must remain un-
changed and we have to confirm the advice to the people to face death
and worse—if there were anything worse. I am sending you a copy
of that cablegram so that, if you did not know of the news contained
therein, the cablegram will supply you with the information.
Poor Dowd Mahomed must have keenly felt his discharge from
the gaol, when Parsee Rustomjee was still in gaol. However, he has
returned to Johannesburg, so that he is in the thick of the fight.
Mr. Abdul Caadir is here. He is often at the hotel but he is not
living with us. When the balance of the deputation arrives from Durban,
I think all will engage rooms at this hotel.
Mr. Hajee Habib has been working splendidly. He always keeps
me up to the mark and does not let me forget anything at all. We are
in perfect harmony. I wrote to you about his eye; it caused him trouble
throughout the voyage, but now he is much better, though there is still
a slight inflammation.
Mrs. Ritch has undergone a third operation, this time at the hands
of a very great specialist, Sir Henry Morris; he has been exceedingly
kind. I saw her on Sunday and there is every indication of complete
recovery in a short time. Dr. Oldfield has entirely fallen—even his
supposed surgical skill is now no more. Ritch thinks that he bungled
the whole thing and was too cowardly to own up to it. It hurts me
to have to write of a man whom I have held in high estimation, but
we have often to break our idols. I am only waiting for permission
from Ritch, to be able to write to him straight or speak to him, but
Mrs. Ritch is averse to any such thing being done until she has completely
recovered.
Dr. Abdurrahman is working [with] might and main. Mr. Schreiner
is a wonderful man. He is rendering very great assistance to the Doctor
1 This letter is not available.
2 Dr. Josiah Oldfield, an old friend of Gandhiji and member of the Vegetarian
Society. Vide Vol. VI, p. 23.
and is not at all without hope. Olive Schreiner and her sister, Mrs. Lewis,
both came up to me when I left Cape Town, to shake hands. Dr. Abdur-
rahman tells me that Mr. Sauer tackled her and she, in her own charming
and yet refined manner, told Mr. Sauer that she merely wanted to
shake hands with me. She performed this ceremony most heartily in
the presence of a huge crowd and both the sisters were quite for a few
minutes with us. Fancy the author of "Dreams" paying a tribute to
passive resistance, but the whole Schreiner family, from what I have
learnt through Dr. Abdurrahman, seems to be perfectly exceptional.
Cablegrams supporting the deputation have been received from
Cape Town,
Kimberley,
Pietersburg,
Rustenburg,
Germiston,
Lourenco Marques,
Port Elizabeth,
Standerton.
Grahamstown,
Lichtenburg,
Potchefstroom,
Thursday
Mr. Hajee Habib and I had a very long and satisfactory interview
with Sir Richard Solomon. He went through the whole of the legal
aspect, seemed to be very sympathetic; would not commit himself, but
has promised to see Mr. Smuts and do what he can. Then followed
a long interview with Lord Ampthill. Transparent honesty, courtesy
and genuine humility were written on his face. He—an ex-Viceroy—
did not want to take a single step without our agreeing to its being taken.
His object is not in any way to advertise himself by his connection with
the Committee, but to serve the cause which he is espousing. He did
not know by what right he could ask Mr. Merriman and Mr. Sauer
to see him. It seemed to be nothing to him that he has occupied the
highest positions in India and occupies a fairly good position in public
affairs here. In order that the cause may be served, he is going to see
Lord Curzon and get him to take up the matter at the point he left it
in South Africa. Thus, you will see, our work will be entirely, for the
time being, behind the scenes.
Sir William Lee-Warner is coming to the hotel to-morrow to see
us. Mr. Ameer Ali has undertaken to see Sir Richard Solomon. I
had a long chat with Cotton of India yesterday and he has definitely
promised to refer to your mission in India in the columns of the ensuing
number. I thought that this was necessary in order that the readers of
India might realize the situation.
I think you had seen Dr. Mehta's letter, in which he referred to
his impending departure for Europe, taking his son for education. He
is now here and staying at the same hotel.
I forgot, I think, to give you a letter to Mr. Wadia, who you will
remember, was going to form in Bombay a Committee in connection
with the question. Do not fail to see him at the earliest opportunity.
If Chhaganlal is there, please show him this letter, as I have no
time to write to him at length.
I have written to several Gujarati men, including Mr. Omer Haji
Amod, Mr. Issa Hajee Soomer, Mr. Peerun Mahomed and Mr. M. S.
Coovadia.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4942
