190. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
Urgent
NEW DELHI,
June 27/28, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
I sent you a note in the afternoon. The time after the
evening prayer and walk I wish to devote to talking to you
on certain matters I was able to touch but could not develop
when we met.
I told the Parliamentary Delegation that heralded the Ca-
binet Mission and the Cabinet Mission itself that they had to
choose between the two parties or even three. They were
doomed to fail if they tried to please all, holding them all to
be in the right. I had hoped that you were bravely and ho-
nestly trying to extricate yourself from the impossible position.
But my eyes were opened when, if I understood you correct-
ly, you said that Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah and the League mem-
bers were equally in the right with the Congress members and
that possibly Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah was more so. I suggested
that this is not humanly possible. One must be wholly right
in the comparative sense. You have to make your choice at
this very critical stage in the history of this country. If you
think that Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah is, on the whole, more correct
and more reasonable than the Congress, you should choose the
League as your advisers and in all matters be frankly and openly
guided by them.
1 Vide p. 217.
88-15
You threw out a hint that Qaid-e-Azam might not be able to let
you quit even by 15th August especially if the Congress members did
not adopt a helpful attitude. This was for me a startling statement.
I pointed the initial mistake of the British being party to splitting
India into two. It is not possible to undo the mistake. But I hold
that it is quite possible and necessary not to put a premium upon
the mistake. This does not in any way impinge upon the very
admirable doctrine of fair play. Fair play demands that I do not
help the mistaken party to fancy that the mistake was no mistake
but a belated and only a partial discharge of an obligation.
You startled me again by telling me that, if the partition
had not been made during British occupation, the Hindus be-
ing the major party would have never allowed partition and
held the Muslims by force under subjection. I told you that
this was a grave mistake. The question of numbers was wholly
untenable in this connection. I cited the classic example of less
than one hundred thousand British soldiers holding India under
utter subjection. You saw no analogy between the two instan-
ces. I suggested the difference was only one of degree.
I place the following for your consideration:
(a) The Congress has solemnly declared that it would not
hold by force any Province within the Union.
(b) It is physically impossible for millions of caste-ridden
Hindus to hold well-knit though fewer millions of Muslims under
subjection by force.
(c) It must not be forgotten that Muslim dynasties have
progressively subjugated India by exactly the same means as the
English conquerors later did.
(d) Already there has been a movement to win over to the
Muslim side the so-called scheduled classes and the so-called
aboriginal races.
(e) The caste Hindus who are the bugbear are, it can be
shown conclusively, a hopeless minority. Of these the armed
Rajputs are not yet nationalists as a class. The Brahmins and the
Banias are still untrained in the use of arms. Their supremacy
where it exists is purely moral. The Sudras count, I am sorry,
more as scheduled class than anything else. That such Hindu
society by reason of its mere superiority in numbers can crush
millions of Muslims is an astounding myth.
This should show you why, even if I am alone, I swear by
non-violence and truth together standing for the highest order of
courage before which the atom bomb pales into insignificance,
what to say of a fleet of Dreadnoughts.
I have not shown this to any of my friends.
If I have misunderstood you in any single particular you
have only to correct me and I shall gladly accept the correction.
If I am obscure anywhere, I shall try to remove the obscurity
either by letter or by meeting according to your wish.
My anxiety to save you from mistakes as I see them is the
sole excuse for this letter.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
NEW DELHI
From the original: India Office Library and Records, London; also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 250-
