140. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE WAY TO VOLKSRUST,
October 30, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I sent you a full message from lngogo which I hope you received.
Mr. Mahomed Meer is at Waschbank. He has the 'phone. It was
he who gave the information about the Ramsay Collieries assault. Please
inquire further. You know that I telegraphed to the Protector at Durban
and the Interior. You may now inquire further through Meer and if
there [be] any workers, send one to make local investigation.
The women need not march to Volksrust. If they would, they may
as far as Ingogo and entrain there. But there should be someone to
join them from Newcastle. Mr. Seedat at Ingogo seems to be a decent
man. He gave biscuits, tea, bread, etc., to the men without stinting.
He gave me cigarettes too for them. I have asked him to pay the
express fares for the women and some men who could not and would
not walk. There must be quite 40. If the women who want to go to
gaol wish to entrain, they may do so. As much as possible, please
discourage movement to Phoenix. If you have sufficient accommodation
there, the women should be kept and fed there so long as possible
as you have plenty of rations there and fine workers in Mrs. Lazarus
and Miss Thomas.
If I am arrested, you should immediately transfer the Johannesburg
balance in your name and open a separate account called Agency
1 Vide Vol. XII, pp. 254-.
2 ibid., p. 512.
Account. I may be fined. I shall make a statement to the effect that
I have nothing I can call my own, that I have given up everything
and that even in those things which are in my name I have no interest
of my own. You and others should likewise say and return nulla bona.
In order to avoid technicalities the accounts may be transferred. The
account at Durban should be withdrawn and it should be redeposited
in the names of West and Maganlal, either having the power to operate
upon it severally. The paper too should be transferred in the names
of West and Maganlal and the trustees may transfer it and the Press
to them at pepper-corn rent.
All the men, as soon as they are there, must be marched out. They
must take two days' rations with them. Some stupidly did not fill their
pots.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
