286. LETTER TO SAKARLAL DAVE
ON THE TRAIN TO BOMBAY,
May 19, 1919
BHAISHRI SAKARLAL 1 ,
I have taken longer to write this letter than I had expected.
I am looking out for Amritlal. I am confident that Mama will
be there in June, and I know that he will acquit himself well
enough. We must be able to run the school well.
I was very glad that you pointed out all those grammatical
errors. Mahadev will write to you further about them. I make
every effort to write correctly but it is quite likely the mistakes
remain, for, what command I have over Gujarati is the fruit of
my love. I had no time to learn the language systematically. My
use of the root shak [be able to] is deliberate. Nirbhaya and other
words have not been so used but I find Mahadev defending them.
I shall accept any decision on which you two agree and correct
myself accordingly. Where there is a difference of opinion bet-
ween you, I shall accept your view till I get further light on the
point, for I think yours will be more objective. Please do keep sug-
gesting improvements in my language. I shall take it as a sign of
your pure love.
Now, as for the meaning I have read in the Bhagavad Gita, if
I had not found it in the work independently of all else, I would
have certainly said that the principle of satyagraha was right, despite
the contrary teaching of the Bhagavad Gita. The work is being put
to an utterly wrong use, and so it is that, now that the time is
ripe, I have placed before the people the meaning I have accepted
for so many years.
I very much respect Anandshankarbhai's views, but I would
not give up any opinion of mine which has stood the test of expe-
rience even if it were contested by him. It is certainly the
Bhagavad Gita's intention that one should go on working without
attachment to the fruits of work. I deduce the principle of satya-
graha from this. He who is free from such attachment will not kill
the enemy but rather sacrifice himself. Killing an enemy pro-
ceeds from impatience and impatience proceeds from attachment.
This is but one point in my argument, but I have no desire to
convince you or anyone else with the help of arguments. Even
if I wished, I do not think I have the ability. I have something
far more powerful than argument, namely, experience. As far
back as 1889, when I had my first contact with the Gita, it gave
me a hint of satyagraha and, as I read it more and more, the
hint developed into a full revelation of satyagraha. That a man
of Krishna's intelligence should indulge in all this wisdom of the
Gita for the benefit of an Arjuna in flesh and blood, would be
like killing the buffalo for a leather-strap. To believe he did
so is to tarnish his name, if it is true that he was the Supreme
God, and to do injustice to Arjuna if he was a warrior of expe-
rience and judgment.
I know you will not dismiss these ideas off-hand. I would
rather you embraced and developed them. You will readily admit,
I am sure, that learned commentaries are of much less value than
the experience of one limited intelligence.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
