308. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
April 25, 1925
MY DEAREST CHARLIE,
I have horribly neglected my correspondents including you.
Most precious letters have remained unanswered. But I have been
perfectly helpless. I have been moving from place to place at
break-neck speed. And I am recuperating for four days at Tithal
in anticipation of the Bengal ordeal. That enables me to overtake
at least a part of the heap of correspondence lying in my bundle.
Salutation of the national flag is in my opinion unobjection-
able. I see nothing inherently wrong about it. A national spirit
is necessary for national existence. A flag is a material aid to the
development of such a spirit.
Military training in universities is, I think, inevitable. I do
not think India will tolerate compulsion. I do not anticipate, at
least in our generation, a complete cessation of the warlike spirit,
i.e., even to the extent of banishing punishment of robbers and
raiders. All I am aiming at is non-violence in regaining national
freedom and possibly cessation of war as between nations as a
natural or necessary corollary. Beyond that I have not the con-
fidence to preach.
About birth-control, I should like to study the Holland figures
and conditions. But even supposing that they are all that they
are claimed to be, the posers I have suggested remain unanswered.
The inevitable result of admitting that indulgence is a virtue or
a necessity loosening of the marriage bond is a matter of course
or the ideas about marriage must be so revised as to banish chastity
from all consideration [sic]. And I have heard protagonists of
birth-control arguing against regarding chastity as a virtue. And
personally, if I were to admit that indulgence is a virtue, I do
not see how we can escape the natural deduction that free love
is also a virtue. That is my difficulty. I never knew that birth-
control by artificial means had so seized the imagination of the
Indian youths.
I hope to meet you at Faridpur.
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
[PS.]
I have your wire. I did have a mild attack of malaria. But
it was nothing. I had thirty grains of quinine after the attack.
There is no cause for anxiety. I have replied by wire. Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 964
