393. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Chaitra Sud 8 [April 20, 1926]
BHAISHRI KAKA,
I got one-half of your letter, that is the one giving news of
your health; the other half, I believe, is to follow. Since I have
not written to you for quite a few days, I think I should dictate
something just now.
If the doctor has specially recommended olive oil I do not
wish to argue against it; otherwise I think it would be best to give
it up. The olive oil which I get locally did not agree with me at
all. I don't mean olive oil produced in India; the country does not
produce any. That which we get here is imported from Italy or
Spain and it is rarely fresh. Besides, it is also found that oil and
ghee do not require the same length of time for digestion and also
that the processes through which they are digested are different
from each other. It may, therefore, be better to discontinue olive
oil. Indeed, what you say about a vaid's drugs is true. It is a kind of
quick remedy. It seems you use the language of Sidney Smith
when you say that Dr. Talwalkar has not received respect "from
us". By "us" you mean both the writer and the person ad-
dressed, don't you? Or do you mean "you"? If all you mean
is that he has not received due respect from me, you have needless-
ly dragged in Sidney Smith. Well, I plead guilty to the charge,
my reason being that I have great respect for Dr. Talwalkar him-
self, but not for his knowledge. I have, therefore, called Kanuga
every time. Between the two I would place my life in Kanuga's,
hands. Dr. Talwalkar has gone crazy over "tubercle", as I have
over the spinning-wheel. He sees tuberculosis in everyone. And I
do not know why, but I simply cannot put faith in his injections.
He has read extensively in medical science but I always felt that
he has not digested what he has read. What should I do in these
circumstances? He was here about ten days ago, when I expressed
to him my lack of faith in his approach. He promises to convert
me if I give him sufficient time. But how can I spare all that time?
So maybe, I ought to give up my scepticism. But the truth is that
I have little faith in doctors as such, i.e., in the medical profession
itself, and my distrust is daily increasing. They fail to discover
the right remedies because they hunt for the laws of the body with-
out any reference to the soul.
My trip to Mussoorie had to be cancelled. We drew lots the
day before yesterday. Jamnalalji was not enthusiastic about taking
me there. So we had to draw lots. Personally, I never believed
that it was necessary for me to go to Mussoorie. How would I,
then, decide on my own to go? And Jamnalalji was not prepared
to take the responsibility. And I have always welcomed the idea
that, in matters which do not involve a question of principle and
when we cannot decide one way or the other, we may throw lots to
know God's will.
Nanabhai has decided that Shankar should leave for Bhav-
nagar, latest on June 1. Swami is thinking about Bal. Chandra-
shankar just spoke to me about your letter to Bal. We can, there-
fore, decide only after discussing the matter with Swami.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
As regards cow's milk, I want to write not a letter but a book
for you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19481
