274. LETTER TO H. V. VORA
COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
June 30, 1903
MY DEAR HARIDASBHAI1,
I have your two letters. I am very glad that Harilal is now
out of danger. You know that I sent a cablegram asking that
he should be sent here with Chhaganlal, and I do hope that
he will be sent here. By the time he reaches, the cold weather
will have passed, and seeing that he must not go to school for
some time to come, perhaps he will benefit by the change of
climate and greater regularity of habits. Moreover, your ideas
about natural living will be far better enforced here than there
and I shall see, so far as possible, that he does not receive any
drugs.
During my self-imposed exile, I have been overwhelmed with
kindness of friends in India. I know that you and Revashanker-
bhai have supplied my place to Harilal. I do not wish to en-
large upon that subject. I can only wish that he was here to
be attended to by me, and regret that he should have been a
source of anxiety and worry to either of you.
I hope that you are not overworking yourself in your cases.
I would like to know a little more about the nature of work you
are getting there and the state of your health and that of the
children. I know you will be anxious to know something about
me.
I am doing fairly well with reference to the office work;
in fact, during the few months that I have opened an office
here, I notice that I have built up a decent practice and that
I can afford to pick and choose. The public work, however, is
of a most exacting nature and often causes very great anxiety.
The result is that, just at present, I have to work from nearly a
quarter to nine in the morning to ten o'clock at night, with
intervals for meals and a short walk. It is a time of constant
exertion and worry, and I see no prospect in the near future of
the public work slackening. The Government is now consider-
ing the modification of the existing legislation, and one has to be
very much on the alert. The thing is most difficult to foresee.
Such being the case, I do not know what my future plans will
be, but the more I look into things, the more I feel that
it will be almost impossible for me to get away for several years.
The thing is that I shall very likely have to repeat what I had
to do in Natal. The question, then, is as to the fulfilment of
my promise to Mrs. Gandhi. I told her that either I should re-
turn to India at the end of the year or that she should come
here by that time. I am most anxious to fulfil the promise.
How to do so is the difficulty. To return at the end of the
year is out of the question. If, however, she would allow me to
recede from the promise and not insist on coming here, there
is a likelihood of my being able to return to India earlier than
I otherwise would. In any case, according to present plans, I
must not think of returning for three or four years. Will she
consent to remaining there all that time? If she does not, then,
of course, she must come here at the end of the year, and I
must be content quietly to settle down in Johannesburg for
ten years or so. It will, however, be a terrible thing to estab-
lish a new home here and to break it up as I did in Natal.
Experience teaches me that it would cost a very great deal and,
if there were great difficulties about it in Natal, they will be
greater in Johannesburg. Please, therefore, consider this thing
and, if Mrs. Gandhi is where you are, then you may all con-
sult and let me know. I do think, however, that if she would
consent to remain there, for the time being at any rate, it
would enable me to give undivided attention to public work. As
she knows, she had very little of my company in Natal; probably,
she would have less in Johannesburg. However, I wish to be
guided entirely by her sentiments and I place myself absolutely
in her hands. If she must come, then she may make prepara-
tions in October and leave in the beginning of November. Be-
tween now and then there will be plenty of time for exchange
of news.
I am very glad Bali is not to be married this year. The
1 Addressee's daughter
later she is married, the better it will undoubtedly be for herself
and her future husband.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten copy : S.N. 1
