46. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
DURBAN,
April 13, 1897
EDITOR, The Natal Mercury
SIR,
As this will be my first contribution, after my return from
India, on the Indian question, and a great deal has been said
about me, much as I would like to avoid it, it seems to be
necessary that I should say a few words on the matter. The
following charges have been laid against me: (1) That I blackened
the character of the Colonists in India, and made many mis-state-
ments; (2) that there is an organization under me to swamp the
Colony with Indians; (3) that I incited the passengers on board
the Courland and Naderi to bring an action against the Govern-
ment for damages for illegal detention; (4) that I have political
ambition, and the work I am doing is done in order to fill
my pocket.
As for the first charge, I believe I need not say anything
since you have absolved me from it. I venture, however, to
deny formally that I ever did anything to merit it. As to the
second, I repeat what I have said elsewhere: that I have no
connection with any organization, nor, so far as I know, is
there any organization to swamp the Colony with Indians. As to
the third, I have denied and again deny most emphatically that I
incited a single passenger to bring an action for damages against
the Government. As to the fourth, I may state that I have no polit-
ical ambition whatever. Those who know me personally know
well in what direction my ambition lies. I do not aspire to any
Parliamentary honours whatever, and, though three opportunities
passed by, I deliberately refrained from getting myself placed on
the Voters' List. I receive no remuneration for the public work
that I am doing. If the European Colonists can believe me,
I beg to assure them that I am here not to sow dissensions be-
tween the two communities, but to endeavour to bring about an
honourable reconciliation between them. In my humble opinion,
much of the ill feeling that exists between the two communities is
due to misunderstanding of each other's feelings and actions. My
office, therefore, is that of an humble interpreter between them.
I have been taught to believe that Britain and India can remain
together for any length of time only if there is a common fellow
feeling between the two peoples. The greatest minds in the British
Isles and India are striving to meet that ideal. I am but humbly
following in their footsteps, and feel that the present action of
the Europeans in Natal is calculated to retard, if not altogether
to frustrate, its realization. I feel, further, that such action is not
based on good grounds, but rests on popular prejudice and pre-
conceived notions. Such being the case, I venture to trust that,
however much the European Colonists may differ from the above
opinion, they would be gracious enough to show a spirit of
toleration thereof.
There are several Bills before the Natal Parliament prejudi-
cially affecting the interests of the Indians. They are not supposed
to represent final legislation with regard to the Indians, but the
Honourable the Prime Minister has stated that more stringent
measures may be adopted after the forthcoming Conference of the
Colonial Premiers has taken place. This is a gloomy outlook for
the Indians, and if, in order to avert it, they put forth all the
legitimate resources at their disposal, I venture to think that
they should not be blamed. It seems that everything is being
hurried on as if there was any danger of thousands of Indians of
all sorts and conditions pouring into Natal. I submit that there is
no such danger and the late quarantine would serve as an effec-
tive check, if there was any. The suggestion that there should be
an inquiry as to whether the Indian is an evil or a benefit to the
Colony has been pooh-poohed and an opinion expressed that he
who has eyes can see how the Indians are ousting the Europeans
in every direction. With deference, I beg to differ. The thou-
sands of free Indians, apart from the indentured, who have devel-
oped the large estates in Natal and given them a value, and
turned them from jungles into productive soil, I am sure you
will not call an evil to the Colony. They have not ousted any
Europeans; on the contrary, they have brought them prosperity and
considerably increased the general wealth of the Colony. Will the
Europeans—can they?—perform the work done by those Indians?
Have not the Indians very much helped to make this the Garden
Colony of South Africa? When there were no free Indians, a
cauliflower sold at half a crown; now, even the poorest can buy
it. Is this a curse? Has the working man been injured in any
way thereby? The Indian traders are said to "have eaten into
the very vitals of the Colony". Is it so? They have made it poss-
ible for the European firms to extend their business in the way
they have done. And these firms, because of this extension, can
find employment for hundreds of European clerks and book-
keepers. The Indian traders act as middlemen. They begin
where the Europeans leave. It is not to be denied that they can
live cheaper than Europeans; but that is a benefit to the Colony.
They buy wholesale from European stores, and can sell with a
trifling addition to the wholesale prices, and are thus a benefit
to the poor Europeans. It might be said in answer to this that
the work now done by the Indian storekeepers could be done
by Europeans. This is a fallacy. The very Europeans who are
now wholesale dealers would be retail dealers but for the presence
of the Indian storekeepers, except in isolated instances. The Indian
storekeepers have, therefore, raised the Europeans a stage higher.
It has, further, been said that, in time to come, Indians may
usurp the wholesale trade also from the Europeans. This suppo-
sition is not borne out by facts, because the wholesale prices in
Indian and European stores are, if not exactly, almost the same,
thus showing the competition in the wholesale lines cannot by any
means be said to be unfair. The cheaper living of the Indian is
not an important factor in determining the wholesale price, be-
cause the cheaper living of the one is counterbalanced by the
more methodical business habits and the mercantile "home connec-
tions" of the other. It is objected, on the one hand, that the
Indians buy landed property in Natal and, on the other, that
their money does not circulate in the Colony but goes to India,
because "they wear no boots, no European-made clothing, and send
their earnings to India", thus constituting a terrible drain on the
Colony. These two objections completely answer each other.
Assuming that the Indians wear no boots and European-made
clothing, they do not send the money thus saved to India, but
invest it in buying landed property. What, therefore, they earn
with one hand in the Colony they spend with the other. All,
then, that the Indians send to India can only be a portion of
the interest in the shape of rents received from such property.
The purchase of landed property by the Indians is a double
benefit. It increases the value of land, and gives work to the
European builders, carpenters, and other artisans. It is a mere
chimera to say that the European workmen have anything what-
ever to fear from the Indian community. There is absolutely no
competition between the European artisans and the Indian, of
whom there are very few, and the few are indifferent workmen.
A project to import Indian artisans to construct an Indian
building in Durban failed. No good Indian artisans would come
to the Colony. I do not know of many Indian buildings which
have been constructed by Indian artisans. There is a natural
division of work in the Colony, without any community encroach-
ing upon the work of the other.
If there is any reason whatever in the views put forward
above, I beg to submit that legislative interference is unjustifiable.
The law of supply and demand will naturally regulate the supply
of free Indians. After all, if the Indian is really a canker, the
more dignified course, since it has been admitted that the
Indians can thrive because of the European support, will be that
such support should be withdrawn. The Indians, then, may fret
awhile, but cannot legitimately complain. But it should appear
unfair to anybody that legislation should interfere with the suppor-
ted on the complaint of the supporters. All, however, I venture
to claim on the strength of the above argument is that there is
sufficient in it to justify the inquiry hereinbefore suggested. No
doubt there would be the other side of the question. If there
was an inquiry, both sides could thoroughly be thrashed out and
an unbiased judgment obtained. Then there would be some good
material for our legislators to go on with and for Mr. Chamber-
lain to guide him. The opinion pronounced 10 years ago by a
Commission of Inquiry, consisting of Sir Walter Wragg and other
Commissioners, is that the free Indian is a benefit to the Colony.
That is the only reliable material at present before the legislators,
unless it is proved that the conditions during the last 10 years
have so far changed as to prevent them from accepting that opi-
nion. These, however, are local considerations. Why should not
Imperial considerations also guide the Colonist? And if they
should, then, in the eye of the law, the Indian is to have the
same rights as all other British subjects. India benefits hundreds
of thousands of Europeans; India makes the British Empire;
India gives an unrivalled prestige to England; India has often
fought for England. Is it fair that European subjects of that
Empire in this Colony, who themselves derive a considerable
benefit from Indian labour, should object to the free Indians
earning an honest livelihood in it? You have said that the
Indians want social equality with the Europeans; I confess I do
not quite understand the phrase; but I know that the Indians
have never asked Mr. Chamberlain to regulate the social rela-
tions between the two communities; and so long as the manners,
customs, habits, and religions of the two communities differ, there
will, naturally, be a social distinction. What the Indians fail to
understand is, why that difference should come in the way of
the two living cordially and harmoniously in any part of the
world without the Indians having to accept a degradation of
their status in the eye of the law. If the sanitary habits of the
Indian are not quite what they ought to be, the Sanitary Depart-
ment can, by strict vigilance, effect the needed improvement. If
Indians have not got decent-looking stores, licensing authorities
can soon turn them into decent-looking ones. These things can
only be done when European Colonists, as Christians, look upon
the Indians as brethren, or, as British subjects, look upon them
as fellow-subjects. Then, instead of cursing and swearing at the
Indians as now, they would help them to remove any defects
that there may be in them, and thus raise them and themselves
also in the estimation of the world.
I appeal to the Demonstration Committee1, who are suppos-
ed more particularly to represent the working men. They now
know that the Courland and Naderi did not bring 800 passengers
for Natal, and that, in what they did bring, [there] was not a
single Indian artisan. There is no attempt on the part of the
Indians "to put the Europeans in the kitchen, and to become mas-
ters themselves". The European working man can have no
complaint against the Indian. Under the circumstances, in my
humble opinion, it behoves them to reconsider their position and
direct the energy at their disposal in such channels that all sections
of Her Majesty's subjects in the Colony may live in harmony and
peace, instead of under a state of excitement and friction. Informa-
tion has appeared in the papers that a gentleman is shortly to
proceed to England on behalf of the Indians and the evidence
against the Colony is being collected. In order that there may
be no misunderstanding about the matter, I may state that, in
view of the approaching Conference, a gentleman is going to
London on behalf of the Indian community in South Africa, to
place the Indian side of the question before their sympathizers
and the general public, as also, if necessary, Mr. Chamberlain.
He is to receive no remuneration for his services but passage
and expenses. The statement that evidence is being collected
against the Colony is very ugly and, unless it were true, could
only be made by a person writing under an assumed name. The
gentleman in question will certainly be put in possession of all
the information about the Indian question in South Africa, but
that appears in the papers already published. The Indians never
have wished, and do not now wish, to make out a charge of
brutality or general bodily ill-treatment by the Europeans towards
them. Nor do they wish to make out that the treatment of the
indentured Indians in Natal is worse than elsewhere. Therefore,
if collecting evidence against the Colony is meant to convey some
such impression, it is a groundless statement.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 16-4-1897
