16. LETTER TO P. RAMAMURTI
March 8, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter and I am glad you have written
to me. I wish you would care to read all the numbers of the
Harijan and I think that most of your doubts will be solved. You
1 Acting Secretary of the Bombay Board of Servants of Untouchables
Society
2 Published in Harijan, 4-3-1933; vide Vol. LIII, pp. 457-.
3 A Harijan teacher and member of the Andhra University Senate; Vice-
President, Board of Servants of Untouchables Society, East Godavari District
will find in them that I have unhesitatingly said that all that is
bad about varnashrama and caste should be wholly removed.
Temple-entry is certainly coming much sooner than you expect.
It is the centre of reform because it would be a visible sign to the
millions that untouchability is gone. Therefore we must prosecute
the reform whether the vast mass of caste Hindus come round
or not.
Anti-untouchability leagues are, I think, working satis-
factorily. A great deal is being done by them for the educational
advancement and you should study the columns of the Harijan
to note the progress in that direction. I think that you are not
doing justice to Sjt. Nageswar Rao when you say that nothing but
platform lectures are being given in Andhradesa. But I am writing
for fuller particulars.
If you were to start the leagues and the Birla Committee were
to furnish the funds, you won't call that self-reliance. As a matter
of fact, what you need is not money but men who having received
education would take it to the humbler Harijans. My advice to
the Harijan youths, therefore, is to take up the reform energeti-
cally among the poorest.
I do not know the effect of the Madras Services Commission.
You will perhaps enlighten me on the point, but Harijan gra-
duates and other highly educated Harijans have limitless scope for
serving fellow-Harijans.
If there is no Telugu newspaper specially devoted to Hari-
jans, I suppose it is because there are very few literate Harijans.
Before, therefore, you think of starting a paper, all the educated
Harijans should spread themselves among the illiterate Harijans
and impart instruction to them. Every educated Harijan should,
therefore, become a walking newspaper, and this you can supple-
ment by issuing leaflets from time to time as they may be de-
manded.
Please keep yourself in touch with me.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. P. RAMAMURTI, B.A.
P. R. COLLEGIATE SCHOOL
COCANADA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20495
