51. LETTER TO THE PRESS
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
August 30, 1919
SIR,
It has been my misfortune from time to time to report to the
public deaths of Indians who have worked for and served India
in far-off South Africa. One of the ablest of them, a cable from
Mr. Rustomjee tells me, has just departed this life. His name
was Dawood Mahomed. Mr. Dawood Mahomed rose from the
ranks. He never received any English education. I am not sure
that he passed through more than two standards in a vernacular
school in India. But his versatile ability and perseverance gave
him such a wonderful grasp over languages without any book-
learning whatsoever, that I have known him hold discourses with
people in Tamil, Hindi, Creole, French, Dutch and English,
besides his mother tongue, Gujarati. His native wit made him a
popular speaker. He was as keen a politician as he was a merchant.
And when the critical moment for decision came, he threw in his
lot with the South African civil resisters, crossed the border and to-
gether with other merchants of note presented himself for arrest
for crossing the sacred border of the Transvaal. Having carried
on an extensive business with European business houses, he was
well known to many Europeans and, owing to his great ability,
commanded their respect. And I am happy to be able to testify
that for him, who was used to a luxurious life and who was at the
time 50 years old, to have risked imprisonment for the sake of con-
science was an act which raised him still further in the estimation
of his many European friends rather than otherwise. It was
a privilege for me to find men in South Africa drawn from the com-
mercial class giving freely of their time, their money and even
voluntarily risking loss of personal freedom, by undergoing
imprisonment, and property. Mr. Dawood Mahomed was one of
the best among these. He was President of the Natal Indian
Congress for a number of years and known to Indians all over
South Africa. In my humble opinion, though India knew him
not, she has every reason to be proud of having produced
Dawood Mahomed. Indians in South Africa badly needed his
service at the present moment. They are the poorer for
Mr. Dawood Mahomed's death and, may I add, poorer also for
the death of that brave statesman, General Botha The duty
of India is, therefore, all the greater to see that the interests of
her sons struggling for freedom are fully protected.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-9-1919
