333. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 3, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I have gone through all your letters. I did not feel there
was anything in them which Suo should see. If I have done an
injustice, haven't I washed it off by permitting you to write without
any restraint? The truth is that I have done you no injustice.
Your way was clear. You should not have said anything. "We
are more than even brother and sister. Why should we involve
even you in this?"
I will approve of a catering service. Why should then there
be any need for separate arrangements for the Ashram? Everyone
can feed there. A catering service could mean that one should
be served what one ordered, subject to the normal limitations of
the service. The present kitchen itself may be turned into a
catering service. That would solve the problem and save us all
from bother.
There is no such thing as an avatar. If there is, then all
of us are avatars. Aren't we, whether we know it or not, each
a part of His being? Rama was not the only avatar. Narasimha
also was one, and so were the Fish and the Tortoise. Weren't the
monkeys partial avatars? The question you have raised ought not
to have been raised at all. I do not see the Ashram as a hos-
pital. But in any case this work serves a useful purpose. It can
be organized as a separate department, with separate quarters
and kitchen. Others would then be concerned with it only
when they needed medicine. I thus see no reason for bitterness.
Today I have received letters from Kishorelalbhai and some
others in this connection. I should indeed like some of you to
read them. If you too think like them you should leave me, or
let me go. I am ready for either contingency. I am not in the
least afraid of the charge against me, but I am of you all, for
any step you take will depend on yourself or myself or ourselves.
I had already drafted the public statement I intended to issue,
before I received the above mentioned letters. I had been
thinking of it for the last two days, but could find the time only
today.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5836. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
