195. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
POST ANDHERI,
March 21, 1924
MY DEAR RAJAGOPALACHARI,
I hope you are still putting on weight, avoiding fever and
making steady progress.
From next month, I am taking charge of Young India and
Navajivan. I feel I may no longer postpone, but I do not think
I shall be able myself to provide all the matter as I practically
used to. Please, therefore, regard yourself as bound to send some-
thing every week. You are specializing in khaddar. Therefore,
I do not mind your articles being always on that subject, but
treat it from week to week in a new way, giving new facts. But,
of course, I do not want you to be tied down to that alone and
you may write on any other subject which you think will be of
interest to the readers. I thought that I would be able by this time
to write down my views on Council-entry and the Hindu-Muslim
problem, but I am sorry I have not been able to do so as yet. Please
do not blame me if you do find these views expressed in the
columns of Young India. I wish you were here during the first
month so that you may see everything previous to its being
published, but we must do the best in the circumstances facing
us. After all, it is not of much moment if I cannot avoid mis-
takes. I know I have the courage and wisdom to admit and
correct them. There is the other side no doubt. People may be
misled and it may be too late to set them right. Is not that
also a part of the training?
Someone must have told you that Golikere is already with
me and his assistance is a great thing. He is to help me for the
next three months at the most. Meanwhile Kristodas and Peari
Lal will try to pick up enough shorthand writing for my purpose.
In any case the pressure after I go to Sabarmati or after I begin
to travel will not be so great. The bulk of the steady writing I
want to finish during convalescence.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE EXTENSION
SALEM
From a photostat: S.N. 8556; also C.W. 5132
