204. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 2, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
I am writing this at about 10 p.m. on silence day. I started
observing silence at 11.30 p.m. yesterday and so a little more time
must pass before I can give it up. After my release it is only today
that I may say I had some time for rest, though of course even to-
day I had to listen to many people and hear their stories. All the
same, I have certainly been able to write, for the first time after my
release, the letters enclosed with this and some others. See if you
can pass on their letters to Surendra1, Gangabehn and Vasumati3,
or inform them of their substance. How is Durgabehn's health? I
have not asked Mahadev about it. I don't know where he is at pre-
sent. What is the position about Madhavji's diet? Tell him that
he cannot insist on being supplied milk and dates and that he
should be satisfied if they agree to provide them at his own cost.
Though I have been released, I feel as if I had not been released.
If others are not released and if the situation does not improve,
I shall have no choice but to court imprisonment. My programme
in general is as follows:
I intend to start from here tomorrow evening so as to reach
Bombay on Wednesday evening. I shall be there up to Friday at
any rate. If, however, Panditji's health deteriorates, I may not be
able to leave even tomorrow. Or it may also happen that, after
meeting Sastriji and others, I may have to leave on Friday to
return here. Address the post accordingly. That is, address it to me
at Bombay till I inform you otherwise. I am yearning to visit Kaira
district. I intend to go there if I am free on Friday.
God alone knows when and where we shall meet. Unless some
reason connected with the struggle brings me to the Ashram, I
wish to visit neither the Ashram nor Ahmedabad. For permanent
headquarters, I should naturally choose Karadi, but I see no
possibility at present of my wish being fulfilled. I feel unhappy at
the thought that I shall no longer be able to send discourses for
Gitabodh. If you come to know more about Kaira, let me know.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
