275. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Chaitra Vad 9 [April 16, 1917]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have already dropped you a postcard, which you will get
along with this. I wrote it immediately on receiving the order.
Since they have not yet arrested me, I am writing more in this.
It is literally true that I did not stop even to wash my face. The
Police Inspector [actually] said, "You may wash your face, etc.,
before you send your reply", while I said to myself, "I shall do
so only after sending my reply." They arrested me when I was on
my way to a village for carrying on the inquiry. They then put me
in a bullock-cart and were taking me away. A senior police officer
met us on the way and served the order upon me. At first he only
said, "The Collector wants you." I turned back saying nothing.
I have refused to leave the District. The penalty for this crime is
six months' imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1,000. I am awaiting
further developments.
Herewith the statement of accounts up to date. Let Chhagan-
lal make the credit and debit entries accordingly. I have given the
necessary details. Prabhudas not being with me is a great comfort.
This part of the country is worth seeing. I shall describe it to
you when we meet. It is less hot than there. People are very poor.
What a sad plight for the region where Shri Ramachandra lived,
enjoyed himself and performed deeds of valour! To go to jail here
under such circumstances is a great joy to me. It suggests an
auspicious outcome.
I wish your work goes on with double speed. Carry on the
experiment of the school; teach the twelve or more students from
Kochrab or elsewhere. Purchase land, if all of you approve. If
Shastri's land has sufficient water, I personally like it very much.
Chhaganlal may engage himself in the building work. He may
take a monthly payment if he needs it. I wish he takes to his
work whole-heartedly and with a glad heart.
Muljibhai ought to stay on in the Ashram until he is quite
well. I take it Punjabhai will now be thoroughly engrossed in
the Ashram life.
Consult Polak, Andrews or Malaviyaji whenever you feel the
need. Do keep writing to Doctor in detail. Write to Mr. Kallen-
bach giving him all the news. His address is : Dongeas Aliens
Camp, No. 3612, Isle of Man. Write to Miss Winterbottom also.
More I shall write if I can. I shall send copies, if possible.
Inform Dr. Hariprasad and others.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of a handwritten copy of the Gujarati original: S.N. 9817
