194. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
July 29, 1909
MY LORD,
I am extremely obliged to Your Lordship for the very great trouble
you are taking over the Indian cause in the Transvaal which you have
made your own. Immediately on reading your letter1, I telegraphed
saying that nothing would be done without consultation with Your Lord-
ship and that I was writing this letter and sending the statement .
Perhaps I should explain that most of the letters, which I would
otherwise like to write myself, are dictated, because I write, I am sorry
to confess, a very indifferent and illegible hand.
My colleague and I are very pleased to find that you have been
able to see the distinguished men whom you have mentioned in your
letter.
I am enclosing statement in proof form because, in anticipation
of Your Lordship's approval, it was sent to the printers yesterday, but
it will not be published or submitted without consultation with Your
Lordship.
If the Act of 1907 is repealed and a promise given that six Indians
will be admitted to the Transvaal annually in the way I have proposed,
I would certainly be contented . . . similar question was put to me
by Lord Morley also. May I [hope that the matter will be reconsidered
by the] Transvaal Parliament or the Provincial Council as the case may
be, and that the Immigration Law will be amended so as to leave it
open for Indians of great culture to enter the Transvaal under the
general education test. The number will be limited to six, not in the law
presence in this country, his demand for interviews with Lords Morley, Crewe have
roused the responsible authorities to a sense that the question must be considered.
They have promised to consider it, they are considering it, so that no public pressure
would be opportune or wise at this moment. I am to see General Smuts next week
and it is on him that everything depends. For goodness' sake, keep the Committee and
the M.P.s quiet just for the present." He had further observed: "The letter which I
have just written to Mr. Gandhi and which I have asked him to show to you will
explain why there is nothing for the Committee to do."
itself, but it will be limited or regulated by administrative action, that
is to say, by the imposing of a severe enough test so that the Immigration
Officer will pass only six Indians in anyone year. So far as immigration
is concerned, such Indian immigrants will be free from any measure of
registration or identification, their identification being the examination,
they will have to pass at the border. The whole position, I believe, I
have clearly explained to Sir Richard Solomon and I believe, too, that
he has understood it.
There undoubtedly are other grievances in the Transvaal, as for
instance, the prohibition to hold landed property, to ride in the tram-
cars, etc., and we will have to trouble the local authorities as also
Your Lordship for assistance in the matter, but the distinction between
the two grievances which have brought the deputation to London and
the others is, that the former have entailed passive resistance involving
untold suffering by us, and must continue to do, so long as I can help it,
until the grievances are redressed or every Indian perishes in the
attempt to have them redressed. The latter grievances are of long
standing; there is no solemn covenant to impose upon ourselves personal
suffering in order to remove them and we can wait for public opinion to
mature and prejudice to die out, without reducing ourselves to penury
and filling the Transvaal gaols.
It is to me a test of Your Lordship's very great interest [in our
struggle] as also, may I say, of your high-mindedness. . passive
resistance. Will you excuse me for saying that I know of no Indian,
whether here, in South Africa or in India, who had so steadily, even
defiantly, set his face against sedition—as I understand it—as I have.
It is part of my faith not to have anything to do with it, even at the
risk of my life. Most people, that is most Indians and Anglo-Indians,
express their detestation of bomb throwing and violence in words or in
unreasonable action. The movement in the Transvaal, with which I
have identified myself is an eloquent and standing protest in action
against such methods. The test of passive resistance is self-suffering and
not infliction of suffering on others. We have, therefore, not only never
received a single farthing from "the party of sedition" in India or else-
where, but even if there was any offer, we should, if we were true to our
principles, decline to receive it. We have hitherto made it a point not
to approach the Indian public in India for financial assistance. The
accounts of the British Indian Association are open to the world. A
statement of income and expenditure is published from time to time
and is advertised in Indian Opinion. Mr. Doke, Mr. Phillips4, and other
1 The original is damaged here.
2 Here a whole line is cut off.
3 Vide Vol. VII, Appendix VII.
4 Charles Phillips, Congregational Minister in the Transvaal
notable men who are working in the Transvaal for us, know this fact
most intimately. May I add, too, that the idea of passive resistance
originated in South Africa was independent of any movement in India
and that we have sometimes been bitterly assailed by some of our Indian
friends for pinning our faith to passive resistance pure and simple?
I hope Your Lordship will pardon me for introducing so much of
the personal element, as also for the length of this letter, which was un-
avoidable.
If any further elucidation or information be necessary, you can only
add to the debt of gratitude to me by commanding [me to furnish the
same.]
Mr. Ritch points out that this explanation may not be quite clear to
Your Lordship. He suggests my adding:
The Immigration Law imposes an educational test on all immi-
grants white or black. The severity of the test is left to the discretion of
the Immigration Officer. There will not be, there is not now, the same
test for all. The officer, therefore, will set one test for Europeans—and
perhaps no test at all, as happens often in Natal—and another for
Indians. The Courts will not interfere with such exercise of discretion.
General Smuts has said that the present Immigration Law does not give
so wide a discretion as this to the Immigration Officer. If that be so, the
law can easily be altered to extend the measure of discretion to the
necessary degree. I have already submitted through Mr. Dallow
an amendment which, in my opinion, would satisfactorily effect this.
Mr. Smuts did not reject my amendment, but said that he did not consi-
der it desirable to alter the law during that session (June last). Armed
with the necessary powers, the Immigration Officer need admit only
six Indians under the educational test. If a seventh applied, he can
plough him by imposing a test impossible for him to pass, just as is
done in Australia.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4968
