56. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, August 12, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I had your cheerful note from the 3rd-class saloon of your floating
palace. It is evident that you received my letter as also wires too late
to acknowledge. I wrote to you on Monday so as to enable the letter
to reach you on board.
Received your wire but no letter.
Have heard nothing further about Call.
I am sorry that the bore is making no progress. They now bore
about 4 to 5 ft. per day. The ground is very hard. I have written to
the Irrigation Department in your name asking for a report on the
progress of the work.
The work in connection with fencing is going forward. Assisted
by Krishnaswamy, Revashankar and Devdas, I finished putting in the
pegs today. Albrecht and Naidoo and Coopoo have been putting strainers
and supports near the pegs. The native boy is digging holes. Ramdas
is tarring the poles.
The garden work has been suspended for the time being. The
natives have however ploughed the portion I described in my last letter.
The ground looks very sweet on that account. Quinn has been hoeing.
Medh is still not fit for active work. Mrs. Phillip goes away on Monday.
Krishnaswamy will probably return. He does not wish to leave the Farm.
I am becoming more and more absorbed in the school. The children
are daily improving. They are still saltless. The work on the Farm is
becoming more and more methodical. Albrecht is improving in health.
The vines you were to order have not come forward. If they are
not ordered, I hope you will not order them from there.
Some letters which I think you ought to see herewith.
1 Revashankar Jagjivan Jhaveri, brother of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
Miss Schlesin may leave us. She is accepting an educational
appointment. She hopes still to attend to your work. In any case you
need not worry.
There have been no visitors to the Farm. Ritch will probably come
tomorrow.
Hope you had a good voyage and are having a nice time, i.e., a
good time from a moral point of view. Gool says you have captured
him.
So you see I have simply given you a diary. I must now leave
off. Will write more if I have the time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
Please get the books as per list. If you have no time send it to
Davis.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
