63. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
WARDHA,
October 6, 1933
BHAISHRI THAKKAR BAPA,
I got both your letters. I am glad you reminded me about
Bidhan Roy. My memory seems to be slumbering. If you had
not reminded me, I would have cleanly forgotten about the
matter. Now a letter will go immediately tomorrow.
And now about the tour. Ghanshyamdas writes and tells me
that I should not start before November 15. Dr. Khare also
has been insisting that I should take rest for at least six weeks.
I, therefore, have agreed not to start before November 8. I will
start on Wednesday, the 8th. This has satisfied Jamnalalji. I also
feel that there will be no harm if I rest till the 8th. Meanwhile,
I will be able to attend to some work which has been pending
with me. I shall also have to think about the Harijan settle-
ment. Then there is the problem of the workers in Ahmeda-
bad, and some matters here, too, which require my attention.
If, therefore, you think that this delay is justified, please make
the necessary changes in the programme. Draw up the entire
programme of the tour as follows. Let Jamnalalji draw up model
programme for the Central Provinces in consultation with the
local workers. Assign to the other provinces their respective weeks
and ask them to draw up their own programmes. If this is
done, it will not be necessary to make changes afterwards. When
the programme is ready, we need not publish the whole pro-
gramme for nine months at a time but publish in advance the
programme for one province only, so that, if we find it neces-
sary to make minor changes, there may be no difficulty.
If we
follow this method, we may publish the programme for just
two provinces together and afterwards the programme for the
next province as soon as we have finished one. This will also
make the work easier. I will write more after Jamnalalji is ready
with his suggestions.
And now about the Harijan settlement, namely, what name
we should give to it.
I feel that we should not use the word
Harijan, but that our aim should be clear in the name that we
select. Our ultimate aim is that we should stop using the name
Harijan, or that all of us should become Harijans. Hence Vinoba
has suggested the name Sarvodaya Mandir, or Samabhava Man-
dir. I naturally like the first name, for I called Ruskin's famous
book by the name Sarvodaya as far back as 20 years ago. That
name, therefore, will include Harijans. Discuss the suggestion
with Ghanshyamdas and let me know. Explain to him the
other thing, too, which I have mentioned in this letter.
I am very happy that Bhai Babal listened to your advice and
mine. If he had not withdrawn his name, a very embarrassing
situation would have arisen.
BAPU
[PS.]
We need not make any provision for Delhi, as we need not
make any for Kathiawar. I had heard all about Shrivastavaji's
performance long ago. But to whom can we complain when
our own people turn against us?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1124
