485. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
May 3, 1932
I got your letter. I would not worry over the loss of twelve
pounds of weight, if your strength has not gone down and you
suffer from no particular disease. I frequently write to Tara-
mati, and this time she also has been writing fairly often. In the
last letter Dilip also wrote two lines. Of course I had to ask for
that favour. By now Taramati must have visited you.
According to me, rebirth is a fact proved by scientific experi-
ments and by people's memories of past lives. To accept such
memories as proof, we have to put trust in men who have narrat-
ed their experiences. But so many persons have borne witness
to their remembering their past lives that we cannot brush aside
their evidence. I would not, however, spend time convincing any-
body about the reality of rebirth; nor would I enter into too much
argument on the subject. There are several things scientifically
established, our disbelief in which is of no great consequence in
our lives. It is possible that rebirth may be so defined by some-
body that the usual proof offered in support of it will not satisfy
him. My own definition of it is just this. The soul does not cease
to exist with the end of the body, but migrates from one existence
to another, and that is rebirth. That is, I would say that even
Christians, Muslims and Zoroastrians who believe in the Day
of Judgment believe in rebirth according to my definition of it.
The acquisition of another body, in my view, follows as a neces-
sary corollary from this belief. However, I know that the tradi-
tional Christian view does not permit it, though an increasing num-
ber of Christians now believe in the possibility of the soul getting
another body.
Lagnantar will not serve as a Gujarati equivalent of 'divorce'.
Lagnantar means another marriage, which is possible even with-
out a divorce. If no current word is available, I would coin a new
word Lagnabhanga. On my asking Mahadev, he says that he was
going to suggest this very word. So we have, as the saying goes,
two prescriptions of the same cure for an illness.
Taramati will probably find it difficult to get the 'Yeravda
chakra'-the Yeravda spinning-wheel-in Bombay. I am writing
to her and advising her to write to Bardoli or the Ashram and
ask them to send it directly to you. Your interpretation of Gita,
XVIII. [66] cannot contradict mine. I do not now remember
what the interpretation I offered in my letters was. But I would
certainly oppose your interpretation if you tried to make out
the idea of surrender to God to be a path in itself unconnected
with other duties. I have often noticed that what we have said
or wish to say had already been said by somebody else in diffe-
rent words. Instead of noting a difference or contradiction bet-
ween the two explanations, I see the identity of meaning. What
does it matter if the language differs? I am aware that there are
certain risks in following this method, but they exist only for those
persons who twist the meanings of words to see and prove the
identity of the meaning of the passages in question. I don't think
there is any such risk for a person who sees such identity sponta-
neously. Hence, the question we face is, whether the better course
is to form the habit of seeing identity of meaning or to pro-
ceed on the assumption that difference in language indicates
difference in meaning. In my view, it is dangerous to see difference
in meaning in verbal difference. I very much like to see
identity rather than difference of meaning between Ishvar and
Allah.
It seems that apart from Kishorelal and Jairamdas you have
no other companions. Ask them to write to me if they can with-
out forgoing their right to write an ordinary letter, or include
in such ordinary letter what they wish to write to me. I had
one letter from Jairamdas, to which I replied. It is not at all
necessary for you to let go writing a letter to Taramati for the
sake of being able to write to me. It would be enough if you
include in your letter to Taramati whatever you wish to commu-
nicate to me; or, if you write in the letter to me what you wish
to tell her, to that at any rate there can be no objection.
We three are happy here. It is now three months since I
gave up milk. In its place, I take almonds with bread. So far,
the weight has been maintained. And there is no complaint of
constipation, so that I am carrying on with this diet for the
present.
Mahadev points out that in Marathi they use the word
vivahavichchheda for lagnabhanga. Both the words had occurred to
me but I liked lagnabhanga better. However, I would certainly
accept the word vivahavichchheda and perhaps even prefer it since I
support the view that the terms newly coined in Indian languages
should be uniform.
Convey our due regards to the company there.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 107-
