374. LETTER TO DADACHANJI
October 10, 1932
BHAI DADACHANJI,
This is in reply to your letter of the 23rd. I wish to clarify
my position in regard to Baba. I find it very difficult to believe
that one person can help another to see God. My heart refuses to
accept this idea. When Baba, however, makes such a claim, I
can only tell him that I would welcome his help if he could make
me see God. We need not believe that a person has necessarily
seen God just because he says that he has seen Him. Many
persons who make such a claim are found to be suffering from a
delusion. In many cases the claim is merely an echo of one's
own wishes. I certainly do not believe that seeing God means
seeing some Power outside of us, for I believe that He dwells in
the hearts of us all. But only one in thousands knows Him through
the heart. It is not enough to know God with one's intellect. I
do feel that no person can help another to see God in this sense.
One cannot fast at the instance of somebody else in order
to be able to see God. I would do so only when I feel an urge
from within me. And when there is such an urge, I will not let
myself be dissuaded from the step by anybody. There is absolutely
no reason for assuming that fasting would help me to see God. I
cannot believe that, if I agree to fast for forty days, Baba can
help me to see God. That would be an easy bargain. If one
can see God as easily as that, the experience has no value for me.
I thought that Baba did not divide life into separate fields.
To a person whose life is dedicated to dharma, politics, econo-
mics, etc., are all aspects of dharma, and he cannot leave out
any of them. According to me, a person who regards dharma as
one of the many activities of life does not know what dharma is.
It is, therefore, inconceivable to me that I might some day give
up politics, social reform and other similar activities. I have entered
the fields of politics, social service, etc., for the sake of dharma.
I did not promise to translate Baba's writings into Gujarati.
On the contrary, I suggested to Baba that he should come out of
the spell of English and not write or get somebody to write for
him in English, but write and explain his ideas in Gujarati, his
mother tongue, or in Persian which, as he says, he knows very
well. Yes, I would certainly translate into Gujarati any of his
writings which deeply appeal to me.
In short, I am a student of Baba's ideas. I saw Baba,
having received a wire from Jamshed Mehta whom I regard
as a pure soul. I am always in search of bhaktas of God and,
thinking that Baba was one, I met him.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 125-
