180. LETTER TO PARSEE RUSTOMJEE
[RAJKOT,
March 1, 1902]
DEAR SETH PARSEE RUSTOMJEE JIVANJEE,
I am in receipt of your three letters, dated 31st December,
7th January and 10th February.
I have also received the cheque for £25 sent by you to be
spent on feeding the famine-stricken people in Kathiawar or
for any other charitable object I deem fit.
All your three letters reached me when I arrived here from
North India three days ago. I also received a letter at Ran-
goon, but it is in my luggage, which has not yet been received
from Calcutta. I do not remember that it contained anything
special that called for a reply.
The famine in Kathiawar is very acute. But I have not
yet obtained full information regarding the extent of relief be-
ing given to the famine-stricken. When I obtain it, I shall uti-
lize the cheque sent by you. If I find that it is not needed
immediately, I intend to spend the amount after June, for real
scarcity will be experienced thereafter. If, unfortunately, we get
no rains in June, there is a possibility that the conditions of
1897 might recur. Since it will be advisable to have as much
money as possible for that contingency, I do not consider it
meet to use this amount just now, except when absolutely essen-
tial. I shall write to you if there is any change in this deci-
sion. The cheque was deposited yesterday with a local banker
at ½ per cent interest. The money will be spent under my
personal supervision. You need, therefore, have no anxiety in
this matter.
I cannot understand why Mr. Khan and Mr. Nazar should
not attend to your work properly. You should have patience
and take whatever work can be taken from them. People cannot
speak or act always in the same manner. I think it is not right to
form an adverse opinion on that account. As long as a man
carries out with care the work entrusted to him, it is not
necessary to pay attention to his ways.
I have already sent to the secretaries a report of the work
done here so far. As you must have seen it, I do not write about
it again. The Governor there has declined to receive our address,
saying that the Indians constitute a part of Natal's population.
Please let me know in exactly what context he has said so.
You must have seen the question asked about us in Parliament
and Mr. Chamberlain's reply.
Let me know immediately what Lord Milner writes. The
Bengal Chamber of Commerce is willing to take up our work.
Hereafter, please forward also to Prof. Gokhale at Poona copies
of whatever literature, newspapers, etc., you may have to send
from there to other gentlemen. He is a member of the Imperial
Council and he does a lot on our behalf.
I very much regret to note that the Congress work there has
become slack. You should do as much as you can. One should
content oneself with doing one's duty as one understands it,
facing insults, obstacles, etc., courageously and behaving politely
in every respect. What more can I write from this distance?
It is, indeed, a matter of profound regret that the idea of
inviting Sir Mancherjee has been abandoned. It will, however,
be to our advantage if we can still exert ourselves and invite him.
When I go to Bombay, I shall call at your house and inquire
after your children. But I am not sure when I will go. Every-
thing here is undecided. I intend settling down in Bombay if I
can afford it. It is a little difficult to do public work from here.
The future alone will decide it. Dr. Mehta strongly advises that
I take complete rest at least for the next two or three months.
The children are here with me. They are for the present
attending the local school. Gokaldas and Harilal are studying in
standard IV of the secondary school. Manilal studies privately;
he has not been admitted into any specific standard at school.
I hope you have recovered completely by now. It is necessary
to take proper care of your health there. It is essential that one
should observe moderation and regularity in the matter of food.
Please give my compliments to those who may enquire after me.
With regards,
From a photostat of the office copy in Gujarati : S.N. 3937
