436. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
November 14, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,
Your letter to Kakasaheb was received late. I understood
the situation better from it. People certainly give you credit. But
exercise the utmost patience. You have taken upon yourself a
great responsibility. But you should meditate over those three ver-
ses which we have recently included in the prayers. Those who
work for God with His name ever on their lips, He makes them
His special concern and ensures the success of their undertakings,
and it is He who guides them; why, then, should we worry?
Padma seems to have got fever. She has a swelling too. If
you cannot judge what to do to cure her, get her examined by
Haribhai. If you can judge what to do, don't be afraid to apply
any treatment you think best. Even when doing that, you should
feel that you are guided by God and take measures which seem
best at the moment; having done that, you should rest complete-
ly free from worry. Do not take upon yourself a burden beyond
your strength to carry.
Man has ill-treated woman and is still doing so. But the
remedy for this ultimately lies in woman's own hand. If she
stops thinking that she is weak, she can be free this very day.
The really strong are not those who are strong in body. Ravana,
who was a demon, that is, had physical strength, was helpless before
the seemingly weak Sita. I am sure you remember the story. Sita
was under the protection of a boon to the effect that anyone
who cast an evil glance at her would be instantly burnt to ashes.
Ravana knew this and that is why, though he carried her away, he
could not touch her person with impure thoughts. He had to
entreat Sita to let him embrace her. He threatened her time and
again in the hope that she might yield; but unless she yielded of
her own free will he was, in spite of his strength, as helpless as a
goat. Though physically Sita was utterly helpless, in spirit she was
a lioness.
We know the meaning of a boon. It is only a symbol. Every
woman who has inviolable purity of character enjoys the same
boon as Sita did. Any man who casts an evil glance at such a
woman would be instantly burnt to ashes. If man has ill-treated
308
woman, the reason is that she, too, has yielded to lust. Being en-
slaved by passion, both forgot their higher nature, forgot that
they were souls and remained mere bodies. So far as the body
is concerned, man is undoubtedly the stronger of the two. Hence
woman was enslaved by man and the impression came to prevail
that she was helpless before man, that she was weak and always
needed man's protection.
As souls man and woman are equal. If a man does not recog-
nize his spiritual nature but a woman does, the latter is the
stronger of the two, as Sita was stronger than Ravana, and the
other remains weaker, as was Ravana. Don't believe, moreover,
that this was possible only in the time of Rama. Even today
there are countless Sitas in the world who require no man's help
and are yet safe against all danger. One such is Janakimaiya. You
must have seen her. Whenever I went to Bombay, she came and
saw me. She had not much intellectual capacity to speak of, but
had boundless strength of spirit. She must have been good-looking
in her youth. She embraced a hard path of service in the prime of
her youth. I have known other Indian women like her, and also
Englishwomen. They are examples of but a small measure of
spiritual strength. A woman who has fully grown in soul deserves
to be revered as the world's mother.
For those who wish to cultivate such strength, satyayuga exists
today. Your task, therefore, is to make women strong. That is the
right method of securing justice from men. A man like me may
guide you and awaken other men to a consciousness of their duty.
But my capacity for serving women is limited.
Women alone can serve women perfectly. It is my ambition,
through the Ashram, to prepare not one such worker but many.
An opportunity to do so has presented itself to us just now.
If you have not followed this, ask me to explain again.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro -6: G.S. Gangabehnne, pp. 45-7; also C.W. 8764. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya
