349. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SEVAGRAM,
February 7, 1942
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I have been intending to write to you for some time, when,
10 and behold, today I got your letter. Do try and arrange to
get uncooked vegetables from somewhere. The experiment has bene-
fited me greatly. I have, therefore, advised Ghanshyamdas to
make the same experiment and have him put on four ounces of
butter. This has increased his energy and strength. Please do
not, therefore, give up the experiment. If you keep the leaves
immersed in salt water solution, they will remain fresh. It will
be enough if you eat only four or five of these. But you can eat
onions, carrot, knoll-cole, radish, etc., even after two or more days.
You need not take more than two ounces in all. The rest is all right.
I am writing to Prithvi Singh.
You may send . . .1 over here. I will train him further here
and then let him go. He may then utilize your help. He is indeed
a good man. He is a little immature, but will learn here. You
may send for him if you need him again.
Please take it that the adhesions in your intestines can be cured
only through a carefully selected diet. You should not strain at all
when passing stools.
I understand your eagerness to get Mahadev over there. But
he cannot look after Harijan properly from there. He would nat-
urally like to show me what he writes and I to see it. After reading
what he writes I often find it necessary to make some essential,
though only a few, changes. I have asked Narahari to go over there.
Ghanshyamdas is staying in the room which you used to
occupy. If he were to stay in Wardha, I would not be able to treat
him. I would not be able to judge clearly what to do.
Ba is not keeping quite well. When your planned stay at Hajira
is over, please remember you have to come here. You may go out
from here only when necessary. You must have read my suggestion
regarding spinning in Gujarat. See that it is fully implemented.
And collect some money for the Spinners' Association.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
HAJIRA, via SURAT
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 266
