155. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
LONDON,
October 26, 1931
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I simply get no time to write letters. I am writing even
this letter while attending the meeting of the Federal Committee.
You ought to take some treatment for your nose. All my work
here is done outside the Conference. It may not yield immediate
results, but I believe it will have very good results afterwards. I
have very little hope of returning with anything substantial. How-
ever, I will not return with dishonour. I have been meeting many
responsible men.
The work of the Conference is likely to be over by the
middle of November. I have invitations from nearly all over
Europe. I am very eager to visit all those countries. I think
my visiting them can do nothing but good. Meet all the people
and cable to me your decisions. If you think it necessary that
I should undertake the tour, you may take it that I shall be
away a month longer. That is, I can reach India not earlier
than in January. (Having written so far, I started dozing in the
chair. As you can see, the pen refused to proceed further.) If
you can spare me for so long, do so. In India you may do what
you think best. You must have seen my reply to Jawaharlal's
cable. Irrespective of what happens here, I am convinced that,
if it becomes necessary to fight the Government there on any
issue, you should do so. I see no possibility of anything being
done here just now concerning local issues. I had thought that
something could be done about the Bengal detenus, but I got no
opportunity to do anything. I can't say if anything can be done
after the election.
I see that in Gujarat the authorities are violating the Settle-
ment in everything they do. Fight against all their decisions.
The reply that has been received concerning Ras seems to me
insolent. I am confident that we shall be able to fight it out
with the Government on all these issues.
I think I have written enough.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro- : Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 15-
