272. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
January 30, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
There has been no letter either from you or from Sushila.
No sooner you leave the shores of India, my complaints start.
Sita's boils must have disappeared as soon as the ship had left
the shore.
I hope your work has become smoother. Let me know what
arrangements you have finally made. If you wish to live happily
and preserve your reputation, payoff the debt soon and never bor-
row money again. One should not incur a debt even for the sake
of one's father. One may give one's life for him, but not forsake
one's dharma, and incurring a debt is as good as forsaking dharma.
I am all right. I do not know whether or when I shall have
to fast, but I am sure of this, that I will fast only if, and when,
God prompts me. If you believe me when I say this, you will not
be upset and will not be anxious to come running here. You
should leave South Africa when you feel beyond doubt that it is
your duty to do so. Till then, your duty is to remain there and
do what service you can. You should live as if at present your
country was South Africa.
You should preserve the utmost simplicity in your life except
in regard to things which may be necessary for conforming to the
standard of life there. Do not discontinue the daily recitation of
the Gita; Chapter XII is in fact your spiritual food in the journey
of life. Not only should you be able to recite the verses from
memory but they should have also sunk into your heart. If they
have, you will find that they contain the essence of all Shastras.
Did I write to you that Chhaganlal Joshi was with me? We
are all well.
Ramdas also is well. Devdas is touring with Rajaji in con-
nection with the temple-entry movement. Most probably they will
see me today. Ba has gone to Kaira district. She writes to me.
Radha and Kusum keep indifferent health. The former is likely
to go and stay in Deolali. Dahyabhai is completely all right now
and is now in Poona for change of climate.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4805
