20. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
P. O. Box 3553,
[JOHANNESBURG,]
June 8, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
I have seen the Gazette notice today intimating that the Asiatic
Law Amendment Act has received the Royal sanction, and that it will
come into force on a day to be appointed. I do not know what this
means, but it leaves breathing space, and I, therefore, wish to place
before the public a mercantile view of the Act. In order to do that,
I am obliged to enter into a bit of autobiography. I have been settled
in the Transvaal for the last 19 years, and have the honour to represent,
as managing partner, the firm of Suliman Ismail Mia and Co. My
firm has very large dealings with European wholesale houses, who have,
need I say, derived very considerable pecuniary profit from their trans-
actions with the firm. It suffered severe reverses during the Jameson
Raid and yet its creditors were paid in full. It underwent a similar
ordeal during the Boer War; the creditors were still paid in full. And
now, for the third time, complete ruin stares it in the face. In the
two previous instances, the cause was beyond human, at any rate my
firm's, control. Today, the cause will be of its own seeking, and why?
For the simple reason that the Asiatic Law Amendment Act is considered
by every Indian who has understood it as a mark of slavery pure and
simple. It makes of the Transvaal a prison-house for every Indian,
so far as I know my countrymen's mind. They have, therefore, decided
not to submit to such an Act, but to suffer the consequence of such
disobedience. It goes against the grain for an Indian to disobey any
law, and yet the feeling aroused by this Act is so strong that disobe-
dience is deemed a virtue and obedience a cowardly vice. The position
that I, as an Indian merchant, am placed in is the position occupied
by many like myself. Do you suppose that all such Indians do not
realize the full force and effect of what they stand to lose from
a worldly standpoint by disobeying the law? But we have learned at
the feet of your countrymen that it is better to suffer such loss than to
surrender personal freedom and accept humiliation. Why should I
accept cancellation of my title-deeds, and have to go to the Permit
Office, hat in hand, and beg for a new title-deed with many restrictions?
Moreover, as a Mahomedan, I resent most bitterly that, whereas non-
Mahomedan subjects of the Turkish Empire are free from the galling
yoke of the Act, Mahomedan subjects of that Empire are not. These
are facts which I venture to ask you and the public to weigh well.
I should not have troubled you were it not for the fact that the
Government have reserved to themselves yet the right to retire from
what is, from the Indian standpoint, a false position. Let the offer of
voluntary re-registration be accepted and, if it fails, a day may be
fixed for the compulsory registration of those who have not abided by
the voluntary offer. It is true that, under the voluntary offer, there
will be no ear-marking of Indian babes, but I must frankly confess that
no loss of the good things of this world will deter me from disobeying
an Act which means that I shall have to supply identification parti-
culars of a day-old son of mine, and be subject to the tacit assumption
that the infant is a future criminal of the direst type. I have spoken to
many European friends of mine. They all consider that our offer is
very reasonable. I ask you, and them, to support us in our struggle for
a respectable existence in the Transvaal. Jesus is as much a prophet
of the Mahomedans as he is of the Christians. He has somewhere said :
"Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you." May
I ask the Christian Government to follow this wise saying?
I am, etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
The Star, 11-6-1907
