138. LETTER TO D. B. KHOJA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 11, 1926
BHAISHRI DHARAMSHI BHANJI,
It is only today I am able to answer your tenacious ques-
tions. It is not right, I think, to discuss so many questions in
Navajivan. I am quite pleased with your questions. I now answer
them one by one.
One who is ready to immolate himself for the sake of truth
should not bother about protecting his body, but he should do so
to the extent necessary for the purpose of realizing truth. I do not
think it wrong to take the weight of the body, and so on, with
a view to studying the physical effects of a fast undertaken for a
moral purpose. But it is possible that in so doing one may
succumb to temptation. God alone knows whether I have ever
fallen a prey to temptation. My renunciation of activities is only
in the interest of health. If it is incorrect to call it renunciation
of activities where a person has limited his activities to a certain
field, let us call it limitation of sphere. This limitation is not based
on moral considerations; hence there is no room for any illusion
either gross or subtle.
We cannot know the outcome of many things, and yet we
experiment with them; so too with diet. Even from the point of
view of abstention there is full scope for discrimination in regard
to diet.
My service to India includes service to all creatures, because
mine is a non-violent service. One who serves another selflessly
and without any attachment serves all.
It is not for me to permit anyone to fight. I would only show
to those who want to fight what, I think, their duty is. I agree,
one gets results according to one's prarabdha but as we cannot peep
into the future, let us put forth our best efforts regardless of
results. When the rule of the just prevails, it would be my duty to
earn my living and be a burden to none. I know of no religion
which cannot be put into practice.
Instead of modifying dharma to suit the ways of the world,
why not change these to conform to dharma? All practices that are
contrary to dharma deserve to be abjured. What I regard as the
truth is not dependent on its acceptance as such by the world.
That alone I believe [as truth] which I have experienced myself.
A Shastra which condones adharma while upholding dharma is
to that extent unworthy of honour.
I believe some rare persons can know the nature of the uni-
verse and of its Ruler; but none can describe it. That being so, I
think, theological differences will persist.
If a man who has many wives frees himself of passions, etc.,
and regards them all as his mothers or sisters, he can certainly
qualify himself for moksha.
The passion that dwells in the senses is contrary to human
nature and should therefore be abandoned. Man and woman are
both born free. Hence when one is overwhelmed by passion and
loses oneself, what else shall we call it if not going astray? If a
man and his wife cannot get on after marriage, is that reason
enough for a divorce? The bond between father and son does
not come to an end on account of disagreement; I regard the
bond between husband and wife as similar. If they cannot see eye
to eye, they may well have recourse to non-co-operation. But
once the marital bond has been established, it can never be dharma
to act contrary to it. That a man may indulge in sex pleasures
with one woman and none other and that too for the sake of pro-
geny and similarly a woman with one man is, I believe, the far-
thest limit that he or she can have.
Time goes on doing its work. Our manliness lies in foreseeing
its changes and putting in the right efforts.
It is quite possible that those whom we regard as having
attained moksha might not in fact have attained it. But those who
have really attained moksha are a manifestation of God Himself,
because they cannot be thought of as apart from Him. I am not
able to understand your next question. I am against purdah for
women because it shows man's meanness and his oppression of the
weaker sex. It is quite possible that the steps I take or advocate
may in future prove disastrous instead of being beneficial. Of course
my own conviction is that each and every step of mine will turn
out to be beneficial in the end. If I do not have this faith I shall
be doing offence to my truth and I should as well end my life.
For, even if I may choose to be quiet I would still go on seeing
visions of many worlds. In prophet Mohammed's life, we come
across many acts of kindness. I do not know if Lord Mahavir
has laid down two distinct standards-one for dharma and the
other for worldly life. So far as I understand Jainism, I think it
has no such compartments. Passages which are apparently sug-
gestive of different standards can be interpreted to agree with what
I say; for example, the Mahavrat 1 and Anuvrat. Religion exhorts
us all clearly to follow only the Mahavrat; but if we cannot do it,
we should at least follow the Anuvrat instead of resigning ourselves
to a life of sin.
A gun manufacturer is certainly responsible for the destruc-
tion caused by the guns he makes. The object of a man's life is
said to be realization of the self. A convention which runs counter
to human nature certainly deserves to be broken. Even otherwise
it is bound to go. If an infant tries to hold a fire-brand, its parents
and the world have a right to check it. Nobody has any further
right.
Since God has not endowed man with the power of creating
even a single life, how at all can he have the right to inflict
capital punishment? I have remained absolutely free from the
habit of masturbation. Even today I am not able to understand
it. I shudder at the thought of it. I have no doubt whatever that
a man who practises it would become weak in body and mind. I
know of many such cases. The remedy for it is that those who wish
to reform themselves should shun solitude and as far as possible
keep both their hands as well as their body busy. They should
take sattvika food, which is easy to digest, go for walks in the open
air and repeat Ramanama.
Marriage is no remedy for bad habits. A child of five, seven
or ten years contracts a bad habit; is it due to want of the married
state? Wherever I go, I see immeasurable unhappiness caused by
child-marriages. I have known no benefit flowing from child-
marnages.
I return your questions as they would help you understand
my answers.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19833
