255. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
March 20, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
Brushing the teeth with datan should be supplemented by the
use of fingers. That is, rub the gums vigorously with the fingers
while gargling after you have brushed the teeth with datan and
cleansed the tongue with the twig. One suffering from pyorrhoea
should brush the teeth with datan twice daily, and I would not
think it too much to give half an hour each time. I have come
across negroes brushing their teeth at all times in the day. The
benefit from the use of datan is not merely that the teeth are brush-
ed with it, but also that all the poisonous matter in the gums is
thrown out with the fluids discharged from the mouth while
crushing the datan, as we spit out the fluids entirely. I myself use
nothing else except common salt with the datan. Of course, my
brushing the teeth does not mean much, because I have not a
single tooth left in the upper jaw and even in the lower only a
few remain. Both the babul and the neem twigs are good for datan
but perhaps the neem is likely to be better for one suffering from
pyorrhoea as the bitterness of the neem is highly beneficial.
There is not the slightest need for the girls to use a foun-
tain pen. Really speaking, nobody in the Ashram should need
a fountain pen. Why should anybody be in such hurry? For
students at any rate, it is certainly a harmful thing to use. The
reed-pen is the best for writing Gujarati, Hindi, Urdu and other
Indian scripts. We should teach the children to use it properly.
During prayers at the Ashram, none should start reciting
or singing before the leader begins. And again, the rule is that
when he leads, only those can join in the recitation or singing
who can do so in tune. When the whole community sings
harmoniously in one tune, their singing never fails to produce
an effect. Nor does silence fail. Both are beneficial, each in its
proper place. In offering oblations, etc., at a sacrifice, the incanta-
tions used to be chanted aloud in the belief that thousands were
witnessing the ceremony with reverence. Once that became a cus-
tom, even when only five or ten persons are present the incanta-
tions at a sacrifice continue to be chanted aloud.
The observance of one principal vow mostly includes that of
several minor ones.
Just as a neem tree comes out of another neem tree, so human
beings are born from human beings, and just as the general pro-
perties of the neem are transmitted from one to another, so are
those of human beings. But because of several other factors which
also operate, the transmission of all characteristics is not, as it
should not be, maintained. Moreover, we observe certain pecu-
liarities in man also because of the difference that exists between
man and other living creatures.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7492. Also C.W. 4969. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
