209. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 4, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
You must have received my letter of yesterday. You are
very cruel indeed, and also childish. You may write as rude
letters as you can but they will not make me angry. But why do
you get so angry? You are wise and are capable of self-sacrifice,
but it pains me to know that you are eaten up by anger. The
knowledge that you are harming yourself does wring my heart.
I feel afraid of you. It does not do you credit that I should
weigh my words when writing to you.
Your letter to Saraswati was bad. She has been terribly
upset. Here is her letter to me. Why pit an army against a
goat? It was you who ensnared her. What is the meaning, then,
of your growling at her now if she cannot live without you? She
is your helpmate, your partner in dharma, and not your slave
or your property. It is not proper that you should first make
a doll of her and then treat her as your property. Do not
dismiss all this in a fit of anger. Remember that I am a man of
experience.
I am afraid there is no way out except marriage. After the
marriage you may do what you like. Do not worry if I do not give
my consent to the marriage. It should be enough for you that I
do not oppose it. It would of course be best if you two could bear
separation and be content with writing to each other from time
to time and meeting occasionally. But that seems impossible so
far as Saraswati is concerned. Think over what you should do
after the marriage. Discuss the matter with me. My feeling is that
you will have to give up study afterwards. But I shall be happy
if my fear is proved wrong and both of you study together, as
Saraswati says you will. You may now think calmly and do
what you please. Meanwhile I am tending Saraswati like a
flower.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I had finished this letter before I sent you the wire1, but
kept it back on getting your letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7340. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
