54. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION CAMP,
January 24, 1944
SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
BOMBAY
SIR,
I have been served with a notice showing the cause of my
detention and informing me that I have a right to make re-
presentation against the order. In the exercise of the right thus
conferred upon me, I beg to say as follows:
I admit that I took a leading part in the passage of the
Congress resolution of 8th August, 1942. I must deny emphati-
cally that the mass movement sanctioned by the Congress was
"calculated to impede the successful prosecution of the war".
Moreover I am in a position to show conclusively from my
speeches at the Congress meeting and otherwise that there was
no intention on my part, as the person in sole charge of the
movement, to start it immediately and that, as publicly an-
nounced by me, I was to enter into correspondence with H.E.
the Viceroy with a view to avoiding the contemplated move-
ment. Had the correspondence proved abortive, being a firm
and tried believer in non-violence, I would have taken every
precaution to keep the movement under restraint.
By their hasty and ill-conceived action in arresting me and
leading Congressmen, the Government goaded the populace to
acts which they would otherwise have never done and thus did
disservice to the Allied cause. By their persistence in continuing the
unfortunate policy of August 1942, the Government are increasing
the existing bitterness between the Government and the people.
And this I say in spite of the fact that they are able to procure
recruits and money enough for the military.
I have little hope of getting a fair or impartial hearing
for my representation. By their pamphlet Congress Responsibility for
the Disturbances, 1942-43, Government have condemned unheard
Congressmen and me. That pamphlet bristles with inaccuracies
and reckless statements.
In view of the foregoing, I ask for an open investigation
by an independent tribunal into the charges against the Con-
gress, Congressmen and me, and counter-charges against the
Government, or, in the alternative, the discharge of detained
Congressmen and myself.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 6642
you would take an active part in directing the movement.
(2) You are
informed that you have a right to make a representation in writing against
the order under which you are detained. If you wish to make such a
representation, you should address it to the undersigned and forward it
through the officer-in-charge of your place of detention as soon as possible"
(File No. 3/41/44. Courtesy: National Archives of India).
1 This letter was forwarded, on January 26, to Sir Richard Tottenham
who advised the Government of Bombay, on February 17, to send the
