258. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Shravan Sud 4 [August 16, 1912]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Ba has been seriously ill2, Ani is passing through a crisis
and Kisan has been none too well. All the three are practi-
cally bed-ridden. Being occupied with this, I can do nothing else.
At night, Kisan and Nagin share the bed with me, so that I don't
get much sleep either. Gokuldas who is here, has his bed
beside Ani's. All the three patients, I think, are on the way to
recovery, though not completely out of danger yet.
The error in the figure for the Famine [Relief Fund] has been
found. It now remains for me to go through the thing. I shall
send the figure by and by. I got Popat's letter. I have got every-
thing that you sent. Your letter is not with me at the moment and
hence I cannot recollect the items in the list you sent.
The booklet about Prof. Gokhale should be as good as you
can make it. I can only ask you to do what we ourselves do
here. Saturdays and Sundays may be availed of for this work.
Anyone who wants to may help. Here, Devibehn and Mr. Kotwal
have been of invaluable assistance. Devibehn starts work at seven
[in the morning] and goes on till nine at night. She cooks her
own meals and eats them hurriedly, standing. Mr. Kotwal gets
up at three in the morning to cook for those keeping the roza
Jeki has greatly improved in health now. She too, therefore,
makes herself quite useful. All of you having joined in spoiling
Jamnadas's health, he cannot give of his best, though he is
willing enough. He is always suffering from one ailment or
another. While there, he let himself go in the matter of food,
and all of you, in your affection, allowed him this liberty. He is
suffering the consequences now, as he himself admits. He has,
on his own, described [to me] all the liberties he took. It is
possible that I may be able to go there in September.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have Devibehn's help, but that has not reduced my work.
I have to be careful still, because of fear on Ba's account. I shall
have some time to myself only after she has got used to things.
However, about sending the account, I have it on my mind all the
time. I shall send along with it the papers about Devibehn also.
Lallubhai simply wants to get the most he can out of his book.
By all means let him. Why did you publish the matter advertising
it in the news columns?
Remember that we are not to publish anything relating to the
Hindu Conference. Not even its advertisement material, if recei-
ved. You must have seen that the whole thing is a humbug.
I am not in a position to leave immediately to look into the
affairs of the [Natal Indian] Congress.
Mr. West's statement of expenses on fare, etc., is all right. He
is not to be asked to reimburse the amount. He has drawn no-
thing here.
Manilal Doctor may be going to Fiji to keep his promise.
He is in no position to start legal practice immediately. He can
do so only after the new law has been passed.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5710
