377. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
December 25, 1945
BAPA,
I am going to accommodate all the topics in one letter.
I am writing this on the steamer taking me to Midnapore.
You have written to me about Kuttimalu Amma of Malabar
but I am afraid she may not be able to complete our job if she
becomes a member of the Assembly.
I have written to Purnima telling her that I very much
doubt if she can be an Agent if she wishes to enter the Assembly.
I discussed the same point with Jawaharlal also. If, however,
you think that this will not present any difficulty I might revise
my opinion.
I think anyone wishing to take up work among women,
especially village women, will have no time for and no interest
in the Assembly. For my part, I would suggest that you write
to Kuttimalu Amma to give up her longing for the Assembly;
only then will she be able to work whole-heartedly for the
K. G. N. M. Trust.
Now your second letter—regarding Ram Swarup Khanna. I
do not remember if the words "as far as possible" were dictated
by me or by some other trustee. But they were added during
the meeting itself. If you are inclined to delete the words I shall
not say no. But if the words are to be removed we ought to
obtain a formal consent of all the trustees.
I do not yet have Shyamlal's letter in this connection.
I have gone through Hariji's report on Midnapore and I
am proceeding there.
Sucheta has sent a very good and exhaustive account of
the camp at Sahibnagar. The girls of the camp also came and
saw me. We are likely to gain some worth-while experience
from it. You should however write to me only at the Sodepur
address. Midnapore district will take eight days. On the 3rd
I shall return to Sodepur. After having spent there a few days I
shall go to Assam, where I expect to spend seven days at the
most. After that to Madras via Sodepur. The date fixed for
Madras is 23rd January. Let us see what happens there. Will
you be going to Madras?
I ask this because we had some talk about the K. G. N. M.
Trust. Spending a day in Orissa does not appear possible.
THAKKAR BAPA
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
