95. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
October 17, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have received all your letters. During the last week after
the Monday letter I have not written to you so far as I can
remember. It has been a perfect rush in Travancore and
Malabar and an anxious time, all of my own making and seeking.
I therefore needed rest. As soon as I mentioned the fact, Raja-
gopalachari cancelled three places and also his own Ashram where
I was eager to go. But as I want to be fresh for Ceylon where I
have promised myself a strenuous time I have reconciled myself
to the cancellation. Needless to say there is nothing wrong with
me. The rest is a mere precautionary measure. On 21st I move
to Tiruppur which I leave on 24th night. The rest of the pro-
gramme stands. The places to visit near Mangalore I do not
know as yet. So you will write your letters to Mangalore to
reach between 26 and 31st.
There should be no hurry about the hair cutting. I want you
to carry the ladies with you. I have much hope of your be-
coming a powerful influence among them. You must not there-
fore unnecessarily become a strange creature to them. They will
appreciate the consideration you will show to their feelings even
in a matter purely personal to yourself.
Your suggestions about the guest house were admirable. You
may anticipate my approval in all such matters so long as you
can accomplish them without a jar. We should tolerate any
amount of carelessness and apparent dirt if insistence on their re-
moval should mean discord. Dangerous insanitation should be put
down, discord or no discord. You know what I mean.
Come near as many of the inmates as possible. And if you
rule out the odd corners in Chhotelal, it will be a great blessing.
I want you, in order that you can drink in the Ashram spirit and
atmosphere, not to have any rigid time-table. Keep several un-
mortgaged hours so that you may be free to handle what comes
your way.
Yes, do insist on scrupulous cleanliness in the dairy. But here
again you will not sacrifice good fellowship for securing the highest
standard. What has gone on so long without apparently doing
harm may be endured a little while.
It was good you went to the Ambalals. Mr. Ambalal is so
good, in spite of his obstinacy and often ignorant and harsh judg-
ments.
No hard and fast vows beyond those that are necessary for
the protection [of] the fundamentals need be now taken so long
as I am in your midst. You will use your judgment as to what
may be necessary either for your own growth or of the society in
which you are living, when I am gone.
Please tell Mr. Saunders that it is difficult for me to write the
book he suggests. It is so unlike me to write anything of an
academic nature. And where is one to find the time when one
lives from moment to moment!
In Ceylon, unless I write to the contrary, the address should
be Colombo.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5287. Courtesy: Mirabehn
