314. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
[June 6, 1919]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I see you have been wrestling with Cotton. I think he has
floored you with his quotation from The Servant of India. But both
you and I have survived the fall. I rejoice (almost) in the wreckage
about me. Shraddhanandji gone. Mr. Jamnadas has left. Some
others may follow suit. These occurrences do not baffle me as does
violence from the people. But I approach the 1st of July with confi-
dence. The Government are prepared for emergencies. And I
shall avoid all demonstration. Civil disobedience will be intensive,
not extensive, this time. Please make it clear to Mr. Montagu that
there can be no peace in India without the withdrawal of Rowlatt
legislation. He is badly served by the permanent officials here.
Take the horrible misrepresentations about Mr. Horniman. The
real reason for his deportation will probably be never given. Read
Young India carefully. Most of the leading articles are mine. I am
virtually editing it. See the Sind article. More revelations are
yet to come. If Mr. Montagu wants to do justice, he has to do
things with better eyes than those of the officials who, wishing to
support a system to which they owe their present position, cannot
be expected to give him an impartial version of affairs. Rowlatt
Act must go. Mahomedans should be satisfied and substantial
reforms granted. For the Punjab tragedy, an impartial committee
with the power to revise sentences is an absolute necessity. Give
these 4 things, and peace can be had in this unhappy land. There
will be no plenty so long as India is exploited for Britain's sake.
Take the second increase in the rate of exchange. It means a loss
to India of crores of rupees without any corresponding gain. It
means a bonus to Lancashire and to the Civilians. But these matters
can be adjusted if people's minds are eased by the relief above
mentioned. Rowlatt legislation represents the Government deter-
mination to defy public opinion. The attitude is intolerable on
the eve of Reforms.
This will be presented to you by Mrs. Naidu. She is a wonder-
ful woman. I have compared her to Mirabai. I have seen no-
thing to alter that opinion. She will give all my messages of love
to you and the family.
Yours,
BHAI
PS.
Will you contribute to Young India? I wish you would.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
