367. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
February 14, 1937
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter.
Whatever Valji may do, you cannot come out of Saurashtra
in the manner suggested by you. I can understand your resorting
to satyagraha just to oppose the Foreigners' Act, after giving the
Government a sufficiently long notice, though I wouldn't approve
even of that.
64-24
I do not think you will have to wait long now. After the new
constitution starts functioning, the Government will probably find
it difficult to keep such notices in force. Meanwhile, you should
write to the persons named by you and ask them what their aim
is in disobeying the law. If I could write to them, I should be
glad to do so, for that might lead to an opportunity for a pure
fight and the Foreigners' Act might even go. But it is outside my
present sphere of work to collect material for such a fight. How-
ever, if you have learnt anything from me, you can form an
intelligent and firm plan on these few words of mine. Nineteen
persons can do a lot.
The views which you have expressed are a sign of cowardice.
It does not befit a satyagrahi to think of quietly disobeying a law,
out of desperation and submitting to imprisonment or other con-
sequences which might follow. The line, "Bathe and wash your-
self and dress your hair, for the time has come to go to live with
the beloved one", holds true of all satyagrahis. When a
satyagrahi goes to battle, he does so after full preparation and
with beating of drums, for he goes to jail as he would go to live
in a palace. To be merely ready to suffer the punishment if
caught is not the right attitude for a satyagrahi to adopt. Even
thieves and dacoits do that. Everyone who follows the way of
violence risks his life when he embarks on his venture. Is not
being confined to Kathiawar a form of imprisonment? If you are
weary of such imprisonment, how would you bear banishment to the
Andamans? But I will not dwell further on this subject. If I were to
go on writing about it, I have so much to say that I would fill pages.
Your letter has opened not a small window but a big door
in my brain, from which can pour out a flood of thoughts. But,
however unwillingly, I must shut that door.
I am giving rest to my right hand these days, and so dictate
the letters. On Mondays I cannot do without using the right
hand. I can write with the left, but at present I cannot spare the
time that this would require.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5542
