142. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
8 p.m., January 14/19, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the post today at 8 in the morning. I found on the
cover stamps worth eleven annas. On the packet, the stamps used
to be three annas worth. I don't feel, however, that paying the
extra eight annas every time will be an extravagance. This
time at any rate I didn't feel that it was so, for your letter con-
tained news of Surendra's fast and I could send a wire to you to
persuade him to give it up. These days the officials here are careful
about the post received from and addressed to the Ashram. At
both ends, therefore, we are likely to receive it regularly.
Inform Surendra. Show this to Nathji or write to him. I see
ignorance and impatience in Surendra's step. The ignorance is on
two counts. There is ignorance in the belief that, when imprisoned,
one is prevented from doing work of service and, secondly, in the
belief that one does service by giving up one's life in this manner.
The duty of everyone in Surendra's circumstances is to preserve his
body carefully and use it for service. In jail one can spin and
weave and do many other kinds of productive work. Upright con-
duct will have its effect on the masses. That is also part of ser-
vice. I see cowardice and lack of understanding in ending one's
life by fasting. Surendra's motive is noble, but the goodness of the
motive does not by itself condone the intrinsic badness of an action.
Considered from every point of view, therefore, Surendra's action
102
in embarking on a fast was blameworthy. Obtain Nathji's opinion
and let me know what he thinks. If Surendra has anything to say
in defence of his action, let him. I don't wish to suggest that one
may not give up one's life in any circumstances. All that I mean is
that Surendra's circumstances are not such as will justify his doing so.
Madhavji has decided to follow my example in experimenting
with jowar and bajra. Dissuade him from doing so. For one thing,
my experiment cannot be considered to have succeeded. Even if
it is so considered, an experiment of this kind should not be
imitated too hastily. Milk and dates have agreed with him, and let
him cling to them. I may say that I have earned the right to make
experiments and play with my body after many years' practice till
it has become accustomed to such experiments. This can be said
about few others. Moreover, this is not the time for such experiments.
Let us not shed tears over your not having received my post-
cards regularly. After all, am I not a prisoner? What facilities
are given should be accepted as a kindness. I have no complaint
to make about my health now. At present my diet consists of dates,
almonds, curds and lime juice. I am watching the effects of these.
I do not take more than ten tolas of curds, whether in liquid or semi-
liquid form. I take them only once. I don't think I can digest more
just now. The total number of almonds at two meals comes to
forty, and that of dates, at three meals, to seventy. I will not increase
the number for some time. Perhaps I may reduce it. I am proceed-
ing cautiously. This quantity of food contains plenty of energy.
It is yet six days before this letter will be posted. If I make any
changes during this period, I will write about them. There is not
the slightest cause for worry. The almonds are first soaked in
water and peeled, they are then roasted and crushed into a jelly.
I follow this method in order to save time. The other method of
crushing the almonds without roasting them and then boiling the
paste in water is of course an excellent one.
We should realize that we can never do our yajna work too
methodically. The vigilance which we exercise in such work will
keep us vigilant in all other matters, provided of course we are
sincere at heart.
If even now Keshu calms down and devotes himself to work,
I will not believe that he has wasted his time so far. You took a
very good step indeed.
Tell Devdas that I agree with what he says. I would be asham-
ed to be released on the ground of illness. I would rather prefer
to take milk and curds and preserve my health. That is actually
what I am doing. The primary aim of my experiment is to keep
up my health here by exercising self-restraint. The experiment was
started entirely for the sake of health, but, since it also satisfied
my conscience, a spiritual motive has entered it.
Do what is necessary to settle the affair of Nanibehn and
Budhabhai. When you think it necessary that I should write to
anyone in the matter, let me know.
Tell Sarja that I regard her as very fortunate.
She should
now pick up great courage and go forth and make good use of
every moment of her time.
Mathew should not be permitted to use the name of the
Ashram for working outside. In any case he cannot be paid money
for doing so. If he can, he may do some teaching work in the
Ashram or the Vidyapith. But shouldn't he first acquire suffi-
cient proficiency in spinning, carding, etc., and obtain a certificate?
And in Hindi, too? Till he has done this, he cannot be entrusted
with responsibility for outside work. I will write to him also to this
effect.
I suppose Mirabehn's paper has closed down completely.
Did she issue any statement or let the public merely guess as much?
What about the money received from people? Who was, or is,
in charge of the financial affairs?
Be firm in dealing with Sarojinidevi. If Padma herself wants
to leave, I think it would be best to let her go. You should tell her
plainly that if, after leaving once, she wants to return, you will
have to consider then whether to re-admit her. If the mother
or the daughter or both leave, they should understand just now
that they will be leaving for ever.
Ask Devdas to send my compliments to Lala Hansraj and tell
him that every thread which he spins brings swaraj nearer. I hope
that he will excel me in speed.
Night, January 18, 1931
Read my letter to Sarojinidevi. If she has calmed down and
if you fear that she will be upset again by my letter, do not give it
to her. There was a complaint in one of the letters (I forget whose)
that the children have again started playing mischief among
themselves and making noise at prayer meetings. Please look into
the matter if there is any substance in this complaint.
Night, January 19, 1931
Prabhavati's husband has gone to Delhi and may, therefore,
send for some inmate of the Ashram. If he does so, send someone
immediately to bring her to the Ashram. If she recovers, we shall
have earned the merit of saving a cow from the slaughter-house.
My health has remained very good. I continue the same diet
and in the same quantity.
Blessings from
BAPU 1
[PS.]
There are 78 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
