502. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Saturday, May 8, 1926
BHAI KAKA,
I have to further postpone the writing of the book for you,
because, if I do not write a letter to you under the excuse that I
am to write a book for you, I am afraid I may write neither. I
had thought that I would write out the book soon so that I need
not write the letter. But the Congress Committee took up practical-
ly my three full days, with the result that the Girnar of work has
now become the Himalayas. On top of this, I see from today's
mail that I shall have to go to Mahabaleshwar. Nothing is likely
to come out of the visit, but courtesy requires that I should go;
let the outcome be what it will.
I have never felt that the inmates of the Ashram are indiffe-
rent to Dr. Talwalkar, but it may be that my indifference, if it can
be called so, has been reflected in their attitude.
If you have been using olive oil as a substitute for cod-liver
oil, [by all means] go on with it. Some regard it as superior to
cod-liver oil. Shri Bhansali had used this same thing in jail.
My habit of drawing lots has absolutely no relation with your
"examination as of a bride's qualities". The poor little piece of
paper cannot bear all that burden. There is no attempt in it to
win over the gods; on the contrary, there is a sort of indifference
about lots. In cases in which we need not tax our reason, in
which we are indifferent to either of the alternative courses and yet
must adopt one of them, and none of our good friends is prepared
to take a decision for us, I think it is an excellent practice to
seek the good offices of our friend, the lot. This saves time and
also spares us the burden on our mind. In matters of principle,
drawing lots is an immoral solution.
You cannot draw lots whether or not you should steal. But
is it not better to draw lots rather than go on debating whether
or not to go out for a walk with A, citing reasons from Vedas
and other holy books for and against? If we try to consult the
inner voice in such matters, the latter would lose all its value; a
child like Rasik might excuse himself from doing any work by
pleading his inner voice! Have we not known instances of such
abuse of the plea of inner voice during the non-co-operation move-
ment? Suppose tandaljo and methi are both permissible items of
diet, both are easily available but only one of them is to be pur-
chased, and suppose further that we cannot make up our mind
immediately, would it not, in such circumstances, be better to
draw lots and be indifferent to the result, rather than make it a
matter of conscience?
I shall see about Shri Harihar when he comes here. Shri Nara-
hari had thought of getting Harihar to open a nursery school in
Surat. If the people of Surat are ready to have such a school and
collect a big amount they are certainly welcome to start it, but
we cannot try the experiment on behalf of the Vidyapith. I re-
member having been told by Shri . . .1 as early as when I was
in jail that Shri . . .2 had gone romantic. He had shown me
an indecent poem signed . . .3, when I asked who this . . .4
was, I think he said it was . . .5 of the Ashram. But maybe, I
am mistaken. It may not have been . . .6 but someone else who
told me this. We shall have to think about the matter when . . .7
is here.
Nothing has yet been decided about [my visit to] Europe.
Yes, Swami too had expressed to me his disagreement. The Ame-
rican tour would have only meant addressing thousands of people;
going to Finland means attending a convention of student-delegates
from all over the world. There is a great difference between the
two propositions. Moreover, in America I was supposed to give
to the people India's message; though there was no message to
give. In this case the idea is that I should establish a spiritual bond
with students. There is no question of delivering a message. These
are the reasons why the idea of going to Finland is tempting me,
though, of course, there are some misgivings in my mind. That is
why I have thrown on K. T. Paul the responsibility of arranging
my visit after telling them of my conditions. He, too, instead of
accepting the responsibility, has passed on my letter to Geneva. If
they still keep the invitation open, can we say it is God's wish
that I should go? Personally I will certainly believe so.
I am convinced that Uttamchand will have nowhere else the
facilities which he enjoys here. And now we have started a
course of injections by Dr. Talwalkar. He is keeping well enough.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19539
