281. LETTER TO HANUMANTRAO
May 25, 1918
What I want you to do is not to sever your connection with
the Society2; but remaining in the Society do the Hindi work.
I would like Mr. Shastriar to permit you to go to Allahabad,
stay there a year and learn Hindi fairly well, then return to
Madras and side by side with your other work spread a knowledge
of Hindi among the Telugu people. The fact of your having
studied Hindi will enlarge the scope of your work and enable
you if the occasion arose to work among the masses outside the
Madras Presidency. I do not know whether you have noticed it.
I have. There is almost an unbridgeable gulf between the Dravi-
dians and all the other Indians. The shortest and the most
effective bridge is undoubtedly the Hindi language. English can
never take its place. When Hindi becomes the common language
among the cultured classes the Hindi vocabulary will soon filter
down to the masses. There is something undefinable about Hindi
which makes it the easiest language to learn and somehow or other
there is a licence taken about Hindi grammar such as I have not
known to be taken about any other language. The result is that
the learning of Hindi becomes largely a matter of memory only.
Hence do I say that for doing national work a knowledge of Hindi
is an absolute necessity. What can be better than that a member
of the Society should give himself a training in Hindi? Mr.
Gokhale once told me that he wanted a knowledge of Hindi to be
obligatory on the part of all the members and that he wanted
Hindi to be the language spoken at the Society's meetings. He
added that the Tamilians and especially Mr. Shastriar presented the
greatest difficulty. He was too old to learn it !!!
You seem to think of Satyagrahashram as something apart from
the Society. But I do not. During the last days of Mr. Gokhale's
life on this earth his wish was that I should open a branch in
Gujarat and bring to life a province which appeared to be
politically dead. It fills me with pride to know that I have
played a humble part in carrying out the programme. It is a
matter not of much moment that Satyagrahashram for very sound
reasons cannot be recognized as a branch. The work is there.
In so far as it is good in my estimation the credit is the Society's,
the failures are due to my limitations and need not be shared by
the Society. When in the fullness of time, I have got over my
limitations, the Ashram will merge in the Society. Till then even
if you wanted to come to the Ashram I would not admit you
except as a loan from the Society. So you see that in thinking of
you as a candidate for learning Hindi I have not even conceived
the possibility of your severance from the Society.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
