505. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 1, 1929
MY DEAR JAWAHAR,
You should carefully read the Punjab letter that I have
reproduced in Young India about what was done in Calcutta. Pro-
bably you knew everything of what is stated in the letter. I wish
that you will make it your business first to put the Congress
Committees in order and then organize the work in connection with
the constructive programme. Unless by some unforeseen circum-
stances there is an honourable settlement with Great Britain, there
will be practically no other party save the party of independence
in the country. But the cry will be ineffective if we cannot put up
a proper fight. If that fight is to be put up through the Congress,
then the Congress must be a living thing. And if it is to be a
non-violent fight then the present constructive programme ought
to be worked now for all it is worth. Apart from the fact, there-
fore, that you, as is your wont, having taken up the secretaryship,
would work your office whole-heartedly, I would like you on
the strength of merits also to give your undivided attention
to the Congress programme. I cannot help feeling that we
can do much with the boycott of foreign cloth through khadi and,
if there are enough workers, also about picketing liquor shops.
And if these things are to be done, I think that it is necessary
for you to travel in all the provinces and first put the machinery
in order.
They stopped me from leaving for Sind yesterday owing to
the terrible cold winds that had suddenly overtaken Sind. It
was foolish of them to have stopped me, but I was helpless. I
am now leaving tomorrow. You will therefore post-date the pro-
gramme by two days.
Sitla Sahai is leaving tomorrow to prepare balance-sheets,
etc. I expect him back by the time I return from Sind.
Now that the European visit is dropped, you will be free to
take me to the U.P. Andhra and Burma which must precede will
prevent me from going there before the last week of April.
I hope Kamala is better.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
11 CLIVE ROAD, NEW DELHI
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1929. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library; also S.N. 15318
