65. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
September 22, 1934
CHI. NARAHARI,
One must accept water served by anybody, unless, of course,
his hand or the utensil is not clean. You may, if you wish, except
that worker's mother from this rule, though I wouldn't like even
that. If we make such an exception, it is likely to create a good
deal of bitterness in the Ashram. I go even further and hold
that, though the restrictions about inter-dining and inter-marrying
observed outside the Ashram are all right, we should tolerate no
restrictions about inter-dining in the Ashram. Hence we shall be
justified in accepting anybody as a tenant only if he is ready to
go as far as we do in this matter. Sometimes we may have to
tolerate a person whose services we need in connection with our
work but who sticks to some practices regarding untouchability.
For example, an artisan whose help we require for a Harijan
may tell us that he will not eat or drink anything touched by the
latter, and we are unable to get anybody else; we may tolerate
such a person. But your questions are not about such a case.
You have still not been able to satisfy Sardar. Try to do so
if you can. The problem of the library has no connection with
the question he has raised.
You should see that very clearly.
Sardar has not found fault with me, but Kaka's error implies an
error on my part. Moreover, even if I am not a trustee, I am
looked upon as a very vigilant watchman. Looking at the matter
in that light, it can be said that I should have saved Kaka even
from writing that letter to the Collector.
Why did I at all
[allow the] mention of the other Trustees in the letter without
verifying the facts? But doesn't the poet's line, "the powerful attract
no blame"1, apply to me also? It is not that I have not borne
this in mind. Only, I have not involved myself in this affair. It
is enough for me that I have understood the truth. And what
more vigilance can I exercise? If I did not act on the assumption
that everybody knew his responsibility in what he did, I would
not be able to cope with as much work as I do. I have acted in
this manner all my life. I have been content to accept moral
responsibility.
After writing all this, the conclusion to which I come is
this, that though Vallabhbhai has understood all this in his
mind he has fearlessly done what he thought right. Even if,
therefore, he harbours a prejudice against Kaka, that cannot be
deduced from this incident. Hence, if he did anything in the
past, that should not be made a reason by Kaka for leaving
Gujarat just now and, therefore, not a word should be uttered
against Sardar. Kaka has held his view all the time and we
ought to try to persuade him to change it. I did that even while
I was in jail and am still trying to persuade Kaka to see the
matter in that light. And since Vallabhbhai's name has been
connected with Kaka's desire to leave Gujarat and his good name
has suffered, it has become all the more Kaka's duty not to
leave Gujarat.
Only then can the wings of slander be clipped.
Otherwise this kabar will keep on flying.
Does this reasoning appeal to you?
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
