61. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
SABARMATI ASHRAM,
Phagun Vad 6, Friday [March 5, 1926]
CHI. PRABHUDAS 3 ,
I have your letter. Devdas, too, had paid a visit. According to the size of
your body, your weight should not be less than 120 pounds. But as far as I
am concerned, I do not lay emphasis on weight. You should have a well-
1 The postal cancellation mark at Lonavala is dated February 18, 1926. Wednesday,
however, was on 17th February.
2 From the combination of Gujarati day and month, the place-name and Friday;
Phagun Vad 6 in 1926 corresponded to March 5 and was a Friday. The reference to
Kuvalayanand also confirms the year as 1926; Vide Vol. XXX, p. 191 and Vol. XXXI,
p.427.
3 The letter is in a different hand but the subscription is by Gandhiji.
51
52
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
built body. I had tried grape-seeds. I do not know whether they have any
purgative value. I do not even know whether they have been analysed.
However, powder of the seeds might be having the same effect as sand. That
is to say if a man takes two to four grains of sand, his intestines develop a
kind of irritation because of which irritation, he passes stools. But this remedy
should not be tried regularly. It might be effective if tried occasionally. But
it will definitely harm those who have delicate intestines. So, I do not
recommend grape-seeds for you. You may try them if Kuvalayanandji knows
of their analysis and if he knows from his personal experience of their having
a light purgative value, and advises you to take them. But do tell him what
I have written to you about the seeds. Tell him also that I feel they are best
discarded if you can pass stools without them. Even after reading this, if he
insists on your taking the seeds, try them by chewing them well. You will
know their effect within two or three days. Beetroot contains a kind of sugar
and, therefore, to some extent it is healthy. It has a purgative value too.
Beetroot has to be boiled well. It is a false notion that the vegetables and
fruits which are red in colour have rajoguna. Onions in spite of being pure
white definitely have rajoguna. Tomatoes, melons, red grapes, in spite of being
red are satvik. If those who practise yoga hold contrary views, I would like
to know the reasons.
What is said about millet could possibly be true. The bad qualities it has
are not due to its colour but due to certain substances it contains and the
lack of certain others. A person who does not have sufficient physical exercise
and has to do a lot of mental work, is not able to digest it. For that reason,
it is considered to have rajoguna and wheat is said to be satvik.
Milk in comparison to meat is satvik Compared to fruit, etc., it certainly
has rajoguna. But do not go into such details. For you at the moment, milk,
wheat, fruit and green vegetables are the things worth taking.
Do not hesitate to ask me any question you feel the need to ask. Sooner
or later, I will certainly answer them. The best service you can render is to
make yourself fit so that I can take any work I like from you. Improving
health means achieving equilibrium of body, mind and spirit. If you feel
like rendering more service, propagate khadi whenever you get an occasion.
Persuade the non-wearers to wear it. Whenever it becomes necessary, do argue
in its favour without getting excited. Do this work only if you can do it as
fun. There is no need to ride two horses at a time. It is enough if you pay
attention to your health. Though no community prayer is held there, you could
drag along some worthy friends for the prayer. I am sure there is no difficulty
in holding joint prayer.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32949
