285. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
SABARMATI,
March 3, 1930
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I have your message. It does not move me. I want you to
read my letter to the Viceroy with an unbiased mind. You seem
to have made up your mind that the Independence Resolution is
wrong and that Civil Disobedience—its corollary—is also wrong,
i. e., at the present moment. You will find neither to be wrong.
We cannot achieve unity through any Conference. But we can
through fighting for common causes. At the time of the flood
in Gujarat four years ago, all without exception in the flood
area made common cause. There was no difficulty about
Mussalmans seeking the same shelter as the Hindus. The blindly
orthodox Hindu suspended his prejudice against the untouch-
able. The snake discarded his venom for the time being. True,
they are again "as you were", but a few more such lessons will
certainly set them right. I want you to realize the new orienta-
tion I have given to the struggle. I seek independence through
a redress of the age-long grievances which touch the masses
more than us. I want you to throw yourself heart and soul into
this battle. If your preoccupations prevent you, you must at
least give it your blessing. I have smallpox raging in the
Ashram. We are most of us anti-vaccinationists from religious
motives. No provable virtue of vaccination will therefore move
us. If you know of a remedy apart from vaccination, please
send me the prescription. The treatment we are having is red
colour, strong permanganate solution warm baths followed by
wet-sheet pack and liquid food, chiefly fruit juices, and when
the virulence abates a little milk and water, but of 12 cases
three have proved fatal. Two obstinate cases of confluent smallpox
have completely recovered. There is uncertainty about one bad
case. We are trying to keep children from the patients but it
is so difficult to isolate patients completely. It is an expensive
process if you will not make it heartless and leave the patient
practically to his fate.
If you have leisure please dictate full instructions.
Id mubarak.
Yours ever,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Ansari Papers. Courtesy: Jamia Millia Islamia Library
