121. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
February 10, 1932
CHI. PANDITJI,
I got Barve's book. I will dip into it when I get time.
Your explanation about the first doubt is quite correct. I have
felt that that is the implication of Chapter XVII. Ultimately one
has to rely on faith. We see again and again that what seems to
be the truth to one does not often appear so to others. How-
ever, to follow truth as one sees it is like walking on the razor's
edge. Anyone who tries to do so ought to remain wide awake and
rigidly follow all the rules and restrictions. The lazy, the licentious,
and the hypocrites can claim no right to act according to their
view of truth. That privilege belongs only to the sadhak, the seek-
er after truth.
As for the second doubt, I think that the sadhak will not
trouble himself with deciding what is and what is not for general
good. He would say that he was not interested in the question,
and that universal good lay in truth since truth was the supreme
Being. While all other names of God suggested only one aspect
of His, truth signified His perfect essence, so that a person who
opposed truth could never accomplish anybody's good. Truth
necessitates harmony of thought, speech and act. That is, one must
follow truth as one sees it and always be faithful to it in thought,
speech and action. But a false notion is widely prevalent among
us. We are not always bound to answer a question asked by
anyone. There is no violation of truth in refraining from giving an
answer. To keep silent when it is one's duty to reply to a question
amounts to telling a lie. For example, if my father asked me whe-
ther I had stolen a piece of gold, I would be bound to answer the
question. However, if even my father asked me whether some-
body had stolen a thing, I would not be bound to answer. If,
therefore, I did not reply, I would not be telling a lie. I re-
member the chapter in Gitarahasya I did not agree with the sug-
gestion in it. If you tell a lie under force of circumstances, you
are certainly not telling the truth. There never can be an occa-
sion when one must tell a lie. If there can be such an occasion,
then it would follow that the principle of following truth in
speech and action was imperfect. There can be no exception to a
principle, and hence there can be no atonement for untruth spo-
ken knowingly. Or the only possible atonement would be never
to do so again. Atonement is possible only when some error is
committed in ignorance.
I think that this answers your second
question too. Ask again if anything is still left out.
I have not revised this letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W.222. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N.
Khare
