316. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised
WARDHA,
February 18, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
Your letter of 5th instant is still before me.
A parcel of envelopes was sent to you the other day.
The writers' cramp is still there. I wrote today for Harijan
and a few brief letters. But that was about all I could do for the
day with the right hand.
I know that your entry and that of women like you into the
village movement will make it artistic and attractive.
I take it that Shummy's name may now appear on the Board
of Advisers. Never mind his ignorance. It takes a wise man to
own his ignorance. And have not doctors to unlearn many things
if they would serve villagers? Please tell me his full name and
title for the Association Register. My love and thanks to him.
I am glad you have commenced your visits to villages. I
wish it were possible for you to lessen your desk work and in-
crease concrete village work. But I see you have a special gift
for writing work. Your organization perhaps can't do without the
quantity of work you are giving it. Only, please take care not to
overwork yourself by reason of your having taken up village work.
I have passed on your message to Kumarappa. You are quite
right in not taking member's pledges indiscriminately.
Here is my message to Harijans:
"Please tell Harijans that in the movement for self-purifi-
cation that is going on at present, they are expected not to copy the
vices and errors of the so-called caste Hindus. I was therefore
distressed to find that child-marriages were as common among them
as among some caste Hindus. It is a cruel custom having nothing
of good in it. They should also know that it has been declared
illegal by special legislation. I hope therefore that Harijans will
make a great effort to rid themselves of this evil custom."
I hope this meets your requirements.
Mira had a bad motor accident. All her companions were
hurt. One of them was very badly hurt. She was the least in-
jured. The car was smashed to pieces. They were all thrown
up in the air. It was a miraculous escape. The one who was
seriously injured is lying in the local hospital. He is out of danger.
No one dies without His will.
Love.
BAPU
SHRI RAJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
JULLUNDUR CITY
From the original: C.W. 3522. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6331
