443. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Unrevised
SEGAON,
March 11, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
You of course read what I have been writing about khadi
these days. And you have also read Maganlal's book. Will you,
taking that book as your guide or according to any other plan
you like, write something on the science of khadi? For a historical
account, you will need literature on the subject. If you don't have
it or have no time to read it, please see if you can write a
book giving an account of the work being done now and giving
information about all the processes from cotton onwards.
You must have read my questionnaire and Lakshmidas's
article. We must have a book giving all that information.
Kamu writes that she has now started going to school.
I read your printed programme. I didn't like it as well as I
did your statement. The portion in dialogue form is certainly
excellent, but it can't be said to have been artistically interwoven
with the rest. That, however, is a minor defect. I notice spelling
mistakes too. The Vidyapith dictionary is an authority for us. I
don't know if it contains the words peen, reeban, chipia, etc. If it
does, you should look them up. Now the dictionary does not at
all give the word pin.
In English the vowel is short and we
should spell the word accordingly. I went through the rules about
spelling and there also it is stated that words borrowed from
foreign languages should be spelt in conformity with their spellings
in those languages. Moreover, the word peen has a definite mean-
ing in Gujarati. The dictionary explains it as "thick", "well-
fed", "rounded". At first sight I didn't get the meaning of
peen, but I made it out as I proceeded further. In the dialogue
you have spelt the word as cheepeeo. It should be cheepio. It is
followed in the same sentence by reeban . In English the word
is pronounced as "riban" and that is how it should be spelt accord-
ing to the rule given in the dictionary. The word is not given
in the dictionary, though there is no harm in using it all the same.
You will find many more of similar other spelling mistakes.
I see no poetry in the bhajan or song "He is the witless man".
The language jars on the ear and the thought also is none too
pleasant. The very first syllable augurs ill. There is no such word
as murakh. The word is moorakh. The thought in the line "feeds
the foreigner lovingly" is indicative of ill will. It does not befit a
follower of non-violence. And if a foreigner is hungry, why should
not one feed him lovingly? Of course the meaning in the author's
mind is different, but the reader is not concerned with the
meaning in an author's mind if it is not expressed in his lang-
uage. In the phrase, deshana dukkhne tane, the syllable "na" should
be nasalized. The expression "to serve the stones of unem-
ployment" lacks moderation. The metaphor also is not happy.
The thought in "The fine noose of the craze for fancifulness" is
touched with bitterness. A noose cannot be described as "fine",
nor can it be said that the word "fine" has been used ironically.
The word greeva is not in keeping with the author's attempt to
use rustic language. The spelling januni is incorrect. The word
is janani. But I will not go on with this criticism. Go through
the second part from this point of view. I felt the whole poem
crabbed and unpleasant. The other song also didn't interest me.
I have not read it carefully, though. But Vidhatara did catch my
eye. Nanavati suggests that it must have been a misprint.
The author must have written Vidhatra. If that is correct, please
note that the dictionary gives no word like Vidhatara. It gives
Vidhata and Vidhatri. A poet has no right to alter spellings of
words without sufficient reason.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8516. Court-
esy: Narandas Gandhi
