337. LETTER TO E. S. MONTAGU
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
June, 14, 1919
DEAR MR. MONTAGU,
At the time I sent you a message through Sir Prabhashankar
Pattani I told him I would probably be writing to you on the
subjects I discussed with him. But I have refrained till now, as I
was loath to trouble you more than I could help in the midst
of your multifarious duties. I however did send another message
through Mr. Shastriar as also Dr. Sir Stanley Reed.
Your kindly reference to me as also your hope that I would
act more responsibly necessitates my writing to you. Our common
interest in an Empire to which both you and I belong is my
excuse for asking you to spare a few moments for this letter.
I would like to assure you that I have acted with the greatest
deliberation and with a due sense of responsibility. I had not the
vaguest notion of the deep-seated and widespread anger against the
Government. When I suggested the Sunday demonstration and
fast, I thought I would be laughed at by most people as a lunatic.
But the idea struck the religious imagination of an angry people.
They thought that deliverance lay through some such demonstrative
and penitential act. I was unprepared for this universal response
as I was unprepared for the shooting (in my opinion, totally un-
called for) at Delhi and much more so for my arrest and depor-
tation and various orders of exclusion and internment. I was
proceeding to Delhi not to offer civil disobedience but was going
at the instance of the Delhi leaders to calm the popular mind
there and thence to the Punjab on a similar mission. The seizing
of Drs. Satyapal and Kitchlew was a criminal blunder of the first
magnitude. I had no warrant for imputing such madness to the
Punjab Government or weakness to the Government of India which
sanctioned the action of the Punjab Government. Both knew that
I was proceeding on a mission of peace and both ought to have
known that the arrest of the two doctors and myself was bound
to incense a mob that had already become infuriated at the actions
of the authorities at Delhi and Amritsar. But for these blunders,
you will believe me, the awful acts of the mob would never have
occurred. The fury of Ahmedabad was more personal than other-
wise. The people could not tolerate my arrest and the rumoured
arrest of Anasuyabehn.
I have however taken my due share of responsibility for the
criminal misdeeds of the people. But I remain unrepentant about
my creed or its preaching. Disobedience of some sort is the right
and duty of human beings when they see a wrong and are otherwise
unable to right it. In the vast majority of cases, they resort to cri-
minal disobedience. This I think is wrong in every case. I have
attempted unceasingly for the last 12 years with more or less
success to replace criminal by civil disobedience as a method for
securing reform. And had the doctrine sufficiently permeated the
masses, there would have been no violence from the people in any
event whatsoever. It is the advent of satyagraha which localized
the disturbances and which has been such a powerful aid on the
side of law and order.
I beg to assure you that there will be no peace in India until
Rowlatt legislation is repealed and Mahomedan sentiment is satis-
fied. I venture to suggest too that the inquiry contemplated by you
should include revision of sentences passed by the Martial Law
Tribunal in the Punjab.
This retention of Rowlatt legislation in the teeth of universal
opposition is an affront to the nation. Its repeal is necessary to
appease national honour. Conciliation of the Mahomedans is
necessary to appease their religious sentiment. The reforms will
fall flat if they are not accompanied or preceded by an announce-
ment on these two points.
In conclusion, may I congratulate you on your great and
generous speech on the second reading of the Reforms Bill? It will,
I know, be hailed with acclamation throughout India. I hope the
Bill and the regulations will come up to the standard of your speech.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6658
