420. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 19, 1948
CHI. MUNNALAL,
Why did you use khadi paper? For such purposes one
should use only waste paper, which costs nothing. Wait and
see what happens here.
I should be very happy to have you with me. I know your
worth. But just now this place is overcrowded, and I shall not
be able to give you work which will do you justice. When I go
out, I need only a few persons to accompany me.
1 Daughter of Harilal Gandhi, married to Surendra Mashruwala
456
Learn to read and write Urdu as soon as possible.
If living together Kanchan and you cannot free yourselves
from passion you are not likely to do so living apart either. You
should be able to do so. Only it requires mental self-control of
the highest order. Being alone together has to be avoided.
Likewise all touch with impure thoughts must be avoided. What-
ever you do must have her fullest co-operation. She is right in
believing you to be weak.
My intention ultimately is to keep you with me. And I
seem to be free, too. I may, therefore, reach Sevagram even
earlier than expected.
It is perfectly true that khadi, to which we had dedicated
ourselves from the beginning, seems dead today. The fault is
entirely ours. We have not mastered its science. The science
died with Maganlal. We made ourselves, and remained, mere
labourers. Nayee Talim played some part in making the produc-
tion of khadi a science, but we have still much distance to cover.
That is why I say that the most important work for the Ashram
is to develop khadi into a science. One must learn to do the
spinning with perfect concentration. Merely drawing yarn is
not enough. What this means, I will explain to you some time
if you ask me, or will write. But I don't want to have you
here just for this purpose.
Regarding Nayakum the solution is clear. Let him have
whatever he wants for the Nayee Talim work. There is no
question of money at all. If this means that you have to give
up the land and the building in Sevagram, you may do even that.
Ask me what to do when such a situation arises. I will guide
you then. There is, therefore, no reason for worry. You must
not lose your sleep because of the noise of any celebrations. Pay
no attention to it at all. If, however, it becomes unbearable,
draw Nayakum's attention to it.
If Prabhakar has got the entire area paved with stones, he
must have had some reason for doing so. Discuss the matter with
Sushila. No notice need be taken of the foundation work
having been wasted.
I have sent the reply to Prabhakar's letter through Sushila.
Pass it on to him. If you tell me what it is in the hospital
which you don't approve of, I will think over the matter.
You may unhesitatingly write to me whenever and whatever
you wish to. Learn to write briefly but fully. If I stay away,
1 E. W. Aryanayakum
by all means free yourself from Sevagram for some time and
come and stay with me for a week or two. I shall like it.
Go and see Ramdas Gulati.
I have already written about Kanchan. If you want me
to write in greater detail, please let me know. If you want me
to give you a letter for her, I will do even that.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8386. Also C. W. 7208. Cour-
tesy: Munnalal G. Shah
