169. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
Ganesh Chaturthi, Monday [September 9, 1918]
RESPECTED RANCHHODBHAI,
I have your letter. My health is gradually improving but I
am still too weak and so am confined to bed. There is no cause
for worry though. I had quite recovered, but in the meantime
I had fever, which increased the weakness. Now there is no fever
at all. I feel ashamed of my disease. I had thought I could
never have a disease such as dysentery. I am myself responsible for
the disease, of course. I had been keeping fairly good health,
but my skin had become rather tender. I had been able to
manage without salt for a long time; but my legs were still not
as sturdy as they should have been. Doctor friends had been
constantly telling me to take salt. I may well have to go to
France or Mesopotamia in which case it would not do to have
a tender skin. So I started the salt experiment. That gave me
dysentery. I should have taken the warning and fasted. Yet
I fasted only partially. The result was that I developed acute
dysentery. Taking food when you are having dysentery is like
taking poison. Still I ate. Thus I am suffering the punishment
for not observing restraint. People will have to undergo a lot of
suffering because of the failure of rains. There has been a little
rain this side at least. I ask for news about Kathiawar from the
people passing by here. I also get information from the newspapers.
From all that I gather that the situation there is even more difficult
than it is here.
I can very well understand that you cannot leave the work
there and come here. I shall see the Pataka for the article on the
untouchables and read it. I want to understand fully the oppo-
site point of view. And if I find dharma in it I will not hesitate
even for a moment to give up my view. All the arguments I
have so far come across proceed from the orthodox doctrine. I
have not heard so far a single argument resting on true religion.
I have raised the question of untouchability purely from the re-
ligious point of view. It has nothing to do with the political
problem. It can certainly have political consequences, but I have
never had that in view. I also wish to add that I do not intend
suggesting that orthodox religion should not be given the slightest
recognition. True religion is firm like a rock. Orthodox religion
should change with the change in times. If we were to live
according to some of the things mentioned in the Manusmriti,
we should be committing immorality. We have silently abandoned
those things.
With regards,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4119
