125. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
AHMEDABAD,
October 31 [1915]
MY DEAR WEST,
I have your indictment. If you do not speak out, who would?
I value your friendship just because you always say exactly what
you mean.
Now for the reply.
I could not consult anyone there as to allocations because I
was not there. The Phoenix allocations were discussed between us
there. Relief allocations needed no discussion. Valiama Hall
allocation was settled there. The £1,000 for Polak's expenses,
should he have to return to England penniless, was a matter which
was fixed there but I am not able to say that it was positively dis-
cussed. But I suggest that it is again an expense about which I
should not deem consultation necessary. If the community has
any respect for itself, it could not send them away starving. It
would be pure passive resistance relief. I would not dream about
publishing it in the accounts sheet. We are not bound to disclose
the names of the resisters helped.
Mr. Petit's statement was published after consultation with
me. Mine was delayed at his instance. I have brought every item
including Polak's £1,000 to the Committee's notice. I am even
going to bring to Mr. Petit's notice your and Rustomji's dissent.
You suggest that you could not take interest which is tainted
nor would you take the help offered. I congratulate you. The
stronger you are, the better. The allocations suggested by me
were due to our collective weakness. But you will not find me
weakening you if you are strong.
You suggest that for Phoenix's improvement, I would have to
send you money from elsewhere. This I could not do. Even when
we discussed there, it was clearly understood that the charges
should come out of the passive resistance funds, as we were run-
ning Phoenix as a P. R. farm and wanted to make it more and
more a refuge for indentured Indians who may be in distress. If
therefore you want the help, it can only come out of the fund.
I would certainly welcome any decision you may come to as
to not receiving any help.
The money does not belong to South Africa. The Committee
here has control over it. They asked that the funds be transferred
to them, subject to such allocations as I may suggest. I am now
having no definite allocations but shall receive monies for you
in S. A. as you there may desire from time to time. This gives the
Committee here the fullest control. I shall act as the go-between.
As to books, you are quite wrong. Our books contain all the
receipts and all disbursements. We need no audit, we owe nobody
anything and no one has a legal right to ask us to do anything
except the Committee. Individual subscribers may ask. Them we
could satisfy. Not a penny has been yet spent which could not be
brought within the scope of the fund.
Relief to resisters includes Polak, Thambi and even Mr.
Cachalia. I do not think we have received the loan given to him.
So will it include Chhaganlal, Maganlal, Pragji, etc. It will
most decidedly include Naidoo's and other passive resisters' child-
ren. It will not include me and my family simply because our ex-
penses are found otherwise. As I am or rather have been the con-
troller of the funds, I have desired to remain free from personal
help. But if I had no one else to help me, I should not hesitate to
draw for self and children. Only then I would at least make that
clear to the public. No such precaution is necessary regarding
other passive resisters as I cover them.
I need not discuss your proposal to invest in land, as we no
longer have the funds under our control.
I have cabled you regarding Chhaganlal. He seems to be
breaking up. If so, he should be sent here. And unless Pragji
and Imam Saheb undertake the work, I must send someone from
here. All I know is this that you must continue I.O. even if you
1 Vide the following item.
have to labour in the streets and if you burn your boats, so much
the better. If you cannot, you and your family, so long as you are
at Phoenix turning out the paper, will be supported at all costs.
I think I have now exhausted all the material points raised by
you. I mean material in view of the new state of things. Now
you may all consider and let me know your decision. I have P. R.
a/c to 31st Jan. If Chhaganlal is there or if Pragji can manage it,
you should let me have further a/c.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4421. Courtesy:
A. H. West
