291. LETTER TO PEOPLE OF KHEDA
SATYAGRAHA CAMP,
NADIAD,
June 6 [1918]
TO
THE BROTHERS AND SISTERS OF
KAIRA DISTRICT
The struggle that the people of the district of Kaira entered
upon on the 22nd of March last, has come to an end. The people
took the following vow on that day.
The meaning of this vow is that the Government suspending
collection of the revenue from the poor, the well-to-do should pay
the assessment due from them. The Mamlatdar of Nadiad at
Uttersanda, on the 3rd of June issued such orders, whereupon the
people of Uttersanda, who could afford, were advised to pay up.
Payments have already commenced there.
On the foregoing order having been passed at Uttersanda a
letter was addressed to the Collector stating that if orders like the
one in Uttersanda were passed everywhere the struggle would come
to an end, and it would be possible to inform His Excellency the
Governor on the 10th instant—the day of the sitting of the Pro-
vincial War Conference—that the domestic difference in Kaira
was settled. The Collector has replied to the effect that the
order like the one in Uttersanda is applicable to the whole district.
Thus the people's prayer has at last been granted. The Collector
has also stated in reply to a query about chothai orders that the
orders will not be enforced against those who may voluntarily pay
up. Our thanks are due to the Collector for this concession.
We are obliged to say with sorrow that although the struggle
has come to an end it is an end without grace. It lacks dignity.
The above orders have not been passed either with generosity or
with the heart in them. It very much looks as if the orders have
been passed with the greatest reluctance. The Collector says :
Orders were issued to all mamlatdars on the 25th April that no
pressure should be put on those unable to pay. Their attention was again
drawn to these orders in a proper circular issued by me on the 22nd
of May and to ensure that proper effect was given to them the mamlatdars
were advised to divide the defaulters in each village into two classes, those
who could pay and those who were unable to pay on account of poverty.
If this was so, why were these orders not published to the
people? Had they known them on the 25th April what sufferings
would they not have been saved from! The expenses that were
unnecessarily incurred by the Government in engaging the officials
of the district in effecting executions would have been saved. Where-
ever the assessment was uncollected the people lived with their
lives in their hands. They have lived away from their homes to
avoid attachments. They have not had even enough food. The
women have suffered what they ought not to have. At times,
they have been obliged to put up with insults from insolent Circle
Inspectors, and to helplessly watch their milch buffaloes being taken
away from them. They have paid chothai fines and, had they
known the foregoing orders, they would have been saved all the
miseries. The officials knew that this relief for the poor was the
crux of the struggle. The Commissioner would not even look at
this difficulty. Many letters were addressed to him but he re-
mained unbending. He said, "Individual relief cannot be granted,
it is not the law." Now the Collector says:
The orders of April 25, so far as it [sic] related to putting pressure on
those who were really unable to pay on account of poverty, were merely
a restatement of what are publicly known to be the standing orders of
Government on that subject.
XIV-27
If this is really true, the people have suffered deliberately
and through sheer obstinacy! At the time of going to Delhi,
Mr. Gandhi wrote to the Commissioner requesting him to grant or
to issue orders to the above effect so that the good news could be
given to His Excellency the Viceroy. The Commissioner gave no
heed to the request.
"We are moved by the sufferings of the people, we perceive
our mistake and in order to placate the people we are now pre-
pared to grant individual relief," the officials could have generously
said all this and endeared themselves to the people, but they have
obstinately avoided this method (of winning them over). And
even now relief has been granted in a niggardly manner involun-
tarily and without admission of any mistake. It is even claimed
that what has now been granted is nothing new. And hence we
say that there is little grace in the settlement.
The officials have failed to be popular because of their obsti-
nacy, because of their mistaken belief that they should never admit
being in the wrong and because of their having made it a fetish
that it should never be said of them that they had yielded to
anything like popular agitation. It grieves us to offer this criti-
cism. But we have permitted ourselves to do so as their friends.
But though the official attitude is thus unsatisfactory, our
prayer has been granted and it is our duty to accept the conces-
sion with thankfulness. Now, there is only 8 per cent of the
assessment remaining unpaid. It was a point of honour with us
till now to refuse payment. Conditions having materially altered
it is a point of honour for a satyagrahi to pay up the assessment.
Those who can afford should pay without causing the Government
the slightest trouble and thus show that where there is no conflict
between the dictates of conscience and those of man-made law,
they are second to none in obeying the law of the land. A satya-
grahi sometimes appears momentarily to disobey laws and the
constituted authority, only to prove in the end his regard for both.
In making a list of those who are unable to pay we should
apply a test so rigid that no one can challenge our findings. Those
whose incapacity for payment is at all in doubt should consider it
their duty to pay. The final decision as to the incapacity for pay-
ment will rest with the authorities, but we believe that the judg-
ment of the people will have its full weight.
By their courage the people of Kaira have drawn the attention
of the whole of India. During the last six months they have had
full taste of the fruits of observing truth, fearlessness, unity, deter-
mination and self-sacrifice. We hope that they will still further
cultivate these great qualities, will move forward on the path of pro-
gress, and shed lustre on the name of the Motherland. It is our
firm belief that the people of Kaira have truly served their own
cause, as well as the cause of swaraj and the Empire.
May God bless you!
We remain,
Always in your service,
M. K. GANDHI
VALLABHBHAI J. PATEL
Young India, 12-6-1918
