147. LETTER TO FRIEND IN BURMA
January 29, 1921
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I know I owe you many apologies, for I have not personally
attended to so many of your letters. But you know my diffi-
culties.
I have, however, been sending you replies through
Mahadeo Desai or another Desai who has also been kindly help-
ing me.
You do not now want me to deal with the difficulties you
raised in your previous letters. If you have any doubt still left,
I promise to give you fullest satisfaction about the utmost cor-
rectness of my ruling to Mr. Jinnah about Swaraj Sabha Did
you ever see my reply to his letter?
Do you also know that all the Commissioners have at least
fulfilled their obligations. For Mr. Jayakar also has suspended
his practice.
And now for the education question there. We have such
an awakening here all round that really it is not possible to spare
anyone of those you name. My advice to the Burmese is that
they must revert to the old system with a new spirit. They need
not at the present moment think of Western education. If there
is any tradition there about hand-spinning it should be revived or
you should find out the Burmese supplementary industry to agri-
culture and revive that lost industry pending full swaraj. Let
the students understand that swaraj is not to be obtained by
learning but by an exhibition in their own lives of the qualities
necessary for swaraj, viz., openness, truthfulness, courage, cohesion,
fellowship and self-sacrifice. If they have these qualities, they
must take them to their villages and spread them. They must
teach the villagers that the English are not here for the benefit
of the Burman but for their material end. They must therefore
suspend their literary training till they have freed themselves from
foreign domination. If I came there, that is how I should talk
to them. They must unlearn the infatuation of the English lan-
guage. Today it is positively a hindrance to national growth.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy; Narayan Desai
