253. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
TOLSTOY FARM,
August 4, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
Many thanks for your long letter I would not dream of
having you here at the cost of your after-cure. But I assume that
you would be able to complete your cure before sailing for S. A.
Roughly this is likely to be the programme, subject to your consent :
22nd & 23rd Oct. at Cape Town, 25th & 26th at Kimberley, 27th
at Johannesburg. I take it that most of the time will be passed in
Jo'burg. Two days may be given to Pretoria. Unless you cable
to the contrary I propose to ask General Botha & Mr. Fischer to
receive you. If Lord Gladstone returns by that time I propose
asking him also. I shall ask Mr. Merriman to receive you. He
is the greatest statesman of S. A. Addresses will be presented at
all the places named by me. It is also the intention to have a mixed
banquet in Johannesburg. Probably the Mayor will preside. The
last week of your stay will be in Durban and Phoenix. You will
sail from Durban. Your passage for India may conveniently be
booked after your arrival.
I have first sketched the programme so that if you wished to
propose any change you could do so by cable as also by letter.
It would be no calamity if Mr. Fischer goes back upon Gen.
Smuts' promise. It can only strengthen our cause. But I hardly
think it is possible for the Union Government to do so. What is
quite likely is that the Parliament (local) may not pass the Govt.
Bill. The Govt. may not make it a point of honour and simply
tell us as also the Imperial Govt. that they are helpless. In that
event the struggle will be bitter and fierce; but it will go on so
long as some of us have a spark of life left in us.
Mr. Sorabji is now there and I dare say he has already paid
his respects to you.
How very nice of Mr. Tata to have given Rs. 25,000 again.
I know that I owe it all to you. Each time the donations have
arrived in the nick of time. It was becoming a difficult question
to conduct the farm.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 3773
