112. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
[ AHMEDABAD,]
February 23, 1919
I got your letters. Give no assurance to anyone without
taking thought, lest you should become guilty of breach of
promise. Harilal used to write a very bad hand; he saw to it
that it improved. Three of the brothers, at last, have acquired
a beautiful handwriting. But your hand goes from bad to worse.
It was with the utmost difficulty that Mahadev could decipher
the Hindi letter you wrote on behalf of Swamiji. I could not read
it at all. Bad handwriting is a serious defect. A good hand is an
accomplishment. By writing a bad hand, we place a heavy burden
on our friends and elders and harm our work. You know well
enough that I cannot easily read a letter written in a muddled hand.
I would urge you, therefore, to improve your handwriting.
I keep well. I take four pounds of unboiled milk during the
day, spread over four meals. Two goats are being maintained.
I have had practically nothing except milk for seven days. Today
Dr. Ice recommended seven raisins with every meal. I cannot
move about as yet. Dr. Ice believes, though, that I shall be up
and moving in a few days. We are thinking of giving him a third
name, Dudhabhai [Brother Milk], as these days he has gone
milk-crazy. He believes that milk is the best of all foods. So I told
him that he should take only milk all his life. He is taking it, for the
present at any rate. Let us see what happens hereafter.
I hope to be there by the end of March.
A meeting of satyagraha warriors is to take place in the Ashram
on Monday. The final decision will be reached after considering
what weapons each has and how much of ammunition. If you
have read Shamalbhatt's description of Ravana's war council,
Mahadevbhai will not have to recount Monday's history.
Manu has been stealing fat from all and sundry in the Ashram,
except from me, so that she looks like the largest water melon in
the Ashram. When there is an occasion for installing Ganapati, an
elephant's trunk should be secured and stuck on her face, and she
would indeed look quite a beauty. Her radiance is ever grow-
ing brighter, with the result that she has become everyone's doll.
Rasik [one full of zest] often demonstrates his zestfulness by
employing the stick. Kanti is growing calmer. Rami's health
continues so-so. Ba's time is taken up in ministering to them all.
I notice that she even finds the thing irksome and, in consequence,
her temper is often snappy, and just as the potter, when angry,
twists the ears of his donkey, his wife, I infer, must be doing the
same to the donkey's master. After this jesting, I shall give some-
thing serious to balance it.
"It is my firm belief that every Indian ought to know well his
mother tongue and Hindi-Urdu, which is without doubt the only
common medium of expression between lacs of Indians belong-
ing to different Provinces. There can be no self-expression without
this necessary equipment."
This is a translation of what you have sent. Give this in
Tamil as the motto: Karka Kasadara Karpavai. 6 Beneath this, give
the Hindi equivalent, which Swamiji will provide, of "Drop by drop
fills the lake", and beneath it still, give in English: "Cons-
tant dropping wears away stones". The Tamil saying occurs on the
first page of Pope's book. Find its equivalent in Telugu and give
that too.
If you send your Primer here for our comments before printing
it, Kaka and the others will go through it. And also, if you send the
proofs, while it is being printed, they will be able to examine the
design of the motto, etc., from the artistic point of view. You need
not send them if you are in a great hurry over the thing.
Surendra used to make the same comments about the school
here as he has done about the one there. Often, at first sight, a
thing makes a certain impression on a straightforward man, and
this is natural. Miss Molteno described Phoenix as heaven upon
earth. Had she stayed longer there, I am sure she would have
changed her opinion. At first sight, Bean thought Phoenix was
the best thing he had ever seen. After a few months' stay there,
he could not imagine an institution anywhere as bad as Phoenix.
Enough for today.
Probably this too will go all right as a saying:
"Rasiklal Harilal Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi,
Had a goat in his keeping;
The goat would not be milked
And Gandhi would not stop his weeping."
—Rasik, Poet of Poets
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
