9. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
PHOENIX,
April 11, 1913
TO
THE SECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR 2
CAPE TOWN
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 4th instant. I beg to thank the Minister for accepting the two
names that were rejected from among the educated entrants for
the past year.
1 Vide Appendix II; also, "The Storm Signal", p. 3.
2 E. M. Gorges
It is not my intention that the names of entrants submitted by
me in future should always be accepted. But I do respectfully
submit that the names of such entrants up to six for the Transvaal
should be submitted by me in my representative capacity and that
they should be accepted by the Government so long as the settle-
ment remains in a provisional state. As soon as it becomes final,
as I hope it will be during the current session, no doubt, some
arrangement satisfactory alike to the Government and the Indian
community will be made for the selection.
Personally, I think that the Government of India can have
no voice in the selection for the simple reason that they cannot
judge the wants of the local community. I venture to think that,
if after the settlement becomes final, different Indian associations
and groups submit too many different names, it will be for the
Government to give due weight to each representation and select
from the names so submitted the number, previously determined, of
entrants for any particular year.
I note that your letter seems to suggest that the entrants will
be restricted to certain provinces. I beg to point out that the settle-
ment contemplates the ability of educated entrants, under a general
Bill governing the whole Union, to enter and settle in any province
of the Union subject, nevertheless, to the local disabilities not con-
nected with immigration. It is submitted that it is the essence of
the compromise that, as to immigration, new Indian immigrants
are not to suffer any disability not imposed upon any other section
or race. This, however, is a matter which is now, I note from your
wire, among the other points raised by me, under the consideration
of the Government.
I am now asking the Immigration Office, Pretoria, to let me
have permits for the two gentlemen whose names have been
accepted.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5762
