433. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
ON THE FRONTIER DOWN MAIL,
August 28, 1931
DEAR C.R.,
What shall I write to you? Do you know that not a day has
passed but I have thought of you and also felt the need of your
presence? But I was not to have it and as ill luck will have it,
I cannot have even a few words with you before sailing. There
are two men whom I would like by my side in London, you and
Jawaharlal. But I feel that even if both of you were available I
must not have you by me. Somehow or other I do feel that you
will both be helping me like the others by being here. Only your
presence with me will have lightened my burden. But I must bear
the Cross alone and to the fullest extent. When I think of myself
with all my limitations and ignorance I sink in utter despair but
I rise out of it immediately, as I think and feel that it is God
within Who is moving me and using me as His instrument. He will
give me the right word at the right moment. That does not mean
that I shall make no mistakes. But I have come to believe that
God as it were purposely makes us commit mistakes if only to
humble us. I know that this is a dangerous belief which can be
utilized to justify any error. But I have no doubt about its cor-
rectness in respect of all unconscious errors. But this is not a
letter to air my philosophy. This is written to ask you to give me
through weekly letters, sent even by air mail, what I cannot get
through your presence. I would like you also to write for Young
India every week. I do not think there is any legal necessity for
advertising a new editor during my temporary absence. If there
is a legal necessity I would like you to wear the editorial mantle.
I would like you to prepare a rejoinder to the Madras Govern-
ment's reply to the Madras charge-sheet and bring the latter to
date and send your rejoinder to the Sardar.
By way of preliminary send me by air mail your detailed re-
flections on what you expect me to do in London. Copies of
whatever you send by air mail should be sent through the usual
weekly service.
How is Papa? I do hope she is better.
From a photostat: S.N. 17609
372
