580. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 14, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
How surprising! At the very moment I thought of calling
Sharad here, I also thought of sending you a telegram to call
you here. With great difficulty I checked myself. I knew that
you would definitely come if I sent you the telegram. But
I felt pity for you. Why ask you to come just for a couple of
days? For how many patients should I call you? With that
thought, I left her to God's care, and went to sleep. The last
two nights were very difficult for both of us. I kept on waking
up at night and found her crying. She cried a lot for two
nights. One night I sent Pyarelal to her twice and once I went
myself and came back only after putting her to sleep. But
I am glad that you thought independently about it. Now she
has recovered. She is not having any temperature at all. She is
feeling weak. She passes a lot of stool after enema. It has a
foul odour. I am purposely not giving her a purgative. Is it
all right? Akbar has become very weak. He eats well. Do
you think he needs to be given any tonic? Vijaya and Sharada
have arrived. Both of them have lost a lot of weight. Sharada
has become extremely lean. I cannot bear to look at her. What
can be done about it? You would have to open a hospital if
I sent all such patients to you.
These days I am writing to you almost every day. I do
not ask for replies to all the letters but I do wish to have them
acknowledged. I will be satisfied if you give an account of
the letters you have received whenever you write to me.
Do you find it difficult to read my handwriting? Would
you prefer me to write in Gujarati or in Hindi?
Keep Kanchan in the general ward if she does not feel
hurt. I would think it proper to give her only the hospital
food. But even in that matter do what both of you think right.
About the car, it is rather surprising. I shall of course
investigate. From now on, I shall make a separate arrangement.
Here the reverse has happened. Tulsidas has taught that the
name is greater than Rama. But here, the name proved to
be of no avail. The fault is mine, is it not? I have not earned
so much merit that my name should be greater than me. If many
others have the same experience as you the result would be that
my name would carry no value after my death. Chintamani has
already predicted that my body will be burned with the discarded
spinning-wheels. This is for your amusement.
Pyarelal is really settling down.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
