222. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
BIRLA HOUSE,
NEW DELHI,
November 1, 1947
DEAR MISS SCHLESIN,
Chhaganlal has redirected your letter of 15th ultimo to my
address at New Delhi where I am fixed up to 'do or die'.
Usually your letters are models of accurate thinking. The one
before me is not. You talk of my "decision to live 125 years". I never
could make any such foolish and impossible decision. It is beyond the
capacity of a human being. He can only wish. Again I never
1 The second paragraph of this letter is reproduced in Vol. LXXXIX, p. 449.
166
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
expressed an unconditional wish, nor did I, so far as I remember,
advise you to entertain any such unconditional wish. I think if you
re-read my letter you will find that my wish was conditional upon a
continuous act of service of mankind. If that act fails me, as it seems
to be failing in India, I must not only cease to wish to attain that age
but should wish the contrary, as I am doing now.
More when you come to India and if I am alive when you do.
The rest of your letter is full of inaccurate information.
As to the paragraph on different scripts, I feel that you have to
be in India in order to understand the intricacies of the problem. I am
quite clear that for generations to come the Roman script has no
chance of having a foothold in India on a national scale.
Dr. Mrs. Besant undoubtedly contributed to the cause of
freedom of India.
The only way you can get any information about Darjeeling is
by writing to the Prime Minister of West Bengal, in which Darjeeling
is included. There is no position analogous to the Town Clerk in
South Africa, but I need not worry you about the intricacies of the
Indian system. If you will tell me what you wish to know about
Darjeeling, I might be able to help you more quickly than anyone else.
Yours sincerely,
M.K. GANDHI
MISS SONJA SCHLESIN
P.O. Box 2284
JOHANNESBURG
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
Vol. LXXXIX, fn. 2.
