485. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEGAON,
February 14, 1940
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have picked up the pen but God alone knows if I shall be
able to write what I have to write.
My step is towards the quest of truth. It dawned on me that
I was following the path of untruth. Yesterday the turmoil in
my mind was beyond endurance. My decision has become a
secondary matter. The great thing is the background of that
decision. And what is the untruth? Well, there is Sushila. I
take her as an example. It was an untruth to let her believe
that I am keeping her as my physician. I wanted to draw her
to me. The reasons are many. But all of them put together
would not have attracted her. So I let her believe that she is
with me as my physician. I would consider it sinful to have her
principally as my physician. I would consider it the proper thing
for her to give me medical care while doing my other work.
This would not always include her travelling with me. Whatever
work I entrusted to her would be service done to me. And
while doing that work she could also look after my medical needs
and be content. This attitude of 'all or nothing' is a great
mistake. How long am I going to live? How can she have the
heart to leave me? Why does she forget that she does so many
other jobs for me? I consider it sheer obstinacy on her part
even to overlook the fact that her presence will give you the
satisfaction of being near her. You will please her. Now you
guide her in any way you think proper. I consider it your duty
to accompany me.
Now I come to the main point. If I have to lose Sushila
it will be because of the untruth which I have mentioned. If I
had not resorted to it, Sushila would not possibly have come.
If that had happened, no harm would have come to her. Now
if she leaves, there is danger of her being harmed. The blame
then would be on me.
There was untruth in saying 'yes' to Kanchan, etc. There
was untruth in saying 'yes' to Rajkumari. It was softness on
my part to give them the impression of being needed when I
actually did not need them. There is no place for softness in
truth, for otherwise there is no non-violence in it. If I did not
see their good in their coming to Santiniketan and Malikanda
it was my duty to firmly stop them. Yesterday God granted me
the strength to follow that path of duty. I could not tell them
so in the manner I wanted to. But take it as it is. My way
will become easier if you follow this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
