307. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
June 1, 1919
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I heard about your having gone to Vijapur on my arrival here.
You did well, though I was quite eager to see you. My remark about
yarn was not meant as a rebuke. How can I rebuke you? It was
intended to make you more alert, that you may put on spinning
the same value as I do. What I wanted to say, and would still
say, is that we should be ready to curtail as many of the other acti-
vities as possible. Who should curtail which, is for you to consi-
der and decide. To be sure, my initial demand was that you
should get plenty of cloth woven out of indigenous yarn, but I
thought I had corrected it in the letter I wrote from Surat. On fur-
ther reflection, I realized that this earlier demand was mistaken.
We should drop or curtail, one by one, those of our activities which
we think others are likely to take up; and pay more attention to
those in which others have less faith, or none, but which are all the
same essential. Spinning is one such activity. Besides, the more
experience I gain, the more I realize that machinery will keep us
in permanent slavery, and I find that what I said about it in
Hind Swaraj is literally true. About satyagraha, too, I have been
discovering new truths. I see that, for the weakest as for the
strongest, it is a weapon of the utmost purity. There will be many
business men to attend to the weaving of cloth from indigenous
mill-made yarn. I shall be able to get others to do that work sooner,
but hand-spinning we ourselves should start. The day before
yesterday, some Punjabis came to see me. They told me that, on
their side, women of all castes, high and low, spin at home and get
weavers to make cloth out of the yarn. Thus, the cost of yarn comes
to no more than that of cotton. The fact is worth reflecting over
carefully. You did well in taking Keshu with you. If he learns
spinning there, he will be able to teach it to others when he gets
back. If anyone from among us picks it up there, our needs will
be supplied.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
