332. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Kartak Vadi [14, November 30, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
For providing meals to Karamat you should, I think, take money
from Rustomjee Sheth. That is reasonable and I do not think Rustomjee
Sheth will raise any objection. You did right to ask Karamat to cook
for himself. I see nothing wrong in it. I too feel that you cannot take
up that responsibility in view of your many preoccupations. I suspect
Karamat must have eaten something somewhere. He needs bath [treat-
ment]. It is also necessary to try earth-bandages. I do not, however,
think that even the earth-bandages will cure him, for there is too much
of suppuration. I think what he needs is complete fasting. But will he
stand it? He may take bananas and lemons only if it becomes absolutely
necessary. I am writing a letter to him. I think he can read Gujarati;
if he cannot, please read it out to him. Even when his wound healed
up very quickly, I was afraid that the improvement was rather alarming.
Mr. Polak will leave for the Cape tomorrow. He will go from
there to Phoenix. He will also go out for collection. Regarding
Purshottamdas, I think nothing should be drawn for him from the
[Passive Resistance] Fund.
Let Ani draw whatever she wants and
debit the amount to my account for the present. You may ask Ani what
she requires. She will require less when a good half of her children are
at Tongaat. You may, however, give her whatever she asks for. Let
me know how Veerjee is faring. I do not write about him here as I have
already written to Mr. West. Please write to Ismail Dawji Mian and
tell him that the arrangement regarding the school has been completely
upset just now. Purshottamdas, who was looking after it, has gone to
gaol. However, if he sends his son, we are prepared to take him. He
will have to pay £2 a month for him. That will cover his lodging,
boarding and tuition. The curriculum will include farming, press
work, English and Gujarati methods of accountancy, etc. If he sends his
son even after this clarification, you should keep him with you.
1 The original reads "Kartak Vadi 4" which corresponds to November 20,
1910, but it appears to be a slip for "Kartak Vadi 14", for Polak left for Cape Town
either on December I or 2 and Doke arrived in South Africa on November 22.
2 Not available
3 Letter not available
Mr. Doke has returned. Please ask Mr. West to write to him a
letter welcoming him. I forgot to mention this in my letter to him
[West].
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4945
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
