20. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Now 5 a.m., January 12 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter arrived as usual. Also your notes on Dr. Gour's
book.
I always omit to tell you about what our common friends write
about you. They all think of you, would like to write to you
if you could receive their letters and invariably send their love to
you. Among these are the Kingsley Hall people, the Privats, the
Italian sisters, the Larks of St. Francis and Mary Barr. This is
not an exhaustive list, it is only an illustrative list. But I must
1 Addressee's mother
2 Addressee's father
3 The source has "13", but in his letter of January 19, 1933, to the addres-
see, Gandhiji refers to this letter as of "Thursday", which was January 12.
Vide also "Letter to Narandas Gandhi", pp. 35-.
send you some of the letters themselves. Thus you will find Made-
leine's letter and a copy of my reply, Andrews's and John Morris's,
the blind man. I must not omit Agatha, Esther, Horace and the
Woodbrooke people. They never fail to remember you whenever
they write. You will find with this also John Morris's X'mas card
and one of the very beautiful picture-cards that Princess Aristarchi
sends every week. She seems to be a learned woman of deep
devotion.
You are late with your remarks about the primus stove. It
was banished from the Ashram now some two months ago. I
ought to have written to you then. On learning of the death of
Prof. Trivedi's brother's wife from the primus-lighting, I wrote to
Narandas that the best way to mourn the event was to banish the
stove altogether from the Ashram. It was a hard job to con-
vince some of the women. But they all realized the necessity. The
banishment was not made compulsory. Everyone gave it up volun-
tarily. I should have given you this pleasing information before but
how many such titbits I must be omitting every week! However, I
know that you do not expect such things from me. And yet if I
do not tell them to you, you remain ignorant of all the happenings
in the Ashram which you should and may under the prison rules
know. I must do what I can.
My weight is the same as last week and so is the food. No
salt as yet. It is no deprivation for me. There is no craving
for it. When I take it, I like it. But I would not like anything
the moment I knew that it was harmful for me. The elbow pain
remains what it was, not the slightest cause for anxiety.
You need not return the enclosed letters and the cards.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9679. Courtesy: Mirabehn
