19. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[June 8, 1932]
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in today. Yes, the left arm is in splints. The
passers-by who do not know the cause must be pitying me. If the
packing of the elbow does not improve it, I might have to try
milk. If I do, I shall also try the saltless experiment. But only
when I learnt that there was no such thing as a thorough saltless
experiment, I accepted the medical friends' advice and began
taking salt. Milk contains plenty of salt as does water. And at
a seaside place, you continually drink in salt. And yet there is
decidedly some advantage in not taking additional free salt as a
condiment. What we get in water, milk and air is perhaps quite
enough for the system. I have a prejudice in favour of saltless
diet. Only I do not want to abstain from it religiously, unless I
feel the necessity. Meanwhile your observations are accumu-
lating. They will be useful.
I do not quite understand the position about Verrier. What
does he propose to do now? If the extension is only up to July,
what is to happen thereafter? I have never understood the pass-
port intricacies. If he cannot go to England, he must go to a
hill station. Almora may be a suitable place. If he is and is to
remain vegetarian, he must copy your diet as closely as possible.
Very little starch, no vegetable proteid in the shape of pulses,
plenty of milk and fresh green vegetables. No potatoes and such
other starchy vegetables. No condiments. Has he had my letter?
What may be regarded as final answer has been received
about you. The Government say they are informed that you
were directing the movement before imprisonment and therefore
you could not see me.
I have combated that statement and
have said that you were under instructions not to take part in
civil disobedience movement and that you were confining
yourself to the khadi work and sending reports to friends! If I
have erred, please correct me and I shall have no hesitation in
correcting myself. I do not know whether anything will result
from my letter. Anyway, I am regarding the reply as a final
decision and have accordingly asked N[arandas Gandhi] not
to send anybody. I stopped interviews last week in anticipation,
i.e., I did not see Manibehn and Dahyabhai.
You should rejoice in this additional trial and be thankful
that we can write to each other. But we should rejoice even if
that stops. Nothing happens without divine permission. And
how can we grieve over what He permits?
You should correspond with Radha regularly. I believe
your reading of her. I must not write about it. It will upset her.
She may take things from you. You should make time for writing
to her. I believe that her expenses are met from the Ashram and
that she has not been now for some months a burden on Damo-
dardas.
You will have another talk with Damodardas and leave his
place, if it will at all ease his burden.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6220. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9686
