596. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
January 26, 1947
CHI. MRIDU,
Tendulkar casually gave me your letter. Tomorrow a telegram will
go to you: "My opinion adverse." It is 7.45 in the evening now. There
is no post office or telegraph office here. Everything will be carried
by someone to a telegraph office tomorrow. This letter too will be posted
tomorrow.
If you do not wish to live with me or near me what will you do?
The work here is complicated. You may gain something by being with
me. But I do not see any good in that. If it is granted that I stay
here, then I would like your coming. Right now it is with great difficulty
that I am able to keep even the few who are already here. Troubles
are endless.
You will know more when Tendulkar gets back.
How could the letter written to you have been lost ? I still feel
that you will get it. I do not even remember the contents now to enable
me to write again.
I cannot swallow the idea of abortions. I can understand the
argument about the children thus conceived having to be brought up.
If you can convince me about the advantages of abortion it will be
another matter. Western sisters who were considered great failed to
convince me. In this respect I am impervious.
Are you keeping good health ? Are you taking care ?
Sardar is deliberately spoiling his health.
Jawaharlal is very careless. It is amazing how he is able to carry
on. Who can harm those whom God protects ?
I heard today that Jayaprakash has reached here. He may pay
me a visit tomorrow. I am told he is at Kazirkhil.
I see from the newspapers that Major General Shah Nawaz is in
Calcutta. I do hope he will come to visit me. Niranjan Singh Gill came
today and has gone back. His work also is incomplete.
My boat is being propelled only by faith.
I think I have written to you that Manu is here and sleeps with
me, seen by all and with the knowledge of all. This has nothing to
do with the experiment. The experiment is stopped; though I still have
no doubt as to its relevance. It is stopped only because of the colleagues.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11259. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
355
