411. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
July 17, 1919
MY DEAR WEST,
I have your undated letter from Durban expressing your keen
disappointment at the absence of any news from me. I simply
cannot understand it. I have written to you, Mrs. West and Devi,
not many letters it is true, but enough to show you all that you
are never away from my thoughts. In one of the letters I expressed
my difficulties and wished how glad I should be if you were by my
side. I have not left a single business letter of yours unanswered,
even when I was practically on death-bed. I remember having ad-
vised Mr. Rustomjee to debit me with all the payments made to
you in terms of your letter to me. I remember, too, that in one
of your letters you asked me to cable to Mr. Rustomjee about funds.
I refrained because at that time I felt by computation, and in this
I was supported by Mahadev Desai, that Mr. Rustomjee must have
received my letter. But it is likely that my letters get lost in tran-
sit and it is also likely that the posting volunteer might have
carelessly lost some of my letters. For I have received complaints
not only from you but from Polak, Ramdas and others, and I
must write to you, what I have written to other friends, that they
should bear with me and never think that I am neglectful about
writing. I wish I had more leisure to write as much as and as
often as I would like to but that is not vouchsafed to me at the
present moment. I am writing to Mr. Rustomjee again regarding
the £70.
Recently I wrote to Manilal about Indian Opinion. He asked
me to supply him with funds or to let him revert to advertisements
and business printing. I still retain the view I held there and the
more I see of the jobbery that goes on here, the indiscriminate manner
in which advertisements are taken and the more I think how these
advertisements, etc., are nothing but an insidious method of indirect
voluntary taxation, how all this debases journalism and how it makes
of it largely a business concern, I feel more and more convinced of
the rightness of my view. Any way it would not be proper to blow
hot and cold. Either you must make Indian Opinion a business
concern and then not expect the public to take philanthropic or
patriotic interest in it, or to make it merely an organ representative
of Indian aspirations in South Africa and then rely entirely upon
public support and goodwill. I have dissuaded Manilal from mak-
ing it a business concern. I have not sent him there to do business
but to render public service. I feel that Indian Opinion has served
its purpose if only partially. It has brought into being several
Indian presses and several Indian newspapers. They all in some
shape or other somewhat serve the public. Manilal lacks the ability,
through no fault of his own, for leadership and for original work.
His effort, therefore, cannot be impressive. I have therefore advised
him, in consultation with you and Mr. Rustomjee and consistently
with the obligations to the subscribers who have already paid, to
wind up Indian Opinion, to get up Phoenix, to let you have what
you want of the Printing Press, to parcel out the land as you will
think best and to use the income also, as you consider advisable,
to bring here most part of the books unless they are wanted there
for a better purpose and himself to come away with them. Ramdas
has gone there primarily for business. He seems to be well fixed,
well cared for and happy in the thought that he is at last earning
something without doing violence to his conscience. He may stay
as long as he likes.
I do not think I have made one suggestion in my letter [to]
Manilal which occurred to me possibly after I wrote to him. I
make it now. If you think that you would like to add to your
business, the turning out of Indian Opinion you may do so. Perhaps
it would not be a bad thing. You cannot give the Gujarati portion.
Give only the English portion, thus becoming a vehicle for trans-
mission of authentic news to India and England about Indian dis-
abilities and Indian doings in South Africa. I would like you to
consider it purely as a business proposition. If you find it work-
able, then only elaborate my proposal. If you find that as a busi-
ness proposition it is useless, dismiss it altogether from your mind.
I am moving heaven and earth for getting redress about the
Trade and Land Bill regarding Transvaal. But I am handicapped
for want of information. Ritch has written to me, Naidu wrote
me but once, there was cablegram from Asvat on which I took
immediate action but there is no reply to a cablegram I sent now
nearly a fortnight ago. I am anxious to know the latest news
about the Bill. Will you please collect the information and write
to me? Or ask the proper parties to write? Of the doings here
you should know from Young India which is practically under my
charge. I wonder if you see the paper. It is being sent to Phoenix.
Do please write to Devi telling her that I have written to her also
fairly regularly. How is she doing? Is she in Maritzburg?
Where is Mrs. Doke living now? And Mr. Phillips5? Please tell
Parvati that she never wrote to me again as she promised. I
wonder whether she received my letter which I wrote to her
months and months ago. I believe it was written when I was last
in Champaran. Do you find Manilal any better towards you than
before? Hilda must have grown up into a big girl. Why can't
1 L. W. Ritch, an articled clerk under Gandhiji in South Africa and
secretary, South Africa British Indian Committee, London
2 Vide "Letter to the Press on South African Situation", 25-2-1919.
3 Also in "Letter to Jehangir B. Petit", 2-7-1919, Gandhiji says "I want
to send them a long cable today." This cable, however, is not available.
4 Wife of Rev. Joseph J. Doke (1861-1913), minister of Johannesburg
Baptist Church
5 Rev. Charles Phillips, Congregational minister
XV-30
she favour me with a line? Please remember me to Grannie. She
must be a perfect wonder to all about her. And remember me also
to Mrs. West and Sam. I wonder what he is doing with his gun!
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten copy signed by Gandhiji: C.W.
4431. Courtesy: A. H. West
