191. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 24/29, 1932
Evening, February 24, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet. The issue of visitors has taken a serions
turn and no solution seems to be in sight. As you had hinted
in your last letter, you also do not seem to have made any re-
quest for permission to see me.
This week's post contains a letter by Lakshmi senior in which
she complains against her letters being read [by you]. I think that
once at prayer-meeting you should ask all of them whether any-
body has an objection against your reading his or her letters. If
any of them object, you need not read their letters, and even if
you think that it is necessary to read them read only those of
their letters which they permit you to read. Don't mind if your
letters become long. I should like you to give me all the inform-
ation which it is permissible for you to give.
Discuss with Shankerlal the problem of increasing the quan-
tity of yarn spun.
The Parnerkar affair is a painful one. Show as much love
and sympathy as you can.
I understand what you say about the Giri family. Do what
you can.
Padma's expenses will come to Rs. 60 a month. They are three
in the family and, moreover, Padma is always ill.
If the agreement about visitors does not break down, even as
many as five to seven persons can come and see me. But, as far
as possible, we should take care that they are not more than five.
Send me a copy of Lord Irwin's letter.
If I get an opportunity to see Mukta and other women, I
will not let it pass.
Have you informed Dr. Jivraj [Mehta] that Triveni does
not keep good health?
Is it through obstinacy that Kusum does not try the remedy
which I have suggested? Revashankarbhai's Dhiru had a bone
which had decayed and he was cured by sun-baths. Countless
people have benefited by this treatment.
I had a fairly long talk with Mathew. You will be happy
to know that he spins and does a bit of other work.
Afternoon, February 29, 1932
I have not yet been able to start 'Bal Gita'. Nor can I decide
what else I can write and send. This week, therefore, I send no
special material.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
In the evening, ultimately, I could not resist the impulse to
write something. About visitors there is no decision yet.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8211. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
