158. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
November 30, 1928
CHI. MAHADEV,
I have had a letter from you after a long time. I can forgive
you everything. Certainly you need not spin nor keep a diary.
I certainly observe a difference of temper between us but what
does that matter? How can I expect that you should look at
everything through my eyes, or that your eyes and mine should
be alike? I may not give up the spinning-wheel, because I have
come to regard spinning as a form of yajna. There are other
items in our daily programme of work, and I see their results
from day to day. It gives me pleasure to see them. The results of
the spinning-wheel yajna are a matter of faith. Has anyone ob-
served personally that our spinning ends the poverty of the poor?
But my faith tells me that it does, and so I keep apart some time
for the yajna from the other tasks of our daily programme. If I
did not do so, I would regard myself guilty of the sin of theft.
About the diary, there is another reason. I keep it because
it is part of the discipline of the Ashram, or to be correct, of the
[Udyoga] Mandir, to do so. A diary may not be necessary for
me, but it is so for others and, therefore, I would not confuse
their minds by not keeping one myself.
If anything in the rule which I follow with regard to Santok
is not clear to you, please bear with it to that extent. The pro-
blem has perplexed me very much indeed.
I do not suffer any hardships. The atmosphere here is
very congenial for the work I am doing. I will certainly not do
anything at the cost of my health. Do not jump to conclusions
from any rumours you may hear. If you have any apprehen-
sions, write to me. If I had time, I would myself write to you
about everything. I am not determined to continue at any cost
the experiments in which I am currently engaged. The only
change I have made is giving up of milk once again. Give it up,
and resume it again-this will go on, like ebb and flow alternating
with each other, for, as you know, I am not at all happy that I
take milk.
I have not received a specimen of the diary. Ghanshyamdas
is still here, as also Jagannathji. There are daily additions to the
other company.
Tell Ramdas that he should write once in a while.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11442
