193. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, RAJKOT,
April 19, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,
I am lying on my back with severe headache and slight
temperature which has up to now been diagnosed as gastric flu
which seems to be raging about in Rajkot and especially in the
house in which I am accommodated.
I came here on the 9th instant. It is the 19th today. A
matter which need not have taken more than a day has taken ten
days. Unfortunately, we hold different views about the cause.
I become confirmed in my opinion that Durbar Virawala is at the
back of all this delay. I have proof enough which may not hold
water in a court of law but it is enough for all practical purposes
and certainly enough for me. I have no grudge against Durbar
Virawala. I would love to convert him. It would be a triumph of
non-violence if I could do so. And I could, if I had your active
co-operation. But I know you cannot give it so long as you hold
the very high opinion you do of his ability, efficiency and straight-
forwardness.
I send you herewith copy of the latest letter from the Thakore
Saheb. It speaks for itself. If the proposition laid down in the
letter were to be acted upon, there would never be a Committee
formed in terms of the Award of the Chief Justice of India.
The whole plan laid out in Delhi bids fair to be completely
frustrated if you, as the local representative of the Paramount
Power, do not actively intervene. I invite your attention to the fact
that in the Thakore Saheb's letter to the Sardar dated the 12th
January four out of the seven names were accepted. In an Appendix
to the voluminous papers attached to the Thakore Saheb's case,
signed by Durbar Virawala as his political adviser, occurs the analy-
sis of all the seven names recommended by the Sardar. Only
two have been objected to because of their residential disqualifica-
tion. How is it that now suddenly the qualifications of all but one
have been challenged? And if I am to bear the burden that is
sought to be placed upon me, there will be no end to the preli-
minaries and there will be no enquiry.
I do not like the idea of troubling you or seeking the inter-
vention of the Paramount Power. But I see there is no way out
of the difficulty.
The Bhayats and Garasias Association has also taken up
what I consider to be a most unreasonable attitude. As soon as
I read in the papers that they wanted my so-called promise to be
submitted to impartial scrutiny, I wrote at once accepting the
proposal. But as I sensed danger of interminable delay I said
the proceedings ought not to interfere with the Committee's
work and that if their contention was upheld, the Bhayats'
nominee would immediately be accepted and one name withdrawn.
The Association, however, would not listen to my proposal. They
would hold up the formation of the Committee till the Judge was
selected and his award was available. Acceptance of my proposal
would not have resulted in the Committee functioning before the
award but it would certainly have resulted in the case being
decided expeditiously enough. I have given the opinion that the
Chief Justice of India ought not to be troubled over the issue
though I should have no objection to Sir Maurice adjudicating
if the Government of India could be induced to invite him to do
so and if he accepted the invitation. I have suggested instead
a Judge of the Bombay High Court. I have no doubt that you
could manage this thing easily. I suppose the Judge could fly here
tomorrow or the day after. I have not much to submit to him
nor can the Bhayats have much either. The Judge need not take
long to give his judgment. What I fear and suspect is that there is
no desire anywhere to play the game. You do not mind my think-
ing aloud before you. I would be less than just to you if I
suppressed my innermost thoughts whilst I looked up to you as the
local Crown Representative to see that the Committee was properly
set up and its work proceeded with, smoothly and without delay.
I must leave Rajkot on the 24th instant by the 1.10 after-
noon train and hasten to Calcutta, thence to Brindaban. I would
return here at the earliest possible moment which cannot be
before the 7th proximo. Meanwhile Shri Dhebarbhai will be act-
ing on my behalf. But I hope that during the five days that I
am here, much work will have been done.
May I remind you that my fast was only suspended and if
all my efforts fail and no headway is made I must resume it? It
won't be without serious reflection. I do not want to do so.
I have not the physical energy for it. But a peremptory call of
duty knows no mundane difficulty. The matter is so serious that
I would like you to convey at least the substance of this letter
to His Excellency.
I am loath to interfere with his much-needed
rest. If you think that there is substance in my complaint and
that you have the will and the powers to deal with it I would
much rather that His Excellency were kept undisturbed.
Of course I am at your disposal, if you think that a personal
talk is necessary; in that case you need not mind my fever. I
will come. I have an appointment with Dr. Ambedkar for half
past eleven.
For the moment I am not replying to the Thakore Saheb's
letter.
From a copy: C.W. 7820. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
