284. LETTER TO "THE ADVOCATE OF INDIA"
[LONDON,]
September 28, 1909
TO
THE EDITOR
THE ADVOCATE OF INDIA
[BOMBAY]
SIR,
Your footnote in the issue of the 9th instant to the letter of
Mr. Jehangir Bomanjee Petit, regretting among other things your des-
cription of Mr. Henry S. L. Polak as a paid agent, encourages me to
address this letter to you.
You say, "We have alluded to Mr. Polak as a paid agent and we
have said we think none the worse of him for that. If, however, that
gentleman looks upon this as affecting his status and he can assure
we are wrong, we are prepared to apologize to him". I hope that what
follows will assure you that you are wrong and that you will apologize
to the British Indians of the Transvaal, whom Mr. Polak represents, for
the latter requires no apology. The wrong if any has been done, has
been done to those whom he represents.
1 The letter was apparently not published in The Advocate of India. J. B.
Petit, however, had it published in the columns of Gujarati, 7-11-1909, under the
caption" The Advocate of India and Mr. Polak ", along with the following covering
letter: "You will remember that some weeks ago The Advocate of India sought to discredit
Mr. Polak's activity in this country on behalf of our suffering brethren in the Transvaal
by representing him as a near ' paid agent'. On Mr. Polak protesting, the Editor
made a half-hearted retraction, but he had neither the grace nor the candour to with-
draw the imputation unreservedly. The unworthy attack having attracted Mr. Gandhi's
attention, Mr. Gandhi addressed to the Editor the following letter on the 28th September.
It is now nearly a fortnight since that letter must have been received in Bombay, but
it is not yet published. . . . Will you kindly publish this letter in your columns? Your
contemporary's conduct in withholding the letter is in keeping with the rest of his
behaviour in this not very creditable affair. "
You say that you think none the worse of Mr. Polak even though
he may be a paid agent, and yet the tone of your leading article, which
I have read and re-read is undoubtedly calculated materially to discount
Mr. Polak's efforts. I know him personally as a dear friend and brother.
He came to the cause, embraced poverty and left the Assistant Editor-
ship of a Johannesburg weekly, which might ultimately have proved
much to him, if he had desired the goods of this world. For over four
years he received not a farthing from the funds of the British Indian
community because he needed nothing. During all that time he was
working for the community.
The struggle in the Transvaal has meant for Mr. Polak, as it has
meant for many Indians, the deprivation of even the means or rather
the opportunity of earning a livelihood. Since then, Mr. Polak, who
gives every minute of his time to the struggle, has received enough for
his bread and butter from the common funds, and if I know him at all,
if the community have not sufficient funds to feed its workers, Mr. Polak
would remain at his post, and, ifneed be, perish in the attempt to obtain
justice for those whose cause, in common with many others, he espouses.
You do not know, nor do the Bombay public, that ever since his
marriage, Mr. Polak has given very little of his time to his wife who,
in order the better to enable her husband to perform his self-imposed
duty, has reconciled herself to a life of almost indefinitely prolonged
separation.
I imagine that the term "paid agent" means an agent who names
a price adequate to the work he does, and does the work well enough
no doubt, in many cases, but does it nevertheless for the money he receives
and not for the love of it. If a son in a joint family dying in the perfor-
mance of his sonship may be described as a paid agent, because he is
clothed and fed out of the family funds, then Mr. Polak is undoubtedly a
paid agent, but not until then.
If, after a knowledge of the facts I have ventured to place before
you, you will still consider Mr. Polak as a paid agent, I am afraid that
his co-delegates, who might have been with him if they had not been
imprisoned before their departure by General Smuts, must be described
as "paid agents", because their passage and hotel expenses would have
been found by the Indian community.
I trust that, in fairness, you will be good enough to find room for
this letter.
I am, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5099
