378. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[NADIAD,]
July 31, 1918
CHI. MANILAL,
I have had no letter from you recently. Herewith a letter
from Sam for you to read and ponder over. Whatever their fault,
I am afraid you have been guilty of far too much anger and shown
extreme malice. You were free to stand on your rights but should
not have forgotten your manners. While insisting on order, you
could have spared yourself the anger. None of them has put by
any great sum of money, or appropriated any. What is Devi-
behn's fault? It is too much that Mr. West and Mr. Sam have
had to sacrifice their children's education. It seems to me that
you have vented on them your anger with me. You do not even
visit them. Surely, you should not behave thus. I think you should
apologize to them. Do this, however, only if you think that that
is the right course, and not because it will please me. Anything
you do without giving up your freedom will seem best to me.
I think I have given you many reasons to be angry with me.
Please forgive me for this. I have pushed you about a good deal
and that has interrupted your regular education. You can, however,
forgive me only if you realize that this was inevitable. I have
passed my whole life in pursuit of self-knowledge, in discovering
where my duty lay. My work has been appreciated because I have
acted as I believe. This has saved me from many a pitfall. But,
looking at the matter superficially, your interests have suffered from
a worldly point of view. Just as I have had to pay for my experi-
ments, so have you and Ba. Ba has understood this and has there-
fore gained what no other woman has done. You have not under-
stood this fully yet and, therefore, harbour anger. I would still
say that the service I have rendered to you brothers, no other man
in my place would have done. I got you to share in my experien-
ces on the path of dharma. What more can anyone do? Like
other parents, I could have allowed you to go the way of the
world and shaped my life in my own way. If I had done so, there
would have been no bond left between you and me by now and we
would have been to each other what Gokibehn is to me, a sister
only in name. I could not have acted otherwise than I have be-
cause, in my pursuit of truth, I would have been where I am and
you would have wandered off the path. This would not have been
for your good. If you think over this patiently, you will be able
to get over your anger with me. Consider, there has been a rift
between Harilal and me. His life follows a course all its own.
A father and son are truly so when both follow a common mode
of life, each supporting the other. I can take no interest in Hari-
lal's life and he in mine. The fault is not his. The way he thinks
is governed by his past actions. I am not angry with Harilal. But
the chain which bound him and me together is broken and the
sweetness which should inform the relations of father and son is no
more. Such things happen often enough in the world. What is
uncommon about me is that I could not draw Harilal after me in
my search for dharma and so he kept away. He has, in sheer
folly, lost his employer Rs. 30,000, has passed a disgraceful letter to
him and is now without employment. As they know that he is
my son, he is not in jail. You have stayed on in my life, but are
discontented. You can't bring yourself to go out of it, and yet do
not altogether like being in it. This is why you are not at peace
with yourself. If you can somehow manage to be contented, you
will also have peace. I have not harmed you intentionally. All
I have done I did in the belief that it was for your good. Is not
this enough to bring down your anger against me? What I have
said will surely not make you more angry. I was only too happy
that you told me what you think. All the management must be
in your hands now.
You will see my second appeal in connection with recruit-
ment for the war. I have offered the services of five persons from
the Ashram. There are others also eager to go, but it is not
possible to send them. The five who are to be sent are Rama-
nandan, Surendra, Thakorlal, Nanubhai and Raojibhai. I shall
of course be there. I believe a depot will soon be started here.
Had Devdas not been doing the work of Hindi, he too would
have joined. He is eager to do so. I have written to Harilal,
but he is not likely to go. You are doing important work there;
I cannot therefore ask you. Ramdas remains. He can certainly
join if he wishes. Ramdas does not feel happy if he has to leave
one job and take another. You may ask him.
Nirmala is in the Ashram at present. She has come of her
own choice. How long she will stay, one cannot say. She will
most probably bring in Gokibehn also.
Khushal bhai has come to stay in the Ashram. Chhaganlal
and he live separately. Chhaganlal has joined the national school.
The buildings are still under construction. The weaving
shed is ready. It is used for living also. The library and other
buildings are yet to be constructed.
I feel the loss of Sorabji very keenly . We have now to begin
from the scratch, as it were.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 115. Courtesy:
Sushilabehn Gandhi
