23. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
October 1, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your letter as usual. I have just received your private cable. I take
it however that it has been sent with the knowledge of some at least
of the workers and therefore at the cost of the Association. It is quite
a legitimate Association expense. The cable does not surprise me, nor
does it worry me. I[t] shows more clearly than I can by argument
that the cause for the prolongation of the struggle lies within ourselves.
It is my firm belief that if you are weak, no matter whether you show
your weakness in words or not, you leave unconsciously an impress
of it on your opponent. Such has been the case with friend Habib.
Smuts can feel it and so can Lord Crewe 2 . What wonder then if both
of them be in no hurry to end the struggle ! We have then to be
patient and fight internal forces as well as external that are ranged
against us. Our friend did some time ago suggest it to me too that
we should accept what has been offered. I returned an emphatic 'no'.
Then came Mr. Abdul Cadir upon me. I told him that even if the
community turned upon me and asked me to accept the proposal, I
1 Gandhiji's eldest son
2 Secretary of State for the Colonies
should have to say 'no'; that those were the terms on which I consented
to lead the deputation, and that it was a matter of my own conscience.
Since then nobody has ventured to talk to me about accepting Smuts'
terms. Please make the position clear to the people and tell them that
owing to weakness within we must look forward to a prolonged struggle.
At the same time let no one consider that it was a mistake to have
elected our friend as a delegate. Nothing better could have happened.
He is all right here. He would have been a source of weakness there.
Here his weakness can only make me stronger and here he must keep
himself under check. Indeed he has behaved himself very properly.
I can easily overlook his having written to people there. Weakness ever
expresses itself in such dubious ways.
And now for the home chat. Does not the above incident show
to you that our worst enemy is our weakness. Weakness is due to
fear; fear is due to lack of faith in the possibilities within the soul for
good; lack of faith is due to our over-attachment to the ever perishing
and perishable body. If, therefore, we get rid of the body snare that
binds us so tight, we set the soul free for its work-progress or evolution.
The greater the faith, the greater the strength. Having by strength
surmounted fear, we surmount weakness. And then we are practically
free. This reasoning, I am sure, applies to your disinclination to study.
I can wait and watch. But you cannot wait before you begin. I am
sure that you should go at it again and again until you have gained
mastery over your disinclination. Every failure will be a stepping-stone
to success. Shall I — may I expect to — see you an earnest student?
Just this thing is lacking to fill the cup of your satisfaction.
I am glad you are not hurrying on the construction of the new
house or hut. I am gaining a great deal of experience. We shall discuss
it all when we meet.
You did not give me your opinion of Harilal.
My regards to our friend Umsweli when he returns and also to
Buffer House. Fancy speaking of the two in the same strain ! Why
not?
With love all round,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
