85. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
June 21, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,
I got your letter. I had obtained permission for both of you
to come and see me and was about to write to you, when an
order was issued barring Mirabehn from seeing me. I thought
it my duty not to see other visitors if I could not see her, and
so I stopped the interviews. I am still trying to get the order
barring Mirabehn withdrawn. Hence I did not write to you im-
mediately. I assumed that you must have heard about the order
against her. I think you know that last time I had stopped
seeing visitors on account of the Naoroji sisters, and so I thought
you would draw the necessary inference. I had obtained per-
mission for you to see me not in your capacity as a bone-setter
but as a friend. Of course, if you had come you would have
examined my elbow, and if you had then thought daily massag-
ing of the arm necessary I would have had to obtain
special permission for that. How could I make it a principle
not to let you do such service to me? I would certainly be happy
if your touching my arm could cure the pain. But it is true
that I would prefer, though not as a matter of principle, to leave
the responsibility of calling in a doctor from outside to the Govern-
ment. But such a necessity has not arisen in this case.
The con-
dition of the arm has not become hopelessly bad. Mahadev does
massage the arm as well as he can with the help of your book.
Major Mehta has joined here as a doctor on special duty. He is
trying electric shocks. If these measures have no effect and the
doctors here confess their failure, the question of calling in help
from outside will naturally arise and then you will be able to
come in your capacity as a bone-setter even though I may not
be seeing any visitors. I have always fully understood your love
for me and, therefore, will not feel the slightest hesitation in ac-
cepting any service from you. I would even request it if I need
it. At which place is the hymn, "Lead, Kindly Light", to be
sung? Or will you two sing it every Friday in your home?
If you sing it in your home and if no English friends are present,
I suppose you know that the Ashram Bhajanavali contains a Gujarati
translation of the hymn in case you wish to use it. You may
sing it if you like it. Here we sing that. Is Father Elwin with
you at present or is he still in the Ashram? You had mentioned
a special oil for the massage. If, apart from the massage, the
oil itself has an effect, send a little of it. I hope both of you
are well. All three of us are quite happy.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7549. Also C.W. 5024. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta
