642. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR,
January 23, 1933
CHI. SUMANGAL,
I have your letter after many weeks, nay, months.
It is only proper to utilize some time for improving your
health.
I keep getting news of Kanta. Saroop gives me news of
her, as does Prabhavati. I have no doubt she has been putting
her time to good use.
If one gets food from outside after securing permission, for
the sake of one's health, one is doing nothing wrong. But it is
praiseworthy if one is content with whatever food one gets
inside and refrains from asking for more. But he who cannot
maintain his health on the food he gets in prison, and has
secured permission to obtain it from outside and can easily have
it, yet does not do so and so spoils his health, is obstinate.
Perhaps he could be considered a literalist.
I certainly do not think there is any harm in having a
shikha. It is a time-honoured custom which the reformer may
not try to change and so run into trouble. You may not find a
strong reason in support of every custom, yet if it is popular
and there is nothing morally wrong in it, it deserves to be
followed.
The statement that "a few medicines are found to be effec-
tive but they are well known" is not happily phrased. The
meaning can be made more explicit. Although one may not
repose one's faith in allopathy, some allopathic medicines can
certainly be used. One does not have to go out and look for
them. They are well-known household remedies such as castor-
oil, quinine, kariata, sonamukhi.
I have not come to any harm from fasting. Fasting may be
resorted to in old age. Then, a fast undertaken from spiritual
motives is not difficult to go through. Of course one does
become emaciated because there is not enough fat in the
body.
You write in haste and therefore your letters are diffi-
cult to decipher. If you write a little slowly they will be
easier to read.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original:
Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
