341. LETTER TO BHOGILAL
September 22, 1928
BHAISHRI BHOGILAL,
This is my argument, in the fewest possible words, about my
deliberately killing the calf.
1. The calf was in great pain. It had been under doctors' treat-
ment and they had given up all hopes. We could give it no help.
Four or five men were required to turn it on its side, and even then
this caused it pain. In this condition, I thought that dharma lay
in killing it.
2. I see dharma in applying to human beings, in similar circum-
stances, the rule which I apply to other creatures. There are
fewer occasions of acting in that way towards human beings,
because we have more means of helping them and more know-
ledge for doing so. But history tells of occasions, and we can ima-
gine others, in which there might be non-violence in killing a
person, in the same way that there is non-violence in an operation
performed by a surgeon.
3. The argument that he who cannot create life has no right to
destroy it and that no one can violate another's dharma does not
apply in a case like this. That argument can be advanced only for the
purpose of preventing violence, that is, cruelty. It may be it-
self an act of violence to advance such an argument to a person
about whose non-violent motives we have no doubt at all, for it
is likely to confuse the reason of such a person if he is not vigilant
enough and may dissuade him from performing an act of non-
violence.
4. It is necessary to bear three points in mind in order to under-
stand the non-violence of the act in question: (1) It is ignorance to
believe that every act of killing is violence. (2) As there is vio-
lence in killing, so also there is violence in inflicting what we
regard as lesser suffering. (3) Violence and non-violence are men-
tal attitudes, they concern the feelings in our heart. A slap given
through anger is pure violence, whereas a slap given to a person
bitten by a snake to keep him awake is pure non-violence.
Many other arguments can be deduced from this.
If you
wish to ask me any question exclusively concerning dharma, please
do. You can use this letter in any place and in any manner
you wish to. My only aim in life is to discover dharma, know it
and follow it. I do not wish to breathe a single moment if I can-
not do that.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 11811
