7. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
DETENTION CAMP,
February 7, 1943
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I have to thank you for your long reply1, dated the 5th
instant, to my letter of 29th January last. I would take your
last point first, namely, the contemplated fast which begins on
9th instant. Your letter, from a satyagrahi's standpoint, is an
invitation to fast. No doubt the responsibility for the step and
its consequences will be solely mine. You have allowed an
expression to slip from your pen for which I was unprepared.
In the concluding sentence of the second paragraph, you des-
cribe the step as an attempt "to find an easy way out". That
you, as a friend, can impute such a base and cowardly motive
to me passes comprehension. You have also described it as "a
form of political blackmail". And you quote my previous writ-
ings on the subject against me. I abide by my writings. I hold
that there is nothing inconsistent in them with the contemplated
step. I wonder whether you have yourself read those writings.
I do claim that I have approached you with an open
mind when I asked you to convince me of my error. "Profound
distrust" of the published reports is in no way inconsistent with
my having an open mind.
You say that there is evidence that I-I leave my friends
out for the moment-"expected this policy to lead to violence",
that I was "prepared to condone it", and that "the violence
that ensued formed part of a concerted plan, conceived long
before the arrest of Congress leaders". I have seen no evidence
in support of such a serious charge. You admit that part of the
evidence has yet to be published. The speech of the Home
Member of which you have favoured me with a copy, may
be taken as the opening speech of the prosecution counsel and
nothing more.
It contains unsupported imputations against
Congressmen. Of course he has described the violent outburst
in graphic language. But he has not said why it took place
when it did. I have suggested why it did. You have condemned
men and women before trying them and hearing their de-
fence. Surely there is nothing wrong in my asking you to
show me the evidence on which you hold them guilty. What
you say in your letter carries no conviction. Proof should cor-
respond to the canons of English jurisprudence.
If the wife of a member of the Working Committee is
actively engaged in "planning the bomb outrages and other
acts of terrorism", she should be tried before a court of law
and punished, if found guilty. The lady you refer to could only
have done the things attributed to her after the wholesale arrests
of 9th August last, which I have dared to describe as leonine
violence.
You say that the time is not yet ripe to publish the char-
ges against the Congress. Have you ever thought of the pos-
sibility of their being found baseless when they are put before
an impartial tribunal? Or that some of the condemned per-
sons might have died in the mean while or that some of the
evidence that the living can produce might become unavailable?
I reiterate the statement that the principle of civil dis-
obedience is implicitly conceded in the settlement of 5th
March, 1931, arrived at between the then Viceroy on behalf of
the Government of India and myself on behalf of the Congress.
I hope you know that the principal Congressmen were discharged
before the settlement was even thought of. Certain repara-
tions were made to Congressmen under that settlement. Civil
disobedience was discontinued only on conditions being fulfilled
by the Government. That by itself was, in my opinion, an ac-
knowledgment of its legitimacy, of course, under given circum-
stances. It, therefore, seems somewhat strange to find you main-
tain that civil disobedience "cannot be recognized as being in
any circumstances legitimate" by your Government. You ignore
the practice of the British Government which has recognized
its legitimacy under the name of "passive resistance".
Lastly, you read into my letters a meaning which is wholly
inconsistent with my declaration, in one of them, of adherence
to unadulterated non-violence. For, you say in your letter under
reply that 'acceptance of my point of view would be to con-
cede that the authorized Government of the country on which
lies the responsibility for maintaining peace and good order,
should allow movements to take place that would admit pre-
parations for violence, interruption of communications, for at-
tacks on innocent persons, for murders of police officers and
others to proceed unchecked'. I must be a strange friend of
yours whom you believe to be capable of asking for recognition
of such things as lawful.
I have not attempted an exhaustive reply to the views and
statements attributed to me. This is not the place nor the time
for such a reply. I have only picked out those things which
in my opinion demanded an immediate answer. You have left
me no loophole for escaping the ordeal I have set before my-
self. I begin it on the 9th instant with the clearest possible
conscience. Despite your description of it as "a form of poli-
tical blackmail", it is on my part meant to be an appeal to
the Highest Tribunal for justice which I have failed to secure
from you. If I do not survive the ordeal, I shall go to the
Judgment Seat with the fullest faith in my innocence. Poster-
ity will judge between you as representative of an all-power-
ful Government and me as a humble man who has tried to
serve his country and humanity through it.
My last letter was written against time, and therefore a
material paragraph went in as postscript. I now send herewith
a fair copy typed by Pyarelal who has taken Mahadev Desai's
place. You will find the postscript paragraph restored to the
place where it should have been.
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosure 1
From a photostat: C.W. 10377. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 30-2, and Correspondence with
Mr. Gandhi, pp. 11-
