214. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
AMBOLI,
Friday, April 1, 1927
HIGH PRIEST OF THE LOWLY,
My health has tied me down to the bed; yesterday there-
fore I could go through your [draft] speech from one end to the
other. A person like me could learn a little from it but it is my
humble opinion that as a presidential address it will not do.
I do not write this in exercise of any right of "veto" that you
have conferred on me. I am only arguing with you as a friend.
The speech gives no evidence of a sense of proportion. We
seem to have lost it. Another reason is that it violates the implicit
understanding with the Rana Saheb. A third reason is that the
speech does not suit the kind of audience we are going to muster.
I say there is no sense of proportion because this speech does
not take into account the past convention. There is a breach of
our implicit understanding with the Rana Saheb that there should
be no personal criticism, etc. And the speech will be neither ap-
preciated nor read by the sections whom we are at the moment
trying to rouse. If you follow Gulliver's Travels and conceive an
imaginary country in which to apply your correctives, you could
say all that you have said; or if you emulate Aesop you could
have a bird of your choice perched on every tree in Saurashtra
to expound your doctrines through their chatter. And then you
could have instructed us while you amused us. Or like Vyasa
you may create sub-human and superhuman characters, reject the
past, compile a history of mankind and then give us a miniature
Mahabharata of Saurashtra.
We needs must train a new class of audience for the speech
that you have drafted or that has been drafted for you. Our first
task therefore will be to annul the constitution adopted at Bhavnagar.
I may perhaps agree to this. And then we should call a con-
ference of such select people as would be competent to appreciate
and also act upon the thoughts contained in your speech. We should
place before them your suggestions and have them implemented.
I would therefore make the following suggestions: You should
call a small committee and place your ideas before them. You
may then lay the foundation of your speech as was the practice
followed by the Congress in the past. Speeches by Wedderburn,
Webb, Bradlaugh and others used to be placed before Pherozeshah,
Gokhale and others for approval. In this way a tradition was
maintained. This state of affairs, I know, came down to the
times of Sinha. Your speech belongs to that tradition. I do not
suggest that it is of no use; we want a new society to make use
of it. You cannot address such speeches to peasants.
Whatever happens to me the Conference must be held in June.
I suggest that at the same time we should decide upon the con-
stitution of the Conference and first put our own house in order.
And then start immediately a new era by convening the newly
constituted Conference. But I cannot explain all this in a letter.
I think there is no sense in discussing individual points when I am
recommending a radical revision of your draft.
Though of course I write this, at the moment I am so weak
I cannot invite anyone of you to come here soon. You should
therefore confer with Devchandbhai, Fulchand and Amritlal and
do whatever you have to. I would also invite Patwari, Pattani
Saheb and Shukla Saheb to this meeting. I would acquaint myself
with everyone's opinion and do what appears good for us. But
then that is how I think. If you go ahead you should also obtain
Vallabhbhai's advice. Whatever you do let it be based on solid
foundations.
Wishing success in all your noble efforts,
BAPU
[PS.]
You can ask me anything when you write to me; whether
it does any good can be judged by you or God.
Friday-Belgaum
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
