35. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
LARKANA,
February 9110, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have already mailed you today's post. But I had kept
aside some letters of Mirabai for being sent to you, and I enclose
them with this. These letters are evidence of her clean mind,
her love and her devotion to duty. Her remarks about Hinduism
are worth pondering over. Convey a summary of these letters to
the inmates of the Mandir, and particularly to the women. After
you have read them, send them to Mahadev.
I wrote the above lines yesterday evening. I am now writing
this after the morning prayers on the 10th while waiting to leave
for the station. We wish to reach Sukkur at 8.30 a.m. I shall
spend the silence day also there. The whole of Tuesday will be
spent in visiting people. We shall reach Hyderabad on Wednes-
day evening. On Friday morning we shall leave Hyderabad for
Mirpurkhas. I should, therefore, get the Friday post at the
latter place. The mail from Ahmedabad arrives there at 9 in the
morning. On Sunday morning we shall be in Delhi. Address
the post there c/o Pandit Motilal Nehru, Clive Street, New Delhi.
If I can remember it I shall write to you the number. I hope
to return there on Tuesday, the 19th, but I cannot be sure.
Does it happen that we feel inclined to run to a doctor the
moment we get toothache or similar pain? Our standard is a
village far away from a railway station. We may not receive what
people in such a village do not get. In ninety-nine per cent
cases the pain we suffer is due to our own fault, and in 95
per cent cases again it is such as we can bear. In most cases
mere fasting diminishes the pain. In every matter we should cul-
tivate the capacity to endure. We ought not to bear, in any
circumstances, what we can avoid by some means which lies
within us and what it would be wrong on our part not to get
rid of. For instance, uncleanliness, external or internal. Explain
this to everyone. I have not written this by way of criticism of
those who have gone to Broach; these reflections were provoked by
the news of their having gone there and as part of the train of
reflections following Rasik's death. We live near doctors and
have learnt to take their help. Since they offer it, we shall
certainly avail ourselves of it. What I have said is only by way
of caution so that we may keep within limits.
Are things smooth now between Narandas and you? Do
not rest content with cultivating indifference to each other. You
should shower love on Narandas and convince him that his
suspicion is groundless, that you want his presence. Use his ser-
vices whenever you can.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I got your long letter after arriving here. If it is necessary
to reply to it, I can do so only tomorrow.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5487
