279. LETTER TO RAMANIYARAM G. TRIPATHI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Wednesday, Asadha Vad 11, August 4, 1926
BHAISHRI RAMANIYARAM,
I have your letter. I knew Vibhakar so little that I don't
think I can send any reminiscences of him which may be useful
to you. I remember nothing about him except his cheerful nature.
I keep good health. At the moment I cannot think of any
circumstance which may take me out of Ahmedabad before 20th
December. In case, however, I go to Bombay for a day or two,
you may certainly ask me to spare time for your Association. It is
not at all true that I have started teaching the Bible in the
Vidyapith. How can I help if the papers do not leave me alone?
They do not let me do anything in peace. If my peace of mind
depended on external circumstances, they would have driven me
mad long ago. I asked the students to choose in what manner
they would like me to spend one hour with them every week.
They have decided to put questions to me every Saturday. If
any time was left after answering their questions, I might read
the New Testament with them. On the first Saturday, the one
hour was over before all the questions could be answered. I don't
know what will happen next time. Apart from this, I should
certainly like the students to learn to think about religious issues.
All possible efforts are being made towards that end. It was only
yesterday I got the report of the committee appointed to inquire
into the running of the Vidyapith. I shall, now, consider what
to do with it. Most probably, it will be published in a few days.
What can I write for Samalochak, which would satisfy you and its
readers? Anything I write will be about spinning. If I range
further afield, I may write a little about Antyajas. What use will
such an article be to you these days? The poor Antyaja is making
very, very slow progress, at a snail's pace, so to say. One day,
I am sure, he will cease to be "poor", and that will be the
right time for you to ask for an article from me.
SHRI RAMANIYARAM GOVARDHANRAM TRIPATHI
DR. PAI BUILDING
SANDHURST ROAD
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12237
