623. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
Personal
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
Carefully revised
December 23, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
My yesterday's letter was incomplete. Thinking it over, I
see that your true place is in a large hospital and in your studies.
You fit there very well. Dr. Jivaraj was also happy to see you
there. I have also told you to have your dissertation vetted.
You are appreciated there. You get lost here. There is no
field for your intelligence here. Your progress is hampered and
there is no appreciation of your qualities. You rust here.
It has hurt me that you are feeling scared to come this
time.
I have a different view about your duty. But so what? What
you see as your duty alone is your duty. I waited for you
as the chataka bird waits for the rain. Mahadev had got
ready to come and fetch you. Shastriji, Sharada, Sankaran and
other patients were waiting for you. You appeared so anxious
about Shastriji that I was very happy. Others were also happy.
It was expected that you would come and do something new.
But you gave primary importance to your dissertation. What is
the value of a dissertation as compared to attendance on a
patient? But that is my philosophy.
Brother does not wish that you should come for the sake of
meeting him. He wants you to go to Lahore and do the
needful about the examination. I agree with his view. I have
taken charge of Shastriji. Now I am not doing the massage
myself. Manohar does it. I make my own decision about
my diet. Sharada will be attended to. For your sake only
I am abandoning hope of you. Your good lies in your
studies and in the experience you are getting there. While you
are there, I shall take from you whatever services I can. I
shall send patients from here to you when necessary. The
satisfaction which I cannot give you and you cannot give me we
shall both have by your being there. I know that you would like
to rush here when I am really ill. Come at that time. I shall
take service from you. Do not read any wrong meaning in
this letter and do not misunderstand. You will see my sorrow
in this. That was inevitable. But ultimately, even that is for
happiness. There is sorrow because I had placed my hope in
you and it has been belied. There was no warrant for that
hope. With that thought in mind I shall forget my unhappiness.
But I shall definitely be happy to see that you are in a
position in which you will shine and to which you will bring
credit. If a time comes when you feel you will be happy only
by coming here and not otherwise, do come then.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original:
Pyarelal Papers.
Nehru
Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
