425. LETTER TO PUSHPA K. DESAI
MAIN CAMP: SODEPUR,
ON THE STEAMER FROM MAHISHADAL TO CONTAI,
December 30, 1945
CHI. PUSHPA,
I have your letter. How can you afford to be cowardly? You
should endure your fate. I can bear, even understand, your refusal
to look upon Vajubhai as your husband. But he is a brother to
you, is he not? And why need one fear one's brother? How can
you refuse to discuss the subject with him? He has committed no
fault. If anyone is at fault, it is you. You do not want to abide
by custom. I see no harm even in that. One who wishes to
disregard custom must generally display great firmness of mind,
purity of character and gentleness. Moreover, you aspire to rise
even higher. You are resolved to have as husband no ordinary
man but only God. Your stiffness does not become your noble
resolve. You should, therefore welcome Vajubhai. Then alone
can you uplift both him and yourself. I am glad, that you believe
yourself to be still weak. You should, therefore, carefully observe
the restraints which a weak person should.
These restraints
are only not to be alone with Vajubhai and not to touch
him. It is no part of a sister's duty to a brother to touch him
freely. If she chances to touch him, she does not run away nor
does she experience any passion because of it. But when a girl is
weak, even touching one's blood brother may sometimes have to
be avoided. You will learn to look upon God as husband and
be accepted in His large court only if you understand all these
subtle distinctions. Otherwise you are bound to fall by the way-
side like a mere pebble.
Go to Vinoba when you can. There you will get affection
and knowledge and your determination will grow firm.
If you do not want, I will not send you the letters from
Father or Vajubhai. But I would like you to remain unperturb-
ed even after reading those letters. Yesterday we had a Bengali
bhajan. Daily in the evenings a Bengali bhajan is sung here and
that is only proper. The first line of the bhajan was : "Lord, save
me from weakness even when I am assailed by doubts." That is,
306
destroy every doubt in my mind. Your vow is a hard one. You
have taken it of your own free will. You will not be able to
keep it without God's grace. I am dictating this letter with
great care in the early morning in a boat, hoping that it may
remove your ignorance and strengthen you. There can be no
peace except through absorption in service. You can show this
letter to Vinoba. He will be able to explain my ideas better and
if there is anything lacking he will make up for it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9268
