234. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 10, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter describing the drive with Hakimji. I do
not mind either your tasting the dishes at Brijkishen's or the pan
from Hakimji. The latter's tempting you with pan distresses me.
lt is bad stuff and he should never have offered it to you. But
opinions differ. He evidently considers it to be harmless. How-
ever, the reasoning that you have employed for justifying the tasting
of the dishes and the pan is in my opinion faulty. Why should one
know the taste of what one does not need or wish to take? Do
you know that this is the reasoning that has been applied to
justify every form of vice? It is the million times told story of
the forbidden apple: why should I not know the taste of the thing
I am asked not to take or touch? But you must not worry. If
you do not understand my reasoning, you must argue with me
patiently. If you appreciate my reasoning, it is to serve as warn-
ing in the future. But it must not result in self-reproach. There
is no cause for it. The incident is trivial. But trivialities possess
deadly potentialities. Hence the paternal warning.
Now about your analysis of the Kanya Gurukul. I hope
you have spoken about it to Vidyavati. But you must discuss it
freely with Principals Ramdev and Sethi. Principal Ramdev
is her guide and if he is convinced, immediate improvement can
be made. I propose to send him the relevant extract from your
letter. That will make your position quite clear. The insanitation,
the indiscipline must go. The anti-Muslim feeling is a more
difficult proposition. But you have to do your duty. Little girls'
minds must not be poisoned if we can help it. But whilst you
will talk about these things, you will remember your limits. You
have gone out to learn Hindi and to observe and gain experience,
not to reform or teach. Yours will, therefore, be remarks only by
the way and merely as suggestions either for acceptance or rejec-
tion. Your own conduct is sufficient effort for reform otherwise.
I am writing this on the moving train during my silence
which finishes at 9 p.m.
With love,
BAPU
[PS.]
Yes, when you go back to Delhi to inspect takli-spinning
you may stay with Brijkishen.
BAPU
[PPS.]
Can you decipher my writing?
From the original: C.W. 5195. Courtesy: Mirabehn
