6. LETTER TO CHAMAN KAVI
November 16, 1932
If, on the one hand, hundreds of self-seeking men have mis-
used mosques, temples and churches, on the other millions have
made good use of them. If you wish to test the truth of this
statement, use your wonderful gift of imagination and suppose
that a reformer razes to the ground in a single day all the churches,
temples and mosques. Then picture to yourself the condition of
those millions of simple good souls when they discover that the
temples and mosques from which they daily derived consolation
and support were no more. I see the truth of this every day.
Devotees who visit even the most unholy temples with pure heart
certainly feel the presence of God in those temples, so wonderful
is the mystery of His Nature, or say His maya. But some great
bhakta was inspired and sang: "Maya casts a spell on all, but she
is helpless before a God-lover". If, therefore, you realize through
your imagination that so long as temples exist they should be open
for Harijans too, your own reason will convince you of the necessity
of the fast. My fast is not aimed against the sanatanists; it is
aimed against the thousands or rather the millions who are bound
to me [by the tie of love]. If the fast shocks them out of their
slumber, the temples are bound to be thrown open to Harijans.
I have infinite patience as regards the spinning-wheel. Your
experience of villages is limited to Kutch. But conditions in the
thousands of other villages are far different from those in the
villages of Kutch. And even in Kutch no cloth can be cheaper
than what is produced by the cultivator with his own labour from
cotton growing in his own fields. If there is any such cloth, you
may say that it is a shroud rather than cloth which protects the
weaver against cold and heat or covers his shame. Suppose some-
body offers me, instead of water, a poisonous liquid which looks like
water, gives it free and even offers to me the glass which con-
tains it as a gift, and another person offers real water but pours it
from his jug into my folded palms and asks four pice for the
service, whose offer should I accept? You are impatient, your
mind is very much unsteady and your faith is short-lived. That is
why you get irritated every now and then. But this is not your
true nature. It is a disease in you. Get rid of it. Your true
7
nature is capable of patience and iron firmness of mind. One
need not put faith in anything too readily, but once we have put
faith in a thing after the most careful thought, we must cling
to it as tenaciously as does a black ant to ajar of jaggery. "Better
lose one's life rather than break one's plighted word." I think I
have written enough now.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 250-
