384. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA JAIL,
November 21, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,
Today I have sent you a telegram about Prabhavati which
you will have received. I await your reply. I hope you have
sent her to the Ashram. The best thing of course would be
for you to go with her and have her fixed up there. Any pro-
gramme about her future work can be decided after she gets
well. I understand your sorrow. I have thought over it. You
should not say anything to Prabhavati. If she is moved by
desire there will be no problem. But if she has no stirrings of
desire, it becomes your duty to protect her. I need hardly
remind you that women have as much right to freedom as men.
It is my firm opinion that if one partner in marriage has sexual
urge it is by no means the duty of the other partner also to have
such urge, though it is the right of the partner with the sexual
urge to satisfy that urge. This is perhaps one of the causes of
polygamy. Just as it will be considered immoral for a man to
cohabit with a wife who is ill it should also be considered
immoral to cohabit with a wife who has no sexual desire. It is
therefore my earnest advice that if Prabhavati has no craving
for sex you should give her her freedom and find yourself another
wife. I see no immorality in that. After all what is to be done?
How can your craving be forcibly stifled? You consider sex
necessary and beneficial for the spirit. In such a situation I
would not consider a second marriage immoral from any point
of view. In fact I feel that your doing so may well set an
example to others. Many young men use force with their wives.
Others visit prostitutes. Still others indulge in even worse prac-
tices. Prabhavati has chosen to live the life of a virgin. You
do not wish to practise brahmacharya. Therefore I see nothing
wrong in your respecting the wishes of Prabhavati and finding
yourself another wife. If you cannot think of another woman,
you should, for the sake of Prabhavati, observe brahmacharya. If
your love for Prabhavati is really true you will find that as soon
as you go near her your sexual craving will subside. I have
placed my views before you. Do as your duty bids you. May
God grant you the strength to do so.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
