319. LETTER TO A YOUNG JOURNALIST
BOMBAY,
June 7, 1919
It is dangerous to call me "Revered Father", as you will see
presently. I have no doubt about your prodigality. The very slo-
venliness of your writing is eloquent proof of it and it certainly
requires a prodigal son to write to his adopted "Revered Father"
a letter containing almost as many corrections as there are lines
in it written anyhow and unrevised. A son frugal in his adjec-
tives, obedient in reality, would write to his father, especially when
he is deliberately adopted, a careful letter written in his best
handwriting. If he has not enough time, he will write only a line,
but he would write it neatly.
Your article on Mr. Jamnadas was ill-conceived and hurriedly
written. It could not be printed in Young India, nor is it worth
printing in any other paper. You will not reform Jamnadas by
letters of that character, nor will you benefit the public thereby.
Your second article is not much better. . . . You really lose your-
self in the exuberance of your own verbosity. If you will give more
attention to the thought than a mere lengthening out of your story,
you will produce readable matter.
Why have you inflicted certificates on me? How can they
influence me when I know you so well? I neither consider you
"well-informed" nor "forceful" as a writer and Mr. Menon
must know very little of journalistic capacity if he really consi-
dered that you were able to acquit yourself with credit in any
journalistic capacity. Now you see how difficult it will be for you
to please me and yet it will be easy enough. If you will take pains
in future, I would certainly take you as helper for Young India in
spite of your many limitations as soon as you are free from your
Ahmedabad obligation. I think you owe it to Mr. Chatterjee
and the A.P. to finish the work you have. You can even help from
Ahmedabad by giving me bright and graphic notes on the trials,
not in the nature of carping criticism of the Government or of the
local legal talent. You should try to give pen pictures of men and
manners. Surely there must be many humourous touches about the
proceedings; but probably you will have little time for writing
anything for me at the present moment.
Yours sincerely,
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
