19. LETTER TO MANIBHAI B. DESAI
NEW DELHI,
November 12, 1947
CHI. MANIBHAI,
I have your letter of the 5th. I had a long discussion with
Dr. Dinshaw and Jehangir Patel.
I am glad that the inauguration is to be done by Kakasaheb
Tell all the friends at Uruli that I am both happy and sorry
that I shall not be able to attend the function. I am happy be-
cause the work I am doing here is also, according to me, part
of the work that is being done at Uruli; for, the nature cure of
my conception includes treatment of both body and mind. If we
look at the matter from that point of view, curing the people
here of their psychological perversion is bound to have an effect
in Uruli also and would serve as a fine illustration of nature cure.
I am not sorry that Gokhale and Paramanand have left. It
will be enough if Dr. Bhagwat stays on. I should be glad if
Dhiru clings to the institution till the end and observes all the
rules, too. But I will be satisfied if at least Balkoba and you
remain. That is, I should be very pleased even if you alone decide
to dedicate your life to Uruli. By and by you will find other
workers from the local population. I should think it a disgrace
to have to import workers from outside. It would mean failure of
nature cure.
The present heavy burden on you will not last. You should
admit only as many patients as you can easily look after. If you
can persuade some young men there to volunteer their services,
you can train them. You will need a woman worker from outside.
By yourself, you will not be able to attract any woman worker
from among the local people. Let us see what the future brings.
The division into nature cure, village uplift work and Ashram
life seems all right to me. But from the point of view of nature
cure the three are indivisible. When you develop nature cure to
its highest potential, it will include village uplift work also.
And I cannot conceive of nature cure for village people which
does not imply the Ashram ideal of life. If you start cultivation
work through the institution itself and with the help of paid
labourers, I think you will have to repent it in the end. But
notwithstanding this view of mine, I shall accept what all of
you decide to do after careful thinking.
Since Bhansali sees a flaw in the offer of the donation, I
would prefer to decline it. It seems pointless to me to accept the
thing on a ninety-nine-year lease.
Jehangir told me about everybody.
I have already tried to explain why we should prefer cows
to buffaloes. If Balkrishna cannot collect the required amount,
forget about that scheme. The matter is not worth worrying
about at all. I shall be able to say more after I know the final
outcome.
It would be best, of course, if Premabehn undertakes some
work there on behalf of the Kasturba Memorial Fund. But we
can assume no financial liability for such work. You may permit
her to do what she can within the limits of the Kasturba Fund.
Do not entertain any hope of being able to get an expert
on nature cure from outside. Acquire whatever knowledge you
yourself can. If Dhiru stays there, he also should become pro-
ficient in it. He already knows a little.
If you get any nature-cure expert who does not agree to
abide by the Ashram rules, I will not accept him as suitable for
our purpose. I will write to Dr. Bhagwat afterwards, as also
to Balkrishna.
I am dictating this at night. I must not overexert myself
now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 2723. Courtesy: Manibhai B. Desai
