128. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 23, 1935
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter today. I have sent you a wire asking you
to send Keshu. I do not remember your having asked for my
permission.
I did not at all like Harilal's idea about watches. Dissuade
him. If he goes in for it in spite of that, let him.
1 In Bapu's Letters to Mira, Mirabehn explains: "On my return from Europe,
I joined Bapu at Wardha Ashram. Not long after, Bapu took up residence at
Maganwadi, where the Village Industries Association was then taking root. I
had remained on there when Bapu wrote the . . . letter . . ."
2 The source has "22" which is obviously a slip. Gandhiji reached Borsad
on this date.
3 Anandi Asar
4 Bal Kalelkar
5 Harilal Gandhi wanted to start business in watches; vide "Letter
to Manilal and Sushila Gandhi", p. 98.
90
Mathew has grown impatient about coming. The Ashram
does not owe him anything. If you feel inclined, we may send
him railway fare for coming; I don't. If he is very eager to
come, he will, I am writing to him and informing him that if
he does not come in a few days, time he will not be taken up.
Titus has not gone on leave. He has left altogether. He
was paid railway fare for the journey. I had agreed to keep him
at Wardha, but he did not seem very eager. However, he will
reply from Travancore. I have refused to give him a note of
recommendation on anybody else.
For the present draw the amount for Tharparkar from the
Ashram account. Afterwards if necessary I will pay it from some
other account.
In my view Chimanlal is spending too much. But since we
have tolerated similar expenditure by others, we should tolerate it
in his case too. To a certain extent the desire to recover and
to live on clings in all of us. Each one fixes his own limit of
expenditure. Chimanlal is satisfied merely with staying in Veraval
and having Talwalkar's injection. But we have spent over others
much more than that. I, therefore, do not feel like imposing exces-
sive restrictions on senior workers. We should be satisfied with
whatever self-restraint he exercises. Do you have anything else
to suggest in this matter?
I see that we shall not get interest.
It seems that giving money to Gajanan was a mistake. He
had even given up study. The payment to Dhiru also should stop.
He will have a copy of the agreement he gave in writing. It may
be with Chhaganlal. Look into the matter.
Was my suggestion to Lilavati all right?
I am writing separately to Father.
Prema came and saw me. She handed over some of her jewel-
lery. We couldn't have any talk. If you have preserved her last
two letters, send them to Gomati to read. (She is at Wardha).
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8445. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
