24. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,
[October 10, 1935]
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I wanted to write to you on Sunday but I was so busy that
I simply could not do it. That was to be in answer to your
letter enclosing copy of your letter to Agatha . Yours to Agatha
gave me an insight into the working of your mind which I would
not miss for anything. She fully deserved that frankness. I can
endorse most of your sentiments. You do not know that I have
written to her more than once in much the same strain though
in my own way and my own language. Nevertheless if Kamala
shows distinct signs of improvement and if you are free to go [to]
London and the way is open, I would like you to see the big
ones, open yourself out to them even as you have to Agatha.
But your letter received yesterday shows that you may not
leave Kamala's bedside just yet. After all you have been freed
for that purpose and if Providence keeps you chained to Kamala's
bed, we must not grumble. You have gone there to see her
through the terrible ordeal. How I wish I was there to share your
burden and cheer Kamala! As I saw her for two days in Bombay
before her departure, I observed that she never had so much
peace of mind as she seemed to enjoy then. Her faith in the
benevolence of God, she said, was never so bright as then. Her
mental disturbance had vanished and she did not mind what
happened to her. She went to Europe because you all wished
it; it seemed to be her obvious duty to do so. If she lives, she
will live for greater service than she has yet rendered. If she
dies, she will do so to come down to earth with a body more
fitted for her task than the one she has today.
It is well too that Indu's literary studies remain suspended
for a while. For me, she is having a training that is of far greater
value than any she would have in a college. She is having her
training in the University of Nature. She may give the finishing
touch by completing her literary studies.
I am going through your chapters with the deepest interest.
I should like to finish them at a single sitting as Mahadev did
and as Khurshed almost did. I have no such good luck. I must
reserve my opinion till I have reached the last chapter. I am
thankful that you have sent them to me.
I am not going to talk to you about the politics. It is enough
for my purpose that you will shoulder the burden, if it falls to
your lot. That it will, seems to me to be a foregone conclusion.
You will read the accompanying to Kamala, if you think fit.
Indu used to write to me a few lines when you were not there.
Now I suppose she thinks she is absolved from the task!
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
You must excuse my obstinacy in writing with village ink,
village reed on village paper.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1935. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
