141. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[October 30, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
We reached in excellent condition at 5 p.m. The men have done
extremely well. The store-keeper here is supplying tea. It is big thing
because of the labour involved.
I have just telephoned asking that Mr. Badat should go to Pardekop.
We shall march out early in the morning so that some distance at least
may be cut before daybreak. I am sending back Mr. Vallibhai's cart
but am trying to procure other transport.
I am almost inclined, if the men can be somewhat disciplined, to
march through Johannesburg and hold a meeting there. The merchants
may give a feast to the men. You may discuss with Cachalia through
the 'phone. Hosken and others may be invited. Please tell Miss Schlesin
that my proposed letter should be deferred till the march is over.
There, as I have said, Chergan is the most reliable man for the
strikers' residence But if all are not accommodated there, the one
next man is Sivpal who is above Chergan. It is at these two places
that you should concentrate the majority of the people. Then comes
Ramkhelawan who can take many people, but you must not establish
a kitchen there. There are men also at Rughbir's, towards Newcastle
way and beyond the corner Indian store. If you succeed in getting
1 From the contents; vide also the preceding item.
2 Valli Peerbhai
3 Vide p. 145.
two kitchens established it would save your much work and you will
be able to move about. Men who may come should be served only
with bread or porridge. Rice is a great bother. No tea to be provided
but only sugar. This will simplify matters. But you will use your own
judgment. You will examine and list the jewellery the men have sold
and deposited. Polak should be furnished with the itinerary. I will say
no more just now. I hope you had a nice luncheon and that Miss Schlesin
had something to eat. So long as she is there, you should look after
her food.
I suggest your seeing Mrs. Anton, the baker's wife. She is ill. I
have recommended Kuhne's bath and our bread. You may offer to
explain.
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
Please remove from the jacket lent by Mr. Vallibhai a packet of
stamps I left.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
