225. LETTER TO VICEROY
June 22, 1920
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HON'BLE BARON CHELMSFORD
P.C., G.M.S.I., G.C.M.G., G.M.I.F.
VICEROY AND GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA
SIMLA
YOUR EXCELLENCY,
As one who has enjoyed a certain measure of Your Excellency's
confidence and as one who claims to be a devoted well-wisher of
the British Empire, I owe it to Your Excellency and, through Your
Excellency, to His Majesty's Ministers, to explain my connection
with and my conduct in the Khilafat question.
At the very earliest stage of the War, even whilst I was in
London organizing the Indian Volunteer Ambulance Corps, I be-
gan to interest myself in the Khilafat question. I perceived how
deeply moved the little Mussulman world in London was when
Turkey decided to throw in her lot with Germany. On my arrival
in India in the January of 1915 I found the same anxiousness and
earnestness among the Mussulmans with whom I came in contact.
Their anxiety became intense when the information about the
secret treaties leaked out. Distrust of British intentions filled
their minds and despair took possession of them. Even at that
moment I advised my Mussulman friends not to give way to des-
pair but to express their fears and their hopes in a disciplined man-
ner. It will be admitted that the whole of Mussulman India has
behaved in a singularly restrained manner during the past five
years, and that the leaders have been able to keep the turbulent
sections of their community under complete control.
The Peace Terms and Your Excellency's defence of them
have given the Mussulmans of India a shock from which it will
be difficult for them to recover. The terms violate Ministerial
pledges and utterly disregard Mussulman sentiment. I consider
that as a staunch Hindu wishing to live on terms of the closest
friendship with my Mussulman countrymen, I should be an un-
worthy son of India if I did not stand by them in their hour of
trial. In my humble opinion their cause is just. They claim that
Turkey must not be punished if their sentiment is to be respected.
Muslim soldiers did not fight to inflict punishment on their own
Khalifa or to deprive him of his territories. The Mussulman atti-
tude has been consistent throughout these five years.
My duty to the Empire to which I owe my loyalty requires
me to resist the cruel violence that has been done to the Mussul-
man sentiment.
So far as I am aware Mussulmans and Hindus have as a whole
lost faith in British justice and honour. The Report of the Majority
of the Hunter Committee, Your Excellency's Despatch thereon,
and Mr. Montagu's reply have only aggravated the distrust.
In these circumstances, the only course open to one like me
is either in despair to sever all connection with British rule, or if
I still retained faith in the inherent superiority of the British Consti-
tution to all others at present in vogue, to adopt such means as
will rectify the wrong done and thus restore confidence. I have
not lost faith in such superiority and I am not without hope that
somehow or other justice will yet be rendered if we show the re-
quisite capacity for suffering. Indeed my conception of that Con-
stitution is that it helps only those who are ready to help them-
selves. I do not believe that it protects the weak. It gives free
scope to the strong to maintain their strength and develop it. The
weak under it go to the wall.
It is, then, because I believe in the British Constitution that I
have advised my Mussulman friends to withdraw their support from
Your Excellency's Government, and the Hindus to join them,
should the Peace Terms not be revised in accordance with solemn
pledges of Ministers and the Muslim sentiment.
Three courses were open to the Mussulmans in order to make
their emphatic disapproval of the utter injustice to which His
Majesty's Ministers have become party, if they have not actually
been the prime perpetrators of it. They are:
1. To resort to violence.
2. To advise emigration on a wholesale scale.
3. Not to be party to the injustice by ceasing to co-operate
with the Government.
Your Excellency must be aware that there was a time when
the boldest though also the most thoughtless among the Mussul-
mans favoured violence and that hijrat (emigration) has not yet
ceased to be the battle-cry. I venture to claim that I have suc-
ceeded by patient reasoning in weaning the party of violence from
its ways. I confess that I did not—I did not attempt to—succeed
in weaning them from violence on moral grounds, but purely on
utilitarian grounds. The result for the time being at any rate has
however been to stop violence. The school of hijrat has received
a check if it has not stopped its activities entirely. I hold that no
repression could have prevented a violent eruption, if the people
had not had presented to them a form of direct action involving
considerable sacrifice and ensuring success, if such a direct action
was largely taken up by the public. Non-co-operation was the
only dignified and constitutional form of such direct action, for
it is the right recognized from times immemorial of the subject
to refuse to assist a ruler who misrules.
At the same time I admit that non-co-operation practised by
the mass of people is attended with grave risks. But in a crisis
such as has overtaken the Mussulmans of India no step that is
unattended with large risks can possibly bring about the desired
change. Not to run some risks now will be to court much greater
risks, if not virtual destruction of law and order.
But there is yet an escape from non-co-operation. The Mus-
sulman representation has requested Your Excellency to lead
the agitation yourself as did your distinguished predecessor at the
time of the South African trouble. But if you cannot see your way
to do so, and non-co-operation becomes a dire necessity, I hope
that Your Excellency will give those who have accepted my advice
and myself the credit for being actuated by nothing less than a
stern sense of duty.
I have etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
LABURNUM ROAD
GAMDEVI
BOMBAY
N.A.I. : Home, Political (A), November, 1920, Nos. 19-31
1 Vide footnote I to "Letter to Swami Shraddhanand", 2-5-1920.
2 Lord Hardinge
