271. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
LAHORE,
January 24, 1920
MY DEAR CHILD,
I was delighted to receive your letter on my arrival in Lahore
yesterday.
I am glad you have opened out your heart. It is the truest test
of friendship and affection. You enable me to help you when you
do open out. I had no notion that you had already observed Mrs.
Gandhi's pettiness. I simply warned you, as I asked you to come in
closer touch with her. As it is, my warning reached you just in
time. God will give you wisdom and courage to do the right thing
at the right moment. Only remember one thing, never allow your
held on March 3, when both the respondents appeared in court in person. The
Judges held them guilty of contempt of court but confined themselves "to severely
reprimanding the respondents and cautioning them both as to their future
conduct." vide Vol. XVII.
spirit of sacrifice to go to the length of making you sour and dis-
gusted with yourself or your surroundings. This is one of the
sorest temptations to which workers are exposed. They go on
sacrificing themselves till they become disgusted with everything
and everybody for want of response. We sacrifice truly only when
we expect no response. It is well worth knowing the root meaning
of the word. It means, as you might know, 'to make sacred'. We
make neither ourselves nor others sacred when we are irritated or
angry. There is often more sacrifice—sacred making—in a divine
smile than in so-called substantial sacrifice. The instances of
Mary and Magdalene occur to me as I write these lines. Both
were good but the one who simply waited upon her Lord without
making any fuss was probably more self-sacrificing than the other.
And so may it be with you. Do not overtax your spirit in trying
to win over Mrs. Gandhi or anybody else. Immediately you find
that you cannot get on with her, you must have a separate
kitchen for yourself. You could still serve her but not be so inti-
mate with her. Nothing that you do there should tire out either
your spirit or your body.
Do please ask for every convenience you may need whether
for food or otherwise. Ask Maganlal or Imam Saheb or anybody
who has come nearer you.
Yes, Deepak is all you describe him. I would like you gently to
get him to realize his responsibility and concentrate on his studies.
Supervise his letter-writing. See that he writes fully and neatly
to his mother every day.
My heart is with you in your sorrow. I can understand your
desire to be with your brother in Denmark. But you have chosen
a different path—a path that does not admit of exclusive service.
May God give you strength for your task.
I agree with you about Mahadev. He is needlessly anxious
about his health. He is prized not for his body but for his spirit.
It must be a privilege for friends to nurse him in his illness.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat of the handwritten original in N.A.I.; also My Dear
Child, pp. 47-
