11. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 16, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,
I have your letter. Of course I can agree with every word of
what you have said about typewriters and typists. There is no-
thing inconsistent between your letter and my presentation. I
simply told you why there had been seeming indifference about
getting the very best typists.
But the advertisement idea does not commend itself to me.
We have so many limitations that people who know us will not
care to apply, and if strangers in search of employment but not
knowing what we are do apply, it would be a waste of time for
them and us to trouble them. I am writing this from bitter
experience. But I again entirely agree with you that there is
certainly within limitations scope for educated Indians to find
themselves in khadi work. And that process is gradually going
on. There is much more that I can write on this subject. But
it is unnecessary to tax you on details. I was long with my
previous letter because I was anxious to discuss some principles.
I am entirely at one with you that Maganlalji should have
all the assistance he needs and that whatever assistance we take
should be of the best type available; and if I felt that advertising
in the manner you suggest would do it, I should go in for it.
And, in any case, Maganlal can certainly advertise. There is no
principle at stake, nor is there any question of much expense.
I know that you never implied that there was anything wrong
in handling human excreta and I also know that you yourself
did the thing yourself in the Ashram. What I told you was that
the untouchables themselves would feel as I suggested. That
would be wrong I know. But I simply mentioned the difficulty.
They will take up the kind of work you suggest only after some
of us have done, and done it successfully.
I don't know whether it was your prompting or not, but I
have got a new edition of Dr. Kellogg's book on diet. It is a
big volume and it is lying in front of me. It is enough to make
one giddy even to contemplate reading that volume especially
when I have mortgaged every available minute for the work I
have on hand and which I feel I must do. I shall therefore
profit more by the correspondence lessons that you are giving me
out of your experience on dieting than by reading the big book.
The new shorthand idea appeals to me. And if someone at
the Ashram will go in for it, I would not mind spending the
money. You will therefore press the suggestion on the people at
the Ashram.
With love to you all,
Yours,
R. B. GREGG, ESQ.
C/O S. E. STOKES, ESQ.
KOTGARH
SIMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 14161
