6. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
April 9, 1913
DEAR MR. LANE,
The papers have given the information that General
Smuts will be in charge of the Immigration Bill whose text I have
only just seen. I enclose herewith copy of the telegram I have
addressed to the Government which will show General Smuts how
seriously open to objection the Bill is, examined purely from the
passive resistance standpoint. You will see that my telegram
covers practically the whole ground. You may remember that
some of these objections were discussed thoroughly, and General
Smuts, so far as I am aware, promised to meet them all. One thing
has been omitted from the telegram. In the correspondence bet-
ween us of last year, I questioned whether declaration would be
required from educated entrants under the Free State reservation
clause. If it be eligible, the clause will have to be altered so that,
whilst the prohibition against the ownership of fixed property,
farming, etc., continues, the declaration is dispensed with as re-
gards those who enter under the proposed measure as immigrants
into the Union.
The question about Indian marriages might conceivably be
treated as a new point, but is it in reality? I certainly never dreamt
that Indian marriages that have been hitherto recognized by the
Courts of Law in the Union were unlawfully recognized. It can-
not for a moment be denied that the Searle judgment shakes the
existence of Indian society to its foundation.
Will you place this letter before General Smuts and, even if
he is not to be in charge of this Bill, may I look to him for support?
I know he will accept my assurance that I am not itching for pas-
sive resistance, indeed, I was so sure of the Bill carrying out the
provisional settlement both to the letter and in the spirit that I was
preparing for a visit to India in June, but I fear that, if the objections
are not met, a revival of the awful struggle is a certainty.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
E. F. C. LANE, ESQ.
PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
CAPE TOWN
[PS.]
You will see that I have sent a further telegram to the Interior
as a new discovery has been just made. In it I have brought out
the Free State difficulty.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5754
