389. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
DARJEELING, BENGAL,
June 5, 1925
CHI. RAMDAS,
I get your letters regularly. I write this with the mountains
of Darjeeling in front of me. It pricks me that you are not here to
share with me the view. But I derive satisfaction from the thought
that you are enjoying the scenery there and that it gives you
peace. What profit talking about the Himalayan scenery to one
on death-bed? Only the sight of bread will satisfy the hungry.
Therefore true scenery for a person is that which satisfies the
mind. What effect can the scenic beauty have on the thou-
sands of Gurkhas staying here? They do not even see it. It is
my blessing and my prayer that you may find complete rest
and peace there.
I had written that as a general rule when we had a dif-
ference of opinion with our superior officers, we should obey
the officers. I had written this with Devchandbhai in mind. He
is in charge of the work there. You have asked for double the
quantity of cotton. If Devchandbhai does not agree, do not be
disheartened. Accept his decision cheerfully. Thus alone can an
individual or a nation rise.
There are occasions when one must seek forgiveness not from
another but from one's inner self. The transformation in the
heart can cause miracles. Sometimes seeking forgiveness does
harm rather than good. If I have still not made you under-
stand this do ask me. Harilal sees me often. I meet him and
talk to him very gently. I do not worry. There is a sentence
in the Gita which means that one cannot change one's nature
by force. Our duty is to try to remove our faults. To be lethar-
gic in that is sin. We may only make the endeavour, leaving
the fruit of it in the hands of God.
Therefore, renouncing the
desire for the fruit, we should act.
Now there is no part of your letter left unanswered. I am
not sending blessings to Ch. Jaisukhlal, etc. That does not mean
that they do not have my blessings. They certainly do. It is
unnecessary to write.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Motana Man, pp. 29-30
