94. LETTER TO G. V. MAVLANKAR
[MOTIHARI,]
January 27, 1918
BHAISHRI MAVLANKAR,
I have your letter about the Sabha's draft reply to the Press
Note on Kaira. I like the first part of our reply. The second part
is as weak [as the first is good]. I am not bothering to revise it.
A stronger reply can be given to the Government's contention
that any body outside the Kaira District is not competent to do
anything in matters relating to that district. Whether or no
that district was represented by any member on the Sabha, it is
entitled to address the Government concerning any part of
Gujarat. It is even its duty to do so. It was necessary to mention
the names of the members of the Inquiry Committee. It was
not proper to have made a distinction between senior and junior
officers; unwittingly, we seem to have admitted that the inquiry
would have been more searching and fair if made by senior offi-
cers. Our contention is that Government officers, from the very
fact of being officers, inspire less confidence than experienced citi-
zens who know their responsibility, for the officers are appointed to
safeguard the interests of their class and they have a habit of re-
jecting anything that the people say. Public workers, on the
other hand, have no interest of their own to serve. They are
impartial and conscious that an error by them will not be passed
over, they are more careful in conducting an inquiry. We ought
to have brought out all this very effectively. In taking up this
issue, our purpose is to educate [the people] and to show that we
are as anxious for our prestige as the Government is for its. The
latter often seeks to uphold its prestige by the strength of its autho-
rity. We should do ours merely by the justice of our actions. A
training to this end in every detail [of conduct] and a definite lead
for the purpose will provide the people an excellent education in
swaraj. This is why I have concerned myself to offer all this
criticism.
Another thing I should like to say is that, at a moment like this,
timely action wins appreciation. The Committee must immediate-
ly attend to the problem, setting aside all other work, if need
be. In short, the Committee can in no circumstances put off its
duty. It should have able members, men of responsibility, who
can attend at any time. If we are right in our cause, it involves
the safeguarding of the interests of thousands of poor people. Every
public worker should think himself bound, as by a pledge, to leave
aside all other work in public interest just as he would in his own. I
think we are too late with our reply. Often, the Government, just
because it is more alert, is able to suppress a popular movement.
Justice does not help the ones who slumber but helps only those who
are vigilant. This is not a maxim to be mouthed in courts of law
but to be applied in every concern of practical life.
It is because you are all doing such fine work and are hold-
ing out so firmly that I have honoured you with this criticism. If I
had wanted to suggest that you had been negligent, I would have
done so by maintaining silence. It is never my practice to waste
my time saying anything of the kind in so many words. I have
said all this in love, that you may be more vigilant in future and
that a body like the Sabha, of thirty years' standing, may gain
in stature. Do not think it is a rebuke and do not take it to heart.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
