82. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 20, 1912
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I am now reaching Durban. Up to Newcastle I had a compartment
all to myself. From Maritzburg it became crowded. A native friend
usurped my seat whilst I was walking along the platform. I thought
I would walk and risk losing my seat. Could not manage two meals
yesterday. I shall see what happens today.
The Indian visit fills me — consideration of it in detail sends my
brain whizzing. Why need I think so much about it ? 'One step enough
for me.' That step is the patient to whom I am going. He drove out
the Indian visit from my thought. So much of self
Now you are in a seesaw. Your mind is a spinning top set in motion
at its highest. Well, the comfort before us all is that we cannot peep
into the future and we cannot control all the forces that mould us.
Only this we know that one of such forces is ourselves. So that our
duty is done when we have performed to the best of our ability our
own part. What is your own part? To make up your mind for the
immediate future and stick to it manfully. You have made up your mind.
Now it remains to stick to the resolution. It means your refusing to
waste your time even by your mind idly thinking of other projects which
might have been better.
Do your Hindi, fix up Mountain View and African Building, wind
up your office and do not worry about Call or Geevers or anybody
else or anything else.
For your food, while you need not just now return to the pure fruit
diet, you may only take up bread and oil and not milk and ghee. Later
only may you take these up if they are found necessary. Bread should
have its trial without ghee and milk. That would be a scientific
experiment.
Hope that you will have things not to be kept on the Farm packed
up.
Will you remember that you may not even spend a penny without
careful thinking ? The next year or eighteen months or more are the
time of your life.
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Vide also Vol. XI, pp. 402 and 407-.
104
