363. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,
Saturday
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have read your letter to Chi. Kashi. There is a difference between
thoughts and fancies. Man falls through fancies and becomes a prey to
worrying, thoughts mature him. In the sentence, 'This man is ever thinking',
'thinking' means 'worrying'. You should give that up. But it is essential that
we use our judgement and discriminate between our good and bad tendencies.
By thinking systematically in this matter, we become mature. You should not
worry or indulge in fancies while plying the spinning-wheel. If impure thoughts
forcibly invade your mind, you should, with equal energy, force yourself to
think differently. He who is devoted to his work, has no time to indulge in
useless thoughts. Always remember that there is One Witness to all our
thoughts. How can we entertain impure thoughts in the presence of that
Witness? Take this to be the meaning of the verse, 'It ceases when the
Supreme is seen'. Who, after seeing the Supreme, can take pleasure in the
objects of the senses? We do not know the atman. That is why we commit
sins everyday. If we but know that He sees our thoughts also, then, just as
we are ashamed to commit any sin in the presence of our dearest friend, we
would, if we are definitely convinced that our atman always stands there as a
witness, be ashamed of thinking impure thoughts or doing impure things.
How, then, can hypocrisy remain in us?
Lakshmidas and Velanbehn are generous. They will certainly forgive you.
But it is your atman's forgiveness that you really need. Once you have become
pure, you will as a matter of course be forgiven. It is not in the nature of the
atman to be impure. So, if the impurity has left you, it has left you for good.
When even the worst of sinners becomes clean, he can stand on a footing of
256
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
equality with one who has committed no sin at any time. There is no
distinction of high and low in the state of moksha. When that one
indescribable state is attained, it is the same for all. All of us commit sins.
But manliness lies in seeing and recognizing them and then destroying them.
You committed sins. But you need not feel frightened for that reason. If you
do not desist from sins even after knowing that they are sins, then indeed
you will have great reason to feel frightened. But now you know that they
were sins. Having known that, why need you fear? Be alert and suppress that
disturbing impulse.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33014
