394. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
AGRA,
September 19, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Read the letters on Gangabehn before
passing them on, so that you may know my view. Manji has
given her a real fright, whereas he ought to have offered his
sympathy to her. Personally I am convinced that . . .1 has com-
mitted theft. You know, do you not, that she had committed
some thefts even in the past?
The doubt which I had expressed in a previous letter about
[A] has proved correct for the present at any rate. If he can
cultivate the ability to see his wife's defects, she will cease to be a
wife to him and become one among his countless sisters. This case
of [A] proves to me for the thousandth time that a husband is a
wonderful creature. I have said what I wished to. You may
now do what you think best.
I should like you to believe firmly that your mind is not
impure. You should fulfil only one condition to be entitled to
hold this belief, and that is that you should not nurse impure
thoughts even for a moment but fight them every time they in-
vade your mind. The mind will always be running in all direc-
tions; our manhood and our duty lie in taming and controlling
it. A person who believes that his mind is impure sometimes
nurses his impurity or becomes weak. Hence, so long as we are
continually battling against impurity, we should never admit that
we are impure. This is worship of the truth in its purest form.
It is good indeed if Marathe now admits the failure of his
experiment. In that case, however, it is necessary that he should
make his experiments in the presence of all and give whatever he
has to the pupils learning carpentry, that is, become a teacher.
If you can politely explain this to him, try to do so. Or put it
before Nathji.
You need not send money to Sind just now, for the work
there is being mismanaged and Malkani's services cannot be utilized
fully. He has been, much against his will, drawn into a Govern-
ment committee. I have, therefore, written to him and told him
that he should not spend the money sent to him in the past
through that committee.
You should also keep with you for the present the money
received for the Assam Flood Relief Fund.
In this season of fever, everyone should drink boiled water.
It would be better still if they keep the bowels light with the help
of purgatives or enema, and reduce the quantity of food. If any-
one has the slightest fear that he is getting fever, he should take
3 grains of quinine and 15 grains of soda bicarb in lime juice.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5440; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 134-
