532. LETTER TO PYARELAL
July 18, 1940
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have understood your experience of that night. It pained
me. I do not like dreams at all. But when some action takes
place in a dream it is worse. For instance, it is one thing to
dream of eating. But quite another when somebody really eats
in a dream; it is definitely a bad thing. It would be the end
result of a particular habit. Such a thing happened in my case.
That is why I asked you if you had seen any gesture on my
part. How would it have any adverse effect on you? You
must really feel pity for me. If you did not see anything
wrong in it, it is because of your softness for me. But I must
beware of myself. However close you may sleep by my side,
why should it harm me? I would expect you to see if there
was any defect in me. I would be committing a crime if I hid
even a single defect of mine from all of you who are living
close to me. Hence, you do not have to change anything.
You feel my love only now. But I am not doing any-
thing new. When Sushila was here I used to get her to do
any work I wanted. I used to get details about your diet, etc.
I used to see about your bed, etc. Occasionally I used to
direct her where and how your bed should be made. When
Sushila left, I had already decided to entrust her chores to
you. Hence I am not doing anything extra or anything new.
You of course see it as something different. Let the feeling
persist. If and when Sushila comes she will take charge of
them. Is it going to diminish my love for you in any way?
I do not want to force you. I am glad that you have
given up fasting on Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.
Since you have done it for my sake, you are getting the merit
of fasting and in addition you are giving satisfaction to me.
Had you been fasting, I would not have been able to take
from you as much work as I wish. Whatever you may think,
you would not be able to accomplish as much work as I may
desire. Hence I would insist that since you have given up
observing fasts, you should leave it at that. Now that I have
332
LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
333
said this much, you may do whatever brings peace to your
mind. Actually, you should find peace in satisfying me. That
will cure your blankness of mind and also enable you to avoid
the mistakes that tend to get repeated.
You will now have understood my not being afraid of
Sushila and being afraid of you. She has experienced everything
I have in me. Even though Sushila has entered late in my
life, she is more absorbed in me. Hence I would even make
her sleep by my side without fear. I believe that she can fore-
stall any mistake I may make. In my view, contact with her
has brought greater purity to me. However much I may try,
I cannot take with you the same liberty as I may take with
Sushila. This has been in my nature right from childhood.
Usually, a man can take greater liberty with another man. The
opposite is true in my case. I have felt it is only correct.
Whether or not it is really correct can perhaps be known only
after my death. I am saying 'perhaps', because who can know
it? If I can become pure in this life morning, noon and
evening then I can say it for certain. Right now, I can only
surmise. In spite of my very intimate contacts with women no
woman can say that she has been harmed by contact with me
or been prey to lustful thoughts. This has been a matter of
great consolation to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
