459. LETTER TO LORD SAMUEL
PANCHGANI,
June 8, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,
I had your letter of 25th July, 1944. Perhaps you are right
that after this lapse of time it would not be very profitable to
enter into a detailed discussion of the various points raised by
your speech in the House of Lords.
There is one point in your letter however which challenges
a reply. You have adduced two passages from my writings in
support of your remarks in the House of Lords that "When Mr.
Gandhi called upon the British Government to quit India, he
said it would be for the Congress to take delivery." This, you
have argued, connotes totalitarian spirit in the Congress.
I have seen the full text of the Harijan articles referred to in
your letter. Copies of these are enclosed for easy reference.
The passages cited by you are from the Harijan of June
15, 1940, and December 3, 1938, respectively. You will not
fail to observe that they have no relevancy to the point at
issue. The Congress decision in connection with its "Quit India"
demand in August 1942 is embodied in the official declaration
of its President, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to which I have
referred in my last letter to you. To that decision the Congress
still stands committed and one fails to see what bearing my
writings in Harijan have upon it.
The fact however is that the quotations given by you are
incapable of bearing the totalitarian interpretation you have put
upon them. The British Government have often declared that they
would gladly part with power if there was a body in India ready
and fit to take charge. What is wrong in the Congress trying to
qualify itself for that onerous duty? That it does not want power
for itself but for the whole people of India is made absolutely
clear by me in the course of the same article from which you
have quoted. Here is the relevant extract :
Its non-violence forbids the Congress from standing aloof and
riding the high horse as the opponents say.
On the contrary it
has to woo all parties, disarm suspicion and create trust in its
bona fides.
Is it not the normal goal of every party in a democratic
State to aspire to convert the whole country to its view and
to become its mouthpiece? Does not the party in power in
the House of Commons take delivery of the machinery of
administration from the outgoing party-its predecessor? And is
not the formation of coalition cabinets under the party system
of government an exception rather than the rule? Then how
can the refusal of the Congress to sacrifice or water down its
ideal for the sake of securing unanimity with other parties be
called totalitarian?
With regard to the second passage from the article on the
Princes it is only necessary to point out that it was the British
Government itself that called upon the Congress to secure an agree-
ment with the States, at the Second Round Table Conference.
There could therefore be nothing wrong in its inviting the Princes
to treat with it.
The essential fact to remember in this connection is that
the Congress has no other sanction except that of persuasion
and self-suffering, any other being precluded by its creed. On
the other hand, is not violence, euphemistically called physical
force, the basis and backbone of the totalitarian spirit?
If
it is, and if you believe in my bona fides about non-violence and
also of the Congress, you cannot accuse either of the totalitarian
spirit.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosures : 2
RT. HON. VISCOUNT SAMUEL, G.C.B.,&C.
32 PORCHESTER TERRACE
LONDON W. 2 (ENGLAND)
Enclosures: "Two Parties" (Harijan, June 15, 1940)
"States and the People" (Harijan, December 3, 1938)
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1942-44, pp. 84-
