25. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
September 18, 1908
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
SIR,
I am delighted that you emphatically repudiate my suggestion that
you may have wilfully misrepresented me. Your repudiation fills me with
hope that I may yet convince you of the justice of the Indian demand. I
assume now that you would not mind an open door for highly edu-
cated Indians. If so, the question is not of "whether", but of "how".
You reject my solution to be "a species of dishonesty unworthy
of statesmen". And yet it has been resorted to by statesmen all over
the world. The Peace Preservation Ordinance gave absolute discretion
to the Governor as to the issue of permits. White British subjects received
them for the asking; other Europeans with little difficulty, but not with
the same facility; British Indians after the greatest difficulty. The
Governor went so far as to establish a separate department for
administering the same Ordinance for Indians. This was unfair, but
not dishonest, because it was openly done. The Governor had the
discretion and he chose to use it in this very partial manner, as he said,
in the interests of the predominant race. Indians would not have cavilled
at the differential administration, if the Department at one time had
not been tainted with corruption and always most niggardly regarding
the claims of bona fide refugees.
You have charged General Smuts with having used his discretion
unfairly as to filling the vacancies in the Civil Service with Boers, but
whether it is statesmanlike or not will depend upon results.
In Natal, the Immigration Officer has a discretion as to the education
test. I will take my oath that Europeans as a rule are not even examined.
Indians, as a rule, are examined and that, too, severely. A Mr. Abdulla
Browne an Irishman, was subjected to the test some years ago in Natal,
because he wore the fez, whilst his other white fellow-passengers were
not touched. Subsequently, the late Mr. Escombe and Mr. Browne
1 This appeared in Indian Opinion, 26-9-1908, under the title "A Solution Possible".
2 The Asiatic Office; this was closed down in 1903; vide Vol. IV, p. 15.
3 Elected for third time as Mayor of Durban and Chief Magistrate of Borough
in August 1904; vide Vol. IV, p. 238; originator of the idea of the Bazaar Notice which
sought to confine Asiatic trade in Natal to Locations.
had a hearty laugh over it. Mr. Browne felt the ludicrous position,
but did not consider the examination to be dishonest.
The same thing is, today, done at the Cape.
The fact is that legal inequality would be an insult to the race.
Administrative difference would be a concession to prejudice, and
Indian acceptance of it would be a graceful and, shall I say, statesmanlike
recognition of such prejudice, as also of the fact that, if we want to live
in this country, we must submit to the predominance of the European
races.
In any case, if you agree that a handful of educated Asiatics may
safely be allowed to enter without molestation, surely the combined
wisdom of the Government and the Progressive Party cannot fail to
find a solution that will be acceptable to both Europeans and Indians
and end a situation which cannot be viewed with unconcern by any
lover of the Empire.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 18-9-1908
