14. LETTER TO KUVALAYANAND
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE
June 17, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I now understand all you say about the abdominal massage
and massage of the heart. Of course it has been continued ever
since I wrote to you. I simply wanted to clear what I did not
understand. I have told you that in the physical application
of these exercises, I propose to go by faith in you. Whilst I shall
present my doubts to you so long as I do not understand your
explanations, they shall be final for me.
I want to give the practice of these yogic exercises a full trial,
if only because I regard them of all the methods of medical treat-
ment to be the freest from danger.
After I wrote my letter of the 8th, I took a forward step
which I hope you would not consider hasty. On re-reading your
notes, I saw that you expected me to go up to 30 degrees angle.
So, after writing to you, I immediately broadened the angle but
limited the duration to five minutes in accordance with the instruc-
tions. But I have my own doubts as to the angle being 30, because
I have not yet secured an accurate measuring instrument. Not
being satisfied with the raising of the cot, I looked about for a
plank which I have now secured. The cot has a wooden surface.
I spread on it not a mattress but a padded rug, and I take the
sarvangasan on it with the help of the board. It is now infinitely
better than the previous exercises. Mahadev has been measuring
the thing, and he thinks that the angle at which I take it is nearer
to 50 than 30. I am not satisfied that it is anything like 50.
Be that as it may. I am feeling no discomfort. Today will be the
4th day, and the duration is only five minutes. Blood-pressure is
taken every Sunday, and if I find that the pressure has at all gone
up, I shall ascribe the rising to the angle and drop the exercise
till I hear from you in reply to this. And I shall drop it, in
any case, if you think that I have gone too far.
There is another passive exercise which I have been taking,
not very regularly but fairly regularly, which I used to take when
I was convalescing after dysentery and when I was physically
much weaker than I am today. And it is to raise the legs at
right angles to the trunk and keep them for two or three minutes
there; that is for removing any fatigue there may be after the walk;
and then, I have the legs in that straight condition bent as much
as can be bent without any strain whatsoever towards the head,
whilst the trunk is lying on the bed. This I take to strengthen the
muscular exercise for the abdomen. I think I even mentioned
to you that this was given to me by Dr. Kelkar whom, I under-
stand, you know. And he has been writing to me to press that
exercise on me. Both these things, keeping the legs straight and
at right angles to the trunk and gently bending the legs towards
the head seem to me to do good. There is no fatigue left and there
is felt after the bending exercise a forward movement about the
bowels.
I am still not taking tepid water and salt in the morning;
for, the enema continues and I am now able to retain the water
for half an hour. But I do take a tumbler full of water by the
nose. Less than half of the quantity is spilt in the process of
drinking through the nose. So I think about four ounces of cool
water I take in this way just after the mouth wash.
The walking exercise in the morning and in the evening con-
tinues, 40 minutes each time. But the distance covered is greater
than when I began after coming to Bangalore. It is nothing less
than two miles every time.
I have not yet dared to go beyond two teaspoonfuls of melted
butter. Milk has been increased, I think I told you, from 30 to
40 ounces and bhakhari or oatmeal two ounces remain.
I enclose your original notes which you need not return be-
cause I shall remember the contents. You will please send me
any further instructions you may think desirable.
Yours sincerely,
SRIMUT KUVALAYANANDJI
KUNJAVANA
LONAVLA
From a photostat: G.N. 5048; also S.N. 12596
