210. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
Sunday, February 18, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I sent some matter yesterday and am sending
more today. In the "Johannesburg Letter" that I sent, insert a separate
heading beginning from "It is learnt from Reuter's cables...". I shall
give as much as I can every week under "Reuter's Telegrams" and you
too may add to it. I shall make the "Johannesburg Letter" a separate
item and shall include in it mostly local news. I have asked for such
news-letters from other places also.
It was as well that I did not write to Hemchand. Make the best
use of him there. I shall also write to him. You needs must have a
man of understanding to assist you. Don't mind it even if Hemchand
makes some mistakes, but go on putting the responsibility for the work
on him. When we are overburdened, we should consider the relative prio-
rity of our various duties and try to do the most we can. Everything
will become easy if you look at things this way. Now the first thing for
you to do is to improve the Gujarati Section; this, of course, is your duty.
The second, accounts; this has also to be attended to by you. The third
is the collection of dues; the fourth is job-work, and the fifth Gujarati
cases, which had better stop for the time being. Of course, you should
always keep these in mind. You might drop Urdu for the present. You
must give some of your time to your own land. You should not go out
for more than two days for collecting dues or for anything else. You
should not bother about the income just now. You should think of
other things only after the books have been put in order. It will be all
right if you devote Thursday to the reading of proofs and Tuesday and
Wednesday exclusively to general reading and to writing Gujarati. It
will be enough if you go to town on Monday and Friday or Saturday.
Don't worry if you can't visit the outlying places at present. It won't
matter if you translate less from other newspapers. The main thing to
do is to give all the important news about Natal, and this I do not find
at present. It will become all right when local news begins to appear.
I shall go on sending news about this place and translations from the
newspapers. More skill will be called for in laying out the matter. It
will perhaps do if you devote Wednesday alone to reading. Oh no,
I forget; Monday would be better, for, while the types are being distri-
buted on Monday, you can be ready with the matter. Do not become
unnerved if there are many things to do. You have done well to clear
your position before all your colleagues. Even a mother does not give
without being asked. They will, if you ask them.
I see that it is necessary to clear the Press land, and that with our
own hands. It will be nice if half an hour is given to this job, though
it may be after the Press work is over. If the others do not give of their
time, you brothers at least will. Hemchand will help, and I shall write
to him. West also will help. You may talk to Sam even now and
convince him. Bean will understand only in course of time. I feel this
work should start immediately.
I still firmly hold that it is good that we have given up job-work,
and that it was right for you to have stayed on in the Press. Now
that there is no worry about the job-work, there won't be any need for
some one to sit in the office. I believe it would be better, in so far as
it is possible, to have Indians working with us instead of Kaffirs. How-
ever, you may do what you think proper. In this matter you need not
depend on my judgment. I shall speak to Mr. Isaac.
What you say about Mr. Brian is exactly what I have in mind.
He should do composing for the present when he does come. Do talk
to Anandlal about your difficulties and get his assistance and sympathy.
You may take his advice also, so that he will be pleased. Keep your
mind open.
If Kalabhai has not yet got a room, arrange for him to have one
immediately.
I shall find out about the advertisement that has been withdrawn.
I shall enquire about your slippers, etc., tomorrow (Monday). En-
trust to Hemchand the disposal of post coming in from outside. Tell Vira-
sami that I have not received the order so far. I shall send it as soon
as I receive it.
I have nothing more to add. Have more heart-to-heart talks with
West. Since the two of you alone understand the scheme better than
the others, you have to be in perfect agreement first. Get Anandlal to
mix with you as much as possible. Try to persuade Sam; and win over
Mr. Bean gradually. He likes me, but does not understand the scheme.
He is a good man and has therefore stuck to his post. His mind is more
on the money because he lacks in real simplicity. Yet he won't go after
money at any price. He will do better later on. Do write me a letter
every week, giving full expression to your thoughts.
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
It will not be possible for me to go there this month.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4783
