331. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
March 26, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have sent you a wire today, and am waiting for a reply.
I hope you were able to complete your fast successfully.
A
seven-day fast should not be hard for anybody. It can do nothing
but good. But one must know how to end it. Food must be
light and should be increased gradually. One must pass stools
regularly. Let me know what effect the fast has had on your body
and mind.
Please don't expect frequent letters from me these days. I
can with great difficulty write any. The letters which my com-
panions may write are all that are possible.
The companions are
constantly changing, and that is another reason why I can't
dictate many letters. Though I know your keen desire for letters
from me, I am not able to satisfy it.
I don't wish to ask you to come over—it wouldn't be proper
for me to do that. But if you can't restrain your desire to come,
then do come. I have written to Narandas and Vasumati, and
said the same to them. I wrote the same thing to Gangabehn
too. She didn't come. But you need not follow anybody's exam-
ple. Follow the promptings of your own heart. One may not
obey one's nature for committing a sin, but it will not be a sin
to come to see me.
Chimanlal had written to me about your request for money.
Since you had made the request, I have asked him to send you
the sum. What remains does not belong to anyone person; it
belongs to all of us. If it was in your charge and if I was in
jail, would you not have used it according to your discretion?
It is only by accident that I am outside.
My being outside makes
no difference to our intention at the time of taking the decision
to sacrifice the Ashram. It was indeed a difficult one to act
upon: "Nobody should draw any money from the Ashram funds;
everybody should return to jail as soon as he is released and
should do without money even in jail." But this has remained
so only in theory. Thanks to my coming out of jail, the thing
broke down still further.
But the fact remains that that was the
intention. All of us should adhere to it to the best of our ability.
It will be enough if we bear this in mind. No other check on
you is necessary.
Please let me know if you see any error in
this reasoning.
Miss Harrison has joined us. Pyarelal came with her. Miss
Lester also has been with me. I am going out again tomorrow
to visit the affected areas.
Don't read too much meaning in Miss
Harrison's coming. She has come only to acquaint herself with the
present situation.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5517
