185. LETTER TO VICEROY
ANAND BHAWAN, ALLAHABAD,
February 1, 1931
H.E. THE VICEROY, DELHI
DEAR FRIEND,
You have made a public appeal to me for co-operation in
connection with the further work of the recently held Conference
in London and ascribed to me a belief in the sincerity of British
promises and declarations. I wish that I could endorse your as-
cription. I told you on the 23rd December 1929, that subject to
honourable exceptions I had found to my great sorrow that Bri-
tish declarations and promises were insincere. Had I not found
them so, the active voluntary co-operation that I had tendered
to British officials in India and outside would never have been
withdrawn.
But I assure you that I am simply waiting for a sign in order
to enable me to respond to your appeal. I confess, however, that
some of the signs are highly ominous. In Borsad, in the district of
Kaira, on the 21st January, a cruel, uncalled for and unchivalrous
lathi-charge was made upon wholly innocent women and girls
who were forming a procession which was marching to a women's
meeting that was to be held in order to protest against the bru-
tal treatment of a girl 17 years old by a police official. Neither
the procession nor the meeting was prohibited. The injuries were
severe in several cases. Some of those who were assaulted belong
to the Satyagraha Ashram at Sabarmati. One of them, an old
widow a member of the Managing Board of the Ashram, was
drenched in blood. To give you some idea of the nature of the
police barbarity, I give you a free translation of her letter to me.
The facts stated in that letter are capable of easy proof. The Col-
lector himself was in Borsad on this date. At the time of writing
this, I cannot recall anything in modern history to parallel this
official inhumanity against wholly defenceless and innocent
women. I may complete the outline of this picture by stating that
there were no men in this meeting or procession except a few
volunteer guides.
On the 26th at Calcutta, as you may be aware, the meetings
advertised to be held for the purpose of re-declaring the Independence
Day Resolution were put under the ban and the procession
marching to the principal meeting and headed by the Mayor of
Calcutta, Syt. Subhas Chandra Bose, was dispersed by a cruel
lathi-charge.
In Begusarai (Bihar) on the same date a party of men return-
ing from a similar meeting was fired upon by the police resulting
in six killed and several wounded. The police are reported to
have fired even into a school. You have probably read the official
defence of the police proceeding. My informants deny the main
part of the official defence, and if their version is correct, the firing
was wholly uncalled for.
On the top of these three events comes the news that Sjt.
Bhashyam, a member of the Madras Bar Council, and Sjt. V. A.
Sundaram, a well-known worker, were, whilst they were picketing
foreign-cloth shops, with the concurrence of their owners, assault-
ed and treated in a manner unworthy of a civilized State. They were
taken, after the assault, to an out of the way place and out of
reach of medical or other assistance. Had it not been for the chance
passing of a car, it is difficult to say what would have happened
to these gentlemen.
I do not ask you to accept the versions given here, but I do
ask you to feel with me that it is not possible for those like me
who believe in them to tender co-operation with any confidence,
much less enthusiasm. Whether, however, such co-operation, for
which many other things are necessary, comes forth in the end or
not, it is, I hope you will agree, highly necessary to have an un-
biased judgment over happenings like those I have narrated. Such
an enquiry is necessary because I assume that the Government of
India do not want to countenance methods such as I have des-
cribed. The four cases I have cited are but recent examples. I
invite you, therefore, to appoint an impartial and representative
committee of enquiry acceptable to the Congress to investigate
the allegations of excesses against officials in different parts of
India since the inauguration of the civil disobedience campaign.
If such a committee is appointed I am sure that the Congress
will lead evidence before it to show that in very many cases the
conduct of officials has been contrary to the expectations raised in
the preambles to your ordinances and in your repeated declarations.
Till I hear from you and know your wish in the matter I
am not sending this letter to the Press. I am in Allahabad till
Tuesday. I expect to leave Allahabad on Tuesday evening for
Bombay where I expect to be till the 6th instant.
I remain,
Your faithful friend,
Enclosure: Translation of a letter
Bombay Secret Abstracts 750(14) Pt-A, pp. 159-63
