293. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
November 24, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have just heard from Sir P. Pattani that he would begin to
pay Gurudev Rs. 1,000 per month from December till the Rs. 5,000
are paid out. It will be all right now.
The enthusiasm of the people and the attendance are
phenomenal and exceed my expectations which were fairly high.
You will find it all faithfully described in the columns of Hari-
Jan which as you must have observed has been transferred to
Madras. The people are paying handsomely. If these crowds are
not an indication that untouchability is fast going, I do not
know what can prove it. It must take time for the mighty reform
to be felt.
Later.
The foregoing was written amid interruptions. Your letter
written during the voyage or in Bombay has just been received.
About Gurudev's visit to Bombay I have written very little. I
do not even know what is going on. I can hardly read papers
during this rush. But of course he would be quite all right in
so far as the reception is concerned. Of money he is not likely
to get much. My appeal about Orissa is bringing very little.
Of course, Elwin should go his way and be left in God's hands.
But friends must issue warnings when they have doubts as to the
propriety of actions on merits. It is difficult to say when it is
God's voice and when it is not. Strangers have to judge every act
on its merits. This is applicable of course to my claim in con-
nection with my fasts. I wrote a long letter to E. on what ap-
peared to me his hasty departure from Matheran and avoid-
ance of Wardha. I have not heard from him at all after his go-
ing back to Karanjia.
I hope I shall not have to cable you to return. The Magis-
trates have not worried me up to now. And when and if they
do you would be too late for guidance. You should therefore
trust me to God even as Efy is doing, even as you are trusting
E. to God. I know that He is guiding me.
Love.
MOHAN
[PS.]
Send your letters to Wardha.
From a photostat: G.N. 983
