203. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
COURT CHAMBERS,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 3, 1904
To
THE EDITOR
The Star
SIR,
I trust you will allow me to say a few words with reference to your
editorial on the representation of the British Indian Association. I am
afraid the most important point of the representation has been missed
by you, and, in my humble opinion, the publicists in the country would
1 The wording in this extract from Lord Curzon's Guildhall speech differed slightly from
that cited earlier in "India Makes the Empire", 20-8-1904. with which this has been
brought in line.
2 This was reproduced in Indian Opinion under the title "British Indian Association:
A letter from Mr. Gandhi".
render a service to it by drawing the attention of the public to the fact
that the representation meets entirely the most pressing objections of the
Europeans who do not want unrestricted immigration of Indians, and
would allow no new licences to them. The Association accepts Sir Arthur
Lawley's proposal as to the introduction of an Immigration Ordinance
on the Cape model, and makes a suggestion whereby the objectors them-
selves, namely, the local authorities, would have the virtual control over
the issue of new licences. Could the Indians go further? It should not
be forgotten that, when the late Mr. Kruger wanted to nullify the decision
of the late High Court by Volksraad resolutions, there was tremendous
opposition. The Colonists, who then formed the Opposition, are now
asking for the very thing they opposed, for it is nothing less than the deci-
sion of the Supreme Court that they wish to override by stopping or sus-
pending the issue of Asiatic licences. Such a thing in a British country
would be impossible if self-interest did not temporarily blind the fine
sense of British justice. And yet, the British Indian Association, recogni-
sing the popular prejudice, is prepared to forego very largely the fruits
of victory dearly won after a tremendous struggle. Personally, I do not
fear the verdict of any Commission that may be appointed, believing,
as I humbly but firmly do, that many of the objections raised against
the Indians have no foundation in fact. The number of retail Indian
traders in the Transvaal is very small compared to the European. But
I think that the appointment of a Commission is unnecessary and it will
indefinitely postpone a settlement of the question. It will be very surpri-
sing if Mr. Lyttelton goes back upon his despatch and suspends the issue
of Indian licences, pending the finding of the Commission. The British
Indian Association has ever tried to meet the wishes of the Europeans.
It has again made a supreme effort, and you would, I submit, be serving
the country by laying stress upon this fact, especially in view of the extreme
measures that are being suggested at Potchefstroom and elsewhere. The
time is of the essence at present; the controversy has reached a stage which
admits of a definite decision as the only remedy. Session after session,
legislation has been passed, and each time the question has been shelved.
The Association has made definite proposals which, I venture to think,
afford a reasonable solution worthy of a trial, at any rate. They have,
moreover, the merit of disposing of the question locally.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 10-9-1904
