198. LETTER TO "THE ENGLISHMAN"
LONDON,
August 3, 1909
THE EDITOR
THE ENGLISHMAN
[CALCUTTA]
SIR,
Your correspondent "South African" has packed so much igno-
rance into the letter published by you in your issue of the 21st ultimo,
that he had need to conceal his identity. May I correct a few of his
misstatements?
Mr. L. W. Ritch, though he calls me his friend and colleague, is
not—as your correspondent assumes—an Indian. He is an English
Jew and is at present practising as a barrister.
The registration of Indians is a measure of identification, impug-
ning the honesty of Indians as a class. The pass system with reference to
the Kaffirs is somewhat of a taxing measure and in no way insulting in
the same sense that the Asiatic Registration Act of 1907 is. There is as
much difference between the Asiatic Registration Act and the Conti-
nental Passport system as there is between chalk and cheese. The
Continental Passport is a protection to the holder and the non-holding
of it does not make him a criminal and liable to imprisonment with
hard labour up to six months, whereas the non-holding of registration
certificates under the Asiatic Act by British Indians has sent already
2,500 Indians to gaol in the Transvaal. There are no Indian coolies in
the Transvaal.
The Indian trading community in Natal—notwithstanding your
correspondent's statement to the contrary—had no part in shaping the
legislation in connection with the introduction of indentured Indian
labour into that Colony.
Your correspondent's fiction is that every Indian in Natal lives at a
cost of 10/- per month and a hut made of old tin linings of cases, where-
as the fact, according to the borough valuation of Durban, is that the
Indians hold substantial properties in that place, valued at nearly a
million pounds, and that this very fact has been used against them by
their European competitors in trade.
In one thing, however, the Indians can join hands with your cor-
respondent, and that is in his denunciation of the existence of inden-
tured labour in Natal or in any part of South Africa. British Indians
have been, for the past fifteen years, agitating for abolition of that form
of labour, which the late Sir William Wilson Hunter described as
perilously near to slavery.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 4-9-1909
