140. LETTER TO THE PRESS
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
October 10, 1919
TO
THE EDITOR
THE [BOMBAY] CHRONICLE
SIR,
The Khilafat Conference at Lucknow has decided to observe
Friday next, the 17th instant, as a day of fasting and prayer. There
can be no doubt about the intensity of Moslem feeling on this very
important matter. There is no doubt also that the intentions of
the League are distrusted. In one's darkest hour, God is the
only refuge and it is to Him that millions of Moslems all over
India are expected to turn for comfort, guidance and relief. Mil-
lions of mouths will, that day, ask the Almighty if it be His will
to avert the impending doom. A true Moslem can no more con-
template with equanimity the dismemberment of Turkey than
a Christian can so contemplate the desecration of what is dearest
and nearest to him.
What are the Hindus to do? I feel that they could do no less
than their Mohammedan brethren. Their fast and prayer will be
the truest test of friendship and fellow-feeling. I hope that every
Hindu, man and woman, will observe the 17th instant and thus
put a sacred seal on the Hindu-Mohammedan bond.
There is also to be a hartal. It is intended to impress upon
His Majesty's Ministers the seriousness of the position. But, in
order to be impressive, it has to be absolutely peaceful and volun-
tary. Any exercise of force will make it thoroughly useless for the
purpose for which it is intended. If the Mohammedans really feel,
and if the Hindus are sincere in their professions of friendship, natu-
rally they will both voluntarily stop work on the 17th. I have
ventured tenderly to advise that, in view of past experience, there
should be no processions, no meetings. Everyone must remain
indoors except volunteers and Mohammedans who will visit the
Juma Masjid. Any breach of the peace will simply mar a most
excellent cause. I have, therefore, further suggested that the mill-
hands should in no way be encouraged to stop work, nor those
who are engaged in the interests of the public health.
I venture to hope that the Government will rise to the occa-
sion. Indeed, they could make common cause with the people and,
thereby, tell His Majesty's Ministers that we consider the Khila-
fat question as a sacred trust which must not be betrayed. But
whether the Government go so far or not, they can at least issue
instructions to all the officials not to interfere either directly or
indirectly with the forthcoming peaceful demonstration.
I am,
Yours, etc.
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-10-1919
