156. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
POST ANDHERI,
March 15, 1924
MY DEAR FRIEND,
"Cheer, boys, cheer, no more of idle sorrow." Why worry
about anything? There is an under-note of sorrowful despair
about your letter. Better that, however, than nothing. You want
me to whip you into cheerfulness and for my encouragement you
cite the noble example of your cousin in Zanzibar. Only, he had
1 Abbas Tyabji (1853-1936); former judge of Baroda High Court; nationa-
list Muslim leader of Gujarat. He was one of the Commissioners appointed by
the Punjab sub-committee of the Congress to report on the Punjab disorders.
2 Perhaps a slip for "undertone"
3 This was dated March 13.
a black boy who was really a boy to deal with, whereas I have
the very difficult task of correcting a grown-up old boy with a
hoary beard and a fair face. It was a comparatively easy task to
brave the operation for appendicitis. But how shall I, a mere
youngster compared to you, perform the task you expect me to
handle? However, when we meet, I shall endeavour to prepare
myself for it. You do not know that at the present moment I am
sporting a proper Afghan stick. Therefore better beware. Permis-
sion to lodge with me is only granted to fellow-patients. You are
suffering from melancholia and are hereby permitted to come
whenever you choose and can. Only the upper floor rooms are all
practically taken up. If, therefore, you want privacy, I shall have
to condemn you to a first-floor room, but I have just received a
letter from Devchand Parekh of Kathiawar that that tyrant-king
of Gujarat, Vallabhbhai, is packing you off to Kathiawar.
I am making steady progress. I am putting through a fair
amount of work every day. I am not yet capable of much physi-
cal exertion.
How is Mrs. Abbas? Where are the girls? What are they
doing? Devdas told me that Fatima had at last been married.
To whom was she married? Are the couple happy? Where are
they staying? What is the husband doing? You see I am inte-
rested in all the members of the family because for so many years
now it has made me one of the members! You must excuse a dic-
tated domestic letter. My hand is too shaky to write as much as
I should like to, and as I wanted to give you a fairly long letter,
I had to choose between not writing such a letter or dictating.
I have chosen the latter course.
With love to you all and bhurr to you in addition,
Yours,
M. K. G.
ABBAS TYABJI, ESQ.
BARODA CAMP
From a photostat: S.N. 9595
