49. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
July 4, [1907]
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
You have, much to the surprise of the Indian community, informed
your readers that Indians suffer from practically no disabilities, and that
the question of giving digit-impressions is one to be dismissed from consi-
deration, as the Indian sepoy voluntarily gives his thumb-mark before
receiving his pension.
I wonder whether you would now support the Immigration Bill
published yesterday, as being an innocuous measure so far as Indians
are concerned. Asiatics have been credited with unfathomable subtlety,
but that displayed by the framers of the Bill certainly, to use a vulgar
expression, takes the cake. It is, if my reading of Sub-section 4 of Section
2 be correct, I take it, an answer to "passive resisters" to the Asiatic
Registration Act; and, in order to break the spirit of the last vestige of
dignity that yet remains in Indians in the Transvaal, a system of
State robbery is instituted. For the section in question makes an Asiatic
who does not take out the new registration certificate a prohibited
immigrant, and a prohibited immigrant is liable to suffer imprisonment
and then to be physically deported, the expenses of deportation to be
levied from the estate, found within the Colony, of the deported. Thus,
the law manufactures a prohibited immigrant by a most circuitous
method. A man who has made the Transvaal his home, but who, rightly
or wrongly, protests against a law applicable to him, by way of suffering
further penalty is to be treated as an outlaw in the country of his adoption.
The section in question, moreover, can only refer to the Asiatic and
Immorality Acts, that is to say, prostitutes, pimps, and Asiatics who
refuse to surrender their self-respect are to be classed in the same cate-
gory.
Moreover, to show the wantonness of the insult offered, I draw the
attention of the public to the fact that if an Indian who may satisfy the
most rigorous test, say, for instance, Sir Mancherji, wishes to enter the
Transvaal, he must, perforce, take out a registration certificate for himself
and his minor children, the latter also, if over eight years, to give their
separate and simultaneous digit-impressions, unless he wishes to be classed
as a prohibited immigrant and to be deported. Now the Registration
Act is intended, so it is said, to serve as a measure of identification only.
Is there any meaning in identifying a man who, by reason of his possessing
educational qualifications, can claim to remain in the Transvaal but
for the Asiatic Act? Does he not carry marks of identification on his own
person, seeing that he is liable to be examined as to his knowledge of a
European language, at any time, whether within or without the Colony?
What becomes of the speeches of General Botha, who showed so
much anxiety, when in London, for the welfare of the Empire as a whole,
who assured Lord Ampthill that there was no intention of imposing
humiliation on Indian subjects of the Crown? Is self-government to
mean a licence to deprive Asiatics, without check, of all liberty? Sir
George Farrar, speaking on behalf of the Progressive Party, stated that
the question underlying the Asiatic Registration Act was of the highest
importance, that the passing of the Act inflamed millions of Indians
unnecessarily against the British Empire. And yet, in order to assist the
Government, Sir George, at the risk of wounding, at a most inopportune
time, the susceptibilities of Indian subjects of King Edward, supported
the Asiatic Registration Act. Is the Progressive Party to approve of the
1 Vide Vol. VI, pp. 448, 471.
Immigration Bill with the hideous clause to which I have drawn atten-
tion, in spite of its boast of Imperialism?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 5-7-1907
