422. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
BANARAS,
September 26, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL (JOSHI),
Yesterday I got two letters of yours of different dates. The
same thing had happened in Kanpur. There is something strange
in this. I see in this nothing but the alertness or otherwise of the
postal staff. When there are different routes for carrying the post
to a particular place, the postal clerks dispatch the letters accord-
ing to their whim.
I think that Raghunath and others who have come there from
Vijapur to join in the birthday celebrations or for other reasons
have acted wrongly. For this I would blame the sense of irres-
ponsibility which prevails in our atmosphere more than the persons
concerned. I come to this conclusion especially from Raghu-
nath's action. We are always short of slivers. Raghunath and
Govindji, the two working together, could barely supply our
needs. And now Raghunath has come away. This does not seem
to be good. Chhaganlal too seems to have been unduly lenient.
I am writing to him also about this. It was his duty to have
detained those whose presence was necessary. It is possible that
such persons would have gone nevertheless. We would then have
known where we stand and learnt something even from that. I
write all this so that people may reflect over our shortcomings and
think how we should act in future. We have got to consider how to
meet the needs of slivers in Vijapur. If we get hold of the remedy
for this, which is devotion to duty, it would be easy enough to
meet these needs. I think Raghunath should return to Vijapur.
If those who know carding well make slivers even in the Udyoga
Mandir and if these are sent to Vijapur every week, would not
their shortage decrease? Think about this.
We must master bread-making without delay. From the
women's section, Gangabehn should be spared for the required
number of hours and our bread-making should be made perfect, or
we should give up making bread altogether. If we do not do
one of these two things, I foresee danger to our health.
I see much more meaning in acquiring the ability to do our
daily work systematically and efficiently than in organizing func-
tions like birthday celebrations which come once in a way.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5446; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 142-
