248. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD ELGIN
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 24, 1906
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE LORD ELGIN
HIS MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES
DOWNING STREET
DEAR SIR,
I have seen Mr. Churchill's reply on the Vrededorp Stands Ordi-
nance in answer to Sir Henry Cotton's question . In my humble opinion
the answer is based on a misapprehension of the real state of affairs.
1 This letter along with Sir Henry Cotton's question and Churchill's answer
(footnote 2 below) was reproduced in Indian Opinion, 22-12-1906.
2 On November 22, 1906, Sir Henry Cotton had asked the Under-Secretary of
State for the Colonies in the House of Commons whether his attention had been drawn to
Clauses 5, 8 and 9 of the Second Schedule of the Vrededorp Stands Ordinance of 1906,
under which the residence of British Indians, other than domestic servants, was pro-
hibited within that area affected by the Ordinance; and whether, looking to the fact that
the Ordinance did not come into effect until it had been assented to by the Crown,
and that, for several years past, both under the Boer Government and at present, British
Indians had been allowed to occupy land within this area under grants given by the
The act of granting Vrededorp to the poor Dutch burghers for
personal occupation was accompanied by occupation of Vrededorp
by persons other than the grantees irrespective of race or colour. As
for instance, many non-Dutch white people occupied Stands in Vrede-
dorp from the original grantees with the knowledge of the Boer Govern-
ment.
The Ordinance does not perpetuate the legal conditions which
were in existence before annexation, because the legal condition before
annexation was that the grantees had only squatters' rights. The Ordi-
nance now gives to them a permanent tenure with power to them to
transfer their leases to whomsoever they choose save and except Asiatics
so that the legal condition of personal occupation is now being changed
into that of transferable leases.
I venture to protest against the statement that Indians acquired
rights in Vrededorp in defiance of legal conditions. They acquired
rights in Vrededorp in the same manner that those who were not poor
burghers did.
Nor is it true that Indians have erected shanties in
Vrededorp. In my humble opinion, class considered, what are des-
cribed as shanties are superior to many of the buildings in Vrededorp.
If the doctrine of the desirability of keeping the white and the
Coloured quarters apart is sound, I fear that there will be an end to
British Indian residence in the Transvaal with any degree of self-respect.
The logical conclusion of such a doctrine will be a system of Locations
which can only result in ruination to hundreds of law-abiding and
respectable Indians.
One is appalled by the inaccurate information that is placed before
His Lordship in connection with matters Indian and it is extremely
painful that legislation that is otherwise without the slightest justifi-
cation is justified on statements that are inaccurate or misleading.
In venturing to offer the above remarks, no reflection is cast on
Lord Selborne but it is respectfully submitted that Lord Selborne
burghers of Vrededorp, and were still residing in this area, and had erected substantial
structures thereon, the Secretary of State would advise His Majesty to disallow the
Ordinance.
MR. CHURCHILL: My attention has been drawn to the provision referred to.
This land was originally granted to poor burghers—that is, to white men only, and on
condition of personal occupation. The Ordinance, therefore, merely perpetuates the
legal conditions which were in existence before annexation, and in defiance of which
certain Indians have, I understand, acquired some Stands and erected tin shanties.
I may add that it is very desirable to keep the white and Coloured quarters apart, as
the practice of allowing European, Asiatic, and Native families to live side by side
in mixed community is fraught with many evils, and is, in Lord Selborne's opinion,
injurious to the social well-being of all three. The whole question is, however, still
under consideration.
6‒15
himself receives misleading information, as is painfully apparent to
those who are on the spot and know the inner working of the adminis-
tration.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4635
