275. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
April 27, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
After I had written the postcard yesterday and the last clear-
ance was over, I got two days' post together. I will write nothing
to Gangabehn. I have still not been able to form a mental pic-
ture of what has happened.
Whatever you have done about the women, the present posi-
tion is better than that which existed. There was no question of
your taking the blame upon yourself. I had assumed the sole
responsibility for the change. You need not, therefore, give way
to despair. If anyone should feel despair it is I, but I am not
likely to do so. Though I see my deficiencies and my errors and
realize that my inferences prove wrong, I don't feel despair be-
cause I know that there is no other way of progressing except
to speak and act according to the light within us. I saw my
defeat in regard to the women's section and wrote to you about
the matter in a spirit of humility. If ever I embrace Ashram-
sannyasa, that is, take a vow to live permanently in the Ashram
I would again take courage in both hands and try to reimpose
the old restrictions on the women's section, and being present there
all the time I would certainly succeed in keeping them bound
together. But alas! how can this ever be?
1 The name is being omitted.
I wish that you should not yield to despair and should not
needlessly blame yourself. Cast out the fear that perhaps you will
fall and, instead, determine in your mind that you will not fall and
be confident that you will succeed. If, none the less, you do fall, you
may humbly admit your failure and do what may seem right at that
time. If a person who has bound himself with a vow can give
a hundred per cent guarantee about himself, he will no longer
be a human being who has taken a vow but will have become
God Himself. It is possible for a human being to rise to such
a state, but history does not record the instance of any such
person. Why should we die daily before we really die? Why
should we fear violating a vow before we have really violated
it? It should be enough if we do not take a single step which
would lead to its violation. What is it about which you feel this
fear every day? Does your fear relate to Ramabehn? Or to
some other woman? Or merely to impure desire within you?
Do you feel any other fear besides this?
You raise another question in your letter: Are you not
morally falling by forcing yourself to live with me because of the
strength of your love for me? The question is pertinent and was
worth asking. If, while you live with me, you dwell on sense-
pleasures in your mind and only outwardly give an impression to
other people of being a man of self-control, you are certainly fall-
ing and it is your duty to leave me, even if the Ashram should
go to ruin by your doing so.
Re who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to dwell on the
sense-objects — such a one, wholly deluded, is called a hypocrite.
Think over this verse in our spiritual dictionary. If it applies to
you in any measure, you ought to leave me in order to save your-
self from hypocrisy. You know, don't you, that it is charged against
me that this is the result of people living with me. The instance
of . . .2 can perhaps be cited in support of this charge. If,
however, you control the senses outwardly, that is, physically, and
are at the same time striving hard to control the mind too, and if
living with me helps you in your striving, you should cling to the
Mandir and to me like a spirit clinging to a human being possessed
by it. You alone can know what your real state is.
But he, O Arjuna, who, keeping all the senses under control of the mind,
engages the organs in karmayoga, without attachment, that man excels. 3
This should be my state and yours and of everybody else's.
But even such persons may fall. That is why, in the same chapter,
Arjuna puts this question:
Then what impels man to sin, O Varshneya, even against his will, as
though by force compelled?
Read Shri Krishna's reply to this and think over this. After
that, read and think over the immortal dialogue between Arjuna
and the Lord towards the end of the sixth chapter, and then do
what you wish.
Narandas must have by now made up his mind. It will pain
me if he leaves. But I have faith in him and believe that,
whatever he does, he will do after mature deliberation.
I really believe that Jamnadas will not leave the school. If
he leaves, however, I will bear that too.
It is no ordinary matter that the moral fall of . . . has been
brought to light. Because of faith in his purity, many persons had
remained pure. It is not surprising that a good many should be
shaken on his guilt being published. The event will have an effect
on his brothers in one way or another. Prabhudas is pure and as
frank-hearted as a child. The effect on him, therefore, seems to
have been good. Narandas and Jamnadas are men of the world.
I would not, therefore, be surprised if they are upset, though, of
course, I had not thought that the effect would be such on them.
I still hope that this effect will turn out to be temporary.
. . .'s future conduct, too, will produce profound effects. Let us
bathe him in the purest love.
I believe that now Santok will not leave the Ashram. By
giving Rukhi in marriage to Banarasilal, she has displayed great
courage, shrewdness, firmness and devotion to the memory of her
husband, and made it certain that she cannot live anywhere else
but in the Ashram. If you examine Maganlal's life, you will see
that his path in life, too, was altogether uncommon. He hewed
his way through rocks, without letting any of us know. His faults
were Himalayan, but his virtues and his courage overshadowed
them and made them seem like particles of dust. Do not compare
yourself with Maganlal and feel dispirited in any way. Maganlal
did his work, you have to do yours. "One's own dharma is the best
for one, though seemingly without merit." Maganlal's age has
ended; we have now entered another.
Have Navin and Dhiru left permanently or only for the
summer holidays? Whatever it is, let us be content. Navin
need not have gone for the holidays.
I do believe that there is much room yet for simplicity in
our life at the Mandir. But I see that Kishorelal's analogy is
incomplete. The children in Ville Parle may be living in great
simplicity, but they are not imprisoned by the chain of rules and
may, therefore, be looked upon as living without self-control.
Theirs is enforced simplicity. The labourers living near the Ashram
live in still greater simplicity, but their simplicity has no value.
Though you and I take milk every day, we deliberately abstain from
using many other things which are available to us and, therefore,
our life is simpler than that of the labourers. This is the principle
of the matter. If, however, we get conceited because of this and
believe ourselves on a higher pedestal, we shall fall. Our duty is
to emulate the involuntary simplicity of our friends, the labourers,
and, till we have succeeded in reaching the ideal, to nurse the
purer type of discontent in regard to ourselves.
Do not let it trouble you whether the Mandir will remain full
or become deserted. Remember the reply which Janak gave when
fire had broken out in Janakpuri. After we have done our best
to protect the Mandir and left not a single remedy untried for
the purpose, we can say: 'What matters it to us whether the
Mandir goes up in flames or survives? It is His concern Who may
destroy it with fire or save it, as He will' Therefore, let them
who wish to leave do so and bear separation from them.
It is midnight just now. Mosquitoes are plentiful. I have
not covered the bed with a mosquito-net. I got up at 12.45,
completed the diary and then started this letter at 12.55. I look
at the watch now and it is exactly 2 o'clock. I had been thinking
after I got your two letters yesterday, and this letter is the result.
It is for you alone, but you are free to show it to anyone. I
should like you to show it to Mahadev, etc. But I would not mind
it even if you did not show it to anyone.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5407
