52. LETTER TO P. S. TO GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
JOHANNESBURG,
February 20, 1907
Confidential
PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
I shall be obliged if you will be good enough to bring the
following to His Excellency's notice. I have read the long cable-
grams that have been appearing in the Press regarding the Blue-
Book issued in London on the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance.
The cabled summary goes to show that, in His Excellency'S
opinion, the pledges given by him cannot be carried out without
the Ordinance. I believe those pledges are that no non-refugee
Asiatic should be allowed to enter the Transvaal pending the
establishment of responsible government. I venture to submit
that not only have no non-refugee British Indians been allowed
to enter the Transvaal, but even refugees have found it and still
find it exceedingly difficult to re-enter.
His Excellency is further reported to have stated that an un-
authorized influx of Asiatics on a considerable scale exists in the
Transvaal. I claim to have a fairly intimate knowledge of the
working of the Ordinance, and I have no hesitation in saying that
there is no such unauthorized influx, so far as British Indians are
concerned, on anything like a considerable scale, and my know-
ledge of the working of the Peace Preservation Ordinance shows
that it is not possible for other Asiatics to evade the Law. I here
distinguish between attempts made to do so and successful entry.
The successful prosecutions that have taken place at Volksrust and
Komatipoort go to confirm the view.
With reference to the other portions of the cable, not having
seen His Excellency's dispatch, I am not in a position to say
much, but I respectfully venture to state that the British Indian
deputation has not, in any way, exaggerated the harshness of the
Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance.
An unauthorized influx alone can justify the introduction of
an Ordinance so drastic as the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordi-
nance. Seeing that the British Indian community has denied the
influx, I venture to submit that, even at this stage, a judicial
inquiry into the allegation is the least that is due to the commu-
nity. Such an inquiry can be carried on by a judge of the
Supreme Court, the Chief Magistrate of Johannesburg, or the
First Civil Magistrate, and can be concluded in a very short time.
Those who have made the statements about an unauthorized in-
flux must be in the possession of proof which can be brought
before the Court without difficulty.
The reason why I have marked this letter "confidential" is
because of what follows.
It is my firm conviction that Mr.
Chamney and his subordinates are not in a position to weigh
and sift the evidence that may be at their disposal as to the un-
authorized influx. I have known Mr. Chamney for a long time,
and I consider him to be a very estimable gentleman, but he has
absolutely no training that would enable him to appreciate evidence.
I fear that he has confused the attempts made with successful
entries, for in discussing with Mr. Duncan, be had nothing sterner
to bring before him to justify his allegation of an unauthorized
influx than the fact of a prosecution that was, at the time, pend-
ing, and certain prosecutions that had successfully taken place
at Barberton. I very much fear, therefore, that he has done a
serious injustice, no doubt unconsciously, to the Indian commu-
nity in making the emphatic allegation he has made regarding
an unauthorized influx. I do not know whether it is Mr. Chamney
who made the statement, or some other official, to Sir Richard
Solomon1, but he told me, while we were discussing the Ordi-
nance, that he, Sir Richard, was informed that a wholesale
attempt was being made by the British Indian community as a
body to introduce British Indians into the Transvaal surrepti-
tiously. Sir Richard, moreover, added that my name was also
mentioned in that connection. Probably such a statement has
been placed before His Excellency also. If so, I can only repeat
what I said to Sir Richard, namely, that the allegation is abso-
lutely without foundation. My whole energy has been devoted to
preventing any such influx, and I may be allowed to mention that
it was I who co-operated with Captain Fuge and Mr. Chamney
in bringing forward evidence to show the corruption that was
going on at the Asiatic Office in Johannesburg. The inquiry was
made only after repeated complaints were brought to the notice
of the Colonial Secretary and Sir Arthur Lawley, before whom I
produced the names of the Asiatic Officers who had handled
money. It was only then that prosecutions were instituted, and
Captain Fuge was asked to secure the co-operation of the British
Indian Association. It is hardly likely that those who were so
jealous of the reputation of the community and who were so
zealous about bringing the guilt home to culprits should now en-
courage a surreptitious entry of British Indians into the Colony.
Without presumption I venture to add that throughout my
fourteen years' stay in South Africa I have endeavoured to look
on all aspects of this delicate question, and to advise my coun-
trymen to accept any compromises so far as they were consis-
tent with their self-respect and dignity. And it is because, after
a very careful study of the whole Colonial legislation regarding
Asiatics and a particular study of the Asiatic Law Amendment
Ordinance, I have found that the present Ordinance, without in
any way fulfilling the purpose which it is intended to serve,
imposes most degrading disabilities on British Indians, that I
have deemed it my humble duty to protest against it.
I have placed the foregoing for submission to His Excellency
with a view to securing a public inquiry into the allegation of
an unauthorized influx, because, if it cannot be substantiated,
I hardly think there can be any necessity for the introduction
of the Ordinance. If it is substantiated it will, at any rate, shut
the mouths of British Indians who have repeatedly denied the
allegation of a wholesale surreptitious entry.
If my presence is required in connection with any of the
matters arising out of this communication, I shall be pleased
to wait on His Excellency.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10625. Courtesy: G. H. Calpin
