314. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SHIMOGA,
August 14, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. Today is Sunday, and I am at an out-
of-the-way place called Shimoga, where I have to pass four
more nights visiting surrounding places during these days. I will
have left this place by the time this reaches you. I hope now
the riddle of the missing letter has been solved. I now know that
even if I write the Monday letter on Sunday night after taking
the silence, I should mark it Monday. But I want you to shed
this anxiety about my letters. If they come, it is well. But it
should be well also if they do not come, when you have the
assurance that if anything untoward happens to me, you would be
bound to know it by wire. That the contents of one letter may
be lost or delayed in transmission need cause no worry, because
I should remember and be able to reproduce anything of import-
ance.
The Gujarat work is evidently being done in a most orderly
manner. Of course if you had been there, you would have
thrown yourself in the fray, but those also are as good as having
thrown themselves in the fray who stand watchful at their post
however remote it may be from the scene of a calamity.
What you describe of Vinoba is just like him. But my
sympathy is with the orthodox resisters. This monthly untouchability
is an old custom not altogether harmful, certainly not alto-
gether superstitious. And it is difficult to draw distinctions bet-
ween married and unmarried women in such matters. I have
looked upon the restriction as a check upon man's lust. The con-
finement of the sick woman to a wretched miserable room, rags
for dress, etc., is horrible, barbarous and can have no justification.
But the sentiment of segregation during the monthly sickness
should not be violently disturbed. I want you, therefore, to see
the other side and not merely barely tolerate the attitude of
people like Mogheji, but regard it with due respect as you would
have them to regard your own opposite attitude. I am therefore
hoping that Vinoba has been managing the thing gently and
that he has not carried the orthodox inmates with him by sheer
force of affection without producing a genuine conviction. And,
even if they have willingly withdrawn their opposition, I would
advise you to put a voluntary restraint upon yourself during the
monthly sickness. You may share this letter with Vinoba if you
like so that he may understand my argument. Remember that
my own opinion is the same as yours. My only plea is for res-
pectful and intelligent toleration, and remember also that when
you tolerate in this manner, you do not "suppress" yourself.
Self-suppression comes and is necessary where blind superstition
has to be tolerated. It should not be "revolting" to you to accept
such untouchability. On the contrary, you should impose it on
yourself or accept it with grace and cheerfulness without think-
ing that the orthodox party is in any way unreasonable.
Now about future work: I accept your description of your-
self as being illiterate. But I do not want you to remain so for
ever. It should be not too late to do much to remove illiteracy.
I should be satisfied if you could develop a taste for removing
illiteracy, and to this end, you may take up a decent little gram-
mar book and master it through and through. Similarly, for arith-
metic. You should take up a very simple arithmetic book. If
you think that constitutionally you will be unfit for both or
either, I will say nothing and in any case I do not propose this
addition during these two months which are fast running out,
but I should like you to take these up later if they can be taken
up as recreations.
To start with work in the kitchen will certainly be very nice,
if only in order to discipline yourself in controlling your temper
and suiting yourself to all kinds of people. In practice, we have
found kitchen work to be the most trying of all.
I know that you have brought me boundless love. Everything
else without it would have been perfectly useless, and with it
everything needful will be easy. But I am not going to speculate
about the work. When you have finished your course there, I
know that the way will be open both before you and me with
sufficient clearness.
Bhansali has sent me copy of his reply to you. Do keep up
the correspondence.
With love,
BAPU
[PS.]
This is Sunday. Monday's letter will be separate.
From the original: C.W. 5260. Courtesy: Mirabehn
