252. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
BOLGARH,
December 10, 1927
MY DEAR C.R.,
You will be surprised to know that at least I have three days
of quiet in a beautiful little village. Before that the Ganjam pro-
gramme was worse if possible even than the Ceylon programme,
though it yielded twenty thousand. Then a doctor came to take my
blood-pressure. Niranjan Babu has made the same arrange-
ments for examination of blood-pressure that you had. And
when the doctor read 190, he got frightened and the whole of
the programme has been rearranged. Hence the rest. Personally
I am inclined to disbelieve the doctor's reading. However, even
if it was wrong reading, it has done good. A new doctor who
has come today from Cuttack has read anything between 155 and
165. His own reading is between 155 and 160. Mahadev and
Pyarelal read 165. The diastolic is 90-100. If these readings are
correct, the blood-pressure is the same as before, and there is
nothing to worry. However I am not writing this to tell you
about the blood-pressure. Enough for you to know that I am
all right.
I am dictating this in order to send you the enclosed. If
you can send someone to inspect the village and find out whether
we can take up the proposition, please do so. In any case cor-
respond with the writer Mr. G. Subramaniam yourself. I am
sending him a postcard telling him that he may expect to hear
from you.
I send you also Dr. Joseph's letter. His suggestion commends
itself to me. I think we must do some work in Nagercoil, and
unless you have anything to the contrary, please enter into corres-
pondence with him telling him that his suggestion is acceptable
and that it will be put before the Council of the Association and
you will let him know at an early date. Meanwhile you may
send the sample of yarn he wants. We ought to be able to take
up the yarn, and if there are local weavers, we may be able to
get it woven there. Please write to Dr. Joseph early. I have told
him that his suggestion commends itself to me and that I have
forwarded his letter to you for consideration.
I hope you have fixed up the quarters in Madras. Satis Babu
was with me for a day. He will be in Madras and stay with
us. You should have ready a moderate amount, no more than
one pound at the outside, of goat's milk butter.
Here is a letter from . . . .2 Please ack. to him. I am not
writing to him. His proposal seems to be quite good. Of course
we will be with you.
BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 12647
