238. LETTER TO HIGH COMMISSIONER'S SECRETARY
[JOHANNESBURG,]
October 31, 1904
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE HIGH COMMISSIONER
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
I shall be obliged if you will kindly place this communication before
His Excellency.
The Honourable Mr. Dadabhai has sent me a copy of a letter received
by him from Mr. Lyttelton in reply to his letter enclosing a communi-
cation addressed to him by me on the 4th April last on the outbreak of
plague in Johannesburg. Mr. Lyttelton has quoted a portion of His Excel-
lency's dispatch on the subject and, as it deals with the statements made
by me, I venture to trespass on His Excellency's time by offering an ex-
planation in defence thereof.
His Excellency has said :
I consider the statement that the recent outbreak of plague would not have
occurred but for the neglect of the Johannesburg Municipality to be absolutely
unjustifiable. So far from having been negligent in the matter, the Johannes-
burg Council has displayed considerable foresight in anticipating and making
preparations for the outbreak of plague more than a year before the disease actually
appeared.
It has never been denied that the Council made preparations in anti-
cipation of the outbreak in that a hospital was established at Rietfontein,
etc., but, with the greatest deference, it is submitted that the one preventive
measure that was necessary was totally omitted, namely, to look after the
sanitary condition of the so-called Insanitary Area.
His Excellency has also stated in his dispatch that
it was in a great measure due to opposition on the part of the owners and in-
habitants of the Location that its expropriation and clearance was delayed until
the outbreak of plague had occurred.
May I humbly draw His Excellency's attention to the fact that expro-
priation was effected more than five months before official declaration
of the plague — that is, on the 26th September last year — and that clear-
ance was, therefore, absolutely within the power of the Town Council.
Since that date not only was there no opposition on the part of the Indians
concerned either against expropriation or clearance, but I myself on their
behalf frequently appealed for a new site both to the Town Council as
well as the Colonial Secretary. His Excellency has evidently been informed
that the expropriation was effected after the outbreak of the plague.
For His Excellency in his dispatch again says :
Up to the date of expropriation the Indians were their own landlords, and the
statement that the conditions of overcrowding existing in the Location were
due to the general negligence of the Johannesburg Town Council can only be
described as a gross perversion of the truth.
Had expropriation taken place after the outbreak of the plague, I should
plead guilty to the charge of having been the means of perverting the
truth. As a matter of fact, however, as already stated, the Council ex-
propriated the Location as well in law as in fact on the 1st of October
last year, and, contrary to the suggestions made by the inhabitants of the
Insanitary Area, and in spite of the fact that the Council was not in a
position to look after the proper sanitation of the Location for want of
men, it became immediate landlord to each tenant, established rent col-
lecting offices, and took over the fullest control. The condition under
the new regime became so unbearable that the inhabitants, against whom
the charge of uncleanliness was repeatedly brought in official reports, to
which His Excellency has made reference, came to me with complaints
and I, therefore, wrote to Dr. Porter on their behalf on the 1 1 t h February
this year — that is, more than a month before the actual declaration of
the plague:
I venture to write to you regarding the shocking state of the Indian Loca-
tion. The rooms appear to be overcrowded beyond description; the sanitary
service is very irregular and many of the residents of the Location have been
to my office to complain that the sanitary condition is far worse than before.
There is, too, a very large Kaffir population in the Location for which really
there is no warrant. From what I hear, I believe the mortality in the Location
has increased considerably and it seems to me that if the present state of things
is continued, an outbreak of some epidemic disease is merely a question of time.
On the 15th of February, in a second letter to Dr. Porter, I elabo-
rated the points mentioned in the first letter and even ventured to offer
suggestions, but up to the 18th of March nothing was done, although
on the 1st of March a note was addressed by me to Dr. Porter saying that
in my opinion the plague had actually broken out.
I beg to enclose for His Excellency's perusal copies of all the corres-
pondence in this connection which was published in the papers. The
main facts to this day remain unchallenged, and knowing personally as
I do every phase that the inhabitants of the Location have passed through
since the beginning of last year, with deference, I feel bound to say that
I have stated the barest truth in saying that, but for the criminal neglect
of the Johannesburg Municipality, the outbreak would never have occurred.
The immediate work lying before it was totally neglected by it in favour
of large schemes for shifting the whole of the population within the In-
sanitary Area.
In conclusion, I may state that, in writing to Mr. Naoroji, I had no
other desire than that of serving the truth and of guarding against un-
warranted charges against my countrymen.
I trust the importance of the subject-matter of this communication
4‒19
will be considered sufficient excuse for my encroaching upon His Excellency's
valuable time.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant
From the office copy: C. W. 2264-2, 3,4, 5.
