201. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
December 8, 1932
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,
I hope you got my wire and that it has healed your wound a
little. I was pained to know that you had felt hurt, but at the
same time I was also glad that you had such love for me. It is
only the words of one whom we love that please or pain us.
You wrongly feared that I had communicated to that critic,
too, the opinion I expressed to you. On the other hand, I wrote
to him and told him that I had no right whatever to give an
opinion from jail. The youth has not replied to my inquiry as to
who intended to stage the play. You should rest assured that I
would never criticize your writings without ascertaining your views.
I have great attachment for you both and have told you that I
want a good many things from you. How can I have them unless
I am able to win your heart? I shall never forget that early morn-
ing scene on the beach. I will go through your farce if I get the
time. I will read it with your eyes and write to you if I have
anything to say. I would not use the freedom you have granted
me, and you also need not stop the sale. I do not wish to per-
suade you to do that even through strength of our mutual love.
It is true that I have not read any of your books. I will, there-
fore, try to read them if you recommend any.
We shall discuss art in person if and when God brings us to-
gether. I have been able to understand you from your letter to
some extent.
What shall I write to you about untouchability? You should
learn to see unity in my life in spite of its multiplicity, and, if
you understand it, explain it to your co-workers. All my acti-
vities spring from one source.
I had received an interesting letter from Lilavati just a few
days before I got yours. I have still to reply to it.
I have written this with the left hand as my right elbow is
paining more than usual. Our regards to you all.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From Gujarati: C.W. 7520. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
