237. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
POONA,
June 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
In his letter of yesterday, Mahadev did suggest an operation for Ramabehn.
I learnt about the discussion with Dr. Patel only yesterday. Now get the
operation done as soon as possible. I have already written to you about the
question of your coming here.
Devdas's marriage is fixed for the 16th. It would perhaps be better if
you come on a date later than that. The general rule that nobody need come
from there to attend a wedding may as well be observed on this occasion.
And so we may deliberately not let the saying 'accomplish two objects in one
journey' apply in this case. This does seem a little unnatural, but perhaps it
is more desirable.
For myself, I have been dissuading everyone from coming. Supposing
Prabhudas's marriage takes place about the same time and in my presence, I
would, if I could, stop even Chhaganlal and Kashi from coming to attend it.
If we really believe that the marriage ceremony is a religious rite we cannot
avoid having performed, there should be no need for anyone to come here.
On such occasions, we should be quite content with the company of those in
whose midst we happen to be at the time, and the presence of some others
who can attend. It is from this point of view that it has been considered
desirable to be content with [the services of] Lakshman Shastri [as priest]
who is quite near Poona and without those of Panditji. Combined with all
these considerations, there is of course the desire to save expense. Though
enjoying royal facilities myself, I just cannot forget our poverty. Maybe these
royal facilities are not unpleasing to me, but they are certainly not pleasing
1 With Lakshmi, daughter of C. Rajagopalachari
2 Gandhiji was at this time staying at lady Premlila Thakersey's residence
'Parnakuti'.
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
181
either. My conscience bears witness to the fact that seen from the point of
view of truth, they are more unpleasing than pleasing.
Before fixing the date of your coming here, I have indulged in all this
philosophizing. About my health and my experiment regarding milk, either
Mathuradas or Mahadev must have written to you.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33500
