57. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
WARDHA,
August 22, 1935
BHAI KAKUBHAI,
I have your letter. I for one am satisfied by your reply.
Since you are keen I will read Ratubhai's letter so that justice
is done to him. Actually, the letter is not even meant for me.
It is not for me to do justice to Ratubhai or anybody else. Here
doing justice to Ratubhai only means that I should not enter-
tain any unjust thought about him even in my mind. Ratubhai
seems to be making a great mistake. The judgment about his
Sevak Sangh has already been given. The personal matter has
therefore ended there. During that inquiry Ratubhai talked
about the whole management of the Bhandar. I suggested an
inquiry. Even if I had not done so, it was my duty as President
to inquire into the matter. Ratubhai's resigning does not absolve
him from his duty of co-operating in the inquiry. But that is
a matter for him to consider. Ratubhai in his letters keeps him-
self in the centre and not the improvement of the Bhandar, that
is, the interest of khadi. And by doing so he is making himself
miserable. I do not have to think about anything except the
policy of the Bhandar and the interest of khadi. It is not there-
fore my duty at present to go through his letters. When you
have completed your inquiry and made your recommendations
I will definitely think about the matter if necessary and if I
feel that injustice has been done to Ratubhai and others.
It is good that you feel that both Vithaldas and Ratubhai
may be right. In fact the truth may lie somewhere else altogether.
But God alone knows it. Ratubhai sees the episode from one
point of view and Vithaldas from another. From their respective
points of view, both may be right.
If you wish you may certainly show this letter to Ratubhai.
I tried all means available to me to satisfy him. I troubled
Kishorelal in whom he has faith. I asked you to intervene, be-
cause he has faith in you, too. Finally Mahadev felt that he
could help him and he also lent a hand. If I cannot satisfy him
with all this, then I suppose that is fate. In trying to satisfy
him or anybody else my interest can only be the good of
Daridranarayana. I can think of nothing else but that.
Blessings from
BAPU
PURUSHOTTAM KANJI JERAJANI
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 10835. Courtesy; Purushottam
K. Jerajani
