591. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
May 28, 1926
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,
I have your two letters. The long statements about Hardayal
Babu followed me to Mahabaleshwar. It was then put among my
jacket which I was not able even to look at in Mahabaleshwar.
I reached these papers only yesterday but I have not yet been
able to go through the statement which I shall do in a day or two.
But I think I have told you that had I known that the complaint
was about your father, I would not have sent the telegram without
first referring the matter to you. I suppose you want my opinion
for your satisfaction which I shall give gladly. You have sent me
two copies of the same letter about yourself.
I am sending you Rs. 100 by insured post today. You will tell
me if you need more. Mahadev was asking me only the other day
whether you were likely to return in the early future. And I told
him I thought that from all the accounts you had sent me about
Guruji your place was more near him than me. And even now you
will not leave him unless you yourself feel absolutely sure that he
could be safely left. If, however, you can come it will be quite
handy because at the present moment both Pyarelal and Devdas
are away. But there is another question to be considered. What if
I go to Finland as is somewhat likely? I am in active correspon-
dence with Mr. Paul about it. If I go at all it will be on the 1st
of July that is the day the last steamer that can enable me to reach
Finland in time leaves Bombay docks. The matter will be decided
probably by the end of this week, certainly by the end of next. If
I must go I propose to take Mahadev and Devdas with me. There
will be a lot of work left behind to be done. But whether you
would come down for that work and leave Guruji is a question I
feel for separate consideration. In every case Guruji's health
should have the paramount consideration with you.
Devdas is going on all right though he is still in the hospital.
He is likely to be discharged inside of a week. Lalji has under-
gone an operation and occupies the same room as Devdas. These
two patients are in Sir Harikisendas Hospital. Yeshwant Prasad
also has been ailing. Several minor operations have been per-
formed on him. He had guinea-worms.
I am sorry to hear that your sister has become widowed. Do
please convey my sympathies to her. I am carefully going
through all the cuttings that Guruji sends me. Some of them are
valuable. I had never seen "Muhamed's treaty" before. I knew
that his successors had entered into a treaty of that character with
the Christians and the Jews.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 19579
