457. LETTER TO "LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 22, 1906
[THE EDITOR
Leader
SIR,]
I have promised, in my letter dated the 21st instant1, regarding the
treatment of the Indian woman, Punia, to let you have any official reply
I might receive. The following is the text of a telegram I addressed to
the Registrar of Asiatics :
Leader publishes statement that reason for requiring women take out separate
permits is that women are taken in as wives by Indians in Colony though they
were not wives but were often of indifferent character. Will you please wire
whether your office believes in above charge. I wish to publish your reply.
The Registrar has returned the following reply :
With reference your telegram 21st inst., no such statement as that
alluded to in your message was made by any officer in the service of this
department.
In justice to the community that has been so cruelly libelled by your
correspondent at Durban, I trust that you will publish the name of the
official who is supposed to have given the information referred to by your
correspondent, or ask him to withdraw the statement made by him.
[Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 29-9-1906
1 Vide "Letter to Leader", pp. 434-.
2 In response to Gandhiji's letter, Transvaal Leader, 9-10-1906, published the following
apology:
"With reference to the statements published some days back concerning the grant of
permits to British Indian subjects to enter the Transvaal Colony, and the allegation that
women who were styled wives were 'frequently of indifferent character', The Natal Mercury of
Monday last has the following: 'Mr. M. K. Gandhi has written to us from Johannesburg
concerning an article which appeared in our issue of the 21st ult., in which the detention
of an Indian woman, named Punia, at Volksrust, for being without a permit, was dealt with.
Mr. Gandhi is displeased with certain contents of the article, which he views as casting an
unjustified aspersion upon Indian women in the Transvaal. We applied to what quarters
were available in Durban for information upon the incident, but it will be obvious that
here in Natal the same facilities — such as those open to Mr. Gandhi, for instance — for ob-
taining full intelligence as to the Transvaal affairs do not exist as in Johannesburg, where
Mr. Gandhi resides, and any unfounded or exaggerated statement is mainly attributable to
that cause. It is emphatically denied by Mr. Gandhi that Indians domiciled in the Trans-
vaal are seeking to gain admittance to the Transvaal of women of indifferent character, passing
them off as their wives, and to prove this he has made enquiries in official and other quarters,
and denial was the result. The statement must, therefore, be withdrawn as being one that
is not in accordance with ascertained facts. It is well that the public should know this, and
