77. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
March 4, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT), NEW DELHI
SIR,
It is not without regret and hesitation that I write about
my dead wife. But truth demands this letter.
According to the newspapers, Mr. Butler is reported to
have said in the House of Commons on 2nd March, 1944:
". . . She was receiving all possible medical care and attention, not
only from her regular attendants but from those desired by her family. . . ."
Whilst I gratefully acknowledge that the regular attendants
did all they could, the help that was asked for by the
deceased or by me on her behalf, when at all given, was
given after a long wait, and the Ayurvedic physician was per-
mitted to attend only after I had to tell the prison authorities
that, if I could not procure for the patient the help that she
wanted or I thought necessary, I should be separated from her,
I ought not to be made a helpless witness of the agonies she
was passing through. And even then I could make full use of
the Vaidyaraja's services only after I wrote a letter to the Inspector-
General of Prisons of which a copy is hereto attached. My applica-
tion for Dr. Dinshaw was made in writing on 27th January, 1944.
The deceased herself had repeatedly asked the Inspector-General
of Prisons for Dr. Dinshaw Mehta's help during practically a
month previous to that. He was allowed to come only from
February 5, 1944. Again, the regular physicians Drs. Nayyar and
Gilder made a written application for consultation with Dr. B. C.
Roy of Calcutta on 31st January, 1944. The Government simply
ignored their written request and subsequent oral reminders.
Mr. Butler is further reported to have said:
No request for her release was received and the Government of
India believe it would be no act of kindness to her or her family to
remove her from the Aga Khan's Palace.
Whilst it is true that no request was made by her or by me
(as satyagrahi prisoners it would have been unbecoming), would it
not have been in the fitness of things, if the Government had at
least offered to her, me and her sons to release her? The mere offer
of release would have produced a favourable psychological effect
on her mind. But unfortunately no such offer was ever made.
As to the funeral rites, Mr. Butler is reported to have said:
I have information that the funeral rites took place at the request
of Mr. Gandhi in the grounds of the Aga Khan's Palace at Poona, and
friends and relatives were present.
The following1, however, was my actual request which the
Inspector-General of Prisons took down in writing from dictation
at 8.07 p.m. on February 22, 1944. . . .
Government will perhaps admit that I have scrupulously
avoided making any political capital out of my wife's protracted
illness and the difficulties I experienced from the Government. Nor
do I want to make any now. But in justice to her memory, to me
and for the sake of truth, I ask the Government to make such
amends as they can. If the newspaper report is inaccurate in
essential particulars or the Government have a different interpreta-
tion of the whole episode, I should be supplied with the correct
version and the Government interpretation of the whole episode.
If my complaint is held to be just, I trust that the amazing
statement said to have been made in America by the Agent of
the Government of India in U.S.A. will be duly corrected.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 233-
