156. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
February 27, 1914
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Why very Low House? I see nothing wrong in your letter regarding
food. I have seen nobody who has been able to deny himself so much
of the world's good things of life as you have. And what does it matter
if you have been taking macaroni about which you have so satisfied
yourself. Indeed if you went back to rice and tomatoes, I should not
worry. I would certainly like you not to go back to vegetables. But
your dissatisfaction is that you have been obliged to discuss your food
so much. We are food reformers and so we cannot help it. When
our reform becomes part of our nature, we shall cease to discuss it.
If I discuss it less than you do (which I doubt) it must be because
mine has become more natural to me than yours to you. Though I
love and almost adore Andrews so, I would not exchange you for him.
You still remain the dearest and the nearest to me and so far as my
own selfish nature is considered I know that in my lonely journey through
the world, you will be the last (if even that) to say good-bye to me.
What right had I to expect so much from you !
Now about Manilal. I have given you some idea. He and Jamnadas
appeared to me unbalanced. They did the very things that they used
to criticize in others. For instance, they give themselves every indulgence
that they denied themselves at Phoenix. If Hanif too[k] something outside
Phoenix, both of them used to bring it to my notice. In spite of Manilal's
sad experience, both took the greatest freedom with the girls. They
[were] surrounded with much attention and love from all the members
of the family. Dr. Gool who is such a noble soul but yet youthful,
made a deep impression on them by his suave nature. The result was
that the boys' faculty for thinking, study or work was paralysed. They
rose after 6 a.m. They never studied. Their talk seemed to me to be
unnatural. They found themselves placed in gaudy surroundings which
unhinged them for the moment. I felt that to give them a month of
this life would be to hurt two very sensitive young promising plants.
I spoke very sharply and bitterly to them. They have resented my tone
and my speech as also my action. The discovery I made on arrival
was so shocking that I certainly became impatient. But I am sorry
neither for my action nor for my speech. I had a right to expect them
166
not to misunderstand me. After all I have sent them away to my personal
discomfort and for their advantage. My presence in their midst could
not have counterbalanced the unperceived mischief that was working
its way into their system. Jamnadas must therefore naturally go to
Phoenix and Manilal not to Phoenix whilst Jeki is there and that when
I am away. The only alternative for him was to be at Mountain View
where he can do the right thing just to the extent that he is able. I
wished to place both in circumstances most favourable to their spiritual
growth. I have advised Manilal that he ought to religiously avoid baker's
bread, tea and coffee and that he should rarely go to Town, never
eat the Town food and never sleep in Town. But I have told him he
is a free agent. He need only adopt that part of my advice which
appeals to him and no more. I do not want him to do anything for
my sake. I want him to become not a creeper but a vigorous tree.
I had another glorious interview with Miss Hobhouse yesterday.
We discussed you fairly fully and I have told her that it is likely you
might be here whilst I am also here. She is General Smuts' guest
tomorrow (Saturday). Miss Molteno too has been very attentive and
helpful.
Will you select a tablet for the two deceased. Valliamma's death
I felt most keenly. My first disappointment was that not a single Gujarati
had died. Even I was left alive when those that did not want to die
had gone. I then became conceited and felt that those that had died
had done so because they had lived a most unnatural life. If anybody
should have died it was Mrs. Gandhi. There is no guarantee even now
that she will live. But she seems to be rallying and would certainly
have succumbed under the orthodox treatment. And yet the desire in
me to die is overpowering. I am unable to stare a Tamil in the face
when I recall these deaths. It is weakness I know. But it is there.
Consult Naidoo about the stone, please, and both can be put on when
I am passing through Johannesburg. I should be delighted.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
