168. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 19, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
Your letter arrived the same day as Dr. Ray who gave me
doleful news about Pratishthan. He said that you were not at all
fit for work, and that you were yet going back to Calcutta be-
cause your presence was needed at Sodepur. He added that
Kshitish Babu was being over-worked. Knowing his pessimism, I
have discounted the news he has given me. But I suppose the sub-
stance is true. You will, therefore, tell me all about the work there.
But I want your assurance that, whatever may be the nature of
the work, you are not going to put an undue strain upon yourself.
Of course, you will laugh at this and retort "physician heal thyself".
But I really believe that I do conserve my energy to the best of
my ability. And, then, I have a solid wall of protection from
so many sentinels. That I have not been able to avoid illnesses is
a matter of humiliation for me.
I should have been able to do
so. But as I have said so often, I woke up too late in life to be
able to have a disease-proof constitution. Up to the age of nearly
30, according to my notions of economy, I wasted myself whenever
opportunity offered itself. The real building up began after that
time, and then too, knowledge came in dribblets. This is only one
though the main reason for breakdowns in my life. I want all
co-workers to learn to avoid my mistakes. But of course all this
is wretched philosophizing. You know what I want to say. Do
not be anxious about khadi or the Pratishthan which is one and
the same thing. Let us give the best of what we have, work in
uttermost humility, and then say after the manner of Janaka,
"What does it matter if khadi lives or perishes?"
With reference to the Bengal tour, you will not want me to
come to Bengal unless you are yourself able to bear the strain.
Of course you will not discuss this thing publicly till you know
how the present trial tour shapes. I must confess that I am not
over-well or over-strong. But the doctor who is attending on me
is a clever and a careful man, and he tells me that there is nothing
wrong with blood-pressure or with anything else and that I am
quite all right.
The Hindu-Muslim thing would be unbearable if I begin
to think about it. But of whatever happens there, please keep
me well-informed.
I have not written separately to Hemprabha Devi in order
to conserve my energy. She is ever in my thoughts.
With love,
Yours,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19787
