25. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON,
March 25, 1937
CHI. KANTI 2 ,
I could not write to you earlier. I had a talk with Dev-
das. If you wish to go to Mysore, you may do so. If the
expenses increase by your going there, Devdas will earn the money
or raise it. It is, therefore, not necessary for you to join Wilson
[College, Bombay] for want of money or Devdas's consent. You
may go to Trivandrum if you like. If you get a cargo ship and
desire to go by it, there is no objection. It is certainly good to
travel thus. Devdas will bear the expense of the voyage, but
if he does not, then you may ask me for it. It would not be
proper to take it from me if he can bear it.
I know Devdas could not see you. On my asking him
he told me that he had tried to see you but could not. He did not
send for you because his programme was uncertain. One should
not mind such things. And in any case one should never be
suspicious.
You may take from Nimu or Ramdas whatever
money you immediately need. We, i.e., Ba, Manu, Kanu (Junior),
Mahadev, Pyarelal and I are leaving for Madras today. We shall
be there for three days, and shall be back on the 31st. It has
almost been decided to have Manu's wedding in Hudli.
Did you cancel your proposed trip to Rajkot? Do you
wish to have Amtul Salaam with you? She thinks that you do, but
Devdas's impression and mine is that you do not. If that is the
case, please write to her frankly. She is making herself needlessly
unhappy. She was with me in Delhi as long as I was there.
My language need not be considered mathematical just
because I use mathematical terms. But if it is as exact as
mathematics, that is, if its successive steps in reasoning are logical
and exact, it may be described as mathematical. If my language
has that quality, it is because of my worship of truth.
One who wants to learn only a subject of intellectual study
can very well do so from a person without character, and such
a person may certainly be intelligent also. For instance, a crafts-
man without character may be highly proficient in his craft. But
the highest intelligence or craftsmanship without good character
can never do good to the world or serve it. The effect of such
service will be temporary. That is why the Gita says: "Worship
me and I will give you intelligence and whatever else you need."
"Worship me" means 'serve me—my creation'.
After writing these sheets I went to the 'library' and after
returning I am now drinking milk, and am dictating this while
doing so. I had taken your letter to the 'library', just to see
whether I had omitted to reply to any point. I am replying in
brief to what has been left out. A self-controlled man should
be busy in service for all the twenty-four hours. If it is merely
doing anything, even a demon can do it. This is in the chara-
cter of a Ravana. But such a person cannot be regarded as a self-
controlled man. Activity is threefold: of body, mind and soul. In
pure service there is a combination of the three.
I do know that it is not an easy task to interpret ahimsa
in mathematical language. I am trying to do that. And what is
true of ahimsa is also true of all other things, e.g., spinning,
village industries, etc. But perhaps you will understand all this
on your own if you start reading the three journals'. I am ex-
pecting from you work of that level. I have torn up your letter.
Nothing from it will pass to Delhi. If you decide to go to
Trivandrum, and if you do not take a ship and if you can free
yourself from there, then why not join us in Madras?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7318. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
