48. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Thursday [June 12, 1924]
RESPECTED ANASUYABEHN,
Received both your letters. I tore up your second letter soon
after reading it. Do not hesitate to write anything you want to. No
one reads personal letters written by you. They are passed on to me
intact as they come. If I put them in a file either by mistake or
intentionally, they may be read by others as access to files is not
restricted. But I shall tear up the letters marked "personal" after
reading them and as for my letters to you, I shall write them myself.
I do not like it at all that Bhai Shankerlal has some new ailment now.
He appears to be brooding over something. I can't even ask him to
come and stay with me because my entire life is led in the open. There
is no such thing as privacy for me. What else can I do when persons
who are more ill than I am, expect my help? Even as I try to help them,
I become unhappy. So in spite of having an intense desire to help
delicate flowers that you and Shankerlal are, I have become unfit for
the task. What can I do? I do keep thinking about you both and I do
wish Bhai Shankerlal gets well soon. I believe that on such occasions
the spinning-wheel and Ramanama are effective medicines. I believe,
therefore, it augurs well that Shankerlal can concentrate on the
spinning-wheel.
I have not had any letter from sister-in-law. Write and tell her
that I am happy to learn that she is all right.
The issue of Majoor Sandesh is good. Send me all the issues
from the beginning and keep sending them henceforth.
Ba was here and left yesterday after two days' stay. I am doing
well. These days I begin writing regularly from almost 4.30 in the
morning. I cannot cope with the work otherwise. I keep worrying if
I cannot finish it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S. N. 32776
1 From the references to Majoor Sandesh, a periodical published by the
Majoor Mahajan, Ahmedabad, and to Kasturba's stay with Gandhiji; June 12 in
1924 was a Thursday; vide Vol.XXIV, pp.213 and 223.
43
