130. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Friday, Jeth Vad 6 [June 12, 1925]
CHI. MANI,
I have your letter. I am on the steamer today. The bangles
are in Calcutta. I reach there on the 18th. After reaching there,
I shall send them to you by parcel. Even if Devdas has not
arrived at the Ashram, do make inquiries there as the parcel
addressed to him will certainly be there. You may take it.
Dahyabhai had shown his preference for agriculture and hence
the advice I gave him. But if he is inclined to go abroad, I for
one would not stand in his way. But there is one great difficulty
for me. I would have to ask someone for the money. Some-
one may come forward with an offer, but we should not accept
money like that as far as possible. This is the ideal. But if we
cannot live up to it, there is no harm in getting assistance and
going. It will take me some time to return. I shall be in
Bengal till 15th July. Dahyabhai may come here and have a talk
with me; or he may wait till I return to the Ashram. We must
not displease him in any way. I want to meet his wishes and
guide him gently. There are three ways:
1. To take up private service.
2. To take up farming.
3. To go to America for further studies.
He may do anyone of these he likes. I have no objection.
The fourth way is to serve the nation and take a remuneration
for it. But this is not to his liking and therefore out of the
question. I wonder if he likes studying medicine. There is a
national college here as well as in Delhi. Tell this to Dahyabhai
if he does not know about it already. The college here is con-
sidered to be good. He can study here if he wants.
I am keeping quite fit. A few days back I had a slight
cold, but that was nothing serious. At every place they provide
sufficient rest for me.
Write to . . .1 regularly. That will give him satisfaction. . . .2
is hungry for love.
Attend to Father to the best of your ability. When the wife
dies and there is plenty of outside activity to attend to, it is
the children who can make their father forget all his sorrow if
they are devoted and attend upon him. I tell you both brother
and sister this is my own experience as an obedient son of my
father. I am also witness to the immense good done to children
in such a case. Every moment of life I am enjoying the fruit
of having served my parents as God. I write to you all this be-
cause I know that Father has a heavy burden to carry. I myself
am unable to share it. I cannot find the time even to write to
him. So I am passing on my responsibility also to you.
Take great care of your health. Do not worry if you have
to stay longer [at the college] for your studies. Mahadev was
telling me that both your brother and you are weak in spelling.
Remove this defect. Whatever we learn, we must learn well.
In case of doubt, consult a dictionary. Nothing else needs to be
done.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 24-
1 & 2 Omissions are in the source.
