259. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 28, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter.
You did not get or take even the full four days' rest at
Muzaffarpur. Next time I should stick to such promises. Why
should rest not be taken in the spirit of service? Of course, it
can be easily abused and often is. But that is no reason why honest
people may not honestly give themselves rest so as to enable them
to keep fit for further service. I regard it as self-delusion if not
worse when a person says he is wearing himself away in service.
Is such service preferred by God to service steadily and detachedly
performed? Body is like a machine requiring to be well kept for
full service. Enough however of sermonizing from a safe retreat.
Only I do feel that I have not felt ashamed to take the required
rest. That people about me have thought otherwise is because of
their ignorance of the laws of rest. Rest properly and in due
time taken is like the proverbial timely stitch.
Kaka has had to give up your wheel. He could not pull
more than 70 rounds on it per hour. He uses the box wheel.
Yesterday was the third day and he pulled 119 in one hour. He
expects to do much better. I am making daily progress and do
not know what fatigue is on that wheel. It runs with perfect
smoothness. It will do still better when I have myself made
the mal of the required thickness. The carding gives real music.
Vithal wrote saying that we should use a candle for dressing the
gut instead of leaves. This change has made the gut give much
better results. I wish those who have new experiences will pass
them on to me. Whatever are feasible here, I shall certainly try.
I want to reach a high standard both in spinning and carding.
There is no reason why I should stop at 160 rounds per hour.
I have now confidence that I should do better. For me It is
God's work. If He wills it, He will give me the strength and
the ability.
Narandas tells me you are not hitting it off with Kumarappa.
Charity is our talisman. I should let him do as he pleases. But
of course I know nothing of the differences. N. gives only one or
178
two lines in his letter. My weight is between 103 and 104, the
food about the same.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5413. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9647
