318. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
March 14, 1905
TO
THE HONOURABLE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
My Association ventures respectfully to draw your attention to the
enclosed cuttings from the Potchifstroom Budget, giving a report on the
anti-Asiatic demonstration that took place on Saturday the 4th instant
at Potchefstroom in front of the Indian stores on the market square.
My Association has been informed by the British Indians living in
Potchefstroom that the proceedings were violent and that speeches were
made such as to arouse the worst feelings of the populace. After the
speeches were finished, some mischievously inclined people began to throw
stones at the shop windows of the Indian stores, and had it not been for
the efficient manner in which the police had prepared themselves for such
emergency, it is difficult to say to what extent the violence would have
gone. As it was, the injury done was restricted to the breaking of a few
plate-glass windows.
It is worthy of note that the demonstration was headed by some of
the principal men in the town, such as the President of the Potchefstroom
Chamber of Commerce, a prominent member of the Town Council, and
others holding public or semi-public positions. It was the proposed erection
of a mosque in the town that was used to inflame public prejudice against
the Indian community, but my Association is informed that the site for
the proposed mosque is
(a) not in the centre of the town,
(b) not in a main thoroughfare,
(c) is some distance from, and not, as alleged, next door to a new
hotel said to have cost £30,000,
(d) the site is in a back street and the proposed buildings would
be invisible from any of the neighbouring streets,
(e) the buildings immediately surrounding the site are nearly all
wood and iron and of far inferior construction to the proposed mosque
buildings.
My Association, therefore, respectfully ventures to submit that the
British Indian community at Potchefstroom is entitled to a declaration
1 Not available
from the Government, disapproving of the manner in which the anti-
Asiatic agitation is being carried on at Potchefstroom and to an assurance
that their persons and property will be fully protected. Probably the
Government may be aware that the Potchefstroom Vigilance Association,
and such other bodies in the Colony, carry on the agitation with a view,
as they have stated, to strengthen the hands of the Government, who,
they say, are prepared to fall in with their "Demands" and who are in
their opinion at present engaged in negotiations with the Home Govern-
ment having that end in view.
My Association cannot conceive that such can be the intentions of
the Government, but in its humble opinion the absence of a clear declara-
tion to the contrary by the Government is likely to be misinterpreted
and thereby to accentuate the violence of the agitation.
My Association, therefore, trusts that the Government will be pleased
to take such steps as may be necessary for protecting the rights of the inoffen-
sive British Indians in Potchefstroom and other towns in the colony.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: L.G. 93, Miscellaneous Files 97/ Asiatics 1902/1907
