99. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
[1929]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I have committed a great blunder. Driven by a particular
thought I just said that you should go to Calcutta. By all means, go
to any place where you can find your peace of mind. I have had long
arguments with you. I have prevented you from doing many things.
We must give up the habit of indulging so much in arguments. In that
state of mind I just told you to go to Calcutta if you so wished. But
I cannot give you such a permission. It is one thing if you wish to
go and do go and quite another if I happily permit you to go. Not only
am I not in favour of your going to Calcutta, but I am against it.
Considering my view, take an independent decision. It would not hurt
me in any way. My reasons for opposing your going to Calcutta are
as follows:
I have believed that there is no other city in India as wicked as
Calcutta. The atrocities that are perpetrated in Calcutta can hardly
be witnessed in any other city of the world. This comparison may be
somewhat exaggerated. My knowledge about other cities is incom-
plete. But I have no doubt at all about the cities of India. In Calcutta,
thousands of innocent lambs and goats are slaughtered in the name of
religion. Such a thing is done nowhere else in India. Everyone, big
and small, the learned and the foolish, are a party to this slaughter.
No one stops to think about it even for a moment. The enlightened
Calcutta does not even protest against it. And in this so-called age of
reform, this cruel act is being performed day after day. Stand
anywhere in the Bhawanipur area of Calcutta early in the morning
and you will see flocks of sheep around. I have witnessed that sight
with my own eyes. Right from that moment I had decided that I would
never agree to any suggestion of my settling down at Calcutta. Again,
in Calcutta, cows and buffaloes are milched after blowing. This
process of blowing is so cruel that I cannot even describe it. This time
1 From the contents. In 1929 Gandhiji returned to Ahmedabad from
Calcutta; vide Vol. XXXVIII, p. 244.
78
LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
79
I witnessed that too with my own eyes. Such cruel things always go
on in Calcutta. The very thought that you should spend your life in
that city and waste your time by engaging yourself in futile business
is terrible for me. It seems to me that you cannot chalk out an ideal
life from it. Only some divine creature may remain unaffected in spite
of living in such hell. I do not take it for granted that you belong to
that category. Think a thousand times about what you wish to do in
life and then decide. This is all I wish to say.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Sabarmati
Museum, Ahmedabad
