267. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 10, 1936
CHI. PREMA,
I had a reason for not being content with a three-pice postcard.
I didn't get your rakhdi . I would certainly have worn it
had I received it. Since you sent one, however, you have had
the joy and earned the merit of sending it.
You seem to be picking up know ledge of a good many sub-
jects. I shall at any rate glance through the book sent by you.
I can certainly enlarge the area of experience in Segaon, but
not just now. I have neither the time nor the inclination. The
experiences don't seem to me worth communicating to anybody.
Man's speech has a conventional meaning but in addition
each utterance also has a specific meaning intended by the speaker
which can be known from the context. Nobody has known truth
in its perfection and, therefore, each person describes a thing as
he sees it and that is the truth for him, even though as a matter
of fact his view might be false.
In like manner man's view of a thing changes from age to
age and the view held in a particular age is the truth for that
age. This is the meaning or idea in asato ma sadgamaya.
Where the notion of high and low has disappeared I see no
harm in the Shudras serving the other three varnas. [Nobody]
is compelled to be a Shudra. [If, then, service is the natural bent
of mind of a Shudra,] why should he change that calling for
another? If the Brahmin and the Bhangi both get just enough for
their sustenance, what is the difference between the two? Nobody
will prevent a Bhangi from becoming a jnani. In the varna system
of my conception, no varna will have the monopoly of knowledge.
Think over the verses in the women's prayer. What are the
common dharmas of the four varnas? Maybe you will find some
utterances of Jnanadeva and others which seem to support the
distinction of high and low. But nobody should be judged in this
way by a few isolated sayings of his. I know what you wish to say
regarding Ramdas . Even if those examples could be shown to
be inapplicable, my argument remains untouched.
I cannot accede to your request, for you have given no thought
as to its propriety. You have just been carried away by the
present tide. You, I and all others are cast in the moulds inheri-
ted from our parents. There is as much sense, or lack of sense,
in rejecting it as there is in forgetting the fact and claiming our-
selves to be different. We can remain in the old mould and still
make many changes. That is growth or progress. To assume a
completely new appearance will mean a total revolution or a new
religion altogether. Does Hinduism have no definite mould in any
respect? Children daily trace new letters in water which disappear
the moment they are formed, but they enjoy the game. It seems
you wish to do the same. But do you think you can lure an old
man of 67 who has grown up in the old mould, and interest him
in drawing circles in water? Standing on the bank, I watch the
play of such as you. In the next issue of Harijan, you will see
something having a bearing on this in my comments on a letter.
You have discovered my ignorance all right.
If you search
more, you will discover still grosser ignorance. But I hope you
will not desert me when you have discovered all my ignorance.
If you promise me that, I will confess that I don't know any-
thing at all, for I have not made such a study.
I have read enough about communism to satisfy me. What
we shall need in swaraj I can tell only when I see the swaraj.
Any opposition from me that you may notice will be concerning
the question of truth-untruth and violence-non-violence.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10384. Also C.W. 6822. Court-
esy: Premabehn Kantak
