322. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY, BIHAR AND ORISSA
BETTIAH,
May 25, 1917
TO
THE CHIEF SECRETARY
THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA
RANCHI
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letters
of the 19th and the 21 st instant.
I am grateful for the letters and the assurances contained there-
in.
I am suggesting that [as] the matters complained of by me
required immediate treatment, it was not contemplated that the
Government could pass orders without receiving reports from the
local officers and without hearing the landlords. Had I intended
otherwise, the sending of copies of my note to the local officers and
the Planters' Associations would have been purposeless. If I may
be permitted to say so, the instructions to the local officers and
the invitation to the Planters' Associations to send in their reports
or observations, as the case may be, before the 30th June next
largely meets the situation in point of time.
With reference to the legal aspect and the decisions of courts,
they have not escaped attention. But I venture to submit that
legal decisions or legal technicalities cannot for a moment be al-
lowed to perpetuate wrongs suffered by vast masses of people. With
much respect, but every confidence, I submit that the situation
presented by me raises grave moral issues which in order that
justice may be done might necessitate disregard of legal techni-
calities and legal decisions where they are in conflict with real
justice. The vast inequality between landlords and rayats renders
it well-nigh impossible for courts of law or even Settlement Officers
to arrive at the truth in cases brought before them. I see illus-
trations of the proposition just submitted multiplying before me
every day. Instances are not wanting of wrongs having been
rectified in spite of their having been countenanced by courts of
justice.
Regarding abwabs, I may be permitted to point out that the
inclusion of a penalty clause in the forthcoming Bettiah Raj leases
will grant only partial and tardy relief. For the leases will not
cover the whole of the tenancies affected, and with respect to a
wrong which has been unanimously admitted, the postponement of
relief till the termination of and the renewal of the leases means
unnecessary delay. I take it that the leases will not be renewed
until the agrarian condition is placed on a sound basis. It may be
added that a penalty clause in his lease is no remedy against a
landlord who places himself above law. In my humble opinion,
therefore, the issue of a notice warning landlords against exacting
abwabs, salami1, fines, etc., or impressing labour, carts, or ploughs
and informing raiyats that they ought not to pay them and that they
are not bound to give their landlords their labour or carts or ploughs
will be most appropriate at the present moment, will ease the raiyats'
minds and will be an earnest of the Government's desire to grant
them speedy relief where relief is deemed necessary.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
From a typewritten copy. Courtesy: Gandhi Smarak Nidhi
