74. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
January 4, 1931
CHI. KASHINATH,
Your long letters are no trouble to me to read. Narandas has
also written to me about you. He says that you refused to show
him your diary. If this is true, your action was not right. Narandas
is an extremely straightforward man and always does what he
thinks right. You can tell him everything. Have a quiet talk with
him and, if there has been any misunderstanding, remove it. If
you wish to live in the Ashram and are not opposed to any of its
rules, Narandas on his part will certainly take you back. He
has even written to me to say so.
Whether or not you live in the Ashram, you can keep up
connection with it for other purposes. You can ask for papers
relating to your work. Difference of opinion should not mean
personal enmity.
If you think it necessary to engage a lawyer to defend your
brother-in-law, you may do so. If you have sufficient courage,
however, do without a lawyer. Your actions seem all right. I
did not understand your reason for refusing to sign the summons.
But that is a minor matter. I have written to Shanta, Kalavati,
Raghavdas and Banarasidas. Read those letters. You had asked
the same, or a similar, question about art in your previous letter.
I have already replied to it. Did you get that letter? I got the
booklet on vows. I did not see any letter from Ramnarayan.
There was one from Haribhau and I have replied to him.
Convey my blessings to all.
Mother should take only so much of milk as leaves her hungry.
If, however, she cannot remain hungry and begs repeatedly for
something to eat, you may give her a khakhara 3 . If she can con-
tinue milk and light diet for some time longer still, she will be-
come all right. You should do everything with the utmost patience.
Don't feel unhappy about anything. "What God, World Teacher
and Master has willed for the day, it is futile to grieve over.
Without His will we cannot move a blade of grass. If we do
fuss about things, what is left over is a legacy of sorrows."
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5270
