432. LETTER TO THE ZAMORIN OF CALICUT
January 1, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter of the 26th ultimo. Your letter
has come upon me with painful surprise. In a matter that is
purely religious to me, as it must be to you, I should expect the
uttermost frankness and goodwill on either side. I miss the latter in
your letter under reference. Have you ever turned out an un-
touchable on the Krithigai Ekadasi day? Surely, if hundreds, if
not thousands, of untouchables, both men and women, enter the
temple every Ekadasi, as can be proved they do, it cannot be diffi-
cult to detect some of them. The evidence in my possession goes
to show that crowds of untouchables make use of the privilege every
year on that holy day. You refer me to the judgment of the
Madras High Court. That judgment, if I understand it rightly,
shows clearly that untouchables enter the temple on the Ekadasi
day, not stealthily but openly and as a matter of right.
Here is what I read in the judgment before me:
The Guruvayur Temple is not a private temple, but a public temple
and every Hindu has a right to worship in it, subject to such customary
rules and regulations which have been prevailing from time immemorial.
The high castes are allowed actual right of entry into the temple
throughout the year. In that purpose they have a right of way over the
roads leading to the temple and around the temple. The lower castes are
allowed the right of entry only on Ekadasi Festival day, and on that day
they have got the right of using the roads. On the other days they have
neither of these rights. This was the situation from time immemorial.
I read then from the same judgment:
The lower-caste Hindus are after all Hindus and it may be with
this consideration in view that for one day in the year the temple is
thrown open to them with the ostensible excuse that on such a day it would
be impossible to check the crowds, the inner object being to allow all
castes' entry on that day. This was the view of Ramanuja, the famous
Vaishnava reformer. According to him, all Vaishnava temples ought to be
thrown open to all castes one day in the year.
Unless I am very much mistaken, these two paragraphs seem
to be conclusive evidence that for that particular Ekadasi day un-
touchables are allowed to enter the temple without let or hin-
drance.
As this matter is of great public importance, I am sending
the correspondence to the Press.
Yours sincerely,
RAJA MANAVEDAN RAJA
ZAMORIN OF CALICUT
KOTTAKKAL
From a microfilm: M.M.U./XXII
