392. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[LONDON,]
Bhadarva Vad 13 [September 18, 1914]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I had no time last week to write to you. Most of the time is
spent in the training class for first aid to the injured and the rest
with Mr. Gokhale. He is keeping good health at present. They
will give us training for two more months and then send us to the
front. This means that my going to India in the immediate future
is out of the question, unless the War suddenly comes to an end.
All of you may want to know why I have undertaken even
the nursing of the wounded. Recently, I used to say, in South
Africa, that, as satyagrahis we cannot help in this way either,
for such help also amounted to supporting a war. One who would
not help a slaughter-house should not help in cleaning the butcher's
house either. But I found that, living in England, I was in a way
participating in the War. London owes the food it gets in war time
to the protection of the Navy. Thus to take this food was also a
wrong thing. There was only one right course left, which was to
go away to live in some mountain or cave in England itself and
subsist there on whatever food or shelter Nature might provide,
without seeking assistance from any human being. I do not yet
possess the spiritual strength necessary for this. It seemed to me
a base thing, therefore, to accept food tainted by war without
working for it. When thousands have come forward to lay down
their lives only because they thought it their duty to do so,
how could I sit still? A rifle this hand will never fire. And so
there only remained nursing the wounded and I took it up.
This is how I communed to myself. I cannot say for certain that
the step I have taken is the right one. I have thought much about
the matter though, but so far I have discovered no alternative.
My guess is that we shall be here for at least four months more.
The War should not go on longer than that. Ba is keeping good
health. She can even walk long distances. Here she has given
up wheat as well. She takes only milk in addition to what I do.
Mr. Kallenbach, too, enjoys excellent health. He keeps up his
study of Gujarati. Mr. Sorabji sees me every day. He has joined
the War along with me. We are 70 in the class. He has passed
the first examination, that is, the entrance examination [for the
Bar]. He will take three more years to be called to the bar. I am
growing more convinced with experience that coming here for
degrees serves no useful purpose whatsoever. The students' plight is
pitiable. Maybe they do get some education, but they learn
nothing. Their character is ruined. Perhaps the coming over of a
very small number may be useful (only at a mature age, though).
All of you should read this letter. Make a copy and send
the original to Dr. Mehta. Send the copy to Harilal. Write to
me regularly at this address: 84-85, Palace Chambers, West-
minster, London. I do not write separately to the others. This
may be taken, therefore, as meant for all.
You must be finding yourselves in a trying situation indeed,
all of you. I pray to God to be your help and to give you the
firmness of mind to do your duty. Send a copy of this letter to
Samaldas also. He should join us. Who knows when I shall
be able to bow down my head before the sisters-in-law. I am eager
to know if Maganbhai has been to his people. See if you can
arrange for [teaching] Tamil to Fakiri and Kuppu . You may
see Mr. Natarajan . He will guide you. Ask everyone to write
to me. Tell me how things are with Kalyandas.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C. W. 5766; also S. N. 6052
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
1 Son of Lakshmidas Gandhi, Gandhiji's elder brother
2 & 3 Boys who accompanied Maganlal Gandhi to India
4 Kamakshi Natarajan, editor of Indian Social Reformer, Bombay
5 Kalyandas Jagmohandas Mehta; vide Vol. VI, p. 461.
