358. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
NEW DELHI,
July 16, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,
I have your letter. I have the impression that I have already
written to you something in reply to your criticism of my experiment.
I am doing nothing just now. There has been no change
at all in my conviction up to now. On the contrary, it is deep-
ening with the passage of time. That is, I believe that even
if only one brahmachari of my conception comes into being, the
world will be redeemed. But the task is an extremely difficult
one. Any progress in that direction will of course be a gain.
On the other hand, there is no doubt that if the assumption is
erroneous, much harm can come of it. Just now there is only
one aspect of the question that presents itself to me. That is, that
the difference of opinion between Kishorelal and myself on this
issue pains me, for behind that difference lies great anguish of
mind on Kishorelal's part. Were it not for that, I think the
difference of opinion between us would not be so painful to me.
I would advise you not to worry in the least about this issue as
long as it is only at a theoretical stage.
I like your idea of going to East Africa for collecting funds.
There can of course be no doubt about the necessity of the
laws being repealed. But I am afraid they will not be totally
repealed. The fact that some of the workers are selfish is certainly
348
a handicap, but it seems right to me that you should go on
doing the best that you can in a spirit of detachment.
I think the changes which are taking place here will have an
impact there. Let us see how things shape. The burden of work
on me mayor may not decrease, I don't worry about that. You
also need not worry.
Perhaps I may never be able to return to Sevagram. It seems
likely that I shall have to stay on in these parts, that is, in Bihar
and Noakhali.
I have had a letter from Kaji. He has complained against
Dadoo and others. The letter is a long one. However, it has
produced no effect on me, for have we not had similar expe-
riences in the past?
I was indeed very happy to learn about your health and
I wish you all success. I would even welcome your writing in
detail on the subject. As a result of it you may even succeed
where I failed and live up to a hundred and twenty-five years.
For that, however, you should remember that diet is not the
only thing. The chief thing is the mind. Food, of course, has
an effect on the mind.
It is now 5 a. m. I must, therefore, get ready.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Enclosed is a copy of my letter to S. I am sending it to be
dispatched to you in case they have not sent one to you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5008
