278. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 23, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your comparatively short letter. I sent the copy of the cable-
gram received from Johannesburg last week, regarding the refusal of
the authorities to give facilities for the Ramzan month.
The enclosed is a copy of the cable sent by the London branch of the
All-India Moslem League to the Central League there. I hope that you
are carrying on a correspondence with the Central League from Bombay.
I quite agree with you that the cancellation of the meeting was a
splendid advertisement for the movement, and an equally good adver-
tisement of the folly of the authorities.
The attack by The Advocate of India is simply stupid. It can hurt
nobody but the paper and the writer. If Mr. Wadia has dealt with it,
well and good. If he has not, I do not think that it matters. In the
two packets of cuttings, you will be surprised to learn that the cutting
containing this attack was not to be found. I suppose Kaliandas, or
whoever made the cuttings, must have considered that the paragraph
was too contemptible even to be seen by us here.
I have not yet heard from Lord Crewe. I am sending a reminder.
I can understand my letters to you being opened, but that Millie's
letters to you are deliberately opened, passes my comprehension. Let us
hope they are all the wiser for having read the letters, and also that they
have learnt the meaning of wifely devotion. Her letters must have been
quite an education for them.
I am not likely to leave here—unless Smuts' reply is favourable—
for yet a month. Mr. Meyer is now here. I have asked him for an
appointment. Unless a dissolution comes soon, the season now is favour-
able for public activity.
I do not think I have told you that I am coming in touch with all
the Indian ladies I can, and get from them letters in Gujarati addressed
to the Editor of Indian Opinion, encouraging the movement and applaud-
ing the devotion of the Indian women. You told me you were going to
address a meeting of Indian women. You should get as many letters
as you can from them. There is no reason why you should not get letters
in English also. I have been getting them in Gujarati from Gujarati
women, as I am anxious they should not disregard their mother tongue.
One is from Mrs. Dube, a most charming Hindustani lady, who has
lived in Bombay and can therefore read and write Gujarati. The other
is from Mrs. K. C. Dinshaw, who was for some time in Durban, and who
is now travelling in Europe with her husband. You should get a letter
from Mrs. Petit, Mrs. Ranade and others. Miss Winter bottom has re-
turned from her holiday. I have suggested a letter of sympathy from
English women, and that they should also put down some small sub-
and I think H. A. Wadia will reply. I can't." Gandhiji addressed a rejoinder to
the paper; vide "Letter to The Advocate of India", pp. 436-.
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 Polak's comment on this, in his letter of October 14, was: "You take the
opening of Millie's letters more philosophically than she and I do. I see that your days
of writing love-letters are over! I am sorry for you! I haven't yet authorised Millie to
start classes in marital devotion!"
3 A letter from Ram Kumari Dube appeared in Indian Opinion, 11-9-1909.
4 The original has "oved ", an obvious typing error.
5 A letter from Khurshedbai Kekobad Cawasji Dinshaw appeared in Indian
Opinion, 23-10-1909.
6 A letter from Miss Florence Winterbottom was published in Indian Opinion,
25-12-1909, under the heading: "Message to the Wives of Passive Resisters". Another
letter from Hilda Margaret Howsin was published in the issue of 11-12-1909, under
the heading: "An English Woman's Letter to the Wives of Passive Resisters".
scription for the relief of the suffering wives and daughters of passive
resisters. I would suggest the same kind of thing over there. It is not the
amount on which I should lay stress, but the fact of every cultured
Indian woman having given even a pice for their sisters in the Trans-
vaal, and I should obtain for it the widest publicity in India. There is
no reason, too, why there should not be a women's meeting, only pass-
ing resolutions.
I have been thinking of having a prize essay here on passive
resistance, and a similar essay from India, along the lines of what we
had in Johannesburg. I proposed to Dr. Mehta that he should give the
prizes. He has considered it and he is willing to give them. I shall
draw up the syllabus and send you a copy, but that will be next week.
In the meanwhile, you may consider the following questions:
1. Who should be the Judge or Judges for India?
2. In whose name should the prize be offered?
The subject will have to be a little delicately handled, as It is evi-
dent that the people there, strange as it would appear, do not understand
passive resistance at all, and any essay that we may have there to be worth
anything must contain an examination of the bearing of passive
resistance on public movements in India. You may discuss it with Profes-
sor Gokhale and others. The amount to be offered may be £50 on this
side and £50 on yours, so that we should be able to attract good writers
on either side. I am going to consult Mr. Meyer, Dr. Clifford and others.
This prize essay, if any public activity has to be taken up here, will
widely advertize the Transvaal cause.
Of the Natal friends, Mr. H. M. Badat has left for Paris. His
ultimate goal is Mecca.
I take it that Messrs Omar and Issa Hajee Soomar are still with
you.
I have your cablegram with reference to the Surat meeting. I take
it that the others have also come off well, and I assume, too, that all
your resolutions are being forwarded to the Viceroy of India.
Dr. Mehta is here and will be for a few days. He leaves for Paris
on Sunday and he sails from Marseilles for Rangoon on the 1st, reaching
Rangoon on the 23rd October. Wherever you are, I think it will be
better to go to Rangoon, after corresponding with Dr. Mehta. He will
not be able to write to you before hearing from you, as he will not know
your address. He thinks that it will be a good idea for you to go to
Rangoon. A meeting can be held there, but in any case I am anxious
that you should meet him and—he you. If Mr. Omar goes with you,
it will be ever so much better. There are many public-spirited Memons
and Suraties, and, of course, you will see our friend Mr. Madanjit1, and
you will see there the freest women on earth. From Calcutta it is three
days, from Madras four days, so that you may go to Rangoon from
wherever you are. I do not think you could give more than a week to
Rangoon, but if you are pressed for time, you may give less. Dr. Mehta's
address is 14, Mogul Street, Rangoon.
Mr. Thaker suggests that we are so poor that we should save the
guinea for the London letter, and stop it at least for the time being.
I feel like him and with him, and seeing that to-day the paper is being
used for passive resistance principally, will it not be wise to stop it?
Please let me have your opinion per return.
The news from Phoenix with reference to West and Miss West was
much more reassuring last week. Both are entirely out of danger.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5091
