27. LETTER TO "THE DAILY EXPRESS"
JOHANNESBURG,
[After July 17, 1905]
TO
THE EDITOR
The Daily Express
SIR,
I trust you will allow me to reply to your correspondent who,
under the elegant pseudonym of "Sinkramsam", has attacked British
Indians through your columns in your issue of the 17th instant. There is
a homely Indian saying that you can take a horse to a watercourse but
cannot compel him to drink the water. So also those who shut their eyes
to facts placed before them are not to be disabused of their misconceptions.
Your correspondent, I very much fear, belongs to that category. For his
information, however, I ask again the question, if there were only thirteen
Indian (not "coolie", as your correspondent would have it) "store-keepers,
traders and hawkers" before the war, how is it that the challenge issued
by the Chairman of the British Indian Association has not been taken up
by Mr. Kleinenberg ? Remember that the names of these store-keepers
have been supplied to the Press. I note that your correspondent has gone
one better, in that he makes bold to say that the number thirteen includes
store-keepers, traders and hawkers. Unfortunately for him, he has chosen
a fatal number, and I am prepared to deposit with you the sum of £100 to
be forfeited to any anti-Indian Association your correspondent may name
if I fail to prove to the satisfaction of two arbitrators, one to be chosen by
him and the other by me, with power to them to appoint an umpire, that
there were more than twice the number of store-keepers, traders and haw-
kers mentioned by your correspondent prior to the war in the town of Pieters-
burg; provided that he forfeits to the British Indian Association an equal
sum in the event of the award being in my favour. So much for Sinkramsam's
figures.
As to the charge that the Native is being fleeced by British Indians,
I can only refer your correspondent to Sir James Hulett's testimony be-
fore the Native Affairs Commission as to which is the greater evil-doer,
the European or the Indian. With reference to the other charges made
by your correspondent, and based on "information" supplied to him,
I can only say that sensible people will rate them at their true value. If
there is any nefarious trade done by Indians, and he has received the
information, surely the remedy is in his own hands, and if the question
of trading licences is not yet settled once and for all, it is because Sink-
ramsam and his coadjutors would not accept the very reasonable com-
promise suggested by British Indians, whereby the control of new licences
would be handed to the Town Councillors to be elected largely by Sink-
ramsam and his friends. You, Sir, have some experience of the British
Indian question as it was prior to the war. You have experience of Bri-
tish Indians also. You have adopted an independent attitude in journa-
lism. I am sure you do not wish racial hatred between the component
parts of the British Empire to grow. It must be within your knowledge that
some of the facts stated by your correspondent are untrue. Will you not be
carrying out your mission by correcting what are undoubtedly palpable
mis-statements? Indians want only a fair field and no favour. Justice
ought not to be a dear commodity under the British flag.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 29-7-1905
1 Vide Vol. IV, p. 330.
2 Vide Vol. III, pp. 551-.
