519. LETTER TO BEN M. CHERRINGTON
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 22, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. You altogether overrate my ability to
help you. I however try to answer your questions to the best
of my ability.
Yours sincerely,
BEN M. CHERRINGTON, ESQ.
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY
UNIVERSITY OF DENVER
DENVER
COLORADO
U.S.A.
From a photostat: S.N. 14335
[ENCLOSURE]
I have never had occasion to study the history of the founda-
tions in the West. My knowledge of them being too cursory to
be of any value.
In my judgment, the growing need of the times however is
restoring to the things of the heart, that is, moral well-being, its
true place in life. Social science, according to my view, should
therefore be approached from that moral standpoint. No tinkering
will answer the purpose. Your foundation therefore, if it is to
be true to itself, should be utilized for subverting the system under
which the extraordinary accumulation of riches has been possible
in America. It would seem then that if you adopt my suggestion,
it becomes for the most part independent of monetary help.
In view of my answer to the first question, I need hardly answer
the second. But I would say independently of the first that the
organization of the foundation round industrial, racial and inter-
national relationships would be any day preferable to the tradi-
tional academic departments. If the view underlying my answer
to the first question is accepted, you will have to do original
research work.
In view of the foregoing the answer to this is unnecessary.
It would certainly be wise to have all nations, races and classes
represented. If you can take care of the youth, the citizens will
right themselves.
I should lock up in fairly commodious but not too comfortable
rooms a few professors and students and insist upon their finding
a way out of the present intolerable position, if you hold with me
that the present is an intolerable position.
I am unable to answer this.
The idea is good. Perhaps the most effective way of securing
the proper type or exchange of visiting members would be to send
out a representative to the countries from which you may want
such members so that he may come in direct touch with the living
institutions of the country or countries in question.
From a photostat: S.N. 14262
