337. LETTER TO MAHARAJA BAHADUR
SIR RAMESHWAR SINGH
RANCHI,
June 4, 1917
DEAR MAHARAJA SAHEB BAHADUR1,
In accordance with your suggestion, I reduce to writing my
views about the proposed inquiry.
In my opinion, simultaneously with the appointment of a
Committee of Enquiry (or arbitration, as suggested herein below),
there should be declaration regarding the various points referred
to in my letter to the Government dated the 13th May last. Tin-
kathia in every shape and form, hand-notes being balances of tawan
and hundas as in the Dhokraha kothi, should be declared as abolish-
ed or cancelled.
I have no desire, if I can help it, to lead evidence as to the
coercive methods adopted by the planters to bend the raiyats to
their will except in so far as it may be necessary regarding
sharahbeshi and tawan. I am anxious to see cordial relations estab-
lished between the planters and the raiyats. And in any inquiry
that is the result of a mutual understanding, an investigation into
methods of coercion can find no place.
There would then remain only the question of sharahbeshi,
sattas and individual hardships, in the shape of raiyats having been
dispossessed of their lands, etc., and the refund of tawan and
sharahbeshi already taken. These the Committee will investigate.
Sharahbeshi payments should meanwhile be suspended.
The Committee will confine its attention to sharahbeshi sattas
not covered by the forthcoming judgment of the High Court, the
latter to be accepted as final by both the parties. Inquiry into
sharahbeshi sattas will then naturally be postponed till after the judg-
ment of the High Court.
Upon the Committee being appointed, the scope of our work
will be altered. It will then consist in collecting, collating and
leading evidence and in simultaneously carrying out the educative
and protective programme sketched before you.
Such a Committee, then, may be in the nature of an arbitra-
tion of which the planters' and the raiyats' nominees (one of each)
will be members with the right to them to appoint an umpire. The
decision of the arbitration should be treated as final and binding
on both the parties. Behind it, in the place of judicial authority,
will be that of the Government, if either party failed to carry out
the award of the arbitration. This is a domestic quarrel and if it is
settled in the manner indicated by me, it will create a healthy
precedent.
If, however, it may not be in the nature of an arbitration, it
will then be a Committee appointed by the Government, two
members being the same as under the arbitration scheme and
the president being a High Court Judge.
If there is any point herein which requires elucidation and if it
is so desired, I shall be prepared to wait on the Council at any
time required.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 115, pp. 198-
