163. LETTER TO J. KER
NADIAD,
June 18, 1918
DEAR MR. KER,
I have your letter of the 17th instant in reply to mine of
the 14th instant regarding certain points arising from the settle-
ment. As to paragraph 3 of your letter I can only say that
the rules of interpretation require that that meaning should
be attached to one's language which one's hearer is reasonably
entitled to put upon it. Your answer as to chothai was clearly
in reply to my query and it left no room for doubt either
in my mind or Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel's that chothai was to
SV : I.11
be excused in every case in which it was not yet collected.
What is more, when one in good faith has already acted upon
such interpretation, if the line you propose to adopt is sound,
every order would be interpreted not as the readers, according
to the natural meaning of words, understand it, but as the issuer
has intended his language to mean. Surely you do not ask for
any such canon of interpretation.
Similarly for suspension, I feel that you are importing a
most dangerous principle of interpretation of orders. Suspension
to me could only bear one meaning; 'unauthorized arrears' is
not an unfamiliar expression to me. I did not need to approach
you for any such concession. It would have been no concession.
You would not need time for consideration in issuing order for
unauthorized arrears as you said you needed. I brought the
Mamlatdar's order to your notice. You confirmed it. It is now
open to you to go behind it and claim that the word bears not
its natural meaning but a meaning which you now desire to
give. After your confirmation of the Mamlatdar's order, it is
irrelevant whether he had authority to issue the order or not.
But I would add that I asked him whether he had authority
for what he was saying. On his saying he had, I asked him to
issue written orders which he did.
I do hope that in the circumstances you will not allow your-
self to be in the wrong and let the natural and just view prevail.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10701. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
