1. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
M. K. GANDHI
ATTORNEY
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522, JOHANNESBURG,
July 3, 1905
DEAR MISS GRAHAM,
I thank you for your nice letter of the 7th June. If you were to
examine my messages carefully you would find them to be more or
less selfish. I am looking forward to your arrival here and joining the
busy hive we have in Troyville. I think, by this time, I know enough
of you, from what Mr. Polak has enabled me to see, and I have not
the slightest doubt that we shall get on well together, and that you
will be a most valuable acquisition to the family. Here each one thinks
of duty and insists on doing it, there is no room left for differences
because there are no rival rights. I see that you have commenced your
life mission (shall I call it) already there. Ever since the receipt of
your letter, during my spare moments, I have, therefore, been thinking
how you could utilise your own spare time, if you have any, in doing
things there while you have the opportunity. May I, therefore, suggest
that you should pay your respects to the Honourable Mr. Dadabhai
Naoroji who is the G.O.M. of India. He represents the highest ideal
of an Indian patriot. Aged as he is, he is in the thick of the fight.
He is a candidate for Parliament to represent North Lambeth. Another
thing, I should like you to personally know is the Lady Margaret Hospital
in Bromley, Kent. I send you a pamphlet that has been sent to me
regarding it. The hospital is managed under hygienic principles, and the
diet given is strictly fruitarian. Dr. Oldfield who is in charge, and I
are very old friends. The hospital owes its existence to Dr. Oldfield's
1 Henry S. L. Polak who married the addressee in December 1905 ; vide
also Vol. XXXIX, pp. 246-. For Gandhiji's description of Polak and his work,
vide Vol. IX, pp. 274-.
2 Grand Old Man
3 Vide also Vol. V, p. 91.
4 Dr. Joshuah Oldfield, editor of The Vegetarian. recalling whom nearly
thirty years later, in a letter to Agatha Harrison, Gandhiji wrote: " I remember
Joshuah Oldfield well. He was of the greatest help to me when I went to
London as a lad. He is a fellow crank." Vide Vol. LX, p. 357.
1
energy. Will you pay a visit to the hospital and study everything about
it ? See the patients, examine the nature of the illnesses and come
out with all the information you can. You might also make the
acquaintance of Miss Nicholson of the Vegetarian Society at Memorial
Hall Farringdon St. In Phoenix, we are going to have a sanatorium,
and any experience you may gain there in such matters will be most
valuable. There is also a Tolstoy Farm somewhere near London. You
might see its working also. I think I have given you enough hints as
to what might be usefully studied there before you come out to South
Africa. I enclose herewith letters to Mr. Naoroji and Dr. Oldfield.
Please, however, do not in any way feel bound to see these gentlemen,
or to do any of the things suggested. Your duties there may prevent
you from seeing these gentlemen or doing anything else. I simply throw
out suggestions so that they may be utilised if you have the time for
them. I return the Orient Press letter. I have not yet carried your
message to Mrs. Gandhi, but will do so as soon as I can. She, too,
is like myself, looking forward to meeting you. Please excuse the
typewritten letter. My writing, Mr. Polak tells me, is an infliction on
friends. Many thanks for the book of verses for the children.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
MISS DOWNS
148 SANDRINGHAM RD.
DALSTON, N. E.
LONDON
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
1 The remaining lines of this typewritten letter, as also the word
"GRAHAM" in the superscription and "M.K. GANDHI" in subscription, are in
Gandhiji's hand.
