182. LETTER TO VIJAYA N. PATEL
TITHAL, BULSAR,
May 12, 1937
CHI. VIJAYA,
I met Naranbhai. Sardar also was present. We had a
long talk. His love for you is boundless. When I talked about
Manubhai he started crying. He said: "If she wants to marry only
with our consent, why does she bring up Manubhai's name every
time? We will never be pleased with that marriage. She has
taken a pledge to remain unmarried. Let her keep it. But if
at all she wants to marry, then there are two or three good
young men in our community; she may select one of them."
This is the substance of what he said. I pacified him. I told
him that you were not bent upon marrying him. If you at all
marry, I said, you would marry Manubhai, but that if your parents
would not gladly give you their blessings you would be prepared
to remain unmarried. I also told him that you certainly wished
that they should not press you to marry anybody else. Sardar
also spoke in favour of Manubhai. He said that now in this age
girls should be given some freedom; after having educated them
we should not expect that they should always obey our wishes.
But all this had no effect on Naranbhai. I have assured him
that I would not marry you off to Manubhai secretly.
Now my advice is that if you wish you may send this letter
to Manubhai. Even if you don't do that, you may, if you think
it proper, write to him and tell him that your marriage is likely
to be delayed and may not even come off. I am sure you would
not wish to marry after the death of your parents. Both of you
should wish that they may live long. It would be a different
matter if your patience, your blameless conduct and Manubhai's
purity should melt their hearts. But I do not think that in this
case anything except time and the conduct of you both can have
any effect. If occasion arises I would certainly be ready to
say more. But I shall not have the courage to hurt them.
Sardar is going to try.
I see that Manubhai has become impatient.
He should
have patience.
You must have got my last letter. I hope you have again
become friendly with Lilavati.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I do not see my penknife with two blades which used to
be kept on my inkstand. Please keep it safe if it is left behind
there. If it is not found, it will have to be given up as lost.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7066. Also C.W. 4558. Courtesy:
Vijayabehn M. Pancholi
