395. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 24, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter and wire.
I am not sending a wire in
reply to your wire, since I have already written to you yesterday
on that very subject. If you have not issued any statement as
suggested in that letter, you may state as follows:
I have read the proceedings of the new party formed
by Pandit Malaviyaji and Shri M. S. Aney. I have read
telegrams and letters asking me to clarify certain points. In
my opinion it is not proper to use the Congress name
without the Congress authority. The party may be called
the National Party of Congressmen if its composition strictly
confirmed to Congressmen. But without the authority of
the Congress duly received it cannot with propriety be called
the Congress National Party especially when it is formed
deliberately to propagate a policy in direct contradiction to
that which is the official policy of the Congress. The adoption
of the Congress name cannot but confuse the popular mind
and I would respectfully urge Panditji to reconsider the
position and adopt another name for the party which he had
a perfect right to form for the education of Congressmen and
others. The other point I should like to emphasize is that
no one but the Congress Parliamentary Board can run
elections in the name of the Congress. Lastly in the midst
of the unfortunate differences between Pandit Malaviyaji and
Sjt. Aney and the Working Committee I hope that all
Congressmen will loyally support the policy enunciated in
the resolution of the Working Committee regarding the
Communal Award.
If you wish to make any changes in this, you may do so.
Rajendrababu's letter was rather strange. There can be
only one reply to it. The Congress certainly cannot assume
responsibility for providing the money and we cannot raise funds
at present through private efforts. That is the responsibility of
Bhulabhai and others. Discuss this matter with him.
I will write to Bhulabhai regarding the A. I. C. C.
He wants a meeting of the Working Committee to be called.
I, therefore, think that it will be best to call it. You may
hold it either in Bombay or Wardha, as you wish. He wants it
to be called early in September.
Rajaji will arrive here the day after tomorrow or on Sunday.
Pattabhi and others are here. . . . 1 and others have arrived.
They will leave today.
I understand your view regarding Kaka.
Jawaharlal has
been arrested. There was a wire from Mahadev to that effect.
He could see him. He is arriving here tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 124-
