176. LETTER TO BECHARDAS DOSHI
September 6, 1930
BHAI BECRARDAS,
I have your letter. Really speaking Kakasaheb should reply
to it. But just now I reply as he can write only a limited
number of letters. Take it that the view expressed here is that
of us both. I will say nothing about the method of giving the
etymology. If Kakasaheb wishes, he will write about it later.
After discussing the matter with him, I understand that your
main work is to translate the Agamas . Shri Punjabhai has given
the money for that work, and it is our duty, therefore, to carry
out the object of the grant as quickly as possible. You should
not mind it if in devoting your time to that work you have to
postpone or delay work on etymology; or you may get it done
through somebody else if that can be conveniently arranged.
The idea in placing Bhakti Prasad at your disposal was not that
he might do original work on his own, but that he might work
under you and help you, and might, if he was persevering,
acquire proficiency in the work.
As for your eyes I think you should lay down a limit. You
should be satisfied with whatever help is available in Gujarat. Dr.
Haribhai is a specialist in eye diseases. If he cannot help you, you
should assume that nobody else will be able to and rest content.
There should be a self-imposed limit like this for anyone who has
decided to live a simple life. Do the countless poor have the benefit
of help even from a Dr. Haribhai? This of course is my personal
view. I can say that Kakasaheb now agrees with this view. But
this is a delicate matter. Everyone should lay down the limit
for himself according to his own lights and his own wish. The
limits accepted by one person cannot, in such a matter, apply to
all.
BAPU
[PS.]
My reason for using "now" and saying that "Kakasaheb now
agrees" is that, as he tells me, he himself had formerly advised
you to consult one or two other doctors. He now thinks that my
view is right.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1340
