636. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 27, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have your two letters. If you send me the prescription for Satis
Babu and anything else that is required, I shall do the needful. Pay
the doctors fee if it must be paid. But you must know the way I feel,
the way I acted in Bihar. Let us render such help as we can and
be content. What you are doing for Kalu Mian is an ideal thing in
my view. We should provide him personal service, give him proper
diet and be content with that. For that purpose, a doctor is not needed.
I followed this practice in Champaran from beginning to end. The
doctors and the teachers were Ba, Durga, Manibehn Parikh, etc. It
was very impressive and very rewarding. This is just to suggest what
in my view would be the ideal thing.
I am convinced your good lies in controlling your desire to come.
A.S. and Kanu arrived yesterday. I shall send the letter you have asked
for. There is no hurry about it. Kanu and A.S. will also read it.
What you have written about Harijan is correct. It all depends
on what Sardar finally does. It is hardly possible that he will now run
it independently. But if he does, we shall remove your name. We have
so far entirely depended on our sadhana, particularly mine. I am without
fear. I am unconcerned. But it irks me that I have not yet cultivated
non-attachment to the extent I should have. But in the end there must
be the grace of God behind human effort. Without that, human effort
is futile.
If Kalu Mian feels hot in the soles, I know the usefulness of a
mud-pack. I think it should be used.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I received another letter just while this was going. It is a lovely
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
letter. I have not been able to read the account of your activities and
the lesson for Manu. I shall arrange to send the letter which you are
so eager to read. I had completely forgotten what you wrote about
Rajaji. If you write a letter about it and send it to me, I shall send
it on to him. You can write to anyone from among Rajaji, Kishorelal,
Naraharibhai, Jajuji, etc. Do not worry at all about my health. Should
not a person having faith in God be free from worry ?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
