7. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
PRETORIA, Box 1156,
Paush Vad 8, 1970, Monday [January 19, 1914]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. How nice it would have been if it was not necessary
to call a doctor for Ba. But no one is at fault in that. How can one find fault
where all things are done in good faith?
It will be good for us if Mirza is really good and honest and stays with
us. Train him affectionately. Same is true of Bhawani Dayal.
I do not like it that we should employ paid compositors for . . .4 work.
Are so many of us not enough? You have done a good thing in making it a
rule for the children [to work in the press].
Mismanagement of the newspaper is painful. My guess is that Miss
Schlesin 5 is responsible for it. I am somewhat disappointed with her. However,
she may not be responsible this time. It is necessary that you write to West 6
and sort out the things. I have already written to her to go and live in Phoenix.
Check what Bhawani Dayal writes in Hindi and give it for printing.
Talk to Miss Schlesin about Johannesburg. Get the address of Narottam and
write to him that we would stop sending him Indian Opinion if he did not send
the money. What you write is correct. I, too, do not approve of an agency. Whoever
1 For Gandhiji's speech at reception to C.F. Andrews, who arrived in South Africa
on January 2, 1914; vide Vol. XII, pp. 316-.
2 Hermann Kallenbach, a prosperous German architect of Johannesburg
3 Paush vad 8 in the Vikram Era 1970, i.e., the year 1914, corresponded to January
19 and was a Monday.
4 A word here is illegible in the source.
5 Sonja Schlesin; a Jewish girl who joined Gandhiji as a steno-typist at the age of
16 and was his private secretary for many years; made herself useful to Indian Opinion;
was ardently interested in the Indian cause
6 Albert H. West, Manager of the International Printing Press, Phoenix
LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
7
wants Indian Opinion, should subscribe to it directly. I, too, will write to
Johannesburg from here. But to depend on me at present in such cases is useless.
Here there is an atmosphere of unity. We have not come across a single person
trying to cause trouble in Pretoria where the conditions were always unsatisfactory.
You will find this in my second report which I am about to send to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32888
