333. LETTER TO WALCHAND HIRACHAND
March 6, 1931
DEAR WALCHAND,
I thank you for your letter. In my opinion the meaning of the
clause relating to boycott is absolutely clear. The word boycott
may be omitted for its origin, when it was first coined, or for its
recent memories. Let me then say that the exclusion of British in
favour of Indian goods, Indian companies, shipping, insurance, etc.,
is not only permitted but favoured by the clause. What is
however a taboo under the clause is preference to non-Indian foreign
goods and foreign services over the British even irrespective of
merits, a weapon the country used as a political lever with terrible
effect during the civil disobedience campaign. If a permanent
settlement is the aim of the provisional settlement, as it undoubted-
ly is, boycott or exclusion, by whatever name we call it, should
cease whilst an attempt at perpetual friendship continues. But prefe-
rence for swadeshi over non-swadeshi is, apart from political conse-
quence which it may not have, a permanent obligation which no
nation can ignore without hurting its interests.
M. K. GANDHI
The Tribune, 8-3-1931
1 In reply to his letter which read: "In today's Government commu-
nique about the terms of settlement reference to boycott is made which
requires, to my mind, to be cleared. I understand it to mean that wherever
an indigenous industry, commodity or service is available we are still justified
in boycotting all non-Indian items of such commodities or services even if
they happened to be only British.
"To make my point clear, I will cite shipping and insurance on the
coast. There is only British shipping against Indian shipping. I take it that
the Indian shippers can not only boycott British shipping interests but you will
expect them to boycott these in order to encourage Indian shipping. The
same can be said about Indian insurance companies and Indian cloth.
"I should be grateful if you will kindly let me have your views in detail
and permit me to publish them."
260
