202. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
RANGOON,
March 16 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
We reached Rangoon this morning. This time I had a real experience
of deck passage. The latrines were the filthiest I have ever seen
anywhere and so was the so-called bathing place. The latter we simply
did not use. The deck was crowded. There was hardly seating
accommodation. There was no air space. It was a time of trial. You
would almost have died in the latrine. We had three nights of it and
3 days. Yet I am returning as a deck passenger. I am sending a
complaint to the company. I understand that the steamer is one of the
oldest of the company.
Here in Rangoon it is already very hot. Dr. Mehta however has
built a nice place out in the open. It is therefore not unbearable. I
should not have come here but for Dr. Mehta. Burma for the present
at any rate is not in my line. The country is being exploited by Indians
with the assistance of the English.
We stay here about a week and return to India.
I am seeing much, observing much. I am not disappointed. I am
finding things as I had expected and I feel that you would have felt
the spiritual India, could you have come. The cities are still plague spots.
But even in the cities you meet with real men as you do there.
Harilal came to me for a time. He has again left. He has no faith
in me and my co-workers except you. He thinks that I have used my
sons for my own benefit and sacrificed them to my ambition. He did
not put it quite so badly but the purport was unmistakable. The other
boys have grown in wisdom. Harilal is now not to receive any pecuniary
help from me. I think that is the best thing I can do for him
1 The source has "p.a."
2 This appears to be a slip. Gandhiji had reached Rangoon on March 17; vide
Vol. XIII, p. 162.
3 Vide also Vol. XIII, pp. 36- and Suppl. Vol. I, p. 89.
I shall still be travelling for a few months and seeing things.
I must describe Santiniketan to you in my next letter.
For you, I have still the same message. Have patience, find happiness
in the situation that faces you. There are others much worse situated.
With love,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
