35. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
BORSAD,
June 21, 1931
BHAI KASHINATH,
I got your letter.
I certainly intend to write something about the Digambar
Jain Sadhus. I am thinking what I can write.
I had a talk with Haribhau, too, about your decision to
leave. I understand your reasons. You two cannot save your-
selves from falling. The fact is that you have already fallen.
He who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to
dwell on sense-objects,-such a one, wholly deluded, is called a
hypocrite.
Here we should understand vimudhatma to mean merely that
the person lacks true knowledge and that, therefore, his outward
self-control is of no value. The man who lets his mind dwell on
lustful thoughts cannot be regarded a brahmachari simply because
he refrains from physical gratification. In other words, one must
banish from one's mind all evil thoughts which may arise in it.
Anyone who wants to succeed in this effort would take the neces-
sary steps, which you never did. Now you should recognize the
lack of self-control in you both, live humbly as an ordinary married
couple and practise only such self-control outwardly as you can
do mentally as well. Think over the meaning of the bhajan:
"Unless the mind is free from desire, renunciation cannot endure."
Do not feel that I am reproaching you. Rest assured that I have
only tried to open your eyes to the truth so that you may wake
up.
1 Vide "Digambar Sadhus", 5-7-1931.
2 Bhagavad Gita, III. 6
I am enclosing a note saying that the sums which you owe
to Navajivan and the Ashram should be written off. You may
use it. I think that this was a mistake on your part. You should
not have incurred debts in that way. Instead of borrowing
money and then seeking exemption from repaying the loan, at the
very time of drawing the money you should have asked for so much
more by way of honorarium. We ought not to value in terms
of money the work done for a public cause. I write this for the
sake of purity in our dealings. Only if we maintain the highest
standards of purity in our practical affairs can we come out of our
abject condition of mind. He who never feels inwardly poor is
richer than even the richest millionaire.
I am going to Bombay from here on Wednesday. Both of
you may come before that if you wish to. You may, however,
save your time and money, if you can be satisfied with my blessings
conveyed to you through a letter from here. We haven't yet
learnt the lesson of simplicity. This charge applies to nearly every-
one. The fault lies with the circumstances. I have always had
plenty of money at my disposal, so that I have not succeeded in
exercising strict control in its use. I have therefore often wished
how good it would be if people stopped giving us money and we
did not even know how we would get our next meal. Read
again my article in Navajivan on this subject.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5281
