458. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
June 22/23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I get your letters one by one. You will read about this from
my letter to Mirabehn. I got three letters of yours, of 19th and
26th May and 10th June, one after another during the last six days.
Other letters sent by you must be passing from hand to hand. I
think I have still to receive two letters, of June 2 or 3 and of
June 16. In future give me in your letters the names of those
whose letters you may have forwarded. This is because some of
them have not been given to me.
Do everything you can to please Ratilal. I am writing to him.
Please give the Japanese friend who wants to translate My
Experiments with Truth the permission to do so. With this is a
letter for the Bengali women. Rasjibhai and Shivabhai must have
completely recovered now.
What work is Jagannath doing?
The experiment of making curds from unboiled milk has
proved completely successful. Mostly I take curds instead of
milk. Hence my present diet is curds, raisins or dates and juice
of a lemon once a day. I still do not take any hot drink. Once only,
when I had to take castor oil, I had taken hot water, lemon juice
and salt twice. I drank milk on that day, but it was unboiled.
This diet has had no harmful effects. I think, therefore, that I
shall keep to this diet for the present. The weight is practically
steady. It fluctuates by a pound. It is 105 at present.
Kakasaheb was brought here four days ago. He is keeping
very fit. His diet is milk, bread, ghee and some fruit from what
is allowed to me. He has made a request for vegetables, which
will probably be granted.
I have added sewing to my daily work. I had asked for a
sewing-machine from Lady Vithaldas and it has now arrived. I
sew jail caps at present. I give to this work three-quarters to one
hour daily.
My rate of spinning is 375 rounds minimum. The average
would be 400. Spinning on the takli is also going on. I also
spend considerable time in making my takli. I am trying to spin
fine yarn. The hand has set well and I spin with greater ease
every day. I discover new virtues in the takli daily. Even more
than the spinning-wheel it may prove to be the support of people
in want, though, of course, both give peace of mind. I compared
them today with the sewing-machine and clearly realized the
moral value of manual work. Though I look upon the sewing-
machine as an invaluable benefit, I do not regard it as a source
of peace. When you work on it, you naturally wish to increase
the speed and in the end the brain is bound to get tired. But
once a person has acquired control over the takli, time passes more
peacefully for him as he works on it than for the driver of a
bullock-cart. This is my experience, though I have not become
an expert spinner as yet. I must wait and see what experience
I have when I have acquired perfect control over the takli. Kaka-
saheb, too, spins on it, but he has not discovered its secret yet.
These things are difficult for him to master. He knows that they
are for our good and, therefore, is trying to love them. He does
not want to start the spinning-wheel at present. He wishes to
master the takli first.
I read only after I have performed the spinning yajna. I
look upon sewing as a part of this sacrifice. I had received, and
welcomed, the suggestion sent by Mathuradas. I implement it
whenever I get an opportunity. Since Kaka is here, I am quite
eager now. I started Marathi yesterday. I would be happy if I
make at least some progress in it. If I advise everyone to commit
the verses of the Gita to memory, should not I, too, do that? The
attempt is like fixing the shape of a pot after it is baked. If at
all it is worth making, however, this is the right place. I, therefore,
started learning the verses eight days ago. I have learnt by
heart Chapter XII and have now started Chapter XIII. Kaka's
coming has naturally interrupted the progress. I will do nothing
by stealing time from the hours apart for the spinning yajna. I,
therefore, do these things in spare moments in the course of
other work or in the "library"1, etc. Let no one be shocked to
read that I try to learn the verses of the Gita by heart in the
"library". We have learnt from childhood that there is no spot
where He is not present. We should, therefore, feel no qualms
in taking His name or doing His work there. Yes, this certainly
means that our "libraries" should be as clean as the buildings in
which books are stored. Mine at any rate is. For here in the
jail everyone has to do all the things in the cell itself. They have
given me three cells. That does not mean that the position is
different. In jail I, too, have done all the things in the same
cell, whether in South Africa or here. I have had to do that.
Both of us felt that your long letter of 26th May was none
the less short, or rather not too long. It did not contain one super-
fluous word. If anything was left out, the letter was short to that
extent, but we did not feel at all that anything was left out. I
got this letter of the 26th after I had received that of June 10th.
In fact I got it only yesterday.
I shall not write more now. I think I have replied to all
your questions.
In the letters which you write in future, mention the names
of those whose letters you may enclose.
I have written this letter in two sittings. The first part was
written yesterday evening. I suppose it is Purushottam who at-
tends on Khushalbhai at present.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
If Mirabehn is not there, or if she is too busy otherwise to
find time, you should, when you can, carry out the suggestion
about sending cotton. I will reply to Balkrishna next time.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8113. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
