212. LETTER TO GANGADHARRAO DESHPANDE
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 27, 1926
MY DEAR GANGADHARRAO,
I have your very full letter about your activities. I trace in
that letter signs of both hope and despair. There is no cause
whatsoever for despair. If our experiment is thorough, i.e., only
in accordance with the fundamentals, there never need be the
slightest cause for despair.
Idleness has taken possession of the poor, because they have
lost all interest in living. They will begin to take interest only
after we have worked in their midst for [a] sufficiently long time.
We may wait for full effect even for ages if we are satisfied that
our way is the only way of solving the problem of the masses. It
is because of our unbelief and impatience that often we run from
remedy to remedy, nothing takes root and the position goes from
bad to worse.
About the disinclination of the weavers to weave hand-spun
yarn, there are two reasons. One is that our yarn is not as strong
as mill yarn and the other is [that] the weavers are not satisfied
that hand-weaving has come to stay. Time will give them the
necessary faith and our application must improve the quality of the
yarn. Day after day, we must insist upon the spinners giving us
better yarn. We have to examine their spinning-wheels, correct
their defects so as to enable the spinners to draw better yarn
with greater rapidity. Within limits our wheels do admit of im-
provement.
We in the Ashram are carrying on experiments in improving
the quality of yarn. We are testing it from fortnight to fort-
night and the improvement made is really wonderful. I hope to
publish figures about it.
I am going to make guarded and limited use of the informa-
tion given by you in the pages of Young India. You will see the
table that is being published this week. I would like you to
supply me with the information in accordance with the table.
I would like to make that table exhaustive, giving details of every
khadi-producing organization.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. GANGADHARRAO DESHPANDE
BELGAUM
From a microfilm: S.N. 11209
