643. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
March 1, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
I hope you have heard from the S. D. O. Chandpur, Tipperah District
that I am endeavouring to leave for Bihar tomorrow. I wish I could
say that I am trying to go because of your pressing advice to Fazlul
Haq Sahib who spoke publicly the other day and repeated the same
thing, though very courteously, on Thursday last when he was good
enough to call on me. The memorandum of Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill
about which I wrote to you on February 22, had predisposed me towards
a temporary visit to Bihar. What decided me however was a long letter
from Dr. Syed Mahmud who has sent it with his Private Secretary.
In order to come to a final decision I sent a peremptory message
yesterday through the good offices of Khan Sahib, the S.D.O. of
Chandpur, asking whether the Bihar Chief Minister had any objection
to my immediately proceeding to Patna. The reply may be received
any minute. If I go I would like you to give me hints as to what I
should see. The desire to go has arisen because suspicion has been
created in my mind that all is not well in Bihar so far as the Hindu
behaviour towards the Muslims of Bihar is concerned. The cause in
either case, in Bihar or Bengal, is identical.
There was consternation among the Hindus yesterday when I
announced my intention of immediately proceeding to Bihar. They said
they were afraid of being molested as in October. I hope that the fear
will prove groundless and that you will do all you can to allay the fear.
1 An extract from this has already been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVII, pp. 31-.
It is said that all aid in the shape of rations will be stopped from
the 15th instant. If this information turns out to be true there would
be widespread avoidable distress. The machinery provided for relief
is very slow.
Sufficient material for building is not there. Weavers have got no
yarn for weaving. Fishermen have got none for making nets. Carpenters
have got no tools. Agriculturists have no bullocks. There are no seeds
for sowing. Thakkar Bapa mentioned the difficulty of merchants in
Haimchar for a loan in order to enable them to start business. He
has prepared an application to be sent to you. It makes a business-
like proposition. I should have thought that people who have lost their
all would be entitled to adequate grants for starting business. On the
contrary, however, he offers even interest if it is required for the loan
he proposed. I hope there will be no delay in granting the loan. I would
strongly urge that interest should not be asked in such cases.
There is a strong belief that there is boycott by the Muslims of
Hindus so far as labour for them is concerned. Of course I have said
that no government can compel any community to labour for another.
Critics have no difficulty in agreeing to my proposition against
compulsion. They however suggest that boycott is approved, even
encouraged, by your Government. I hope that my information is wholly
wrong.
I am leaving a copy of this letter with Satis Babu of Khadi
Pratishthan who is at present stationed at Kazirkhil and who will
represent me during my absence which I hope will be only temporary
and will be attended by success. Though my absence will be temporary
I cannot omit to mention that so far as I am personally concerned
the whole of the official world has been courteous and considerate
to me and in this mention I include the police whom you have put
to guard my person.
H. S. SUHRAWARDY SAHIB
PRIME MINISTER
BENGAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
