148. LETTER TO M. CHAMNEY
P. O. Box 4736,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 26, 1908
M. CHAMNEY, ESQ.
COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA
DEAR SIR,
I beg to apply formally for a return of my application for voluntary
registration and all the papers given by me to you in connection with
the matter, for the following reasons.
I have just learnt that it is the definite intention of the Government
to legalize voluntary registration under the Asiatic Act making the Act
applicable to such Asiatics in every other respect. This I consider to be
a distinct breach of the compact arrived at between the Government
and the Asiatic communities of the Transvaal.
General Smuts told me at the interview at which you were present
that, if the compact on the part of the Asiatic communities was carried
out, he would repeal the Act. This, as you are aware, was in answer
to my letter of the 1st February last, asking for a definite assurance on
the matter. I claim that the Asiatics have more than fulfilled their part
of the contract. It was, therefore, the Government's duty to declare
their intention to repeal the Act. Moreover, the letter accepted by
General Smuts shows clearly that the Act was in no case to apply to
those who might be voluntarily registered. The draft letter placed
1 Vide "Letter to General Smuts", pp. 51-.
before the prisoners read that "to all who so register the penalties of the
Act be not applied". Knowing what I was doing, I deliberately
struck off the words "the penalties of" in order that, even if the bulk
of the Asiatics did not accept the compromise, those who did so might
in any case be exempted from it entirely. In proposing to legalize volun-
tary registration under the Act, therefore, General Smuts not only de-
parts from the promise made by him to me but also from his acceptance
of the letter above quoted.
The decision of the Government not to accept voluntary registra-
tion from the domiciled Asiatics now returning from Asia also means,
in my opinion, a breach of the spirit of the compromise if not of its
letter. This unfortunate decision shows that the General has failed
entirely to appreciate the essence of the late struggle now about to be
revived. It was never to obtain individual rights but to preserve and
assert the communal rights and self-respect of Asiatics.
Under the circumstances, there is no course left open to me but the
one I have now adopted. I am once more prepared, as a loyal citizen,
to submit to the punishments involved in non-submission to the Asiatic
Act. The compromise was never accepted by me or my fellow-workers
to escape personal hardships but to show the reasonableness of our
struggle. I propose to ask my brother-Asiatics to follow the same
course that I have adopted.
You will, I have no doubt, perceive the gravity of the situation and
comply with my request on or before Friday next. This gives you
time, should you desire it, to consult General Smuts by wire as to my
letter. I am sure you will see that you have no legal right to the
documents, including the application, possessed by you and which
were given to you only as a matter of grace, and not in virtue of any
law.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 30-5-1908
1 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 40-.
2 That is, exempted from Act 2 of 1907 entirely
3 Chamney did not reply at once. Gandhiji sent Smuts a telegram asking for the
immediate return of his registration papers. This, however, is not available. Vide
"Johannesburg Letter", p. 297.
