262. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
WARDHA,
December 13, 1928
MY DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter. I am passing on your reflections on pool-
ing to Ghanshyamdasji.
I am glad you are already in touch with Mahavirprasadji.
If you have not known him before, I would like you to come
in intimate contact with him. He is an extremely fine man shar-
ing most of our ideals, if not all of them.
Krishnadas is here now, and I am drinking in all the many
things that he has to say about you and Hemprabhadevi and
Sodepur in general. Only you and Hemprabhadevi may not kill
yourselves with work. Those who work in the Gita spirit never
overwork themselves, because they work with complete detachment
and complete detachment means utter freedom from anxiety. When
we work purely as His instrument with an absolute self-surrender
there can be no cause for anxiety or fretfulness whatever the result
or however black may be the horizon for the time being. Jesus
summed up the same lesson in one sentence: "Be careful of no-
thing." Krishnadas tells me Hemprabhadevi is wearing out her
body. She may not do so and let her not deny herself the ordi-
nary creature comforts which may be essential for keeping her
body up to the mark.
I note what you say about the Exhibition. I do not mind it.
It is enough we do not resist and hold ourselves in readiness to
help where need be and this we must do in a spirit of utter good-
will and without irritation.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR
From a photostat: S.N. 13794
a producing Province without taking the responsibility for the disposal of its
whole output. For example, Mr. Jerajani may buy the best khaddar from all
over India, pool the prices and sell at a standard price at Bombay. This is
harmless in Bombay where there is no local khadi."
I The addressee had also said: "The Exhibition authorities have not
communicated with me. . . . Agents of the Committee went about the country
and secured non-Association khaddar from Bengal, Bihar, Andhra, etc. They
arranged to run spinning shows also in the same way. That the A.I.S.A. is
coming now is something additional and therefore the old arrangement
continues."
