79. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
March 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,
I must thank you for your prompt reply to my letter of
17th February. At the outset, I send you and Lady Wavell my
thanks for your kind condolences on the death of my wife.
Though for her sake I have welcomed her death as bringing
freedom from living agony, I feel the loss more than I had
thought I should. We were a couple outside the ordinary. It
was in 1906 that after mutual consent and after unconscious
trials we definitely adopted self-restraint as a rule of life. To
my great joy this knit us together as never before. We ceased
to be two different entities. Without my wishing it, she chose
to lose herself in me. The result was she became truly my
better half. She was a woman always of very strong will which,
in our early days, I used to mistake for obstinacy. But that
strong will enabled her to become quite unwittingly my teach-
er in the art and practice of non-violent non-co-operation. The
practice began with my own family. When I introduced it in
1906, in the political field, it came to be known by the more
comprehensive and specially coined name of satyagraha. When
the course of Indian imprisonment commenced in South Africa,
Shri Kasturba was among the civil resisters. She went through
greater physical trials than I. Although she had gone through
several imprisonments, she did not take kindly to the present
incarceration during which all creature comforts were at her
disposal. My arrest simultaneously with that of many others,
and her own immediately following, gave her a great shock and
embittered her. She was wholly unprepared for my arrest. I
had assured her that the Government trusted my non-violence,
and would not arrest me unless I courted arrest myself. Indeed
the nervous shock was so great that after her arrest she deve-
loped violent diarrhoea and, but for the attention that Dr.
Sushila Nayyar, who was arrested at the same time as the de-
ceased, was able to give her, she might have died before join-
ing me in this detention camp. My presence soothed her, and
the diarrhoea stopped without any further medicament. Not so
the bitterness. It led to fretfulness ending in painfully slow
dissolution of the body.
2. In the light of the foregoing, you will perhaps understand
the pain I felt when I read in the papers the statement made
on behalf of the Government, which I hold was an unfortunate
departure from truth regarding her who was precious to me
beyond measure. I ask you please to send for and read the
complaint in the matter which I have forwarded to the Addi-
tional Secretary to the Government of India (Home Depart-
ment). Truth is said to be the first and the heaviest casualty
in war. How I wish in this war it could be otherwise in the
case of the Allied powers!
3. I now come to your address which you delivered before the
Legislature and of which you kindly sent me copy. When the
newspapers containing the address were received, I was by the
bedside of the deceased. Shri Mirabai read to me the Associated
Press report. But my mind was elsewhere. Therefore the receipt
of your speech in a handy form was most welcome. I have now
read it with all the attention it deserves. Having gone through
it, I feel drawn to offer a few remarks, all the more so, as you
have observed that the views expressed by you "need not be re-
garded as final". May this letter lead to a re-shaping of some
of them!
4. In the middle of page two, you speak of the welfare of the
"Indian peoples". I have seen in some Viceregal pronouncements
the inhabitants of India being referred to as the people of India.
Are the two expressions synonymous?
5. At page thirteen, referring to the attainment of self-govern-
ment by India, you say:
I am absolutely convinced not only that the above represents
the genuine desire of the British people, but that they wish to see
an early realization of it. It is qualified only at present by an absolute
determination to let nothing stand in the way of the earliest possible
defeat of Germany and Japan; and by a resolve to see that in the
solution of the constitutional problem full account is taken of the interests
of those who have loyally supported us in this war and at all other times—
the soldiers who have served the common cause; the people who have
worked with us; the Rulers and populations of the States to whom
we are pledged; the minorities who have trusted us to see that they
get a fair deal . . . but until the two main Indian parties at least can
come to terms, I do not see any immediate hope of progress.
Without reasoning out I venture to give my paraphrase
of your pronouncement. 'We, the British, shall stand by the
Indian soldier whom we have brought into being and trained
for consolidating our rule and position in India, and who, by
experience, we have found can effectively help us in our wars
against other nations. We shall also stand by the Rulers of
the Indian States, many of whom are our creation, and all of
whom owe their present position to us, even when these Rulers
curb or actually crush the spirit of the people whom they
rule. Similarly shall we stand by the minorities whom too we
have encouraged and used against the vast majority when the
latter have at all attempted to resist our rule. It makes no differ-
ence that they (the majority) seek to replace it by a rule of
the will of people of India taken as a whole. And in no case will
we transfer power unless Hindus and Muslims come to us with
an agreement among themselves.' The position taken up in the
paragraph quoted and interpreted by me is no new thing. I
regard the situation thus envisaged as hopeless, and I claim in
this to represent the thought of the man in the street. Out of
the contemplation of this hopelessness was born the anguished
cry of "Quit India". What I see happening in this country
day after day provides a complete vindication of the "Quit
India" formula as defined by me in my considered writings.
6. I note, as I read your speech, that you do not regard the
sponsors of the formula of "Quit India" as outcastes to be shun-
ned by society. You believe them to be high-minded persons.
Then treat them as such and trust their interpretation of their
own formula and you cannot go wrong.
7. After developing the Cripps offer you have said at page
sixteen in the middle of the paragraph:
. . . the demand for release of those leaders who are in detention
is an utterly barren one until there is some sign on their part of will-
ingness to co-operate. It needs no consultation with anyone or any-
thing but his own conscience for anyone of those under detention to
decide whether he will withdraw from the Quit India resolution and the
policy which had such tragic consequences, and will co-operate in the
great tasks ahead.
Then again, reverting to the same subject you say on pages
nineteen and twenty:
There is an important element which stands aloof; I recognize
how much ability and high-mindedness it contains; but I deplore its
present policy and methods as barren and unpractical. I should like to
have the co-operation of this element in solving the present and the
future problems of India. If its leaders feel that they cannot consent
to take part in the present Government of India, they may still be
able to assist in considering future problems.
But I see no reason to
release those responsible for the declaration of August 8, 1942, until
I am convinced that the policy of non-co-operation and even of ob-
structions has been withdrawn-not in sack-cloth and ashes that helps
no one, but in the recognition of a mistaken and unprofitable policy.
8. I am surprised that you, an eminent soldier and man of
affairs, should hold such an opinion. How can the withdrawal
of a resolution, arrived at jointly by hundreds of men and
women after much debating and careful consideration, be a
matter of individual conscience? A resolution jointly undertaken
can be honourably, conscientiously and properly withdrawn
only after joint discussion and deliberation. Individual conscience
may come into play after this necessary step, not before. Is a
prisoner ever free to exercise his conscience? Is it just and pro-
per to expect him to do so?
9. Again, you recognize "much ability and high-mindedness"
in those who represent the Congress organization and then
deplore their present policy and methods as "barren and un-
practical". Does not the second statement cancel the first?
Able and high-minded men may come to erroneous decisions,
but I have not before heard such people's policy and methods
being described as "barren and unpractical". Is it not up to
you to discuss the pros and cons of their policy with them before
pronouncing judgment, especially when they are also admit-
tedly representatives of millions of their people? Does it become
an all-powerful Government to be afraid of the consequences
of releasing unarmed men and women with a backing only of
men and women equally unarmed and even pledged to non-
violence? Moreover why should you hesitate to know their
minds and reactions?
10. Then you have talked of the "tragic consequences" of the
"Quit India" resolution. I have said enough in my reply to
the Government pamphlet Congress Responsibility, etc., combat-
ing the charge that the Congress was responsible for those
consequences. I commend the pamphlet and my reply to your
attention, if you have not already seen them. Here I would just
like to emphasize what I have already said. Had Government
stayed action till they had studied my speeches and those of
the members of the Working Committee, history would have
been written differently.
11. You have made much of the fact that your Executive
Council is predominantly Indian. Surely their being Indians
no more makes them representatives of India than non-Indians.
Conversely it is quite conceivable that a non-Indian may be a
true representative of India, if he is elected by the vote of the
Indian people. It would give no satisfaction even if the head
of the Indian Government was a distinguished Indian not cho-
sen by the free vote of the people.
12. Even you, I am sorry, have fallen into the common error
of describing the Indian forces as having been recruited by
"voluntary enlistment". A person who takes to soldiering as
a profession will enlist himself wherever he gets his market
wage. Voluntary enlistment has come to bear by association
a meaning much higher than that which attaches to an enlist-
ment like that of the Indian soldier. Were those who carried
out the orders at the Jallianwala massacre volunteers? The
very Indian soldiers who have been taken out of India and
are showing unexampled bravery will be ready to point their
rifles unerringly at their own countrymen at the orders of the
British Government, their employers. Will they deserve the
honourable name of volunteers?
13. You are flying all over India. You have not hesitated to
go among the skeletons of Bengal. May I suggest an interruption
1 Vide pp. 105-99.
2 The reference is to the Bengal famine.
in your scheduled flights and a descent upon Ahmednagar and
the Aga Khan's Palace in order to probe the hearts of your cap-
tives? We are all friends of the British, however much we may
criticize the British Government and system in India. If you can
but trust, you will find us to be the greatest helpers in the fight
against Nazism, Fascism, Japanism and the like.
14. Now I revert to your letter of the 25th February. Shri
Mirabai and I have received replies to our representations.
The remaining inmates have received their notices. The reply
received by me I regard as a mockery; the one received by
Shri Mirabai is an insult. According to the report of the
Home Member's answer to a question in the Central Assembly,
the replies received by us seem to be no replies. He is re-
ported to have said that the stage "for the review of the cases
had not yet arrived. Government at present were only receiv-
ing representations from prisoners." If the representations in
reply to the Government notices are to be considered merely
by the executive that imprisoned them without trial, it will
amount to a farce and an eye-wash, meant perhaps for foreign
consumption, but not as an indication of a desire to do jus-
tice. My views are known to the Government. I may be con-
sidered an impossible man-though altogether wrongly I would
protest. But what about Shri Mirabai? As you know, she is
the daughter of an Admiral and former Commander-in-Chief
of these waters. But she left the life of ease and chose instead
to throw in her lot with me. Her parents, recognizing her urge
to come to me, gave her their full blessings. She spends her
time in the service of the masses. She went to Orissa at my
request to understand the plight of the people of that benighted
land. That Government was hourly expecting Japanese in-
vasion. Papers were to be removed or burnt, and withdrawal
of the civil authority from the coast was being contemplated.
Shri Mirabai made Chaudwar (Cuttack) airfield her headquar-
ters, and the local military commander was glad of the help
she could give him. Later she went to New Delhi and saw
General Sir Alan Hartley and General Molesworth who both
appreciated her work and greeted her as one of their own class
and caste. It, therefore, baffles me to understand her incarceration.
1 Sir Edmond Slade
2 Commander-in-Chief, India, since March, 1942
3 Lt.-Gen. George Noble Molesworth, Deputy Chief of General Staff,
India, 1941-42; Secretary, Military Department, India Office, 1943-44
The only reason for burying her alive, so far as I can see,
is that she has committed the crime of associating herself
with me. I suggest your immediately releasing her, or your
seeing her and then deciding. I may add that she is not yet
free from the pain for the alleviation of which the Government
sent Captain Simcox at my request. It would be a tragedy
if she became permanently disabled in detention. I have men-
tioned Shri Mirabai's case because it is typically unjust.
15. I apologize to you for a letter which has gone beyond
the length I had prescribed for myself. It has also become very
personal and very unconventional. That, however, is the way
my loyalty to friends works. I have written without reserva-
tion. Your letter and your speech have given me the opening.
For the sake of India, England and humanity, I hope, you will
treat this as an honest and friendly, if candid, response to your
speech.
16. Years ago, while teaching the boys and girls of Tolstoy
Farm in South Africa, I happened to read to them Words-
worth's "Character of the Happy Warrior". It recurs to me as
I am writing to you. It will delight my heart to realize that
warrior in you. There will be little difference between the man-
ners and methods of the Axis powers and the Allies, if the war
is to resolve itself into a mere trial of brute strength.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 256-62
