401. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
April 18, 1932
CHI.,
1. I have never seen any difference between the Jain doctrine
and the general Vedic doctrine. The difference is only one of point
of view. The God of the Vedas is both a Doer and a non-Doer.
Since the whole world is pervaded by God, He is a Doer, and yet
He is not that because He remains untouched. He does not suffer
the consequences of karma, since the world is not His karma in
the sense in which we use the word. Looked at from this point of
view, the verses which you have quoted from the Gita can be re-
conciled with one another. We should remember that the Gita is
a poem. God does not speak nor does He do anything. We
cannot say that God said anything to Arjuna. The conversa-
tion between Lord Krishna and Arjuna is imaginary. I at any
rate do not believe that such a conversation took place between
a real Krishna and a real Arjuna. But there is nothing inappro-
priate or untruthful in the method adopted by the Gita. It was a
custom in those times to write religious works in such a form,
and even today a learned writer would not be criticized for adopt-
ing a similar form. Jainism stated the truth logically and un-
poetically and, therefore, coldly, and said that there was no God
who might be described as Creator of the world. It is not wrong
to say this, but the ordinary mass of people do not respond to cold
logic. They always crave for poetry. That is why even the rational-
ism of the Jains felt the need for temples, images and similar aids,
for which pure nyaya should have no use.
2. The answer to your second question is contained in the
answer to the first, as the question itself, I think, is contained in the
first question. The word 'grace' is a poetic term. Bhakti itself is
poetry. But poetry is not an unworthy or inferior or superfluous
thing. It is a very essential factor. That water is composed of
two parts of hydrogen and one part of oxygen is a factual state-
ment, but to describe water as a gift of God is poetry. It is es-
sential for a full life that we should feel in this poetic way, but it is
not essential that we should know the scientific truth about the
composition of water. Similarly, it is perfect logic to say that every-
thing that happens is the effect of karma. But the true nature of
karma is an unfathomable mystery. We mortals are so utterly
ignorant that we cannot know all the karmas which are the cause
of even the most ordinary event. It is, therefore, true to say that
everything happens through the grace of God. Really speaking,
that is the perfect truth. Moreover, the atman dwelling in a body
is imprisoned in it like the air in ajar, and, as that air cannot use
its natural power so long as it believes itself unconnected with the
air outside, so the atman imprisoned in a body remains cut off from
the power of omnipotent God so long as it believes itself the doer of
things. For this reason, too, it is only when we say that everything
which happens is done by God that we speak the perfect truth as befits
a satyagrahi. The desires of a votary of truth are good and, there-
fore, they are always fulfilled. Accordingly, our prayers consisting
of the verses which you have quoted are bound to benefit the
world also in the measure in which our prayers are sincere. The
world is not separate from us or we from the world. All are
connected with one another in their inmost essence and the actions of
each have effects on all others. Actions here include thoughts also.
Hence not a single thought is without its effect. That is why we
must cultivate the habit of thinking good thoughts.
3. I was not led to the conclusion that Truth is God by consider-
ing that God is formless and so is Truth. But I saw that Truth
is the only perfect description of God. All other descriptions are
imperfect. Even the word 'Ishvar' is a descriptive term, applied to
an omnipotent something which cannot be described by human
speech. If we think of the etymological meaning of the word 'Ishvar',
the word does not touch our heart. Thinking of God as a ruler
does not satisfy our mind. It may produce a kind of fear in us,
which deters us from sin and impels us to be virtuous. But virtu-
ous actions inspired by fear cease to be virtuous. If we act virtu-
ously, we should do so through love of virtue and not through expec-
tation of any reward. These and similar reflections resulted one day
in my realizing that the statement that God is Truth is also imper-
fect. The statement that Truth itself is God is a perfect state-
ment as far as human speech can express anything perfectly. We
shall come to the same conclusion if we consider the etymological
meaning of the word 'satya'. It is derived from the root 'sat', which
means to exist eternally.
That which exists eternally is satya,
Truth, it can be nothing else. But belief in Truth as God should
not diminish our faith, on the contrary, it should increase it. That
at any rate has been my experience. By regarding Truth as God,
we save ourselves from many a pitfall. We no longer desire to see
miracles or hear about them. We may find difficulty in under-
standing what 'seeing God' means; there can be no difficulty in
understanding the meaning of 'seeing Truth'. Seeing Truth may it-
self be difficult, it is so. But as we go nearer and nearer towards
It, we can have an increasingly clearer vision of Truth that is God,
and that strengthens our hope and faith that one day we shall
have a full vision of It. You can ask me again if you do not find
your questions answered by this. I will not be tired of answering
your questions. And I am confident that we shall find a satisfactory
answer. Maybe this fails to answer all the doubts that may
arise in your mind; in that case you may ask me again and
again.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 105-. Also C.W. 9044. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi
1 Literally, 'ruler'
2 What follows is from the C.W. source.
