156. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
CALCUTTA,
September 1, 1947
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter. Bhopal (Nawab's) letter is strange. I did
not like it. Your task is hard indeed. May God grant you the
necessary strength. If Bhopal plays the game, Hyderabad's problem
will be easy to solve. And the same will be true of Pakistan.
I have already sent you my programme, but now even that
is as good as cancelled. We were to go to Noakhali tomorrow
morning. So Shaheed Saheb went home. I am the only elderly
person in the house. Dinshaw Mehta is here, but what can he do?
He does not know the language and his large body is of no use.
Someone received knife wounds in Machhva Bazaar. No
one knew who stabbed him. People brought him here for demon-
stration. Perhaps they wanted to attack Shaheed Suhrawardy,
but they could not find him; so their anger was turned on me.
There was an uproar in the front yard. Both the girls went
out among the crowd. I was in bed about to go to sleep. Our
Muslim landlady came in to have a look as she was afraid I
might come to harm. I sensed danger and got up. I broke my
silence. My vow permits me to break it on such occasions.
I went to face the crowd but the girls would not leave my side.
Other people also surrounded me. Glass windows were being
broken and they started smashing the doors also. There was
an attempt to cut the wires of the electric ceiling fans but
only a few were snapped. I started shouting at the crowd,
asking them to be quiet. But who would listen? I could,
moreover, speak only Hindustani and they were Bengalis.
There were also some Muslims nearby. I asked them not to
strike back. So they merely stood around me. There were two
groups; one trying to incite the crowd, the other trying to
pacify it. There were two policemen also. They also used no
force. With folded hands they addressed [the crowd] in a loud
voice and they stopped me. Kalyanam suggested that I should
go and sit inside.
Bisen was in the centre. He was wearing
only pyjamas and was taken for a Muslim. Bricks were thrown.
One hit a Muslim. No one was wounded, but the brick could
have struck me. The Superintendent of Police came soon after
and the youngsters dispersed after causing considerable damage
to the house. Prafulla Babu and Annada arrived. Prafulla
suggested the posting of more police guard but I objected.
Everyone suspects the Hindu Mahasabha [was behind the attack].
I have asked them to see Syamaprasad and Chatterji before
arresting the mischief-makers and not to do anything in a hurry.
Such is the position here. I could thus go to bed only at
12.30 a. m. Of course I had to get up at the usual hour.
Please tell Jawaharlal about this when you meet him.
Read the accompanying wire. I feel totally lost. I pin my
hopes on you two. The copy of my reply is on the reverse.
In this situation you may take it that I am here. "As for
tomorrow, who can tell?"
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
1 AURANGZEB ROAD
NEW DELHI
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 372-
