294. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 6, 1937
CHI. NIMU1,
I received your letter. I am sending fifty rupees by money-order. Instead
of keeping the amount with you, hand it over to Vidyavati for safe keeping,
or give it to the head of the office. In an institution, there is constant danger
of money being stolen if one keeps it with oneself.
Your study seems to be progressing well. If you cannot get Hindi books
there, write to Devdas to send you some. Hindi books are available in Delhi.
One cannot expect them here. While learning Hindi, do not fail to give the
fullest attention to it's grammar. Learning grammar develops one's
understanding. There is little in it to be memorized. Much of it requires only
intellectual understanding. And once one's understanding has developed,
learning grammar becomes interesting work. Grammar is the science of
language. It is vary easy, and interesting too, to learn the structure of sentences
and the etymology of words.
I had a letter from Manilal and Sushila which I am enclosing with this. You
1 The letter is in Mahadev Desai's handwriting.
218
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
will know about Ramdas from that letter. He seems to be quite cheerful there.
I got Umiyashankar's telegram for the Rentiabaras 1 day. It also refers to
Ramdas. I infer from it that Ramdas has gone there too. Umiyashankar says
that Ramdas is keeping quite well. You may therefore take this as the latest
information about Ramdas' s state of health. Other letters you may get now
may have been written on an earlier date.
Ramdevji suggests that you should consult a vaidya for the problem of
your health.
I am keeping well enough. I cannot say I am perfectly well. The brain
easily gets tired.
Chimanlal is laid low with typhoid. But the fever is slowly going down
now. There is no cause for worry, therefore. This is the third week.
We are quite a few here.
Lilavati's tonsils have been removed. She suffered a good deal. She is
still at Maganwadi. She will return here in a day or two.
I think it will be quite good if you sit for the examination. That will
give you an opportunity to improve your study, extend your reading and will
also raise your price. We certainly want our price to be raised.
Blessings from
BAPU 2
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
