63. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Vaisakh Vad 5 [May 18, 1911]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have sent Thakar your letter about him. This happens
because your minds are estranged. We know that Thakar is by
nature suspicious.
Gulliver's Travels contains so effective a condemnation, in an
ironic vein, of modern civilization that the book deserves to be
read again and again. It is a very well-known book in the English
language. Children can read it with enjoyment, so simple it is;
and the wise ones get dizzy trying to comprehend its hidden signi-
ficance. In Brobdingnag, Gulliver tumbled as low as he had
risen high in Lilliput. Even in Lilliput, he has represented the
tiny people as possessing a few powers which were superior to his
own, that is to say, to those of normal people.
You should now read Carpenter's Civilization: Its Cause and
Cure; I shall send it tomorrow. Admittedly, Chhaganlal experi-
enced some difficulty owing to his inadequate knowledge of English.
Even so, if we know the subject on which we wish to write or
speak, we usually find the words. The deficiency in your know-
ledge of English will never be made good without a visit to England.
I see that even the short stay in England has done Chhaganlal a
lot of good. He was, moreover, troubled by an illness, so that he
had to face further difficulties. The experience he gained will be
very useful. I expect to be there now in no more than a few
days. I am planning to leave in the beginning of June. I shall
be able to let you know more positively if I get Smuts' reply. It is
expected any day.
It is just as well that Harilal has left. He was much un-
settled in mind. He has assured me that he does not in the least
resent the arrangement I had made regarding Phoenix. He bears
no ill will towards any of you. He was angry with me, really.
He gave vent to all his pent-up feelings on Monday evening.
He feels that I have kept all the four boys very much suppressed,
that I did not respect their wishes at any time, that I have treated
them as of no account, and that I have often been hard-hearted.
He made this charge against me with the utmost courtesy and
seemed very hesitant as he did so. In this, he had no thought
of money at all in his mind. It was all about my general behaviour.
Unlike other fathers, I have not admired my sons or done anything
specially for them, but always put them and Ba last; such was the
charge. He seemed to me to have calmed down after this out-
burst. I pointed out his error in believing what he did. He saw
it partly. What remains, he will correct only when he thinks
further. He has now left with a calm mind. He is resolved to
learn more about those things on account of which I was dis-
pleased [with him]. He is strongly inclined to study Sanskrit.
Thinking that, since Gujarati is our language, his education
should for the most part be in Gujarat, I have advised Harilal
to stay in Ahmedabad. I believe that is what he will do. How-
ever, I have left him free. I feel it will all turn out well.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5087. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
