100. LETTER TO "THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE"
BOMBAY,
April 11, 1920
SIR,
Bombay has responded generously and yet not generously
enough, to the call of duty from the Punjab. At the time of
writing, it has subscribed nearly three lacs to the Jallianwala Bagh
Memorial fund. Is it too much to expect Bombay to pay five
lacs and the whole presidency with such trade centres as Ahmedabad
and Karachi to subscribe the minimum ten lacs?
It is to be hoped that there will be no hesitation on the part
of anyone to subscribe to a fund whose object is not to perpe-
tuate the memory of the atrocity but of the innocent victims. I
am told that the deed was so horrible that the memory of the
dead could not fail to revive the memory of the deed and that
therefore the whole episode should be forgotten. This is like saying
that the innocents should not be thought of in our prayers be-
cause of the likelihood of our thinking of Herod. I suggest that
the objectors have in their most laudable desire not to perpetuate
hatred made the mistake of supposing that hatred can be eradi-
cated by forgetting causes thereof. Hatred can be done away with
only by an enlightened training and that in spite of the remem-
brance of the deed. The nation will not forgive the deed if it
cannot find harmless scope for perpetuating the memory of the
victims. The best way of checking hatred, therefore, is to teach
the nation to isolate the memory of the dead, which is a sacred
trust, from the "frightfulness" which should be forgiven even if
it cannot be forgotten.
What will be the nature of the memorial is the question asked.
It will depend upon the committee which has been specially ap-
pointed for the purpose and which includes the Hon'ble Pandit
Madan Mohan Malaviya, the Hon'ble Pandit Motilal Nehru, Swami
Shraddhanandji and myself. And I do know that whatever the
shape that the memorial finally takes, it will certainly not contain
anything offensive.
I hope, therefore, during the two days that the collection
will continue, those who have not yet paid will not fail to take
their share in this National Memorial. And it will be truly
national and the Bagh will be a place of pilgrimage only if young
and old, men and women, rich and poor give their quota.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-4- 1920
