11. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
UNION CASTLE LINE,
R. M. S. "KENILWORTH CASTLE",
July 7, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I had expected a cable at Madeira giving a resume of the events
during the past 12 days. I take it, however, that there has been nothing
stirring happening and that Polak has gone to India. I shall now expect
some news in London.
The Delegates' statement is quite ready. I have just completed
revision. I hope to send you an advance copy next week. This letter
will be posted before we reach Southampton.
It would not be a bad idea to send a weekly cable giving a summary
of imprisonments, etc. Nothing need be sent if nothing striking or useful
has happened.
We had an outing at Madeira yesterday. Mr. Hajee Habib enjoyed
it. I procured some fresh earth at Reid's Hotel and bandaged his eye
last night. This has given much relief. So the earth bandages are useful
even on board. He thinks that if he could have procured earth earlier
he would not have suffered so much as he had to. We had a prize
distribution last night. Naturally we two simply watched the proceedings
like dummies. I could not help thinking of you then. I felt that you
would have or could have carried most of the prizes. But what then,
I thought. No more inward satisfaction on that account. We would carry,
God willing, other and better prizes. There was so much vanity attached
to the whole performance last night. So much posing, and so much
clapping ! Could not grown-up people amuse themselves in a more
rational manner ? The noise they make at the dinner table is quite
uproarious. Hilarity is good but too much of it is simply vulgar. Vulgarity
1 Gabriel Isaac
2 Vide also Vol. IX, p. 278. For the final statement of the Transvaal Indian
Case, ibid., pp. 288-301.
of the vulgar is natural, but vulgarity of the higher classes is in my
opinion unpardonable. But of course to them proceedings are not only
not vulgar but perhaps necessary, so that they have to be judged from
their standpoint. To them it is all good taste. They know not what they
do, therefore, it is impertinent to criticize. And therefore the above is
not for judging harshly but to act rightly, profiting by such experiences.
I shall look forward to your report on Phoenix. I have not written
to Cordes except to tell him that as my speech or writing warranted,
I would observe silence. To West 1 I wrote at length.
With love and with every good wish,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
Friday
[PS.]
Pray remember me to the Buffer House.
[PPS.]
I have not seen a single passenger except a lad of about 16 who
has appeared in the saloon without evening dress.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
