78. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
May 15, 1940
CHI. AMRIT,
Your two important letters were torn as soon [as] they
were read. Therefore I have to trust my memory for what I am
to write. But since you insist on all this, I have to submit.
The articles I could send earlier but I became indifferent
as Sushila could effectively and quickly translate the articles.
Yours could never reach Delhi the same week.
I have told
you I might get the translation here. You are still to trans-
late for practice, so that when you return, you will bring
greater ability and dispatch for the translation work. You have
therefore to translate the articles with the same care that you
would give if they were to be sent to the press. You should
then send them to me for examination. You should not read
Sushila's translation till you have done yours.
Sir M. disappoints me. His letter is curious. But you are
right in saying that we have to cultivate even such people.
We have to convert the die-hards.
I cannot say I miss you. I am daily getting more and
more detached. I seem to miss nobody and nothing. I have no
time to think of these things. The burden I carry occupies the
whole of my time. This is not to say that I would not like your
return or that there is no work for you. There is work and there
is no work. That has been life from the beginning. But it [is]
much more so now than ever. There is an inner longing for
loneliness. If Harijan was stopped today, I should not feel the
deprivation. And yet the place is growing.
There is no smallpox now.
Lalita Kumari came in today. She has two servants. She
is with me.
Ramnarayan's letter is disappointing. You need not write
to him any more. I shall write when I can.
Your letter to Narsingarh is good. It is being sent.
The war is taking an ugly turn. Let us see what happens.
Somehow or other I do not feel the same way as you do. I do
not want to see the Allies defeated. But I do not consider Hitler
to be as bad as he is depicted. He is showing an ability that
is amazing and he seems to be gaining his victories without much
bloodshed. Englishmen are showing the strength that Empire
builders must have. I expect them to rise much higher than
they seem to be doing. But I must stop now.
If I have omitted any of your questions you must remind
me. Hot here. But I am keeping well.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
This was written 9.30 a.m. Your today's note just in 1.30
p.m. I sent you all my articles. I wrote very few. All but
unimportant five lines going with this.
From the original: C.W. 3667. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6476
