247. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
December 2, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Since you are not in the Ashram, I do not take the trouble
of writing to you every day. But I see from your last letter that
you have carried with you the burden of the Ashram. You should
lay it aside. You have gone out on Ashram work, leaving your
charge to someone else. Why, then, should you carry any
burden? Let things happen as they will. We have the example
of Janaka constantly before us. Gibbon's history, though beautifully
written, is not true history, for it is written with external materials.
It is based on imperfect events of the hour. The Mahabharata,
on the other hand, is based on the timeless and imperishable inner
experience, and therefore it alone is true history. We should not,
therefore, regard Janaka's example as an ancient one, but treat
it as belonging to the present time. Have faith that Krishna,
Arjuna and Yudhishthira are talking about the same things and
acting in the same manner today, though not under the same
names. Is it not through faith that we believe in Gibbon's histori-
cal narrative, too? We have, in fact, more reliable evidence to
put our faith in the stories of the Mahabharata than we have in
Gibbon's history. If we understand this simple and plain truth,
many of our problems will be solved in no time. Let us, there-
fore, not regard Janaka's example as a mere brinjal in a book,
but believe it to be as fresh brinjal, to be plucked and eaten, as
the ones growing in our field.
You will now understand that the resolutions which I have
permitted to be passed, or say inspired, in your absence should
not make you unhappy. You wanted a clarification of certain
matters, which I procured by patiently discussing them with others
and persuading others to discuss them among themselves. Nothing
more than this can be done, and nothing less could have been.
The thing boils over again and again, but that can be controlled
by gently blowing over the boiling liquid or adding a little water.
We need not, however, remove the milk off the stove. If we
are vigilant, it is not likely to get burnt or to boil and spill over.
If it does despite our vigilance, the responsibility is not ours.
The Gita is our authority for this.
228
You feel that some of the things are good there and bad
here: this is both true and not true, more "not" than otherwise.
It is but right, however, that we should magnify our defects. It is
only by constantly doing that that we get the proper perspective.
I, therefore, believe that you are in the right. This is my reply
to your previous letters, as far as I remember their contents.
Now I shall reply to your last letter. If you keep bad health
there, I cannot permit you to stay on. Your health has suffered
because you have given way to false civility or shame. You ought
not to eat imperfectly cooked food. If you cannot get food there
according to your requirement, you should, without taking or
giving offence, go outside and get what you want. This is real
friendship. You cannot eat the dal prepared there; but you can
easily live on milk and rati, with such vegetables as can be eaten
raw, like tomatoes.
I want to be lodged in a tent. That is what I have told
Tandonji. It will suffice if the facilities similar to those provided
by Vallabhbhai in Ahmedabad are provided at Lahore. And I
see from your accounts that they will be. Dr. Gopichand should
remember that I shall be accompanied by quite a number of
invalids. There should be sufficient space to accommodate them
all. In other words, those who undertake to provide me the
facilities I need should put up an ashram on a small scale. They
should also put up a fencing to imprison me so that I may be
protected against crowds wanting darshan of me. If this is done,
I may not have to give nor they need take more trouble.
Everywhere we come across individual votaries of khadi such
as you find there; this is a very hopeful sign. I will certainly re-
member about the Maganlal memorial. I doubt whether we can
look after it in the Ashram. The rule that we can employ only
an associate comes in the way of such additions. Nor do I see
anything wrong in this. If, however, you are confident enough,
though knowing that we shall not get an associate, let me know.
We cannot get, or use, the building meant for the doctor. I do
not think, moreover, that the ground floor is sufficient for the pur-
pose. We have, thus, no choice but to put up a new building
for the memorial. I do not think it would be improper to locate
it in the Vidyapith or in Jamnalal's farm at Wardha. But I
cannot come to a firm decision to that effect just now.
We need give no thought to the objections which Ratilal
might raise about water, etc. He is the proprietor. But we are
the trustees and, therefore, it is for us to decide independently
to what extent and how to use that water. I have explained
this to Ramniklal.
You are quite right in reminding me about Sind relief. The
matter is not out of my mind. But we shall not have done our
dharma by spending the money in a hurry. I have not advised
that the money collected for the Malabar Relief Fund should be
used for khadi work, but I have taken the freedom to use that
money for relief work outside Malabar. The relief was carried out
through khadi work, for we have accepted khadi as a means for
such relief. In Malabar, much relief work was done through
khadi. My conscience is clear in this matter. We have already
come to a decision about Sind. It is that we should send the
money when Jairamdas or Malkani asks for it. Both of them
are planning to organize relief to the distressed through khadi.
Malkani has plenty of money with him just now. More than
half of what he had has been wasted, and he has been looking on
helplessly. I forgot to mention one thing about Malabar. An
alternative name for Malabar Relief [Fund] was Southern Relief
[Fund]. I had, however, inserted a notice to clarify the matter
in order that there might be no misconception among people.
The money has been spent for relief in the South. I have not been
able to decide about the Assam money. I need Satis Babu's opi-
nion before I can do that. I have been in correspondence with
him for one month.
There are two candidates for the honour; one, Dhiraj of
Sylhet, and the other, Suresh of Comilla. The only thing to be
considered is which of them, or whether both, should get the
honour.
Let the account of overseas help stand. I explained this matter
to Ramniklal long ago. I am not in a position just now to get
the money from Jehangirji. However, if I do not succeed in
getting it during my lifetime and if you have not written off the
sum and forgotten about the account, you may be able to get
the money from him even after my death. Even today, if I
spend some time going after the thing, take up the issue seriously
and see a lot of people, I may succeed in getting it. But I
have no wish to do that at all, nor is it necessary that I should.
I am convinced that this account has a claim over the money
lying with Jehangirji and that is enough for me. We may get
something from Birla next year, we do not know how much. If he
and his firm are safe, we are bound to get something. We should
continue to give to the Labour Union what it has been receiving
from this fund, as long as Anasuyabehn wishes. She is trying to
make some other arrangement.
I may have to examine what look like bad debts. They
should, however, be shown separately in our balance-sheet, so that
no misleading impression is produced. For I remember right now
one or two debts which appear to be bad and which are not
likely to become good in future. For instance, Sitla Sahai's and
Rupani's.
I am trying to take in Nanubhai. He came and saw me
yesterday. He feels shy to live in the Ashram, and will not
feel comfortable at Vijapur. He has requested to be posted else-
where. I do not think that will be possible. I believe, however,
that it will be possible to attract him to the Ashram. He asked for
more time to think over the matter and went to Vijapur yesterday.
Manji's problem will give no trouble. The mother-in-law
and the daughter-in-law may certainly stay as long as Gangabehn
has no objection. I have dictated so far by 4.15. To do that,
I got up at 2.45. I have done this not to oblige you, but to
guide one through whom I have to get work done. This gives
satisfaction to my soul.
When I talked to Gangabehn about Krishnamaiyadevi, she
told me, "Things are going on well just now, and she has been
doing good work." Mauni, too, seems to be working. So long as
there is no complaint against her, nothing need be done at present.
I have had no talk with Bhansali. After he saw me in con-
nection with Nanibehn, he has not come again, and I have not
been able to go myself. But, I will have a talk with him. I
do not like his children going to the Vidyapith. But I reconcile
myself to the position with the thought that he lives in a certain
manner as a guest. The inmates of the Mandir cannot follow his
example and send their children to the Vidyapith. We should
tolerate Nayan's and Rupi's going there, since they are being
trained not for village-life but for city-life.
I have had a talk with Dinkarrao. I had also called a meeting
of the Goshala Committee to consider the matter. I have now to
draft rules for a case like his. It is enough if he agrees to observe
brahmacharya as long as he lives in the Mandir. We or I shall
lose nothing by this arrangement. We cannot say that, if a man
observes brahmacharya for the sake of his moral well-being or service,
what he does is improper or is a waste of effort. It should be
enough if he does not cheat us. I am sure in my mind that
most of the inmates of the Mandir are honestly doing their best.
It is possible that there are some who are deceiving us. That
does not diminish the value of our rules, nor prove them unneces-
sary. We can, however, draw this conclusion from the presence
of such persons, namely, that while the world exists, there will
also be people in it who deceive others. What we have to con-
sider is whether there are any persons who have found peace under
the cool shade of these rules. The reply to this is so clear that
no one can have any doubt about it. Maganlal and others came
through all difficulties under the protection of the rules. Prabhudas
and the other boys and Radha and the other girls are holding on
because of the strength they derive from the rules. Dinkarrao does
not seem to me to be a person who is likely to deceive us. However,
who can ever give a guarantee about anyone? "Man commits sin
against his will" is a statement for ever true. I believe that
Dinkarrao will keep his word. Parnerkar and the others believe it.
At present we should run the dairy subject to the same rules as
for the Mandir. It has not reached the stage when it can function
as an independent institution. This is the independent view of
those people, including Dinkarrao.
I have told them to permit old families which wish to opt
out of the common kitchen to do so. Ramabehn made a
start yesterday. I immediately agreed. I complimented her in
my mind for her frankness. You need not feel hurt by this, but
should be pleased. I have not had a frank discussion with her.
Perhaps she would not desire that.
I cannot bring myself to accept a separate kitchen for the
girls. We shall know by and by what happens about this.
At present, by "the rules about the girls' section in the Ashram"
we mean Gangabehn. She may bear those other rules in her mind
and manage the affairs.
Let us hope that in future we shall be able to do all these
things which we cannot do now. If we fail and see our error, we
shall correct it.
I look upon Shivabhai as a person with a sense of responsi-
bility. If he falls, he will be going out of the way. Wherever
people are required to obey rules, impostors have some scope.
What shall we do about that? Darkness always follows the sun.
Nothing remains now from your letters to be replied to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4211
