7. LETTER TO SIKANDAR HYAT KHAN
ABBOTTABAD,
July 17, 1939
DEAR SIR SIKANDAR,
Many thanks for your letter of 12th instant. You have for-
gotten to answer my question about separate electorates for
Harijans.
I have now carefully gone through your scheme and your
remarks upon my draft about Hindu-Muslim unity.
The scheme is too complicated for me to form an opinion. I
must own to you that I never studied the Government of India Act
in the manner required for a proper evaluation of your scheme
which I see is designed, so far as the Federal structure is concerned,
to replace the Act.
I see that you contemplate zonal legislatures in between the
Provincial ones and the Federal legislature. The Government of
India scheme itself is much too expensive and complicated for me.
Yours seems to add to the expense and the complication.
Then you suggest that the composition of the army should not
be disturbed except under the contingency mentioned therein.
For an out and out believer in non-violence like me, I would dis-
band the army altogether. An army and non-violence go ill to-
gether. But I am painfully conscious that in this extreme view of
non-violence I have no partner. How far those who believe in
the necessity of the country having an army even after it has come
to its own will accept your proposition is more than I can say.
Then you have enunciated Dominion Status as an accepted
fact. It is a bitter pill for Congressmen to swallow.
But I see that your solution of the communal tangle is your
scheme including the proposal about the army. Yours is the only
proposal of a constructive character on behalf of the League. I
congratulate you on the great pains you have bestowed upon it. I
am glad that you have decided to publish it in full. I must thank
1 This and other points raised by Gandhiji were met by the addressee in
his letter dated July 20; vide Appendix I.
2 The Congress Working Committee which met at Bardoli on January 11,
1939, had discussed Gandhiji's new draft on the minorities question.
3 It was published on July 30, 1939.
4
you for having taken me into your confidence and asked me to give
you my opinion upon it.
As to my draft solution, as I have already told you, it is in no
sense adopted by the Working Committee. But it does still represent
my views. I prize your criticism upon it. And if it ever formed a
basis for the solution of our difficulties, I should adopt many of
your suggestions.
Your solution for representation of minorities on services causes
difficulty. What are the minorities? Is there a final list? I am
therefore very uneasy about communal representation in the serv-
ices. If we make much of the minorities question in the services, we
shall not only endanger efficiency but we shall endanger purity and
impartiality in the administration of affairs of the country. But I
heartily endorse your suggestion that all the backward members of
the nation should be levelled up to the forward ones.
I do not want to burden this letter with the other points arising
out of your criticism. They are easy of adjustment, if we all make
up our minds to meet with the determination not to part without
reaching a settlement.
Yours sincerely,
SIR SIKANDAR HYAT KHAN
PRIME MINISTER
LAHORE
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
