99. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
BORSAD,
May 6, 1931
BHAI HARIBHAU,
I get your letters. But I have not yet got your acknowledg-
ment of the telegram I sent you. You should have sent one. The
telegram only stated that I would not be able to wire to someone
in Udaipur as I knew no one there, and suggested that Malaviyaji
or Jamnalal might do so. You have written to Ram at any rate.
That was good. I do not even know where Manilal is. I had
addressed a telegram to him, to which there has been no reply.
You are put in a difficult situation. It is possible that the
State may pay no attention to your complaint. Though Trench
will not be able to appreciate the letter which you have written
to him, you did well in writing it. It will do no harm. If
the people's grievance has not been redressed you should, since
you have accepted their leadership, cross the border and court
imprisonment. If the peasants remain truly non-violent, they
are bound to win. Of course the question will remain how far
non-violence can be observed in taking possession of land. What
will the people do when the State police come to dispossess them of
the land? Will they oppose them? Will they remain there squat-
ting? Several questions arise here. I have found that the non-
violence observed in such cases is merely physical. Do what you
think right in the light of the circumstances prevailing there, no
matter if what you believe to be non-violence appears to me
violence. We can do nothing more than act sincerely according
to our lights. If everything was as clear to me as daylight I would
not have thrown on you the responsibility for deciding. From
what is happening in the States, for similar things are happening
in the other Indian States too and in British India, it seems to me
that the effect of all that happened during the last struggle was
only temporary and not enduring. That experiment in non-viole-
nce was on a mass scale, but it was not, or did not remain uni-
formly pure in quality. Our non-violence was the non-violence
1 Vide p. 69.
2 Revenue Commissioner of Udaipur State
92
of the helpless. I do not feel unhappy about this. Nothing more
than that was possible. The foregoing criticism has no other aim
but to help us to understand the real facts about the nature of the
struggle.
I understand what you say about Tyagbhumi and also about
advertisements. Do what is possible.
Ramnarayan ought to go somewhere and take complete rest.
See that he gives up work. Perhaps he will have fewer difficul-
ties if he goes to Almora. Wherever he goes he may be sure that
he will get some opportunity for service.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Immediately after the morning prayer.
From Gujarati: C.W. 6073. Courtesy: Haribhau Upadhyaya
