478. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 19, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I am determined not to make this a long letter.
If you can win over Maitri and all the three sisters improve,
I will certainly regard that as your and Ashram's victory. Na-
randas has tried the way of love. See if you succeed.
You must have realized that Lakshmi must be married off
now, or else she should leave the Ashram. I do not think any
of you should be burdened any longer with her responsibility.
Maruti is an exceptional young man. Lakshmidas also has had a
hand in his training. You have found that what Moti had told
you about him was not correct.
The arrangements which you have made about the girls seem
to be all right. I liked your suggestion about Nirmala. I have
not yet been able to discuss it with Mahadev, though. I also
understand what you say about Prithuraj.
I am eager to know
more details about the Muslim lady. Cultivate the acquaintance
of the English friend whom I have sent there. He has impressed
me as a man inclined to a life of renunciation. Look after his needs.
To which aspect of my behaviour, when you came to see me
with Sushila, did your question refer? I do not remember any-
thing. If you ask this question again, I will try to answer it.
I understand what you say about doctors. Once we have put
ourselves in a doctor's hand, we should get from him whatever
he can give. Otherwise we shall not do him justice, and may do
harm to ourselves. We must admit that doctors do succeed in
some cases, though it is also well known that they spoil many
others through negligence or ignorance. I would certainly respect
a person who takes a vow not to consult doctors any time. Mil-
lions of people cannot consult them at all. But I think that such
self-denial is beyond the capacity of the inmates of the Ashram.
We may, therefore, consult doctors who are reputed to be intelli-
gent. You may certainly seek the advice of Kisan's uncle.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10327
