83. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 3, 1928
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I have your letter. I have discussed it with Jawaharlal, but
he suggests, and I agree, that it will be better for me to reduce to
writing the views I have expressed to him so that there may be
no misunderstanding about the correct interpretation of my views,
and so that he may also know whether he understood me cor-
rectly.
ELECTORATE: I am of the same opinion that I expressed
years ago at Delhi that we should not be party to separate electo-
rates or to reservation of seats, the latter should be by mutual
voluntary arrangement if such is necessary. But unless the Mus-
salmans agree, there is no going back by us on reservation of
seats. The Congress is committed to it. I think, therefore, that we
must simply adhere to the Congress resolution and expect Hindus
and Mussalmans to carry out that resolution. If the All-Parties
Conference cannot discover another method acceptable to all,
we must simply work out the Congress formula.
THE CONSTITUTION: Personally I am of opinion that we
are not ready for drawing up a constitution till we have develop-
ed sanction for ourselves. Any constitution that we may arrive at
must be a final thing in the sense that we may improve upon but
we may not recede from it even by an inch. There seems to be no
atmosphere for arriving at such a constitution. I would personally
therefore prefer instead of a constitution, a working arrangement
between all parties upon which all may be agreed. This would
be not a constitution but chief heads of it, as for instance, the
Hindu-Muslim arrangement, the franchise, the policy as to the
Native States. If we are to make this thing popular, I should
bring in total prohibition and exclusion of foreign cloth as an
indispensable condition. Of course we should guarantee equal-
ity of treatment of all religions as also of the so-called un-
touchables. I am not exhaustive in the list of things on which
there should be an agreement, but I have simply given a few
things by way of illustration. I think that if we go beyond such
a general agreement, we would be making a mistake. In any
case, I do hope that the Conference will not break up without
doing anything, and even if it does, the Working Committee
should take the matter in its own hands and issue its own
authoritative statement on behalf of the Congress on all the
matters for which the Conference has been convened.
SANCTION: More important than the two foregoing things,
in my opinion, is the sanction. Unless we have created some force
ourselves, we shall not advance beyond the position of beggars,
and I have given all my time to thinking over this one question,
and I can think of nothing else but boycott of foreign cloth with
the assistance of mills if possible, without if necessary. I hold it to
be perfectly capable of attainment within a measurable distance
of time if we can create sufficient public opinion in its favour. I
would have exclusive concentration upon this thing if I had my
way. Though I have said nothing in public, I do not at all like
what is going on in Bengal. So far as I can see, it is doomed to
failure and I can see much harm coming out of that failure; and
unlike boycott of foreign cloth, it is valueless, unless it succeeds
to the extent we want. Jawaharlal and I have given most of
our time to a consideration of this question. And he will ex-
plain it all to you. As soon as he can be dispensed with, I would
like you to send him back for further discussion of this problem if
we do not finish before he leaves for Delhi.
I see that I am not to expect you here in the near future.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 13095
