623. LETTER TO K. N. KATJU
SIMLA,
June 26, 1945
BHAI KAILASNATH KATJU,
I have your first Hindustani letter. I liked it very much.
The handwriting is good, as is of course the language. The
letter from Vilas disappointed me. If you can help her to im-
prove, do so.
I finished reading your booklet yesterday. I read it from
beginning to end without leaving out anything. I liked it but I
think it has shortcomings. In this connection I would advise you
to read a big book Satish Babu has written on the cow. The first
part of it is already published, the second is about to come out.
His full address is . . .4 Calcutta. He is a first-class chemist. But he
gave up everything long back and took up khadi work. He is very
industrious. He wrote this book in jail. Those who want to work
in the villages should read this book. It does not contain only
Satis Babu's views. He has taken everything from British and
American reports. There is much scope for improvement and
1 Vide also p. 357.
2 Dehati Pragati; vide also p. 132.
3 Cow in India; for Gandhiji's Foreword, vide pp. 149-50.
4 Omission as in the source
370
addition in what you say in your book about cattle, cattle dis-
eases and land. If the villagers have to depend on Government
veterinary doctors for treatment of their cattle, it is not going to
work. This does not mean that the villagers are not to take their
help but their knowledge should be adapted to village conditions.
I have plenty of material on the subject but I do not want to
give it here. Perhaps you know Dhiren Mazumdar. He is work-
ing in U. P. with Vichitra Narayan. He is Acharya Kripalani's
man and is very industrious. He knows his work well. If you have
not already met him, do so. If possible go and see the Khadi
Pratishthan of Satis Babu and then bring out a second edition. It
will not be of much use as it is. Now that people have become inte-
rested in the subject they will buy your book and probably read
it, too. However, they will not be able to derive much benefit
from it, for, though they will know from the book what they have
to do, it will not tell them how they are to do it. This I will expect
in the second edition. I have seen from your book that you are
interested in the subject and so I have offered the suggestions.
One thing more. Take up at least one village, as I have taken
up Sevagram. Then put into practice the things you have said
in the book. In this way you will gain experience. This sugges-
tion of mine has another consequence : You will have to do very
little legal practice. You must be knowing that Brijkishore
Babu, Rajendra Babu, Vallabhbhai and others had to totally give
up their practice when they took up such work. I do not sug-
gest that you go so far. You have a vast knowledge of law and
have gained so much experience. So with slight modifications
do as Motilal had done. While staying in a village take up two
or three good cases. Take the cases of the poor free of charge.
Devote the rest of your time to village reform. This is all I can
say after going through your book.
Blessings from
BAPU
DR. KAILASNATH KATJU
ALLAHABAD
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
