516. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 19, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your big packet. It is really big this time.
Nobody should copy my bad habits. I can even give reasons
to excuse them. All the same everybody should know that they
are bad habits and avoid them.
1. Nobody should read a book or a newspaper while eating.
The best thing is to have in one serving as much as one wants and
to eat the meal in complete silence. If one cannot do this, one
may talk to one's neighbour in whispers. It is a bad habit to
do two things simultaneously.
2. Nobody should do any other work while spinning, should
neither dictate letters nor teach as I do.
3. It is a bad habit to read in the lavatory.
4. It is unbearable to clean the teeth in the lavatory. The
habit is unhygienic and dirty. I have never been guilty of this
bad habit.
But I do the first three things. However, a person's bad habits
should not be copied. I never defend these habits as good. More-
over, I live in complete privacy. I have a separate room for
lavatory and can keep books in that room. I may die any time,
and cannot overcome the temptation to do as much work as I can
while I live. I am not eager to overcome it either. I have these
and many other reasons or excuses. But nobody else should use
them to defend his bad habits. Show this to all the inmates.
All these habits are also responsible for constipation and other
troubles. We attach great importance to bodily labour and work
in the Ashram. But there should be no impatience or excessive
eagerness in doing even these. Whenever anybody feels that his
work is too heavy, he should reduce it. Nobody is required to work
beyond his capacity. The inmates of the Ashram do not live in
it under compulsion. Nobody, therefore, should feel the burden
of work there.
Read my letter to Dr. Sharma. Talk to him. Do also give him
whatever facilities he wants. Let him examine all the patients
I have mentioned and others who may be ill. Let me know the
results and your views. You will find in my letter to him that I
453
have written at sufficient length, and I, therefore, don't repeat all
that here.
With all my efforts I could not find Valji's article. But he
came and gave me a copy.
Did I give you the address to which the Gandiva spinning-
wheels should be despatched? There is a slight change in it
now: Shri Haribhau Phatak, Pioneer Dyeing Works, Sadashiv
Peth, Poona City.
Lakshmibehn, Narmada, Bhuskute and Amtussalaam—the
last if she is permitted by Dr. Sharma and if she is very keen—
may come next Saturday. I am sending a wire today, for you
may not get this letter in time.
Ramji has asked for permission to put his grievances before
Rajbhoj. If you think it desirable, you yourself may talk to the
latter. He is a man of a suspicious nature and may misinterpret
even your doing that. In view of this possibility, think indepen-
dently and do what seems best to you.
BAPU
[PS.]
I was forgetting one thing. You have heard about N. She
came and saw me some time ago. She has a son who lives with
her. I had heard reports against her and so had invited her
here. She was doing Harijan work in Bangalore. She is a capable
lady, and is an American married to a Greek. Her father was a
theatre designer. She herself can act and knows dancing, etc.
You must have read about three years ago that she had become
a Hindu in Kashmir and was thinking of coming to the Ashram.
The report was true. But she was also living an ignorant life. She
has freely led an immoral life and even accepted money from
people. When she came to me, she confessed to me all her errors
one after another and gave her solemn word that she would devote
the rest of her life to Harijan work. She says she is 24 years old.
She left the hotel where she was staying and went to live among
Harijans. At present she is living in a Harijan hamlet at some
distance from Bangalore. She writes to me from time to time. I
think she has changed and is on the right path now. I have wired
to her and asked her to come here. I intend to send her ultimate-
ly to the Ashram. I don't see any risk in taking her in. She will
stay if she can observe the rules. Let all of you think about this
and then communicate your view to me. If you wish to ask me
1 Vide the following item.
anything more, you may do so. You need not send Poore's book
to her just now. She has not yet arrived here.
BAPU
[PS.]
[Letters for] Sharma, Chhotubhai, Kusum, Rama, Anand,
Lilavati, Mani, Dhiru, Jamna, Rajbhoj, Amtul, Prema, Amina,
Dhananjaybabu.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8358. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
