218. LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE
March 11, 1932
DEAR SIR SAMUEL,
You will perhaps recollect that at the end of my speech at
the Round Table Conference when the minorities' claim was pre-
sented, I had said that I should resist with my life the grant of
separate electorate to the Depressed Classes. This was not said
in the heat of the moment, nor by way of rhetoric. It was meant
to be a serious statement.
In pursuance of that statement, I had hoped on my return
to India to mobilize public opinion against separate electorate, at
any rate, for the Depressed Classes. But it was not to be.
From the newspapers which I am permitted to read, I observe
that any moment His Majesty's Government may declare their
decision. At first I had thought that if the decision was found
to create separate electorates for the Depressed Classes, I should
take such steps as I might then consider necessary to give effect to
my vow. But I feel that it would be unfair to the British Govern-
ment for me to act without giving previous notice. Naturally they
could not attach the significance I give to my statement.
I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have to the crea-
tion of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes. I feel as if
I was one of them. Their case stands on a wholly different footing
from that of the others. I am not against their representation in
the legislatures. I should favour everyone of their adults, male or
female, being registered as voters, irrespective of education or pro-
perty qualifications, even though the franchise test may be stricter
for the others. But I hold that separate electorate is harmful for
them and for Hinduism, whatever it may be from a purely political
standpoint. To appreciate the harm that separate electorates
would do to them, one has to know how they are distributed
amongst the so-called caste Hindus, and how dependent they are
on the latter. So far as Hinduism is concerned separate electo-
rate would simply vivisect and disrupt it. For me the question of
these classes is predominantly moral and religious. The political
aspect, important though it is, dwindles into insignificance com-
pared to the moral and religious issue. You will have to appre-
ciate my feelings in this matter by remembering that I have been
interested in the condition of these classes from my boyhood and
have more than once staked my all for their sake. I say this not
to pride myself in any way. For, I feel that no penance that caste
Hindus may do can, in any way, compensate for the calculated
degradation to which they have consigned the Depressed Classes
for centuries. But I know that separate electorate is neither pe-
nance nor any remedy for the crushing degradation they have
groaned under.
I therefore respectfully inform His Majesty's Government
that in the event of their decision creating separate electorate
for the Depressed Classes, I must fast unto death.
I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a step whilst I
am a prisoner must cause grave embarrassment to His Majesty's
Government and that it will be regarded by many as highly im-
proper on the part of one holding my position to introduce into
the political field methods which they would describe as hysterical,
if not much worse. All I can urge in defence is that for me the
contemplated step is not a method, it is part of my being. It
is a call of conscience which I dare not disobey, even though it
may cost whatever reputation for sanity I may possess.
So far as I can see now, my discharge from imprisonment
would not make the duty of fasting any the less imperative.
I am hoping, however, that all my fears are wholly unjusti-
fied and that the British Government have no intention whatever
of creating separate electorate for the Depressed Classes.
It is perhaps as well for me to refer to another matter that
is agitating me and may also enforce a similar fast. It is the
way repression is going. I have no notion when I may receive
a shock that would compel the sacrifice.
Repression appears to me to be crossing what might be called
the legitimate limit. A Governmental terrorism is spreading
through the land. Both English and Indian officials are being
brutalized. The latter, high and low, are becoming demoralized
by reason of the Government rewarding as meritorious, dis-
loyalty to the people and inhuman conduct towards their own kith
and kin. The latter are being cowed down. Free speech has been
stifled. Goondaism is being practised in the name of law and
order. Women who have come out for public service stand in
fear of their honour being insulted.
And all this, as it seems to me, is being done in order to crush
the spirit of freedom which the Congress represents. Repression is
not confined to punishing civil breaches of the common law. It
goads people to break newly made orders of autocracy designed
for the most part to humiliate them.
In all these doings as I read them, I see no spirit of demo-
cracy. Indeed, my recent visit to England has confirmed my
opinion that your democracy is a superficial circumscribed thing.
In the weightiest matters decisions are taken by individuals or
groups, without any reference to the Parliament, and these have
been ratified by the Members having but a vague notion of what
they were doing. Such was the case with Egypt, the War of
1914, and such is the case with India. My whole being rebels
against the idea that in a system called democratic, one man
should have the unfettered power of affecting the destiny of the
ancient people numbering over three hundred millions, and that
his decisions can be enforced by mobilizing the most terrible
forces of destruction. To me this is a negation of democracy.
And this repression cannot be prolonged without further em-
bittering the already bitter relations between the two peoples. In
so far as I am responsible and can help it, how am I to arrest
the process? Not by stopping civil disobedience. For me it is an
article of faith. I regard myself by nature a democrat. Demo-
cracy of my conception is wholly inconsistent with the use of
physical force for enforcing its will. Civil resistance therefore has
been conceived to be a proper substitute for physical force to be
used wherever generally the latter is held necessary or justi-
fiable. It is a process of self-suffering and a part of the plan is
that in given circumstances a civil resister must sacrifice himself
even by fasting to a finish. That moment has not yet arrived for
me. I have no undeniable call from within for such a step. But the
events happening outside are alarming enough to agitate my
fundamental being. Therefore, in writing to you about the pos-
sibility of a fast regarding Depressed Classes, I felt that I would
be untrue to you if I did not tell you also that there was an-
other possibility, not remote, of such a fast.
Needless to say that from my side absolute secrecy has been
maintained about all the correspondence I have carried on with
you. Of course Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Mahadev Desai,
who has just been sent to join us, know all about it. But you will
no doubt make whatever use you wish of this letter.
Yours sincerely,
SIR SAMUEL HOARE
WHITEHALL
LONDON
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(4), Pt. I, p. 5; also The Bombay Chronicle, 13-9-1932
