154. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
July 6, 1936
BAPA,
At Wardha I can hardly lift my head and read letters, and
if I manage to read them I cannot reply to them. And what
is more, if I am to live long, I must avoid working till late at
night, or in the small hours of the morning.
Do call a meeting of the Committee in August to discuss the
subjects you suggest. Obtain Jamnalalji's consent. I shall be
occupied between August 10 and 12.
I have followed the point regarding contributions. It is sur-
prising that you had no success in Bombay. I do not think
we should cut down on work everywhere, though all the pro-
vinces should certainly become self-supporting.
In accepting conditional Government aid for Kodambakkam I
can see nothing but ruin. I had mentioned to the Rao Bahadur
very strong reasons and I thought he had been convinced. I now
see I was mistaken. The chief reason of course is that if the
money is not forthcoming from the Hindus even for this small
institution, the Sangh or the Hindus cannot take the credit for
running it. Of course if you say we are concerned with the end
and not with the argument, then I shall have nothing to say. But
even so I shall insist that considering the origin of the Sangh, if
nothing else, our ideal should be not to shoulder any burden
that the Hindus would not share. The rest is a matter of method
or means. If it is somehow worth while running it even with
Government aid, why should not the Committee run it on its own
independently of the Sangh? I would be interested in keeping the
Sangh's foundations firm and strong, though the range of my un-
derstanding is limited to Segaon. Hence the correct decision would
be the one that the Committee takes after they have listened to me.
My Malaya or whatever you call it is Segaon, at least for
the present. If God lets me spend three seasons here, I would
deem it great favour of the Big Brother. But what flattery can
work with Him?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1163
125
