106. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,
March 30, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,
I have delayed my reply to your letter of 25th instant
for the sake of having your reply to my wire . I got Sunil's wire
last night. I have now got up before morning prayer time to
write this reply.
Since you think that Pandit Pant's resolution was out of order
and the clause relating to the Working Committee is clearly
unconstitutional and ultra vires, your course is absolutely clear.
Your choice of the Committee should be unfettered.
Your several questions on this head, therefore, do not need
any answering.
Since we met in February, my opinion has become strength-
ened that where there are differences on fundamentals, as we
agreed there were, a composite committee would be harmful.
Assuming, therefore, that your policy has the backing of the
majority of the A. I. C. C., you should have a Working Commit-
tee composed purely of those who believe in your policy.
Yes, I adhere to the view expressed by me at Segaon at
our February meeting that I would not be guilty of being party
to any self-suppression by you, as distinguished from voluntary
self-effacement. Any subordination of a view which you may
strongly hold as in the best interests of the country would be
self-suppression. Therefore, if you are to function as President,
your hands must be unfettered. The situation before the country
admits of no middle course.
So far as the Gandhi-ites (to use that wrong expression)
are concerned, they will not obstruct you. They will help you
where they can, they will abstain where they cannot. There
should be no difficulty whatsoever, if they are in a minority.
They may not suppress themselves if they are clearly in a
majority.
What worries me, however, is the fact that the Congress
electorate is bogus and that, therefore, majority and minority
lose their full meaning. Nevertheless, till the Congress stable is
cleansed, we have to manage with the instrument we have for the
time being. The other thing worrying me is the terrible distrust
among ourselves. Joint work is an impossibility where the
workers distrust one another.
I think there is no other point in your letter that needs
answering.
In all you do, may you be guided by God. Do be well
quickly by obeying the doctors.
Love.
BAPU
[Ps.]
So far as I am concerned, our correspondence need not
be published.
But you have my permission to publish it, if
you think otherwise.
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939
