313. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
February 4, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,
I got your letter. It is a good sign that we are able to see
our own weaknesses. Even if people call us simpletons or imprac-
tical fools, we will not violate truth in word or deed. Your experi-
ence that it is difficult to live in that manner in a place like that is
that of others too, but one may be said to follow dharma only if
one does so even in the face of difficulties. He is not the best cap-
tain who steers a ship in a calm sea; it is the one who does not let
a ship sink even in stormy waters. But we should not feel unhappy
about the past. We have learnt the necessary lesson from it. In
future let God decide what work you should take up and what
you should not. All that we should do is to resolve to cling to
truth in whatever circumstances we may be placed. We should
have faith that God does not test beyond their strength those
who trust Him. The pity is that we do not trust Him. If we
do, why should we feel concerned whether we shall lose our good
name by clinging to truth, or harm the cause or displease
a co-worker? God is there to concern Himself with all these
problems.
But my purpose in saying all this is only to advise you not to
bemoan the past.
Give me a description of Kuvalayananda's Ashram.
Who
are the teachers there? What things do they teach? What fee
do they charge?
Manibehn and you should learn this lesson from what has hap-
pened, that a mother should know how to take care of the child-
ren's teeth. Their food should not be very soft and should not
contain too much starch. They should have sugar and jaggery
in very small quantity only. Instead, they may be allowed to suck
juice from lots of sugarcane in the season. When the season is
over, the children may be given fruits containing sugar, like figs,
munakka, dates, etc. Moreover, the mother should stand by the
side of the children when they brush their teeth in the morning
and teach them to clean the teeth with the babool stick vigorous-
ly, and also see that they use a mixture of powdered coal and salt
224
which has been properly sifted. They should be taught to gargle
properly after every meal and to massage the teeth and the gums
with their fingers.
The truth is that most of us are scarcely fit to be parents.
Why should those who have not learnt the science of child-care
bring children into the world? This question led some to the
discovery of brahmacharya and some others to the discovery of
artificial birth-control. The second is a dangerous and perilous
way. The middle course, that of lethargy and indifference, is
still more dangerous and perilous.
While teaching Mani how to take care of the children's teeth,
teach her the whole science of child-care. She should also learn
to observe the stools and the urine of the children. She should
examine them from time to time. She should also examine their
eyes, ears and nails, their habits of breathing and their tongues,
and watch how they speak and what they do during the whole day.
All these things become very easy to do once the mother has
formed the habit of doing them.
Tell Gomati that she may come whenever she wishes.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9054
