410. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
KANPUR,
September 24, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Jagjivandas has not felt hurt at all by your
or my letter; this is a very good sign.
I have written to Mulchandbhai about the money. You, too,
should write from there.
It is not necessary to discuss further the mistakes regarding
the Mandir. In any case Ramji should not be involved in the affair.
I had another letter from Madhavlal. I do not worry about
the matter. Such disputes will arise and end.
If Lakshmi cannot stay with Gangabehn in any circumstances,
write to Dudhabhai and tell him that he should take her away
for sometime; he may send her back when she agrees to return.
If this is done every time it is necessary, she will become wiser
in course of time. I enclose with this a letter to Dudhabhai; you
may use it if you wish.
I have had a letter from Galiara on the lines I had expected.
It would be good if we could now start as early as possible.
I enclose with this the letter from that Englishman. Note
down the particulars of his ship. Find from the newspapers on
which Friday it will arrive in Bombay. You will get the in-
formation easily from The Times.
I am sorry that I shall not be there, but you should look
after him. Do for him what I did for Mirabehn. That is, see
that he uses a mosquito net, drinks only boiled water, does not
eat pulses, consumes as much milk as he can, and eats butter
instead of ghee. If necessary, supply him the fruits to which
he is used - you may even consult him about this. When he
moves in sunlight, he must wear his hat. He should go out very
little in sunlight. There is a letter on this from Mr. Alexander
who had stayed with us for one or two weeks. Perhaps you have
seen it. I will send it for you to read.
You need not send anything to Malkani just now. I have
already written to you about this.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5445; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 141-
