125. LETTER TO THE JOHANNESBURG PRESS
COURT CHAMBERS,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 5, 1904
SIR,
In view of Mr. Roy's denial, if he is correctly reported, that notice
of plague cases was ever given either to the Medical Officer of Health or
to the Public Health Committee, and now that the disease, thanks to
the efforts (though late in the day) of the Public Health Committee, as-
sisted by Drs. Pakes and MacKenzie and the glorious weather we have
had since the discovery of the outbreak of plague, is under control, and,
therefore, the public are in a position to judge dispassionately, I venture
to enclose herewith copy of correspondence between Dr. Porter and my-
self, with Mr. Roy's concurrence, for publication.
It will be seen that sufficient warning was given of what was impend-
ing on the 11th February last, i.e., exactly a month and nine days before
the official discovery of the existence of the plague in our midst. It was
repeated in strong terms (entirely justified, I think, by the events that
have since happened) on the 15th February last. On the 1st of March,
a letter was written to Dr. Porter definitely informing him that, in my
humble opinion, plague had actually broken out.
Could there be anything more precise? The only answer to this per-
haps is that the information given was unofficial and came from a layman.
But was there not a terrible confirmation thereof in the mortuary record,
which showed, as we are officially told, a pronouncedly abnormal mor-
tality in the Insanitary Area? No, sir, it required an ocular demonstration
of the ghastly tragedy that took place on the 18th, 19th and 20th of last
month before energetic measures could be officially taken. What was
a clear public duty was left to be performed by volunteers who, the disease
having got a fatal grip of the patients, had to wade through what was a
chamber of horrors.
I need not recall the graphic though fanciful description of the In-
sanitary Area by Major O'Meara in the middle of 1902, and the repeti-
tion thereof by Dr. Porter in 1903. The danger to public health was even
then considered to be so immediate that the Town Council was advised
not to wait for expropriating until an elected Council was given to Johan-
nesburg. The Council received on the 30th day of April, 1903 authority
to expropriate. It had then the right, as it was its clear duty, to fix upon
a spot for the habitation of the people who had to be dispossessed. It
failed in its duty; it gave notice of its intention to expropriate on the 6th
June, 1903, but it still failed to provide a site for the housing of the resi-
dents of the Insanitary Area. It entered upon possession on the 26th Sept-
ember, 1903. If, on that day, instead of becoming landlord to every indi-
vidual tenant and leaving it to its collectors, who received a commission,
to let the premises to as many tenants as chose to apply, it had dealt with
the area as it is doing now under stress, would the ratepayers have been
mulcted of £20,000? Would precious lives, though Indian, have been
lost? Would a whole family, save one member left as a reminder, have
been wiped out?
And yet the Indian is being made to feel the heat of the burden es-
pecially in outside districts. He is debarred from the markets. He is pre-
vented from earning his livelihood. Though there may be no plague
there, he is quarantined or at least removed to isolation camps far away
from towns. I do not seek to justify him. On the contrary, I admit that
the poorer of my countrymen do not observe the laws of sanitation,
except under supervision. But I do submit that they are not the keepers of
public health. They are defaulters as individuals, and they have suffered
as such. It is the Public Health Committee which has to enforce obedience
to such laws, and not flagrantly break them, as it has done since the 26th
of September last.
A trinity of interests (viz., of truth, public weal, and my countrymen)
is my excuse for trespassing upon your courtesy.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 9-4-1904
1 Evidently "the heat and the burden" was what was intended.
