89. LETTER TO V. T. KRISHNAMACHARYA
BORSAD,
May 5, 1931
DEAR DIWAN SAHEB,
In Vijapur there is an industrial institution called Udyoga-
laya. I procured through the good office of your predecessor a
plot of ground for founding a centre for spinning and weaving
especially through women and it was registered in the name of
a lady co-worker. She has now retired from that work and so
far as she is concerned the legal right has been transferred to the
trustees of the Satyagraha Ashram. One of the trustees is work-
ing in the Udyogalaya. He has tried to get the land trans-
ferred in the name of the trustees of the Satyagraha Ashram.
After waiting a long time the officer concerned has rejected the
application. He has given, so far as I am aware, no reasons for
it. At one time it seemed that by giving an undertaking that
the institution will have nothing to do with politics there would be
no difficulty about the transfer. Then, I believe, there was a change
of officer. Of course, from its very conception according to
my own method of work like my activities in other Indian States,
this institution has been kept out of politics altogether. It remained
so during the last struggle. As you may be aware, the Baroda
State has been receiving the help of the All-India Spinners' Asso-
ciation for village reorganization through the spinning-wheel.
The Vijapur activity is also a kindred activity. Could I trouble
you to interest yourself in this matter and if you are satisfied
about the facts presented by me, could you please order transfer
of the land in the name of the above-mentioned trustees? At the
present moment this land is given by the State for a nominal
sum for benevolent purposes. But I would like to buy it right
out if the State has no objection. It was offered before. I
may add that we have buildings on this land which have cost
over Rs. 12,000. Through the institution we are supporting
several poor women of Vijapur by giving them spinning work and
we are supporting a colony of weavers and carders. The insti-
tution engages in no other activity. I am sorry to have to trouble
you over a matter which may appear to be trifling. But it is not
so to me as a guardian of the several interests entrusted to my
care.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
V. T. KRISHNAMACHARYA, ESQ.
DIWAN OF BARODA
BARODA
From a photostat: S.N. 17030
