138. LETTER TO URMILA DEVI
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 17, 1926
MY DEAR SISTER,
I have your heart-rending letter. It seems you will never
be free from troubles. I was wondering why I had not heard from
you for such a long time as a letter was overdue from you.
You need evidently a prolonged stay in Kashmir. You invite
me to Puri and you hold out the temptation that you will be with
me all the time I am there. But I am not my own master in this
matter. If I was, at the present moment I am enjoying so much
rest and peace at the Ashram that I would not like to leave it.
Heat is no terror for me. I can sustain it well especially as I have
no active work to do but Jamnalalji and Shankerlal Banker are
my managers and I am under promise to them to go to a hill
station. If sea-side would answer the purpose I have a place
better even than Puri though not known at all and it is only a
few miles from my birthplace where I can get perfect quiet and
rustic life without the insolent palaces that frown upon you in
Puri and the distressful sight of famine-stricken people who flock
to the temple to get a handful of dirty rice from the pilgrims. Puri
reminds me not of the holy associations it once had but of the
degradation to which we have been reduced now. For, is it not
now a sanatorium for the soldiers who are paid with our own money
to suppress our liberty? Puri has no attraction for me. It makes
me sad to think of it. And I felt miserable all the time I was there
though friends had put me in a most comfortable place just
facing the sea-side and were covering me with extraordinary kind-
ness. But they had no remedy for the mental torture that I was
going through as I contemplated the barracks and the misery of
those starving Oriyans and the callous indifference of the moneyed
people.
I can thoroughly understand the wonderful behaviour of your
sister. I wish her all success in her defiance of drugs and doctors.
I envy her courage. She will quit her body, even as the Bhagavad
Gita describes, joyfully, i.e., even as an owner leaves his house which
has given its use and is now about to crumble to pieces.
Yours sincerely,
SISTER URMILA DEVI
4 A., NAFAR KUNDU ROAD
CALCUTTA
C/O JUSTICE DAS
ALI MANZIL
PATNA
From a photostat: S.N. 19365
1 This second address is in pencil.
