456. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 26/27, 1932
CHI. KAKA,
After a long time and through Col. Doyle's kindness I got a
letter from you, dated 1[6-8-1932]. The Colonel also told me
today that you must have reached Ahmedabad today, and added
that you should give up spinning, too, for some time in order
to get rid of the pain in your back. I promised to convey this
to you and to advise you to give up spinning as long as the pain
persists. You should, therefore, give up spinning for some time.
If you can spin on the takli standing and without getting tired,
as you used to do here, you may do so, but you need not do even
that. The only thing which I insist on your doing just now is to
improve your health and get strong. Do get the area on the back
where you feel the pain in the bone gently massaged. It is very
good indeed that you can bathe with cold water. (Please let me
know who are the other people with you there) . . .1
I am writing to Hiralal about the book on astronomy. He
has already sent me three of the books in your list. They are as
follows: Stellar Maps, Khagolchitram and Hindu Astronomy. I am
sending them with this. There is some history behind Khagol-
chitram. It was torn when it arrived here. . . .2 I shall soon be
having a fairly good collection of books on astronomy. There
are three books by Jeans which are worth reading. If you have
not read them, would you like me to send any of them? Hira-
lal has sent me Maeterlink's book at your suggestion. I got it
only two or three days ago. Since it was sent at your suggestion,
you must have read it of course. If you want it, however, please
let me know and I will send it too. I can easily recognize the
morning constellations whose names you have given. You used
to tell me names of many constellations but at that time they were
only names to me. Now I can recognize most of them. I am able
to read something at least every day. I have glanced through
the chapters you have written. Though I have not read them
carefully, I observed one deficiency in them. I felt, after reading
a short sketch of Sir William Hershel's life in Ball's Story of the Sky,
that you should give the names and short lives of Western astro-
nomers, some of whom, as you yourself say, were men of great cou-
rage and spirit and of noble character. A modest effort to do
this was made in Jyotirvilas. The book on astronomy which we
wish to publish should be as perfect as possible and should give
an account of all discoveries to date in the field. After reading
the books of Jeans, I also feel that the book should give some
knowledge about physics. This means that the scope of your under-
taking becomes a little wider. I have merely thrown out a sug-
gestion here. I don't expect you to do all this while you are
resting there. Perhaps it is beyond your capacity, and so I do
not wish to analyse your chapters too critically. Moreover, the
book should not be such as only highly educated persons can under-
stand. It should be written with villagers in view. But you
should attach more importance to your health than to even this
undertaking. You should go on with the work only if you can
improve your health at the same time and not at its cost.
How is it possible that I would not know Pundalik ? I don't
think he is likely to have accompanied you there. The disease
from which he is suffering is an awful one. I have no other
remedy to suggest for it except fasting, cold hip-baths and ene-
mas. The lower intestines will recover their normal position only
if they are given complete rest. Pundalik's complaint is known
as prolapsus of the rectum. The effect of enema will be that the
faeces will be expelled by the force of the water without the rec-
tum slipping out. And since he will be fasting, the intestines will
have no work to do and the rectum will not then slip out.
I think you will get this letter without much delay. Vallabh-
bhai's study of Sanskrit is progressing with the speed of Indra's
horse. As soon as spinning is over, he picks up a book of Sans-
krit. He has completed six parts of Satavlekar's series and two
chapters of the Gita. He does five verses every day. He becomes
equally absorbed in spinning. He has reached as far as 40 counts.
I don't think any student of the Vidyapith can equal his capacity
for hard work. Mahadev's study of French and Urdu is progress-
ing. He has reached as far as 80 counts. I had gone as far as
53 counts on the Gandiva spinning-wheel, but I have gone back to
the Magan spinning-wheel to prevent harm to the left elbow. I
have not been able to rise above 30 counts on it. In addition to
astronomy, I also study Urdu a little. Correspondence takes up a
great deal of time. After Dr. Mehta's death, I have had to write
numerous letters concerning the affairs of his family. I suppose
you have heard about his death. He had got a cut in a foot with
a piece of glass and the wound became septic. The leg had to
be amputated. The operation was successful, but afterwards he
developed double pneumonia which proved fatal. This is the
fourth week since he died.
Maganlal (Dr. Mehta's) must have landed in Bombay to-
day. He had gone to England. . . .2
Blessings from
BAPU
August 27, 1932
. . .3 I had almost completed the history of the Ashram.
After revising what I had written, I was about to proceed fur-
ther but had to leave the work aside. I have not been able to
find time for it since then. I am trying to do so. I have not been
able to write it in as much detail as you may have thought. I
believe, however, that it will contain my views in brief on all
matters.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9488. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
