159. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Wednesday [On or after July 6, 1921]
CHI. MAHADEV,
I got your letter yesterday. I certainly understood what you
had said. I have not, in either instance, put a wrong construction
or shown myself prone to do so. It is perfectly true that, when a
statement is capable of two interpretations, the right course is to
accept the one which is unfavourable to ourselves. The difficulty,
in the two instances, was not this; it was what I have described
it to be. In reading 'twenty-five lakhs' there was nothing parti-
cularly more favourable to us, for, even without this sum, one
crore had been made up and the telegram was actually received
after the last letter was written. It would make no difference to our
cause whether he donated one lakh charkhas or offered them at
a lower price. Even now, I do not understand the sentence about
one lakh charkhas to mean anything else. There is impatience,
it is true, in all these efforts to decide what the sentence means;
impatience, too, is a sign of one's being attached and attachment
is always a source of error. A person who is free from attachment
finds time to reflect and puts a construction which will save the
other party; if he is a truthful man, he will, as I have pointed out,
correctly guess the correspondent's meaning.
I read what you have said about yourself. What has hap-
pened is a distressing thing. It is plain how we come to make
mistakes. The right atonement will be never to eat the thing
again. But I suggest this: on every ekadashi day, have only one
seer of warm milk, 80 tolas, and nothing else. Not even fruit or
sugar. Drink the quantity in two or three meals, not one. Conti-
nue this for one year from the next ekadashi onwards.
Read the writings of Shri Rajchandra and reflect over them.
Read Tulsidasji's Maniratnamala and reflect over it.
Read Bhartrihari's Vairagyashataka, and reflect over it.
Peruse very carefully the chapter on vairagya 1 in Yoga-vasishtha.
Spin daily for not less than one hour, concentrating the mind
on the thought that this yajna may wash away uncleanliness from
you. This, too, for a year, with exemption during travelling
and illness.
All other work in the morning to be attended to afterwards.
After you have, on getting up, cleaned your teeth and answered
the call of nature, if you feel the urge, prayers if you are in the
Ashram and then, half an hour's silent reading as above, followed
by spinning for one hour. Everything else to wait.
For the duration of the year, always go to bed before nine
and never remain in it after four. You may change all this when
ill.
Though prescribing this atonement, I neither magnify your
lapse nor minimize it. You may drop from this any item you
feel like dropping. Do not drop spinning out of a feeling of
shame. Do not let any such feeling or the thought of public service
hold you back from going to bed at 9. And do not let The In-
dependent stand in your way. It is not necessary that one writing
for a daily should keep late hours. In any case, the lines along
which we propose to run it requires you to do no such thing.
Remember that the hour and a half outlined above is to be a
time of silence. Devdas started reading your letter quite innocent-
ly not knowing what it might contain, and then I did not think
it proper to stop him.
The reasons you have given against your coming are quite
sound and you need not, therefore, come. If Panditji sends for you
or Joseph asks you to go and you come over, that would be a
different story, I do not mind your not coming, though I would
have been happy if you had come.
Though I have seen your error, please do not feel that my
love for you is any the less on that account. If I were perfect,
there would be no room for any deficiency in me. Being myself an
imperfect man yearning for liberation, I would be only increasing
my imperfection if I magnify others' lapses.
I have suggested that you daily remind yourself [of your
lapse] but the feeling of dejection must not remain. Sincere repen-
tance is incompatible with dejection. Sin makes a long face.
Memory of uncleanliness may induce humility in us but never
dejection.
"Keeping an even mind in happiness and suffering" applies
to this situation too.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 11429
Blessings from,
BAPU
