34. LETTER TO CHIEF TRAFFIC MANAGER,
E. I. RAILWAY
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY,
POONA CITY,
[February 23, 1915]
THE TRAFFIC MANAGER
EAST INDIAN RAIL WAY
CALCUTTA
SIR,
Mrs. Gandhi, two friends and I travelled on the 21st instant
by the 3 up mail from Burdwan to Kalyan en route for Poona. We
were holders of 3rd class tickets Nos. 7186 to 7189. Upon the
train steaming in, I found that the 3rd class compartment was un-
comfortably crowded containing far more passengers than the
number specified on the label. However, we tried to get in. The
station clerk who was standing by prevented us from doing so. I
suggested that we would stand in the carriage as it was necessary
for us to reach Poona at the earliest possible moment. The clerk
would not listen to me. I then suggested that we should travel in
an intermediate compartment until we could find accommodation
in the 3rd class carriage. This suggestion was accepted. We got
into an intermediate carriage. The station clerk duly reported
the matter to the guard who insisted that we must pay the difference
between the 3rd class and intermediate fares as far as Jubbulpore
or we should not travel by mail train at all and go by the passenger
train which was to follow. I protested but my protest was of no
avail. I had therefore no alternative but to consent under protest
to pay the difference which was taken from me at Asansol. The
excess fare ticket number was 274577. I paid Rs. 19-12-. I asked the
ticket master to note on the ticket that I paid the excess fare under
protest. He disregarded my request. As I had no desire to travel
in an intermediate compartment, I and my party were looking for
an opportunity of transferring to 3rd class compartment which we
did at Mughalsarai. Here I asked the ticket collector to mark on
the excess fare ticket that I had changed to the 3rd class compart-
ment but he declined to do so.
I submit that, in the circumstances above mentioned, my party
should have been found seats in the 3rd class compartment, failing
that, permitted to travel intermediate without extra fare until the
pressure had been removed; in any case it was unfair to insist on
excess fare being paid as far as Jubbulpore and that as my party
actually transferred to the 3rd class compartment at Mughalsarai,
there is no warrant for the retention of the excess fare between
Mughalsarai and Jubbulpore.
I trust that the Railway Administration will direct a refund
of the full excess fare.
I have thought it to be my duty to bring this matter to your
notice, as much for the sake of the recovery of the excess fare paid
(having operated upon public funds for my travels) as for the princi-
ple that 3rd class passengers are entitled to proper treatment. I
observed that they were roughly handled by several officials who
were rude and impatient. I have no doubt that the Administration
do not desire to see 3rd class passengers in any way roughly handled
by inconsiderate officials.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
From the draft in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5667. Courtesy: Radhabehn
Choudhri
