48. LETTER TO BRITISH AGENT
JOHANNESBURG,
July 21, 1899 2
TO
HIS HONOUR THE BRITISH AGENT
PRETORIA
SIR,
On behalf of the Indian community in Johannesburg, I beg
to lay the following before Your Honour:
1. At the interview you were graciously pleased to grant
the deputation, consisting of Mr. Hajee Habib Hajee Dada, Mr.
H. O. Ally, Mr. Abdul Rahman and myself on Thursday last
(July 20, 1899), you informed the deputation that Her Majesty's
Government would not at present interfere as regards the general
question, viz., the whole status of the British Indians in the
Transvaal; that the Indians must abide by Law 3 of 1885,
as amended in 1886, but that Her Majesty's Government would
be prepared to interfere at any time with reference to special
cases, such as the sites of Locations, cases of long leases, etc.
2. I am to say that Her Majesty's Government having ac-
cepted the above law, there is no desire on the part of the Indian
community not to abide by the law, so long as it remains on the
Statute Book of the Republic.
3. But I am to point out, as it was done at the above
interview, with due deference, that as the Locations are to be
pointed out, as the law states, for the purposes of sanitation, the
necessity on that ground ought to be clearly established. And
if in that case the question be that of each Indian having to
prove that he has been living in accordance with the sanitary
regulations, and that his presence in town is in no way a danger
to the community generally from a sanitary point of view, the
matter even then seems to be extremely simple. If Her Majesty's
Government succeed in establishing the point that the Transvaal
Government would not remove those Indians who produce satis-
factory evidence as to their sanitary condition, I venture to submit
that the rest of the burden could be discharged by parties affected,
without having to trouble Her Majesty's Government.
4. In Johannesburg and the suburbs, apart from the pre-
sent Indian Location, there are, it appears, about 125 British
Indian storekeepers and about 4,000 hawkers, the storekeepers
possessing unliquidated assets collectively estimated at about
£375,000, and the hawkers about £400,000.
5. Most of the storekeepers possess leases, with the excep-
tion of three or four. However, none of them has availed of
the Government Notice calling upon them to register their leases.
6. The people were and are in a state of terror; they do
not know what to do. The cablegram appearing in the news-
papers to the effect that Her Majesty's Government were still in
communication with the Transvaal Government, and that Her
Majesty's High Commissioner was instructed to take up the
matter at the Bloemfontein Conference served as an effective
check against the storekeepers registering their leases.
7. The Indians residing in Johannesburg cannot, even if
they wanted, remove to the Location situated in the Brickfields.
8. It contains, according to the report of the Inspector of
Natives and Traffic in Johannesburg, dated the 10th January, 1896,
ninety-six stands, each 30 by 50 ft. The Location was even at
that date, as the Inspector states, overcrowded, containing a
population of 3,300. The state of the Location at present, from
that point of view, is probably worse than it was in 1898.
9. The Government of the South African Republic, it is
understood, intend to remove the Indians in town to a place
called Waterval, 4¾ miles distant from Johannesburg Market
Square, the central part of Johannesburg. Surveyor's diagram and
medical report thereon are hereto attached. The diagram shows the
distance also from the end of the inhabited portion of the town.
10. It is submitted that to ask the Indians to remove to that
place would be practically asking them to leave the Transvaal.
The storekeepers could never do any business there.
The
hawkers could not be expected to walk with their wares from
and to that place every day.
11. The fact that there are no sanitary arrangements there,
no water, no police protection and that the place is situated in
the vicinity of the place where the refuse of the town and night-
soil are deposited, are minor considerations in comparison with
the fact that it is situated at such a great distance as 4¾ miles with
no population of any kind within practically a two-mile radius.
12. The Government appear to have entered into an agree-
ment with Herman Tobiansky, of Johannesburg, in connection
with this site, as will appear from copy thereof hereto annexed.
13. The lease bristles with provisions extremely harmful to
the persons that might be located on the ground leased, but it is
unnecessary to dilate thereon as the site itself is so manifestly
unsuitable for the purposes mentioned.
14. It appears that the Kaffirs too, who are most of them
labourers and not affected from a commercial point of view, have
lodged their protest against their removal to the above site.
15. It has often been submitted that the removal of the
Indian storekeepers to Locations, wherever they may be, would
mean almost certain ruin for them.
16. It is respectfully submitted that if Her Majesty's Govern-
ment could not see their way to move in the direction humbly
suggested in paragraph 3 hereof, the least that would prevent
the entire ruin of the Indian storekeepers would be to leave the
present storekeepers untouched. The hawkers could, if absolutely
necessary, be removed to a Location if it is suitably situated
and otherwise not objectionable. Exceptional sanitary provisions
might, if necessary, be made regarding the storekeepers.
17. If, however, relief of the nature above indicated could
not be secured, I am humbly to submit that a spot in the
business portion of the town set apart for the Indian storekeepers
for their business purposes, subject to such rent and other regu-
lations that may be necessary, might enable a large number of the
traders to earn their livelihood; but such an arrangement would
not by any means afford relief to the few large Indian merchants.
18. While the matter is in course of settlement, the extension
of time enabling the Indians to obtain temporary licences, or an
understanding that they will not be interfered with in pursuit
of their trade in the mean time, is very necessary by way of
immediate temporary relief.
19. It may be stated that the Transvaal Government seem to
have granted the above relief in Johannesburg.
I am further to
state that the Government of the Republic has served the following
notice on the owners of the stands in the "Coolie Location",
dated the 23rd May, 1899:
You are hereby warned that, in accordance with the Government
Notice No. 208, appearing in the Staats Courant of the 26th April, 1899
only you and your family will be allowed to reside on your Stand
after June 30th of the present year.
(Signed) A. SMITHERS
20. It appears that a protest with reference to this notice
has already been lodged with His Honour the British Vice-
Consul. The intention underlying the notice is obvious. It is
submitted that in Law 3 of 1885 and its amendment, there is
absolutely no sanction for any such restriction.
21. It is hoped that the Transvaal Government have no right
and that they will not insist upon disturbing the rights of the
present population in the Indian Location.
22. But if the town population must be partly or wholly
removed to a Location, it is clear that another site will become
necessary.
23. The Town Council, with the approval of the Transvaal
Government, have adopted certain regulations regarding Locations,
which go far beyond the scope of Law 3 of 1885, and its amend-
ment. Copy of the regulations is hereto attached marked D.
24. It is much feared that the Transvaal Government would
apply these regulations to any new site they may select for
the removal of the Indians residing in the town. Indeed, the
Annexure C1 shows this quite clearly.
25. Any scheme, therefore, for the removal of the Indians,
whether hawkers or others, in order to be at all satisfactory,
should give the Indians the same proprietary rights in the
Locations as are granted to the other communities in town
generally.
26. There is no prohibition in the law above referred to
against Indians owning land in Locations or dealing with it as they
choose. Indeed, hawkers could not be expected to buy land and
erect their own buildings in the Locations. And it is respectfully
submitted it would be a great injustice if the land in Indian
Locations or the right to build thereon is given to any but Indians.
27. In conclusion, it is to be hoped that before accepting
any scheme for a Location or a general settlement, the responsi-
ble Indians will, if possible, be taken into confidence so as to
enable them to make suggestions if necessary.
28. Now that there is a prospect of Indians generally being
shifted to Locations, will it be too much to expect a change of
official name "Coolie Location" for "Indian Location"?
29. I may state that I had the honour to wait upon His
Honour the State Secretary on Saturday morning not in my
representative capacity, but in my individual capacity, and while
telling him that with regard to their grievances they must in
future, as they had done in the past, lay them before their own
Government, humbly pleaded for magnanimity in view of the
fact that the Indians possessed great antecedents, were, no
matter where they went, most law-abiding, and instead of being
in any way a harm to the Burghers of the State, they were
rendering a humble but useful service to them in their various
pursuits. The State Secretary was good enough to extend to me
the utmost courtesy, and granted me a long and patient hearing.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 3245
