62. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
As AT SABARMATI,
June 24, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your letter. I shall look forward to Mrs. Polak's
book. I know it will revive old and pleasant memories and it
will tell me of things I have perhaps altogether forgotten.
It is a good thing that your two books are reaching the proper
people.
As is your wont you are distressed over what your eyes see
and ears hear. This time it is the terrible unemployment in
Lancashire and what you see and hear acts as an effective barrier
against perceiving the truth. I have seen from extensive experience
the truth of a legal maxim which says: "Hard cases make bad
law." Many legal maxims are also sound moral maxims as this
one is. I can say with perfect detachment although I am Im-
mersed in the Indian turmoil that the way you suggest is not
the way to help Lancashire. If it was wrong any time for
Lancashire to impose its cloth upon India by hook or by crook
it is wrong also today and more so because India has become
conscious of the wrong. And if India now refuses to be party to
the wrong, surely she won't be adding wrong to wrong but she
would be assisting the process of undoing the wrong done by
Lancashire. That the labourers were not conscious of the wrong
that was being done is no justification for the wrong itself being
sustained by the party wronged, that is, India or anybody else.
The proper course is to show the labourers how they have been
unconsciously assisting the wrong done by Lancashire to India and
therefore how necessary it is to retrace the step. The first thing
to do therefore is, if Lancashire cloth cannot be sold outside
India, to find some other employment. What that can be it is
difficult for me to say. I do not know how England itself is
clothed. Why should not the same machinery be used for pre-
paring the clothing of the kind required by England or better
still, why should not the machinery be scrapped and the unem-
ployed take to handicrafts? I know these are vague ideas without
any basis for them but I have given them to show which way my
mind is working.
Let me help you by putting before you another fact. Foreign-
cloth boycott has created a kind of atmosphere. Its effect upon
Lancashire is nothing so serious as it is made out. In the first
place do you know that before the boycott became a live thing
Lancashire sent to India only 12% of her output of piecegoods?
Have you studied the illuminating figures published in a recent
issue of Young India showing conclusively that Lancashire had to
fear not so much Indian boycott as the ever-growing Japanese
competition? My heart goes out to the unemployed. It goes
out to you in your terrific moral struggle. But I cannot be
helpful in the way you suggest. Of that I am quite clear. That
there is a way out I have no doubt and probably if I came to
London, after a study of the situation on the spot I should be
able to suggest some practical solution. And if I came at all I
would certainly do as you want me to, first of all proceed to
Lancashire and see the unemployed face to face.
But I am not at all sure that I shall be able to go. As yet
of course there is no invitation. The Settlement is causing me
much anxiety. The local governments are not playing the game.
Lathi charges too are now and then resorted to. Jawaharlal
sends me bitter complaints from Allahabad. But I shall see what
is possible when the time for sailing comes. Jawaharlal cannot
accompany me unless he forms part of the deputation. I do not
think it would be advisable though of course if he was in London
his presence would relieve me of a great deal of responsibility.
Malaviyaji and Ansari are a certainty. They are most likely to
be invited apart from the Working Committee and so is Mrs.
Naidu. I note you will house me with Muriel.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 970
