408. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,
May 31, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,
I have your letter. I have said my say. I understand your
reasoning and value your determination. However, I send you
the book on Food and Health. As a chemist you will understand
it better than I can. Personally, I challenge many of the authors'
conclusions. But my challenge is based upon prejudice. I at-
tack their data on insufficiency of evidence; but I have no data
myself to support my challenge. I know the healthier condition
of widows.
So far as Nikhil is concerned, he need never go to Calcutta.
If Hemaprabha Devi can be happy at the Ashram, she can live
with Nikhil there and husband his strength. Or, she can stay in
Patna, and she can be in Wardha also with quarters all to her-
self.
I must finish Madras and would really like to go through the
other provinces also if I can do them gently and in a leisurely
fashion leaving ample margin for rest and having no more than
one meeting per day or even per two days. Not to do Madras,
if I can at all manage it, would be criminal as there is already
nearly three lakhs of rupees collected and locked up and people
will not part with it unless I present myself to receive it. I can
therefore combine rest and work. It becomes fairly cool in the
Madras Presidency in the month of July. The whole of June will
be spent in resting. The Mysore tour will be easy, because Mysore
is on a higher level. It is a plateau of 3,000 feet above the sea
level and the climate at this time of the year is exceptionally mild.
Then there are other parts of the Madras Presidency too which are
quite cool. And Karnatak is perfect after June. You need have
therefore no worry whatsoever, and, of course, I shall be taking
soundings as the tour progresses. What is more, the ever kind and
the ever vigilant Nature will give warning betimes of any danger
that may be lurking. And then, in spite of all the extraordinary
precautions, she will one day send her messenger who like a thief
in the night will steal in some day and unperceived by anybody
administer the dose which will send me to long sleep.
Yours,
BAPU
SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
HOME VILLA
GIRIDIH
(BIHAR)
From a photostat: G.N. 1572
