269. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
MOTIHARI,
January 16, 1918
MY DEAR MILLIE,
I hope you have received the two letters written to you during the
past fortnight. In the one I told you not to worry about the money
discrepancy and in the other I gave you a brief account of the Congress.
Here the planters are doing their utmost to upset the committee's work.
They are carrying on a most unscrupulous agitation. I believe it was
at their instance that a case was brought against one of the workers
for rash driving. He was unjustly found guilty and has, therefore, by
way of protest elected to go to gaol and has become a hero. His
sentence is fortnight's imprisonment or Rs. 40 fine.
You will be glad to hear that I have four women working with
me. They are all doing good work. They go about among the village
women, teach them the laws of cleanliness and get hold of their girls.
We have opened one girls' school. People here are most reluctant to
bring their girls out. They are distributing also medical relief. I know
you would love this kind of work. But your time is not yet. I have
my eyes upon you. When Waldo and Leon are able to take care of
themselves and after you have had a few years of peaceful life together,
I should not wonder if you do not feel the call to work among the
villagers here. If India is to become the seat in the world of a mighty
spiritual force, it would need to have international workers in her midst
who are fired with spiritual zeal. Some of India's problems are world
problems. They can be solved in a narrow sectional spirit or from a
broad humanitarian standpoint.
I know you and Henry will rally round the humanitarian flag.
1 Vide also Vol. XIV, pp. 95-.
2 Durga Desai, Avantikabai Gokhale, Anandibai and Manibehn Parikh
With love,
Yours ever,
BHAI
[PS.]
I am sending you a copy of my address on Social Service. Please
congratulate Waldo on his vegetarian work. When is he going to fulfil
his promise to write to me ?
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
