271. LETTER TO K. B. BHADRAPUR
AHMEDABAD,
August 1, 1931
DEAR MR. BHADRAPUR,
I now enclose herewith a report prepared by Sjt. Mahadev
Desai on the ex-parte report prepared for you about the con-
dition of Ras Khatedars. This is how this report was prepared.
I sent Sjt. Chhaganlal Joshi with Sjt. Ravishanker to Ras to meet
the Khatedars. They were there practically a whole day. They
brought the results to Sjt. Mahadev Desai who had previously
conducted an exhaustive inquiry into the Ras cases and prepared
an account of which an abstract was supplied to Mr. Perry. A
second exhaustive report was prepared as a result of discussion
with Mr. Perry which it became unnecessary to give to him as
there was a sporting settlement. This report deals with the crops
of Khatedars and will be found annexed to the report sent here-
with. The present one is prepared in the light of these reports.
You will see that Schedule F of your report is the most im-
portant of all because it contains an examination of 126 Khatedars.
The annexure to the enclosed report is a complete answer to
Schedule F. The other schedules relate to only 66 Khatedars. The
enclosed report deals with these and it appears to me a conclusive
answer. In the circumstances I have not the heart to ask any of
the Khatedars to pay anything more. As I told you, even the Rs.
500 was not exacted by me without some effort. The reason is that
the Ras Khatedars have been universally admitted to have been
the heaviest losers. But as I have told you already this does not
mean that the Khatedars have no credit. On the contrary their
credit stands perhaps higher than before. But it is common cause
between the Government and the Congress that these civil resisters
are not to be expected to borrow money in order to pay the
revenue dues, whether current or arrears.
I enclose herewith the schedules you very kindly entrusted to
my care.
Yours sincerely,
K. B. BHADRAPuR, ESQ.
From a microfilm: S.N. 17420
241
47-16
