485. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[February 19/20, 1933]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Is the cost of milk, etc., which you send for Ba and Mira-
behn paid by the jail authorities or is it borne by us?
I follow what you say regarding the weight of Rambhau,
Jekore and others. I feel relieved. We should take care and see
that the children do not feel the burden of the Ashram life.
What you say about Chhotubhai is correct. Keep me informed
about Liladhar. Duncan Greenlees will have arrived there and
have been one of you by the time you get this letter. He will
give you a letter which I have sent with him. He has produced a
good impression on me. Make some arrangement to help him to
learn Hindi. I hope you are not taken by surprise when I send
somebody in this manner without previous warning. I could have
written to you about D[uncan] G[reenlees] five days earlier,
but I forgot to do so and he arrived suddenly yesterday. I
knew that he might arrive any day. If, therefore, I had written to
you at the same time when I decided to write to him, you would
have got five days' or at least three days' notice. If you think
that it is improper for me to send people like this without
previous intimation, tell me so. I will not then do it again.
Give him clothes and other things which he may require. Supply
him the required utensils too. Ask him not to keep any money
or costly article with him. I forgot to do that.
If the digging of wells is about to be completed, write to
Soniramji for money. Does Ranchhodbhai visit the Ashram
occasionally? I wonder because I have had no letter from him
at all. Let all those to whom Hariyomal has written describe
to him in plain words the bitter experiences they have had. He
seems to be an honest man and, therefore, such frank letters are
likely to produce an effect on him. Persons like Hariyomal learn
only from bitter experience.
I felt depressed after reading . . . 's letter. You must have
read it. It is likely that . . . beat her, as she says he did.
Inquire and find out the truth. Ask . . . . Who writes the letters
for. . . ? Or is her own handwriting well-formed and firm?
Where is . . . now?
Read what I have written to Kusum about sun-bath. Tell
Dr. Talwalkar about it. If he approves of my suggestion, put up
a sort of wall of hay or hessian or any other suitable material
round the place where Kusum sits. The wall should be such as
can be removed every day. Or you may select some other
suitable place in consultation with the doctor and put up such
a wall there and let her have sun-bath in that enclosure. If
necessary, she may be carried there in a cot. Find out whether
it is necessary to obtain Government's permission for putting up
such temporary wall on agricultural land. Patients like Kusum
are known to have recovered by only taking sun-bath with their
bodies completely uncovered.
Some boys ask me in their letters to write "Blessings from"
at least when I write to them. Please remind all that in order
to save time and spare the hand unnecessary work I don't say it
in words but leave it to be understood by the addressee. Every-
body, therefore, should supply the phrase in his or her letter.
4 o'clock, Monday [February 20, 1933]
Prakash complains that the inmates of the Ashram do not
like looking after a sick person. If there is any truth in this
criticism, we should hang our heads in shame. Do not mis-
understand Prakash's criticism. All of us should examine our hearts
and reform ourselves in whatever respects may be necessary.
Write to . . .1 also what you wrote to me about him. Don't
mind if he feels a little hurt. He is childish, but not dishonest.
BAPU
[PS.]
I had got the soap sent by Panditji. Why has he coloured it?
There are 36 letters in all, tied with a string.
From a microfilm of Gujarati : M. M. U./I
