516. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
May 14, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got your letters. I went through the Press cuttings. The
criticism of Andrews's letter was not convincingly argued. If
Manilal says that he had not made any such promise, he should
have quoted the exact words. A promise like that couldn't
have been merely an oral one.
Manilal has quoted from
Andrews's letter though it appeared in the same issue, whereas he
has [not] quoted the exact words of the promise on which his
whole case is based and thus has denied the reader an opportunity
to judge for himself.
How could a person who has a doubt in
the matter merely trust Manilal's word? If, therefore, the pro-
mise was in writing, he should even now quote the exact words,
so that the charge of violation of pledge may be refuted.
If the
promise was what Manilal asserts it was, Andrews's statement is
plainly unjustified. He must have arrived there now.
Manilal
should have a talk with him and try to convince him if he can.
There is no need for him to satisfy me. You should follow what
seems to be truth to you both, and that should be enough for me.
I agree with Miss Schlesin with regard to Thambi.
The views
expressed in the article are bound to appear as vilification.
There
is a saying in Latin, to the effect that one must speak nothing but
good of the dead. Tulsidas says: "IT efu 5;:@ q~f§~ 5;~T<lTI This is
described as one of the marks of saintly character.
5;\T<lT means
to cover up. A good man will himself suffer but will not
expose the weaknesses of others.
He might say something for
the good of such a person, but that would be a different matter.
This cannot be applied in Thambi's case, for he is dead now. Try
to satisfy Miss Schlesin in this matter if you can.
You know that very important changes are taking place in
my life. Learn from them what you can.
All this is the result
merely of devotion to truth.
You know that your duty in regard
to civil disobedience has now increased a hundredfold.
You have
to cultivate the fitness to be ready for it when it comes. The same
is true about this tour on foot. It is not unlikely that many more
people may have to undertake such tours.
Make your life straight-
forward, simple, tough, truthful and self-controlled so that you may
be able to take up such duties.
Ba will now be released in three or four days. Lakshmi and
her daughter and Nimu and her daughter are fine.
I have no
time to give other news. But I think I have given enough this time.
You must have read about my narrow escape.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Today we are camping on the bank of a river near a village
in Utkal. It is extremely hot.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4820
