87. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 28/31, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. Kakasaheb remarks that the ink and the
paper which you use are such that the ink comes out on the other
side of the sheet, and hence it will not do to write on both sides.
What he says is correct. In such a case, it is desirable to write
on one side only.
This time the letters were properly packed. I preserve the
envelopes and will use them when I need them. I have already
told you in my previous letter that I had received the cotton. I
could card some of it only today. The air was very moist because
of the rains. It is not the spinning which tires me out, but the
sitting for long hours. I shall discover some way by and by. I will
not readily accept defeat. There is nothing in this which need
cause you concern. Even when I was out of jail, did I ever sit at
the spinning-wheel for four or five hours at a stretch?
The injury to Keshu's finger must have healed by now. Can
Balkrishna's body stand the strain of night watch? He should not
do anything beyond his strength.
Both of us keep good health. On a spring balance Kaka-
saheb weighed 109 lb. He must be walking about 8 miles a day,
including the walking he does for exercise and during work. The
exertion of spinning is in addition to this. His diet is still the same.
If there are any men or women to whom I have not written
and who expect letters from me, let me know their names. I should
have had a letter from Ramabehn (Ranchhodbhai's). She must
have received mine.
Now about ahimsa.
Tuesday morning
The commencement of this discourse is both comic and pain-
ful. We two had a discussion on how to economize in the use of
cloth-lined envelopes and save the same envelopes for use again
and again. The question was whether to paste a blank sheet on
the whole side of the envelope or paste only slips over portions
where something was written. This was a futile discussion. We
wasted on it 15 minutes of beautiful time after prayers, demon-
strating our foolishness thereby. In doing this we violated truth and
ahimsa and displayed lack of discrimination. Truth was violated,
because the discussion was not inspired by an ardent desire for its
search. Ahimsa was shamed, because I, who ought to give every
moment of my time to discover the sufferings of the people and
in thinking about the ways of ending them, wasted 15 priceless
minutes in a futile discussion. We displayed lack of discrimina-
tion, because if we had thought about the utility of the discussion,
it would not have lasted even a minute. After we had stolen 15
minutes from people's time, we realized our foolishness and thank-
ed God for opening our eyes.
I have purposely given this introduction.
The path of Truth is as narrow as it is straight. Even so is
that of ahimsa. It is like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword.
By concentration an acrobat can walk on a rope. But the con-
centration required to tread the path of Truth and ahimsa is far
greater. The slightest inattention brings one tumbling to the
ground. One can realize Truth and ahimsa only by ceaseless
striving.
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect truth so long as we
are imprisoned in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it
in our imagination. We cannot, through the instrumentality of
this ephemeral body, see face to face truth which is eternal. That
is why in the last resort we must depend on faith.
It appears that the impossibility of full realization of truth in
this mortal body led some ancient seeker after truth to the appre-
ciation of ahimsa. The question which confronted him was:
"Shall I bear with those who create difficulties for me, or shall I
destroy them?" The seeker realized that he who went on destroy-
ing others did not make headway but simply stayed where he was,
while the man who suffered those who created difficulties march-
ed ahead and at times even took the others with him. The first
act of destruction taught him that the truth which was the object
of his quest was not outside himself but within. Hence the more
he took to violence, the more he receded from truth. For in
fighting the imagined enemy without, he neglected the enemy
within.
We punish thieves because we think they harass us. They
may leave us alone; but they will only transfer their attentions to
another victim. This other victim, however, is also a human be-
ing, ourselves in a different form, and so we are caught in a vici-
ous circle. The trouble from thieves continues to increase, as they
think it is their business to steal. In the end we see that it is better
to tolerate the thieves than to punish them. The forbearance may
even bring them to their senses. By tolerating them we realize
that thieves are not different from ourselves, they are our brethren,
our friends, and may not be punished. But whilst we may bear
with the thieves, we may not endure the infliction. That would
only induce cowardice. So we realize a further duty. Since we
regard the thieves as our kith and kin, they must be made to rea-
lize the kinship. And so we must take pains to devise ways and
means of winning them over. This is the path of ahimsa. It may
entail continuous suffering and the cultivating of endless patience.
Given these two conditions, the thief is bound in the end to turn
away from his evil ways and we shall get a clearer vision of truth.
Thus step by step we learn how to make friends with all the world;
we realize the greatness of God, of Truth. Our peace of mind in-
creases in spite of suffering; we become braver and more enter-
prising; we understand more clearly the difference between what
is everlasting and what is not; we learn how to distinguish bet-
ween what is our duty and what is not. Our pride melts away
and we become humble. Our worldly attachments diminish and
likewise the evil within us diminishes from day to day.
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to appear.
Not to hurt any living thing is no doubt a part of ahimsa. But
it is its least expression. The principle of ahimsa is hurt by every
evil thought, by undue haste, by lying, by hatred, by wishing ill
of anybody. It is also violated by our holding on to what the world
needs. But the world needs even what we eat day by day. In the
place where we stand there are millions of micro-organisms to
whom the place belongs and who are hurt by our presence there.
What should we do then? Should we commit suicide? Even that
is no solution, if we believe, as we do, that so long as the spirit
is attached to the flesh, on every destruction of the body it weaves
for itself another. The body will cease to be only when we give
up all attachment to it. This freedom from all attachment is the
realization of God as Truth. Such realization cannot be attained
in a hurry. Realizing that this body does not belong to us, that
it is a trust handed over to our charge, we should make the right
use of it and progress towards our goal.
I wished to write something which would be easy for all to
understand, but I find that I have written a difficult discourse.
However, no one who has thought even a little about ahimsa
should find any difficulty in understanding what I have written.
It is perhaps clear from the foregoing that without ahimsa
it is not possible to seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth are
so intertwined that it is practically impossible to disentangle and
separate them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather of a
smooth unstamped metallic disc. Who can say which is the ob-
verse and which is the reverse? Nevertheless, ahimsa is the means
and Truth is the end. Means to be means must always be within
our reach, and so ahimsa becomes our supreme duty and Truth
becomes God for us. If we take care of the means, we are bound
to reach the end sooner or later. If we resolve to do this, we shall
have won the battle. Whatever difficulties we encounter, what-
ever apparent reverses we sustain, we should not lose faith but
should ever repeat one mantra: "Truth exists, it alone exists. It is
the only God and there is but one way of realizing it; there is
but one means and that is ahimsa. I will never give it up. May
the God that is Truth, in whose name I have taken this pledge,
give me the strength to keep it."
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 57 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
