98. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[PHOENIX,]
Ashad Vad 1 [July 19, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I got your two letters together. I advise you to marry be-
cause I do not credit you with spiritual strength of a high order.
By obstinately refusing to marry, you will cause extreme pain to
your parents, and still more to your prospective father-in-law.
You can do all this, but for that you require higher knowledge.
When you have achieved it, you will ask me no questions, nor
will your parents or anyone else take your words amiss. You can-
not say with certainty that your present state of mind will last for
ever. When Lord Buddha had an indirect knowledge of the truth,
he went away, abandoning his wife as she slept, and causing much
grief to his parents. Yet, the world has admired his action. At
present, your ideas rest on your faith in me. I have, therefore,
given you advice in keeping with your state. You may, however,
remember my condition. I have told you that you will have to
marry. All the same, if you have no sexual union with your wife,
this cannot but conduce to the welfare of both of you. It will also
be an excellent example to others. It is more difficult to observe
unbroken brahmacharya in marriage than without marrying. You
will be able to observe it only if you are strongly impressed with
1 The letter appears to have been written after the addressee's departure
for India in December 1912.
XII-10
its great virtue. This will happen only if you have earned extra-
ordinary punya in your previous lives. If you have the strength,
you should do this. You should respectfully tell your parents of
your views and your father-in-law through them. You may tell
them : "I desire to observe inviolate brahmacharya and feel that it
will be better for me not to marry. If you understand my
ideas, kindly help me. If you think this to be mere childishness
in me, I will obey you and marry. But I shall have no union
with my wife. I shall try to persuade her also to observe brahmacharya
and seek her cooperation in my effort. We shall not share the same
bed. I shall look after her in all other ways and bear her pure
love." If you can speak these words with knowledge, they will have
effect and, having announced this, you will find it extremely difficult
to seek union with the lady, notwithstanding the fact that you two
are married. You will see that this course will keep you free from
the difficulties of looking after children, etc., which you have been
thinking of
There has been no settlement yet. I believe there will be one.
Even if there is, it is not possible now to leave here before September.
I shall send you a cable when I start.
You have correctly explained why unwholesome food pro-
duces an immediate effect on persons like us. When Lord Buddha
ate the flesh he received as alms, his body fell dead. If, through
ignorance or oversight, eggs have been used in Mrs. Besant's food,
she vomits it.
It will be a good— an excellent— thing for Valji Fojdar's son
to take in water through the nostrils. He should also modify his
diet. First, he should fast for a day or two. For some days he
should live on fruit diet, and of that, too, only one meal every
day. He should take Kuhne baths and eschew supper altogether.
Ghee should be washed and mixed well with camphor powder,
and this may then be smelt. It will be good to do this three or
four times every day. There is no harm in smelling tobacco either.
Tobacco can be used with discrimination for medicinal purposes.
You are right in what you say about Sir Isaac Newton's dis-
covery. The well-known scientist Wallace has recently expressed
the same view. He says that people's moral sense has in no way
improved as a result of all these discoveries.
Don't suppose that no one has ever thought about milk. I am
sure there must be quite a few who go without milk. But as I
said once, the giving up of meat-eating in India at the instance
of some great man was a change of such far-reaching importance
that we do not find anyone to have thought or written about milk.
This, however, is due to our ignorance. We have not read every-
thing and seen everyone. The best test is this : "Does the thing
appeal to reason, leaving aside the question whether or not it was
considered in the past?" Moreover, nobody has said or believed
that it is a sin to do without milk. Swami Ramatirth's teaching
appeared to me very gross in many places. Some of it also seemed
morally unsound. His ideas about travel are much too rough and
ready. Malbari has better ideas. There is no need whatever
for a religious leader from India to go preaching to America.
Karmayoga imposes limits on us and to cross them would be
moha and mamata on one's part.
I have never believed that Japan and America are advancing.
The man who gave up his life to no purpose did nothing worthy.
That was self-will on his part and, therefore, a sinful act.
If the husband and wife belong to different religions, there
can be no sense of oneness.
Printing presses and newspapers are also evils. Knowing this,
we should not venture upon new ones. What I have written in
Hind Swaraj on this still holds good.
Manilal has written about the episode involving him . . . ,
so I will say nothing here. It has many lessons to teach.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5647
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
