50. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
September 30, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I have your letter of even date. It fairly sets forth the
Congress position as I placed it before you. It is a matter of
deep regret to me that the Government have not been able to
appreciate the Congress position, meant just to satisfy the bare
requirements of the people, whether Congressmen or others, who
felt a conscientious objection to helping a war to which they
were never invited and which they regard, so far as they are con-
cerned, as one for saving imperialism, of which India is the
greatest victim. Their objection is just as conscientious as mine
as a war resister.
I cannot claim greater freedom for my
conscience than for that of those I have named.
As I made it plain in the course of our talks, the Congress
is as much opposed to victory for Nazism as any Britisher can
be. But their objection cannot be carried to the extent of their
participation in the war. And since you and the Secretary of
State for India have declared that the whole of India is volun-
tarily helping the war effort, it becomes necessary to make clear
that the vast majority of the people of India are not interested
in it. They make no distinction between Nazism and the double
autocracy that rules India. Had His Majesty's Government
recognized the freedom required in the special condition of India,
they would have justified the claim that they were receiving
from India only such effort as they could voluntarily. The
war party and the no-war party would have been placed on an
equal footing so far as each worked fully non-violently.
As to the last paragraph of your letter, I wish to re-
mind you that it was never contemplated to carry non-em-
barrassment to the point of self-extinction or, in other words,
stopping all national activities which were designed to make
India peace-minded and show that India's participation could
not benefit anyone, not excluding Great Britain. Indeed I hold
that, if India were left free to make her choice which freedom of
speech implied, India would probably have turned the scales in
favour of Britain and true liberty by the moral prestige which
Britain would have then gained.
I must, therefore, repeat that the Congress does still want
to refrain from embarrassing the British Government in their
war effort. But it is impossible for the Congress to make of the
policy a fetish by denying its creed at this critical period in the
history of mankind. If the Congress has to die, it should do so
in the act of proclaiming its faith. It is unfortunate that we have
not been able to arrive at an agreement on the single issue of
freedom of speech. But I shall hug the hope that it will be
possible for the Government to work out their policy in the
spirit of the Congress position.
I should like to touch upon the other points I raised in our
talks.
But for fear of burdening this reply, I refrain. I shall
hope to make a public statement on them as early as I can.
In conclusion, let me thank you publicly for the great
courtesy and patience with which you listened to my very long
statement and argument. And though our ways seem to diverge
1 Vide pp. 77-80.
for the moment, our personal friendship will, as you have kindly
said at the time of saying farewell, bear the strain of divergence.
As arranged I am handing our correspondence to the Press
for publication.
Harijan, 6-10-1940
