356. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
July 26, 1933
CHI. KAKA,
I have your letter.
Many others may have had to suffer what Amritlal had to.
It was certainly a painful affair, but nobody can be blamed, or
if at all it was Bal who should be blamed. And next to him, or
even more than he, Amritlal himself should be blamed. Mathura-
das gave the reply that he did only to protect me from unnecessary
trouble. I didn't know anything about the incident at all. I
saw that Mathuradas was asking somebody to go away. But how
was I to recognize Amritlal? If he gave your name, I don't know
that at all. However, had he taken the incident in good humour,
everybody would have laughed at the error. I myself treated
Kanu in a similar way here. I did not recognize him and pushed
him away when he was trying to touch my feet. Amritlal was not
treated as he was knowingly. If you ask why nobody recog-
nized him, I don't see how a person can be blamed for that.
Amritlal should have laughed at the error and replied in Guja-
rati instead of in Hindi.
Bal may not have been able to tell Mathuradas anything,
but he should have told me. I am not sending the letter to
Mathuradas. Sending it to him will only keep alive the incident.
I had no choice but to put you in charge of Harijan. Now
Anand has been sent. When he is ready you may leave it off.
A person like you who has the gift of writing can easily get his
English corrected. You do not have a good style in English, but
it is not as if your thoughts do not flow in it at all.
I will certainly like it if you can come here. I have asked
Bal to write a long letter to you, but seeing the place for yourself
will be a different experience altogether.
The pessimism expressed by Mahadev in his letter is un-
justified. But I understand your attitude and what you say about
staying with me. It is a complete error to believe that you
were a burden on me. However, why do you believe that we
can do anything that we may wish to? I am indifferent as to
who will come and stay with me. I do believe that the Govern-
ment will send Mahadev. They know [that I need him].
If you can come, do come please.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9477. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
