183. LETTER TO A GUJARATI STUDENT
December 6, 1932
To ensure that my fast does not by any chance pass as black-
mail, the opinion of the people living in the neighbourhood of the
temple is being collected. If the majority is in favour of the reform,
the reform is a duty and should be effected. This in no way involves
injustice to the minority. If the minority desires, a fixed time can
be set apart for them.
Otherwise, it is open to them to build a
temple of their own. If three of the four brothers living as a
joint family change their religion, it will be justice if they be-
come the owners of the joint family property and give the fourth
brother his share. In the present case the utmost that the mino-
rity can demand is money to build a separate temple for them-
selves. However, they cannot do even that if an exclusive time
is set apart for them when they can worship in the temple. If
we apply this line of reasoning to your case, the conclusion is this:
The Grandfather should have the freedom to follow dharma as
he understands it, and you to follow it as you understand it.
If, for this reason, he asks you to leave the home, you have no
choice but to endure the boycott. If your wife refuses to live
with you unless you undergo ceremonial purification, you should
134
endure boycott by her too. You should not live with her against
her will. A husband has no right whatever to force his wife to
do or believe anything. But it is probable that the wife will say
this: 'What else can I do even if you do not undergo purifica-
tion? I will live with you.' If your wife says this, it means
that she cares for you more than she does for the custom of untouch-
ability. In other words, as between the custom of untouchability
and living with you, she regards it as her duty to live with you.
We have to make innumerable such choices every day in our life,
but we make them spontaneously and, therefore, are not conscious
of doing so. This contains a reply to all your questions. Ask me
to explain again if you do not follow anything in this. If you
wish to put other questions, you may do that too.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, p. 308
