66. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
Immediate
DETENTION CAMP,
February 14, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS
POONA
SIR,
I told you yesterday that Shri Kasturba was so bad dur-
ing the night that Dr. Nayyar got frightened and awakened
Dr. Gilder. I felt that she was going. The doctors were natu-
rally helpless.
Dr. Nayyar had, therefore, to wake up the
Superintendent who kindly phoned the Vaidyaraj. It was then
about 1 a.m. Had he been on the premises he would certainly
have given relief. I, therefore, asked you to let him stay at the
camp during the night. But you informed me, the Government
orders did not cover night stay. The Vaidyaraj, however, you said,
could be called in during the night. I pointed out the obvious
danger of delay but you were sorry, the orders would not
allow you to go further. In vain I argued that the Govern-
ment having given the authority to call in Vaidyaraj on condi-
tion that I absolved them from responsibility for any untoward
result of the vaidic treatment, they could not contemplate any
restriction on the duration of the physician's stay at the camp
so long as it was thought necessary in the interest of the pa-
tient. In view of your rejection of my request, I had to trouble
the Vaidyaraj to rest in his car in front of the gate so that in
case of need he might be called in. He very humanly consen-
ted. He had to be called in and he was able to bring the
desired relief. The crisis has not passed as yet. I, therefore,
repeat my request and ask for immediate relief. I would like,
if I can, to avoid the last night's experience. I do wish that the
vexations caused by the delay in granting my requests about
the patient's treatment came to an end. Both Dr. Mehta and
the Vaidyaraj were permitted to come in after protracted delay.
Precious time was lost making recovery more uncertain than it
was. I hope you will be able to secure the necessary authority
for the vaid's stay in the camp during night, if the patient's
condition requires it. The patient needs constant and continuous
attention.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3932; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 299
