116. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
PATNA,
Sunday [September 20, 1925]
CHI. MAHADEV,
You mayor may not follow the other rules, you mayor may
not have [my] address, but do write to me even if you should be
sitting on the stake. May this devotion bring you fruit. It is for
the same reason that I too am ever desirous of writing to you;
but I am only an object of worship. How can I write so long
as I do not become a devotee? Many an idol may be falling,
whereas innumerable devotees have crossed over. Many attain-
ed moksha with the help of Krishna's name. But poor Krishna of
the Mahabharata had to die without glory. For how could he
have Krishna's name on his lips? Now tell me who is greater.
Is it not the devotee rather than God?
That you would fall ill I certainly knew. I hope you are
quite well by now. Yesterday I sent you about 12 columns and I
shall try to send you some more today. Without worrying, stay
there. Let Durga be completely satisfied. I want you to observe
one condition: do not get bed-ridden.
Maulana Shaukat Ali reached here only yesterday. Jawahar
and others are arriving today.
I am sending you Urmila Devi's letter just for fun. I had
asked Devdas for the Indian Opinion file. I have not yet got it.
Keep writing to Rajagopalachari.
He is just now both
happy and unhappy.
Here they have found the best accommodation for me. It is
right on the bank of the Ganges. From where I sit I can see the
river flowing before my eyes. I am writing you this letter early
in the morning. Indescribable peace prevails. Rajendra Babu who
thoroughly tried me yesterday, has compensated for it today.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I do not know my tour programme, but today I shall ask them
to send it to you.
I see I have destroyed Urmila Devi's letter as is my custom.
I have entrusted Devdhar's case to Perinbehn'. Devdhar
did not meet me. Vallabhbhai was to decide about Dahyabhai .
I shall write to Perinbehn. If Vallabhbhai decides about Dahya-
bhai, I shall promptly follow it up.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11451
