376. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
Confidential
BARDOLI,
January 26, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
Your clear reply of the 4th inst. in reply to mine of the
23rd ultimo emboldens me to bring to your notice certain happen-
ings as I see them.
In Orissa things seem to be worst. Public opinion there is
not so strong as elsewhere and the most unfortunate murder of
Major Bazalgette in Ranpur has complicated the situation. The
Orissa Government, as has been officially admitted, has rendered
every assistance it could have. This unfortunate event apart, out
of a total population of 75,000 souls in Talcher, 26,000 have
been compelled by sufferings said to be indescribable to migrate
to British Orissa.
I feel that it is the clear duty of the Resident to see that
the cause of this migration is investigated and redress given to
the people.
The Resident in Kathiawad, as far as I can see, has made
the Thakore Saheb of Rajkot break his solemn pact with his
people published in the form of an official Notification.
The struggle has, therefore, been resumed in Rajkot.
The British Prime Minister of Jaipur is said to have vowed
to crush Seth Jamnalalji, a well-known banker, philanthropist and
social reformer, and socio-political organization of which he is
the President. Their crime consists in aiming at responsible
government in Jaipur under the aegis of the Maharaja.
I take it that the Central Government cannot escape respon-
sibility, if the information given herein is trustworthy.
This means that the people of the States have to fight not
only their rulers who by themselves cannot resist their people but
they have also to combat the unseen and all too powerful hand
of the Central authority.
I venture to present this awful problem to you. I call it
awful because I do not know how far it will commit both the
Central authority and the Congress which has a moral duty by the
people of the States. I can understand the treaty obligations of
the Paramount Power to protect States against danger from with-
out and anarchy within.
Is not the corollary equally true, that
if the States suppress their people, the latter have also to be
protected by the Paramount Power? Can a State suppress free
speech, meetings and the like, and expect the Paramount :Power
to help it in doing so, if the afflicted people carry on a non-
violent agitation for the natural freedom to which every human
being in decent society is entitled?
I do not expect any reply to my letter unless there is any-
thing to tell me. I know how every moment of your time is
occupied. It is enough for me to know, as I do know, that
my letters receive your personal attention.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm of a printed copy: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy:
National Archives of India. Also Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 401-
