554. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON, POONA,
[Before August 20, 1932]
CHI. BALKRISHNA,
I was not at all vigilant. I could suspect others but I could
not suspect you. Whether I was vigilant or not it was your
duty to inform me immediately about the lapse. That way the
lapse would have been to some extent remedied. But it is futile
to think over the past.
But now you should be able to sleep. Do not strain your-
self to induce it. Sleep out in the open air. Be without any
thoughts. Utter Ramanama if thoughts occur. If in spite of
it, thoughts keep coming, let that be so. Once you have
decided that you must sleep then there is nothing to think
about. Instead of worrying it is better to court failure. If there
is discharge during sleep, do not fret. If you remain indifferent
to it, I shall consider that you have learnt the lesson taught in
the verse q~., ~ucr., ~q~;:r f::;r~;:r. If we have completely shut
our minds to it,e how are we responsible for an emission in
sleep? All this can be addressed only to one following truth.
You do not require wheat for putting on weight. However,
do take it if you can digest it. If you find it difficult to digest
wheat then take as much milk as you can and also fruit.
For the moment do not think about the cost. Therapeutically
milk and neem could be a complete diet, but this can be proved
only by experiment. If you can free yourself from there I
would like you to go to Almora for a few months. Discuss it
with Vinoba.
To show you how Suraj Bhan had a break-down, I send here-
with his letter.
Now for the questions. I take it you have these with you.
1. Yes and No. Because I am myself not clear as to what
activity goes on for the whole day.
2. Both are alike, so I have not made an effort to find out
the difference. There is scope for wide difference where the
word 'like' is used. There is a great difference between the
statements: 'gold is like brass' and 'gold is brass', and similarly
between 'a rope is like a snake' and 'a rope is a snake'. The
first is a beautiful example of eloquence but is meaningless as
usage. There is no eloquence in the second. There can be
many usages.
3. The reply to the first question covers that to the third.
4. Both the activities are different; so there can be no
comparison. Only an experienced person can say more.
5. The brahmi state is positive, it is an affirmation. But it
cannot be described as it can only be experienced.
'Sensitive' means delicate and soft. It is good you introduced
the children to me. A letter to them is enclosed.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11279
