480. LETTER TO EMIL RONIGER
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
September 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. I had not seen Mirabehn's letter to you.
Evidently my words carried a meaning to her which I had not
intended. I did not want her to write in my name and on my
behalf. But interpreting my remarks in the manner she did, she
was of course quite right in writing to you in my name. She
has read to me her letter to you. I had not got from that letter
that she said anything that might lead you to think that I was
displeased. As a matter of fact, I am not inclined to quarrel with
your preface even now and after your explanation and after your
having recognized your own attitude.
In my opinion a publisher has every right in publishing
certainly writings and dissent[ing] partly or wholly from the
views expressed by the author or to tone them down. You know
much better than I do what the European reader will approve of
or can assimilate. You have, therefore, a perfect right to tone
down my remarks.
1 Andrews sailed for South Africa on September 29. The letter appears
to have been written on the preceding Thursday, which was September 23.
I myself recognize the defects from a scientific point of view
of the Guide to Health. In its translated form, I have never read
it through. The information given in it about physiological facts
is undoubtedly borrowed. The only value of the book consists in
subordinating health of the body to that of the spirit within.
When I wrote the chapters, I wrote them purely for the Gujarati
readers of the Indian Opinion. I give you my assurance, therefore,
that there was no question of my being displeased at all.
One thing certainly I did not like. Mis-translations and omis-
sions of portions in the original. That I hold is unpardonable.
A publisher should publish the whole of an author's writings un-
less he has the author's permission to delete passages and un-
less the publisher has informed the author of deletions. You will
please, therefore, dismiss from your mind the slightest suspicion
that I was either displeased or angry about anything you have
done in connection with the publication of my writings.
Yours sincerely,
EMIL RONIGER, ESQ.
SCHWEIZ
From a photostat: S.N. 10819
