553. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
August 28, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have been awake today since 1.00 a. m. I woke up
Pyarelal at 3 o'clock and asked him to get me some paper.
This is the first letter. You are not the only cause for this sleep-
lessness. My other jobs are also the reason. You being the
chief reason, I am taking up your letter first.
Pyarelal gave me your letters yesterday. This is in reply
to those letters. My programme of action is uncertain. I do not
know whether I shall fight or resort to a fast. One of the two
courses appears certain. You must be aware of this. You
should not make any changes in your programme on that
account.
351
The fact that the dispensary drove you from Sevagram means
that had there been no dispensary and had you not been the
resident doctor, the question of your walking or not walking
with me would not have arisen.
It is not right that you should compare me with Mahadev
and Devdas. In the first place, you are doing gross injustice
to Mahadev. He has no hatred towards you. Only he is not
any more under your spell. For this I hold myself responsible.
It has been to the good of you both. I am firmly convinced
that Mahadev still wishes you well. If possible, he would
serve you and do it whole-heartedly. You do not know him.
Your impression about Devdas is correct. But if he has contempt
it is not for you but for me. Behind it is his deep knowledge.
But my position is not to be equated with that of either. For
the change you find in my behaviour is solely for your good, for
truth. How stupid and unthinking of you that you should see
displeasure in my well-meant behaviour. Get rid of such a
thought. It does not behove you. It is wrong. There is no
displeasure at all in the step I have taken. It is possible that
I may have been unfair knowingly or unknowingly. I see in
it only the purest justice and purest love. I would cease to be
a satyagrahi if it were otherwise. I would be disqualified for
conducting the struggle.
I shall not force you to come to Sevagram. Your good
lies in being away. Your being a doctor is a restraining factor. I
often feel it is your duty as a doctor to be at Sevagram. So long as
I do not cease to see your usefulness as a doctor for Sevagram,
I cannot take you around with me as I do Mahadev. If I
do that, it would appear to me against my duty. You hold
the contrary view. Hence, so long as we hold opposite views
about duty, how can your talents be put to use? How can I
allow it that your medical services should not at all be made
available to others? I feel your need every moment. Ba yearns
for you. She thinks of you when someone falls ill. Hence,
whatever I may have said earlier, I clearly see your place is
essentially in the Ashram. Unless you see it as clearly as
the reflection in a mirror, your coming here will be meaning-
less. Once this point is clearly understood, it would be another
matter if I take you out for my sake or even your sake.
I do hope that you will get a job. Concentrate on your
studies. What would be the value of a degree obtained without
hard work? You ask me what you should do. This is my
reply. You will have peace only when you become a full-
fledged doctor. That will be your happiness.
I abide by what I said about Mother. You should forget
everything else.
Pyarelal and I have come to an agreement that only I
should guide you, not he. He would not give you any inde-
pendent guidance. He is incapable of doing that. How can he
guide you when he himself is in need of guidance? Then, why
do you always expect letters from him? What can he write? At
least he can write nothing concerning you. Should he always
give you the news about the Ashram? I can send that even
through somebody else. I advise you to stop altogether writing
him confidential letters. Write to me when it is necessary.
I consider it your great fault that you preserve the letters.
Whatever the nature of letters that might have been written,
why should they be preserved? Dwelling in the past like that
hampers human progress. Even Pyarelal has that bad habit.
I shall make him give it up. Whatever letters you write to
me, I will read and destroy. I will not give them back to
Pyarelal. I will not send them back to you. I would advise
you to destroy my letters too. You may preserve the letters in
which I may have written something important or valuable.
But it would be wrong to preserve the letters which you have
not liked or in which you have seen only my faults. We should
not be obsessed with the faults of our elders or dear ones. Nor
should we preserve their references. Now the prayer bell has
gone. May God always protect you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
SV:III. 23
