66. LETTER TO SIR REGINALD M. MAXWELL
NEW DELHI,
March [15]2, 1939
DEAR SIR REGINALD,
Owing to the facilities kindly given to me I was able to see
the three prisoners on hunger-strike in the Delhi Jail and I am
glad to be able to say that they accepted my advice and gave it
up-perhaps it is more correct to say suspended it. I tried to
persuade them to give the assurance required by the Govern-
ment. But they said they did not want to purchase their freedom
by giving any undertaking. They were prisoners without any
trial and so they should be discharged without any condition
as so many others have been discharged. I felt the force of
their objection. But I told them that in order to enable me to
work for their release, they should give me satisfaction that they
believed in the Congress policy of non-violence and that they
would work under the Congress. This they readily agreed to do,
and they gave me, too, a letter reducing their assurance to
writing. But they wanted to make it plain to me that I was
not to use that letter for securing their freedom, nor to ask the
Government to discharge them on the strength of that letter. I
wish you could see your way to discharge these prisoners un-
conditionally.
If you do so it will strengthen my hands in the
prosecution of my mission of non-violence on the political field.
I see in the letter that was sent to me by Mr. Puckle another
condition that they should not enter this or that province. Surely
it is a superfluous condition. If the Governments of the provinces
concerned do not want them to remain within their jurisdiction
they would issue orders of prohibition. Why should the Govern-
ment of India attach those conditions?
I am sending this letter with Mahadev Desai so that he can
give you, if you require it, a graphic description of the conver-
sation that took place between the three prisoners and myself.
Yours sincerely,
THE HON. SIR REGINALD M. MAXWELL, C. S. I ., ETC.
HOME MEMBER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI
From a copy: C.W. 7814. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
