662. LETTER TO SYED ABDUL AZIZ
April 25, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
Many thanks for your letter and the pamphlets. I must make time
to read the latter.
It is impossible not to admire your courage in surviving your cruel
disability and retaining your mind unimpaired. Mine was no mere social
call. It was a pleasure to meet you and listen to you. I never expected
you to return that call. You have but to tell me that you would like
me to see you again and I would gladly do so.
I must confess that I had never realized until I came to Bihar the
extent of damage to life and property by man become fiend for the
time being. Let us hope that the awful scene will never be repeated
in Bihar. My opposition to the formation of colonies is restricted to
the Government co-operation even to the extent of land acquisition.
I would have no objection to affected Muslims congregating in Muslim
areas. There should be no check on free movement or congregation.
Your legal acumen should have prevented you from making the
sweeping remark that I had ever denied the right of self-defence. That
right does not and ought not to carry with it the licence to bear arms.
A moment's reflection would show you its futility. What you want
probably to convey is that it is the right of the citizen, however humble
he or she may be, to demand protection by the State against the thieves,
robbers and miscreants. A Government that fails to perform that duty
forfeits all claim to govern. Let me add, too, that neither during my
stay in England nor for 20 years in S[outh] Africa did I ever know
a Westerner feeling incompetence to defend himself without arms when
and if the occasion arose. Like several superstitions this one you name
seems to be confined only to this unhappy land of ours. Your gibe
at the ministers and incidentally at me, though wholly irrelevant to your
argument, is well deserved.
I am wholly at one with you in your desire that the Congress and
the League should live at peace with each other.
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

