96. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May 18, 1941
BAPA,
You did very well in going to Garhwal. It will do you
good. I think the climate and water of that place are good.
Jainarayan came and saw me. I accepted Vaze's suggestion
and so I told him to go to you and do nothing else. I have already
communicated my view to you, namely, that the Standing Committee
stands suspended and during the struggle the Emergency Committee
should function. I certainly should not like the whole organization
to remain under Amritlal Sheth's control. I do not even like that
the paper should run with his money. Jainarayan thinks that the
Emergency Committee was a private body. There was no report
about it in the papers nor is it likely to do any work. It is the
Standing Committee which must have the sole authority. I had
asked Jamnalalji. He says that the Emergency Committee was
formed with the consent of Jainarayanji and others, and, therefore,
the Standing Committee remains suspended at present.
It was
Balwantrai, and not J., who was keen on the States' People's
[Conference]. Jawaharlal has conveyed to Menon that he should
abide by my advice. That is why I have taken interest in the
matter. My opinion is as above. If you also agree with it there
will be no need for you to come. If you differ, however, then it
is desirable that you should come here. I think there will be no
difficulty if the States' People's [Conference] is run independently.
I think we should meet and decide about that. I leave everything
to you. I would certainly like your coming here. If you feel that
anybody else should be present, you may arrange accordingly. Do
you find it difficult to decipher my handwriting?
I ask the
question this time because I have had to write a rather long letter.
BAPU
[PS.]
After writing the above I got your letter full of joy. I had
foretold your victory. Still you want a reward?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1187
1 Owner of the Janmabhoomi group of papers
69
