222. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
October 9, [1907]
TO
THE EDITOR
[RAND DAILY MAIL
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
As you were good enough to warmly take up the case of
Mr. Suliman Manga and an Indian woman named Punia who were
both grossly ill-treated, I take the liberty of inviting your attention to a
third case that has come under my observation, which equals, if it does
not surpass, the other two in wanton insult.
Mr. Anthony Peters, a born Indian Christian, and an old civil
servant of Natal, at present Interpreter at the Chief Magistrate's Court,
Pietermaritzburg, was on his way to Johannesburg on Sunday and was
a passenger by the Johannesburg Mail which left Pietermaritzburg on
Saturday. He held a concession ticket and a certificate from the
Railways in which his official position was described. At Volksrust, the
Examining Constable put him through a searching cross-examination.
1 Vide Vol. V, pp. 278- and 284.
2 Ibid., pp. 450-
Mr. Peters produced his permit, which was issued to him at a time when
the Indian community had not voluntarily given thumb impressions.
This did not satisfy the Constable. Mr. Peters, therefore, produced the
concession ticket referred to by me and offered to give his signature,
but all to no avail, the Constable insulting him by saying that he might
have got somebody else's concession ticket. Mr. Peters, therefore, went
so far as to produce his walking-stick, which bore his initials, and his
shirt, which bore his full name. Even this was not satisfactory. He
then offered to deposit money to ensure his return after three days, but
the Constable ordered a Kaffir policeman to literally drag Mr. Peters
out of the compartment. Sergeant Mansfield, before whom Mr. Peters
was taken, realised the terrible mistake, apologised to Mr. Peters, and
let him go. That, however, was small comfort. Added to the insult was
weary waiting at Volksrust, where he knew nobody, and a large slice
taken out of his all too brief holiday of three days. Mr. Peters returns
to his duty tonight. I need hardly comment upon this episode, beyond
saying that this is a sample of what many a respectable Indian has to
suffer in even visiting this country. Here there is no question of general
legislation, no question of an Asiatic influx, but a question of simple
courtesy and justice between man and man. Or is the wearing of a
coloured skin to be, in the words of Mrs. Vogl who wrote the other day
to the Glasgow Herald, a crime against the white people of the
Transvaal?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 10-10-1907
