260. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 5, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. I understand and do not mind the dis-
tinction you draw between Wardha and Sabarmati. I am glad
you have written to Bhansali. There is nothing further about
the Ashram beyond what I wrote to you.
The learning of Hindi must not be a strain upon you. You
must not do it as a task. Immediately it gets on your nerves, you
must let it go. I have told you that I have infinite patience and
I shall certainly not take you to task if you can't finish your
programme in two months' time. The work must give you plea-
sure, and it must be left off as soon as it fatigues you.
If I knew what work is to be given to you as soon as you go
to the Ashram, I would certainly tell you; but I do not know it
myself. I quite agree with your argument against teaching English,
and I shall certainly avoid giving that work. So far as I can see
at present, it will be some work to be done in company. For,
I want you to be accustomed to different temperaments and work-
ing under circumstances no matter how adverse they may be. But
if you have any choice, by no means tell me. My own habit is
never to tax myself about things which I need not decide at the
moment. But if you will begin to think of it from now, by all means
do, and discuss with me through your letters. In no case would I
have given you anything without first consulting you. I shall cer-
tainly want to know your choice whether now or after you have
gone to the Ashram.
It is quite right your not having written to the Rao Saheb
until you had the inspiration. There is no hurry, and so long as
the proper language does not come you need not write at all.
I just returned from touring this morning to find your letter.
The touring will be resumed on the 9th instant. Then probably I
shall be away for nearly 10 days. But it would be safer to send
your letters to Bangalore. I said Bangalore City before, but I
find that Bangalore brings your letters two hours earlier. Kumara
Park is not served from the City office but from the Central office.
With love,
SRIMATI MIRABAI
WARDHA
From the original: C.W. 5258. Courtesy: Mirabehn
