19. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
CHITTAGONG,
September 1 [1921]
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
I have your long letter written in pencil. I found it difficult
to read. Other letters in pencil sometimes come to me and I
find them also difficult to read. From this I conclude that my
pencil letters too must cause a lot of difficulty to the addressees.
I have always felt that it was a crime to write a letter in pencil.
However in my difficult predicament, I took that liberty. But I
cannot tolerate that crime when somebody else commits it. I
know you have committed no crime, for you wanted to keep a
copy. It often happens that the first carbon copy is clearer.
I have changed my mind. It would be better for you first
to meet me in Calcutta and then send for Durga. If you have
decided to stay on there, send a wire to Devdas . But I feel it
would be better to do whatever is to be done after we meet and
discuss things and am therefore sending you a wire with an al-
together different message.
I read about the Malabar incident later.
I have already
written and despatched an article about it for Young India. It
would have been better if I had sent you a copy. As to your arti-
cles, etc., I shall be able to see them only after I reach Calcutta.
I cannot imagine that either Malaviyaji or the Poet is envious
of me. Both lack fearlessness and are proud of their opinions
and ideas. You can tolerate pride if it is not accompanied by
fear. They cannot look at non-co-operation from our point of
view, cannot overlook the shortcomings of non-co-operators, as we
do and so may oppose us. Besides, they are confused by the
novelty and simplicity of my ideas. To believe anything more than
this about them seems to me positively sinful. Bipin Babu and
1 Gandhiji wrote two sentences and crossed them out, and hence this.
2 1900-57; youngest son of Gandhiji
3 This is not available.
4 Vide "The Two Incompatibles", 8-9-1921.
5 1861-1946; founder of the Benares Hindu University; President, Indian
National Congress, 1909 and 1918
6 Bipin Chandra Pal (1858-1932); educationist, journalist, orator and poli-
tical leader of Bengal
Vijayaraghavachariar may think all sorts of things about me.
Ramakant I consider but a child. He appears to have opposed
me to show that he is a man of independent views. We should
leave him alone and go on offering our comments as journalists
without acrimony. Do point out the Poet's and Malaviyaji's ideas
on . . whenever there is an occasion for doing so. This cannot
be done freely in Young India, but it can be easily and tactfully
done in the Independent.
It will be easy enough to have garlands for Indu made of
hand-spun yarn.
I have no objection to your taking coffee. It is more essential,
to my mind, that you keep fit. I see, and it is my considered view
as well, that ordinarily one does not need it. I did not notice
any benefit from it when I used to take it. My not taking it now
certainly means so much less burden [on the stomach] and less
risk of harm.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11418
