435. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM PATWARDHAN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Bhadra Sud 7, September 14, 1926
BHAISHRI APPA,
I have your letter. After leaving this place, Bhai Abdullah
went to you. He must be an old friend by now. I cannot of
course object to your resuming the diet of uncooked articles;
under one condition, though, your health must not suffer. I,
too, have had sufficient experience of the harmlessness of un-
cooked food. But experiments should be carried out in a scienti-
fic manner and on a big enough scale. There can be no doubt,
of course, that such food should be eaten in small quantity only.
Those whose stomach may have become as weak as mine, what
should they do? I can think of nothing as a substitute for milk.
The Spinners' Association can certainly take proper precau-
tions in its own stores to ensure that they do not sell fake khadi.
But what can it do about other stores?
The broad limit for eradication of untouchability has already
been defined, which is, that the four varnas should act towards
the untouchables as the first three varnas act towards the fourth.
Anyone who wishes to go beyond this, to eat in the company of
untouchables, for instance, may do so of his own free will and
at his own risk. We may not refrain from eating in their company
fearing that others might follow our example and be guilty of sin,
for those who eat in their company commit no sin at all. We, at
any rate, eat with them because we think it meritorious to do so.
If we cease believing in the idea of pollution through touch, the
restrictions in regard to eating will not be, ought not to be, con-
sidered an essential part of the caste-system.
If Bhangis are forbidden to ride in tram-cars in Bombay,
I think that is an injustice.
Even the present caste-system is based on contempt. All
trace of contempt will disappear from Hinduism, if it gets rid of
the spirit of untouchability. The notions of high and low are
fruit and symptom of the disease of untouchability. Even the
history which we learn tells us that the ideas which at present have
struck deep roots among us were not a part of the varna system of
old days.
You may go on asking questions till you are satisfied.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI PURUSHOTTAM PATWARDHAN
(BHAISHRI APPA)
SHRI TILAK RASHTRIYA SHALA
RATNAGIRI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12281
