309. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
[Before May 3, 1929]
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
It is 5.30 a.m. now. I am attending to your letter first. I have
drafted a telegram to you and sent it for despatch. You should
certainly obtain release from the Udyoga Mandir or the Ashram
whichever you call it. I think for the present your good lies in
doing this. You have an extremely straightforward nature but
your judgment is immature. You are unable to decide indepen-
dently what is dharma and what is not, nor is there logical consi-
stency in your thought. You therefore often slip off the track
and are bewildered. Under the circumstances I think it is only
good for you to stay away and let yourself develop. Since you have
a pure heart you will shine wherever you go.
Here is my advice. You should lead an independent life by
hiring premises within the Ashram precincts, like Pannalal who
is going to take up a separate residence near the Ashram, or like
Budhabhai. You should be free from such restrictions as obser-
vance of the Ashram's external rules. It is another thing if you
come to the prayers of your own accord. You may have a salary
if you wish to or if you need it. Immediately you should set out
to investigate what scope there is for khadi around Jabalpur which
is in the grip of starvation. This will take about a month or so.
The climate there is said to be congenial. We shall see what you
should do when you have finished this work. There are several jobs
awaiting you. My feeling is that Tara needs to be in contact
with the Ashram. No other place has what the Ashram offers to
women. Tara may lead an independent life, take from the Ashram
whatever she may and offer what she can. In this world no
one can take without giving something in return. Some people
give willingly, some under compulsion; some knowingly, some
unknowingly.
All these are merely suggestions. If, for the sake of your peace
of mind you feel that for the present you should stay away from
that atmosphere by all means do so.
Now let me point out the obvious flaw in your reasoning.
1 According to the source the letter was received at Sabarmati on May 3,
1929.
2 This is not available.
Here is your statement: "I do not think that I am guilty of
violating the aswadavrata if I take spiced food, or that if I cannot
memorize the Gita I violate an Ashram rule and my progress will
stop." This statement in itself is true; it is however false in so far
as it is a statement of facts. Taking of spices is bad because in
our book of rules it is regarded as breach of the aswada vow, though
in fact it may not be so. If it is not, the rule needs to be
abolished. But so long as the rule stands it is our duty to observe
it. The aswada vow may have nothing to do with the practice
of taking only five articles of food but anyway I have taken the
vow and since there is nothing immoral about it I must observe
it. The same argument applies to the memorizing of the
Gita. This is not covered by our rules, but we have accepted its
desirability. We get the children to memorize it; we call it a spiritual
treasury. I have therefore believed that you all support me in my
estimate of it. Then if we make no efforts in this direction we strain
our vow of truth. I can understand your inability to memorize the
Gita owing to your many occupations; but would it not be a breach
of truth if, in spite of constantly commending the memorizing of
the Gita, you did not take some time off to undertake it?
But that is enough. Thinking generally tires us and we move
in endless circles. This is exactly why the votaries of truth do not
let their fancy wander, but like a ghost cling to only a few things,
and draw the whole truth from out of them. They would humbly
stick to what they have undertaken rather than perpetually doubt
whether it is correct or not.
But every single thought, every single act of ours is for ever
imperfect, we are liable to err; now what can we do about this?
If we would not take up these or remain sceptical about them as
long as we are not perfect, well, in that case we shall never be-
come perfect.
May you both attain bliss.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4144
