203. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
February 13, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I sent you some time ago Miss Neufliess' name as a paid subscriber.
Please register her name as a subscriber if it is not already registered.
Her post office box is 5889, Johannesburg. She ought to receive all the
back numbers as from the first of January.
Manji N. Ghelani writes to me saying that he has not received for
the current year numbers two and three. He has been receiving his papers
regularly of late. You should therefore send him numbers two and three
and let me know that you have done so. His box is 110, Pretoria.
Please change Mr. Ritch's address at London to 41 Springfield Road,
St. john's Wood, London.
1 Vide pp. 144-52.
Let me know who have not paid regarding the sale of Mr. Nazar's
goods.
Should such changes be notified to you in future, or shall I write
to Hemchand about them? I am anxious to take much of such mecha-
nical work from your shoulders, but I want to do it cautiously. If these
instructions have to pass ultimately to Hemchand, it would then cause
a saving to send them directly to him. Your immediate main work is
to look after the Gujarati editing and to put the books straight as soon
as possible, prepare the balance-sheet and find out the cost of each buil-
ding. Please let me know how far you have progressed with reference to
the straightening of the books, bringing the cash book up to date and
finding out the cost of the buildings.
I sent you yesterday a correct [ed] copy of the current number of Indian
Opinion. I would like you to note all the corrections carefully and avoid
them in future. We ought to make the Gujarati portion totally excep-
tional2, and if in order to do that you must concentrate your energy for
a month or so to the exclusion of everything else except book-keeping,
you may do so. I notice Gujarati is only seven pages. Why so? How
much can Gokuldas now do of the Gujarati composition? Is he working
steadily? Ask him to write to me.
With reference to your suggestion about paying £2/10 to Mr. Madan-
jit, we ought to pay all that and more if he kept in touch with us. It
is impossible to pay anything unless he would do so. That he is working
away in India I can well understand, but his work must be reproduced
in the Opinion. I told him distinctly that he would be expected to help
the Paper. If he will not, I do not think that we are at all called upon
to give anything to him. He has not written to me. Two letters appear
to have been sent from Pretoria yesterday. Please print them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. G.
TO
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
c/o Indian Opinion
PHOENIX
From a photostat of the original : S.N. 4307
