179. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
POST ANDHERI,
March 19, 1924
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I was able today to read your interview from first to last.
You have touched upon topics on some of which I am pledged
to silence till I have met the leaders who have warmly advocated
Council-entry.
Whether the last Congress was a success or not is a question
upon which I can say nothing because I was not an eye-witness.
Your remarks on the question are most interesting.
You seem to think that the Congress has done very little in
the matter of untouchability and general national education. I
venture to dissent from the view. The removal of untouchability
has been brought within the range of possibility in the near future
because of the incessant propaganda by Congress Hindus. No
doubt a great deal still remains to be done. It is not an easy feat
to root out prejudices which have acquired an undeserved sanctity
because of their age. But the barrier is breaking down.
I heartily endorse your remark that it is the duty of the
Hindus to move and win over all the minorities to the service of the
country.
I wish that your pronouncement against untouchability was
more precise and uncompromising. I am not concerned with its
ongm. I have no manner of doubt that the higher orders are
entirely responsible for perpetuating the sin. It is unfortunate,
too, that you have likened the untouchability of women and others
on certain occasions with the permanent untouchability under every
circumstance of the suppressed classes and their descendants. Nor
am I enamoured of the method you have suggested for the ame-
lioration of the condition of these classes.
You say that the boycott of law-courts and Government schools
should be removed. I venture to doubt the soundness of the
proposition. Its value is at the present moment negative, but none
1 C. Vijayaraghavachariar (1852-1943); lawyer and Congressman; presided
over the Nagpur session of the Indian National Congress, 1920
2 This had appeared in The Hindu and Voice of India. Vijayaraghavachariar
had sent a copy to Gandhiji which, however, is not available.
3 The Cocanada session of 1923 over which Mahomed Ali presided
the less great on that account. Both these institutions have lost
prestige. What is wanted is removal of the slightest trace of bitter-
ness against those who do not comply with the boycott, that is,
lawyers who still practise law and boys who still make use of
Government schools. We shall win both over if we are not bitterly
hostile, but concede to them the right of free judgment or
sympathize with them for their weakness. I am convinced that,
whenever we have not succeeded well or at all, the primary reason
has been our inability or unwillingness to enforce non-violence with
all its implications in our personal conduct.
I do not wish to say anything about your suggestions as to the
position after swaraj, if only because methods that ultimately
bring about swaraj will largely decide our programme after swaraj.
You seem to think that "for years to come, perhaps for a
century or for ever" we are bound to be partners with England
not from choice, but because we must. Therefore, for you evidently
swaraj without the British connection is unthinkable. In my
opinion, if British connection is a necessity of our existence, what-
ever the measure of freedom we may enjoy under that connection,
it cannot be described as full swaraj, for full swaraj means, in my
humble opinion, our ability at any moment to sever the connec-
tion. Partnership for me has no meaning if one party is too weak
to dissolve it. It will also follow from your reasoning that swaraj
will only have to be a grant from the British Parliament. You
know my view. The very definition that I give to swaraj is that
we have to take it and, therefore, we have to grow to it. It is
an eternal condition, whether with an individual or with a nation.
Moreover, if swaraj has only to be received as a grant from the
British Parliament, the whole of the argument against Council-
entry, in my humble opinion, falls to pieces.
I hope you are keeping well. I am making slow but steady
progress.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
THE ARAMA
SALEM
From a photostat: S.N. 8526; also C.W. 5125
