71. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAI
ASH RAM, SABARMATI,
March 2, 1926
DEAR LALAJI,
You will forgive me for not replying to your letter earlier.
The fact is that I am supposed to work only for a limited time
every day and as Panditji was here when your letter was received
almost all the time at my disposal was given over to him.
The
correspondence was therefore held up.
Though your letter was marked private, I used my dis-
cretion and showed it to Panditji in order that I might discuss
the various important matters to advantage.
I felt that he
should know your views whilst we were discussing subjects of
common interest.
I sent you a telegram yesterday saying that it was not
possible for me to give you a decision regarding the delegation
to the International Labour Conference. I should have much
hesitation about your acceptance of the delegation if the All-
India Congress Committee embarked upon the modified Council
boycott contemplated during the last session of the Congress.
All my views about what the A.I.C.C. should do at the pre-
sent moment have been clearly put before Panditji. I do not there-
fore reiterate them here. Technically the delegation may not be
covered by the Congress resolution, but if you vacate your seats
in the Councils, it seems to me to be hardly dignified to accept
the delegation or any such nominations to Committees or Con-
ferences in which the Government may be concerned. How nice
it would have been, if you could possibly have come whilst
Panditji was here!
I have watched with greatest pain the progress of the
Frontier Province resolution. I have given my own opinion
upon the matter to Panditji to be shown to all concerned.
Motilalji told me that there were no resignations except that
one was threatened, one was compelled and one was withdrawn.
I am destroying your letter. Do please come even now
whenever you get the time, but give yourself at least 2 or 3
days so that we might talk at leisure. And whether you go to
the Labour Conference or not, it would certainly be nice if you
had a voyage and rest in some quiet place pleasing to you. I
do not find much in your idea of combining political work with
rest and, as I do, you will throw yourself in the work and have
no rest. If you go at all therefore there should be a sacred
resolution extorted from you that you will not do any political
work at all but merely rest and be thankful.
Yours sincerely,
LALA LAJPAT RAI
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 19341
XXX-
