44. LETTER TO RAMSAY MACDONALD
September 9, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I have to thank you for your frank and full letter telegraphed
and received this day. I am sorry, however, that you put upon
the contemplated step an interpretation that never crossed my
mind. I have claimed to speak on behalf of the very class to
sacrifice whose interests you impute to me a desire to fast my-
self to death. I had hoped that extreme step itself would effec-
tively prevent any such selfish interpretation. Without arguing
I affirm that for me this matter is one of pure religion. The mere
fact of "Depressed" Classes having double votes does not protect
them or Hindu society in general from being disrupted. In esta-
blishment of a separate electorate at all for "Depressed" Classes I
sense the injection of a poison that is calculated to destroy Hinduism
and do no good whatsoever to "Depressed" Classes. You will
please permit me to say that no matter how sympathetic you may
be you cannot come to a correct decision on a matter of such vital
and religious importance to the parties concerned. I should not be
against even over-representation of "Depressed" Classes. What
I am against is their statutory separation, even in a limited
form, from Hindu fold, so long as they choose to belong to it. Do
you not realize that if your decision stands and constitution comes
into being, you arrest the marvellous growth of work of Hindu
reformers who have dedicated themselves to the uplift of their
suppressed brethren in every walk of life?
I have therefore been compelled reluctantly to adhere to the
decision conveyed to you.
As your letter may give rise to a misunderstanding, I wish
to state that the fact of my having isolated for special treatment
the "Depressed" Classes question from other parts of your deci-
sion does not in any way mean I approve of or am reconciled to
other parts of decision. In my opinion many other parts are open
to very grave objection. Only I do not consider them to be any
warrant for calling from me such self-immolation as my con-
science has prompted me to in the matter of "Depressed" Classes.
I remain,
Your faithful friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of India, Home Department, Political, File No. 31/113/32 Pol.
Courtesy: National Archives of India
