207. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
August 9, 1909
MY LORD,
Before I write on the subject which to my colleague and myself is
of the utmost importance, may I once more thank Your Lordship for
the very great interest you have taken in the struggle? Whatever may
be the ultimate result, my countrymen and I can never be sufficiently
grateful for what you have done for us.
If I understood you correctly, in your opinion the entry as a matter
of right will be recognised if the number were limited by the law itself. If
that be so, it appears to me that the concession should be given coupled
with repeal of the Act, without any bargaining with the passive resisters,
but on thinking the matter over, if General Smuts is really desirous of
meeting us, he should have no objection to accepting the amendment I
have submitted, together with the proviso I give hereunder. It should
be read after "1908" and before "Provided further that"—
"Provided that it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to
restrict by regulation the number of persons belonging to different
nationalities (notwithstanding their having passed such examina-
tion) who may be allowed to enter the Colony as immigrants."
This amendment just—and only just—satisfies the Indian covenant.
It still creates no disqualification on the Statute-book against British
Indians as such. It completely, in my opinion, meets the objections
raised by, or on behalf of, General Smuts.
In submitting this amendment, I recognise that I am becoming a
party to a dangerous precedent in the history of Colonial legislation, but in
deference to the views of Your Lordship and of other distinguished friends
of our cause, I am prepared to advise my countrymen to accept this
1 Vide enclosure 2 to "Letter to Lord Ampthill", pp. 333-. The proviso was
inserted by Lord Ampthill in the draft of the amendment which he sent to General
Smuts.
further proviso, and if it is not accepted, it would be, I am sure, patent
to you that there is no desire on the part of the Transvaal Government
to offer an honourable settlement. With the knowledge—right or wrong—
that I have of the methods of General Smuts, may I suggest that Your
Lordship should not put this amendment as coming from me, but ask
him independently— unless you have closed entirely the negotiations with
him—whether he would be prepared to amend the Immigration Act in
the direction above indicated? This proviso I am submitting because of
my earnest desire to promote an immediate settlement and to avoid
your long and arduous labours proving abortive; but if nothing comes of
it, I should like Your Lordship to treat it as if it had never been suggested.
The first amendment submitted by me is such, as I for one should advise
my people to accept at any stage of the struggle, but the proviso I am
now submitting does not fall under that category.
Kindly let me know whether you have any further suggestions with
reference to the statement, of which I sent you twenty copies, and whether
it may now be published and circulated.
I am, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4990
