351. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
March 4, 1913
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 24th ultimo regarding the procedure adopted at the Ports in
respect of those British Indians who come from India and who
have residential rights in the Transvaal.
In the humble opinion of my Association, the reply is highly
unsatisfactory, for it ignores the real state of things obtaining at
the Ports.
Your letters seem to suggest that Indian passengers arrive from
India with unsupported claims for the Transvaal and that such
persons are detained on board pending investigation by the Regis-
trar. If persons having unsupported claims were in the habit of
coming in any numbers, and if they were allowed to remain within
the borders of the Union, though under detention, my Associa-
tion would have no cause for complaint. But it is the experience
of my Association that Indians with unsupported claims do not,
as a rule, come, and that those who do come are not detained,
but sent away by the vessels that bring them.
In the case of the brothers Dayal, their claims were, as the
Hon'ble the Minister is aware, fully supported, yet the boys
would have been sent away, had not the Supreme Court inter-
vened. What my Association submits is that the relief which the
Supreme Court grants should be accorded to such applicants with-
out their having to call in its intervention.
To explain its position better, it is perhaps necessary for my
Association to set forth the classes of persons who have Transvaal
claims.
Those Indians who are registered under the Asiatic Act and
hold registration certificates form one class. These are able to
produce documents to prove their right of residence in the Transvaal.
Those Indians who are not yet registered but who have a
right to be registered form the other class. These cannot always
have documentary proof, and never such as could be effectively
checked by the Port Immigration Officers, for a majority of
them can support their claims only by producing evidence of
witnesses in the Transvaal. Such was the case with the brothers
Dayal. Their title to registration was based on the fact that they
were in the Transvaal on the 31st May, 1902. My Association
suggests that it was not possible for them to prove their claim,
unless they were enabled to bring forward evidence that was avail-
able only in South Africa. It is for such persons that my Association
seeks protection, which has been cruelly and vexatiously denied
hitherto by the Immigration Officers at the Port; and my Associa-
tion trusts that the relief requested will be granted.
A. M. CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913
