548. LETTER TO MATHURADAS P. ASAR
[Before August 7, 1932]
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have your letter. The hook for the cup has not yet arrived.
I am not even ready to use it as yet. Every day the cup is before
my eyes. It has not been our intention to go on increasing the
count. I am going to be steady at around 40 counts myself.
Most probably it will be the same in the case of Sardar. Mahadev
may settle at around 80 counts. Then testing it would be the
thing to do. It would be easy to see the result. If the yarn
is even and does not break while being taken off and is tightly
wound round the spindle, then the yarn is not likely to
be weak. On the other hand, there are chances of being cheated
in the tests made using the cup or the machine used in a mill.
The yarn cannot be unwound from just any place. There would
be much waste in doing so. Hence, only if the yarn is even
from the point of unwinding can it stand the test. This means
that yarn can be tested only by the weaver. The yarn which
can be used for weaving without difficulty is good yarn. But the
purpose of writing is not to disregard the tools of yarn-testing.
My purpose is only to indicate the time for doing the test. At
one time I used to do the testing every day. I had prepared
the tool for the purpose with the materials available at home.
But then I found that it was taking a lot of time. And I was
not able to effect much improvement thereby. I also saw that
where I only used my guess instead of the test, my guess fre-
quently turned out to be correct, because, while unwinding the
yarn, it would have passed before the eyes. One would also
know how often it has broken and also how well the yarn has
been wound on the spindle. And so, an intelligent spinner auto-
matically gets an idea about the quality of his yarn. Otherwise
you are absolutely correct in arguing that there is no reason to
gloat over the fact if the yarn is of 100 counts on weighing. I
know that there can be yarn of 100 counts fit only to be thrown
away. I have also seen such yarn. Any attempt to spin such yarn
is sheer waste of time. Hence, anyone spinning fine yarn should
be convinced that the yarn will easily be turned into a length
of cloth. Then alone can the yarn be considered as of good
quality, otherwise it is useless. That is why I had written to
Narandas two or three months ago that he should make arrange-
ments for the weaving of fine yarn.
Your report about the Yajnik Sewing Machine is interesting.
If we get volunteers in thousands involved in the . . .1 right at
the beginning, the experiment will not go very far. Hence, we
must invent something which will ensure proper use of the hand
needle and does not take much time. It is only with this in view
that I have kept embroidery and knitting in my mind. The art
of Yajnik sewing is not for making available to the poor ready-
made khadi garments, but for quick disposal of the khadi woven
by the poor without loss. It is for making expensive-looking khadi
inexpensive. But if we expect from a fairly wealthy person that
he shall buy khadi however expensive and however coarse it may
be, and then get it stitched at his own expense, then khadi
cannot go very far. Alternatively khadi should be sold at a loss
or the spinning charges, etc., should be brought down. In your
plan I saw the suggestion to avoid doing that and so I prompt-
ly welcomed it. Hence you should convince the ladies who have
protested that they should feel gratified that they adorned the
khadi woven by the poor by stitching it free and serving the poor.
For, by their action, the stitched garments could be sold at the
price of unwashed khadi and we could pay the poor their full
wages. We can certainly make an inexpensive sewing-machine
in this country; but I think it can only be an imitation of the
machine in vogue at present. If so, it should mean overriding
the patent law. The Singer and other machines have invested
capital of millions of rupees and wherever patent laws prevail,
they must be registering their patents. But I am not fully con-
versant with the situation, and if somebody invents an original
design and prepares a sewing-machine which is simpler than the
machines currently in use, he himself can earn millions by regis-
tering his patent. Because, he would then compete with the
Singer machine. Our craftsmanship has still not inspired such
confidence in me. In the West, there are countless new inven-
tions every day. But that is not our field at all. Something like
that has no doubt been in my mind. Our ancestors invented the
greatest thing in the shape of the spinning-wheel. Millions of
people have benefited from it. Textile machinery is based on the
design of the spinning-wheel. Hence there is still much scope
in the direction of improvement of the spinning-wheel. I am sure
that something will emerge. There can be a profit of millions,
but there is no chance for a single individual to earn millions.
Now about your diet. You have done well to give up starches.
Equally important is the point about pulses. If the curd is abso-
lutely sweet (not sour), it can never cause headache. To make
it safe, a little soda may be added to it. But if one can take
milk, there is no need to take curd. It is only superstition that
papaw is harmful to the eyes. Any person can test this fact by
taking only papaw. He should take nothing else with it. This
can be tested by having a single meal of papaw. There is no
need to entertain such a superstition even with regard to ripe
tomatoes. Your diet can consist of thin chapati, green vegetables
and milk. You must have something sweet. You can take cur-
rants, black grape or raisins. Raw onion can do you good, but
it can be taken only in the evening because I know that it gives
off a terrible smell. I have myself eaten lots of raw onions. I did
it only in the evening and avoided meeting anyone afterwards.
But the tolerance of our women is infinite. But since Ba has
been in the habit of making free comments over the years, she
could not hold herself from remarking on the matter. And in
the end she always warned me against going before anyone else
with my mouth stinking. And she was absolutely right. I am
afraid your digestive system cannot accept almonds. Do not go
on brooding about your diet. Do not brood over your illness
either. Once you have decided about something, it should be
taken as settled. Taking a vow only means that our mind stops
bothering about it after the vow has been taken. Just as a trader
does not bother about the thing he has already sold and starts
thinking about the next thing, so also the mind.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3761
