279. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
M. K. GANDHI
ON THE WAY TO POONA,
August 8 [1919]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I am on my way to Poona to deliver an address on the Transvaal
question and chat with the moderate leaders on swadeshi. I have your
letter. If you will read my reply to Arundale published in Young India
you will find in it my reasons for remaining in politics. The more I
observe and the longer I live, the more do I find that you cannot divide
your energies into watertight compartments. You deny religion when
you plead on the ground of your exclusive religious nature inability to
help, say, a man so unjustly treated as Kallenbach. I say that you fulfil
your religious mission only when you take part in and alleviate human
sorrow as often as you see it and are able to share it. I know that
Rowlatt Act takes away manliness from a nation. I know that I have
the ability to do something to secure its repeal. I must act. I
take so much part in politics as is necessary for the due fulfilment
of my religion.
My sympathies go out to you in your trials there surrounded as
you are by so many conflicting elements. I know you will do the right
thing. In my opinion you are mistaken about my estimates of people.
But I need not discuss them. I do hope you have received Manilal
Vyas's papers, i.e., Young India containing all the facts and arguments.
The matter is still engaging the attention of the Government of Bombay.
The Punjab sentences are being materially reduced. They produce
in me no satisfaction. It is like robbing a man of all his property and
giving him back a portion of it.
Mr. Montagu is reported to have said that Rowlatt Act is necessary.
Well, all I can say is that civil disobedience is equally necessary in
that event. It is an insolent declaration to make that an Act which
has involved such brutality is necessary. I hope you will raise a great
agitation over it. Anyway, you will presently see a great agitation here.
Jamnadas left on Wednesday last, the 6th of August for Chindwara.
He has his wife and two friends with him. They will all live together
1 From the contents; vide Vol. XVI, pp. 16-18.
2 ibid., pp. 5-.
3 ibid., pp. 22-.
269
for the time being. You will please do the needful. You and Millie
will not fail to make Jamnadas feel at home in that big city of yours.
He will in the initial stages require all the warmth that love can give
in that, to him as to many, lonely place. You will find out when
Chindwara reaches London. Someone must go and receive him at the
Docks or at Waterloo where I suppose he will arrive.
The Ashram is looking superb. Shankerlal Banker and Anasuyabehn
are regularly learning weaving. They are giving much time to it. Spinning
is becoming fashionable. I wish Millie will write to me something on
it for publication if she has at all followed what I have been writing.
Did you ever receive my cablegrams about civil resistance ?2
With love,
Yours sincerely,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
