310. LETTER TO FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
SEVAGRAM, via WARDHA (INDIA),
July 1, 1942
DEAR FRIEND,
I twice missed coming to your great country. I have the
privilege [of] having numerous friends there both known and un-
known to me. Many of my countrymen have received and are
still receiving higher education in America. I know too that sev-
eral have taken shelter there. I have profited greatly by the writ-
ings of Thoreau and Emerson. I say this to tell you how much
I am connected with your country. Of Great Britain I need say
nothing beyond mentioning that in spite of my intense dislike of
British rule, I have numerous personal friends in England whom
I love as dearly as my own people. I had my legal education
there. I have therefore nothing but good wishes for your country
and Great Britain. You will therefore accept my word that my
present proposal, that the British should unreservedly and without
reference to the wishes of the people of India immediately with-
draw their rule, is prompted by the friendliest intention. I would
like to turn into goodwill the ill will which, whatever may be said
to the contrary, exists in India towards Great Britain and thus
enable the millions of India to play their part in the present war.
My personal position is clear. I hate all war. If, therefore, I
could persuade my countrymen, they would make a most effec-
tive and decisive contribution in favour of an honourable peace.
But I know that all of us have not a living faith in non-violence.
Under foreign rule however we can make no effective contribu-
tion of any kind in this war, except as helots.
The policy of the Indian National Congress, largely guided
by me, has been one of non-embarrassment to Britain, consist-
ently with the honourable working of the Congress, admittedly
the largest political organization, of the longest standing in India.
The British policy as exposed by the Cripps mission and rejected
by almost all parties has opened our eyes and has driven me to
the proposal I have made. I hold that the full acceptance of my
proposal and that alone can put the Allied cause on an unassail-
able basis. I venture to think that the Allied declaration that
the Allies are fighting to make the world safe for freedom of the
264
individual and for democracy sounds hollow so long as India
and, for that matter, Africa are exploited by Great Britain and
America has the Negro problem in her own home. But in order
to avoid all complications, in my proposal I have confined myself
only to India. If India becomes free, the rest must follow, if it
does not happen simultaneously.
In order to make my proposal foolproof I have suggested
that, if the Allies think it necessary, they may keep their troops,
at their own expense in India, not for keeping internal order but
for preventing Japanese aggression and defending China. So far
as India is concerned, we must become free even as America and
Great Britain are. The Allied troops will remain in India during
the war under treaty with the free Indian Government that may
be formed by the people of India without any outside interfer-
ence, direct or indirect.
It is on behalf of this proposal that I write this to enlist
your active sympathy.
I hope that it would commend itself to you.
Mr. Louis Fischer is carrying this letter to you.
If there is any obscurity in my letter, you have but to send
me word and I shall try to clear it.
I hope finally that you will not resent this letter as an intru-
sion but take it as an approach from a friend and well-wisher
of the Allies.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
PRESIDENT FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT
From a photostat: G.N. 873. Also facsimile in Mahatma, Vol. VI, be-
tween pp. 152 and 153
