10. LETTER TO EMILY HOBHOUSE
110 FIELD STREET, DURBAN,
January 5, 1914
DEAR MISS HOBHOUSE 1 ,
It was a perfect pleasure to have received your very kind and
generous letter. Had I known how to approach you before, I would
undoubtedly have endeavoured to enlist your large heart in our
behalf. It was during the Boer war that I came to admire your selfless
devotion to Truth, and I have often felt how nice it would be if the
Indian cause could plead before you for admission; and it is evident
to me that your first telegram uttering a note of warning was an
answer to that yearning. I am loathe to write to you on this question,
as Miss Molteno has told me how feeble you are now in health. She
was good enough to read to me a part of Miss Greene's letter, telling
her in most pathetic tones how it was the duty of those who loved you
to refrain from imposing fresh burdens on you. I am, therefore, torn
by conflicting emotions. But, as Miss Molteno, who knows you better
assures me that [sic] to expect you now not to interest yourself in our cause
1 Miss Emily Hobhouse, the daughter of Lord Hobhouse, who at the time
of the Boer War, moved among the Boer women and encouraged them to stand
up against the concentration camps; vide Vol. XIX, p. 148 and Vol. XLVIII,
p. 288.
2 Of December 27, 1913, which read: "Kindly postpone the rally by
fifteen days on the plea of an humble woman like me." Vide also Vol. XII, p. 3 01.
3 Elizabeth Mari (Betty) Molteno (1852-1927); eldest daughter of Sir
John Charles Molteno, the first Prime Minister of Cape Colony; she did her best
for the Indians in South Africa.
4 Alice Greene, sister of Graham Greene, was a friend and companion of
Miss Molteno.
10
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
is to misjudge you and to aggravate your illness, because you would,
she says, fret about us without being enabled by us to render your
assistance effective.
If your health permits and if the climate on the North Coast of
Natal would not be too trying for you, I would esteem it a privilege
if you could take rest on the little settlement at Phoenix where Indian
Opinion is published. Miss Molteno knows the settlement well. It is
situated about eighty feet above sea-level and is exposed to certain
winds which sweep across the hills that overlook the settlement and
purify the atmosphere. The scenery around is certainly very charming,
the site is beautifully isolated, there is no bustle or noise, it is two
miles from the nearest station and I venture to think that you will find
loving hands to administer to your wants, and nothing would give me
personally greater pleasure than, if I were free, to be able to wait upon
you and nurse you. You will, I hope, consider this offer as coming
from the heart and without the slightest hesitation accept it if you can.
I will not weary you with copies of correspondence and details
about the question. I enclose the telegrams exchanged between
General Smuts and myself, which speak for themselves. We have
always accepted what we could get in matters of detail, but, in this
matter of the Commission we are solemnly bound to sacrifice
ourselves for the principle of consultation. In striving to secure this
recognition of an elementary right, if we must, for the time being,
forfeit public sympathy, we must be prepared to do so. Knowing that
the truth is on our side, past experience will enable us to have
patience, and, as days go on, the mists of ignorance will be removed,
the cloud will lift and I have no doubt that Truth will conquer. What
we have asked for is the smallest measure and, if the Government
1 A Weekly published by Gandhiji
2 Vide Vol. XII.
3 Indian Grievances Commission; ibid, p. 272, fns. 1&.
4
ibid pp.; 277-.
LETTER TO EMILY HOBHOUSE
11
obstinately refuses to grant that measure of justice, surely it will be
an indication of their disinclination to recognize the status of British
Indians throughout the Union. Indeed, through my twenty years'
experience, I have been able to gather many an indication of the same
spirit and it is really against that that we are fighting. In those matters
to which Passive Resistance is directed, I hold there can be no
compromise. Could Daniel have compromised by bowing to one of the
laws of Medes and the Persians and not to others, or would the whole
body of those laws have represented the influence of Satan and,
therefore, been unacceptable in toto?
The last paragraph of your letter seems to assume that we are
following the tactics of the high-souled militants of England. May I
say that we have not only not copied them, but, wherever it has been
necessary, I have drawn a sharp distinction between their methods and
ours. Indeed, I used to have long discussions with the followers of the
great Mrs. Pankhurst on this very question. At no stage do we believe
in the use of physical force, but I am free to confess that we have
certainly been encouraged, in the hour of our weakness, by the noble
example of devotion to duty and self-sacrifice that the militants have
set, though we condemn their methods and tactics as suicidal and
beneath the dignity of woman.
I hope that God will restore you to health and spare you for
many a long year to continue your noble and unassuming work in the
cause of Humanity.
I am,
Yours truly
MISS HOBHOUSE
THE COTTAGE
KENIL WORTH
CAPE TOWN
From a copy: C. W. 11345. Courtesy: E. S. Reddy, New York
1 Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928), leader of the suffragette movement
in England; vide Vol. XII, p. 37.
