147. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 26, 1908
THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
Mr. Gandhi has just explained to me that it is the intention of the
Government to legalize voluntary registration under the Asiatic Act
and to make it applicable to Asiatics who have voluntarily registered,
save for the penalties for non-registration under it hitherto. I beg to
state that Mr. Gandhi, when, after the interviews with you, he explained
the compromise to the British Indian community, gave a totally different
version. He declared emphatically before vast audiences that, if the
community represented by my Association accepted voluntary registration,
the Asiatic Act would be repealed. The news now given by Mr. Gandhi,
therefore, comes to the British Indian community as a most disagreeable
surprise. The documents exchanged between you and Mr. Gandhi,
in my humble opinion, also bear out the version given by the latter.
In this connection, I wish to draw the attention of the Government
to the fact that the leaders of the Asiatic community, with much personal
risk to themselves, endeavoured throughout the last three months un-
ceasingly to help the Government to identify the British Indians resident
in the Transvaal. The least, therefore, that my Association had a right
to expect was a scrupulous regard for the part of the compact to be
carried out by the Government. But, as I understand from Mr. Gandhi,
you have irrevocably taken the step and stated that the new legislation
that is to be passed will be merely to legalize registration under the
Asiatic Act.
It will be the duty of my Association, therefore, again most reluctantly
to take up the position that it occupied three months ago. My Association
is advising British Indians in the Transvaal to withdraw their applications
for voluntary registration and all documents lodged with Mr. Chamney.
This was an act done by the community as a matter of grace and in
order to show the Government its complete bona fides. It is impossible
for the community to do otherwise than what I have above indicated,
for the simple reason that it was never the intention to submit to an
Act which the community was bound by a solemn obligation not to
accept and moreover to strive to resist.
In conclusion, I venture respectfully to point out that the departure
by the Government from the original intention and undertaking given
to the Asiatic community through Mr. Gandhi and his co-signatories
is a most unfortunate event and likely to intensify the feelings of suspicion
among the Asiatic races inhabiting the Colony, and, as I deem myself
a citizen of this country, it hurts me to think that those who are in authority
and who govern this country in my name should have little regard for
solemn obligations.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 30-5-1908
