139. LETTER TO KARNAD SADASHIVA RAO
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR SADASHIVA RAO,
I have your letter of 13th instant written on the train.
Untruthful propaganda and abuse are the lot generally of all
reformers. Why should we be any exception to the general rule?
Those who can stand such abuse and will not retaliate by match-
ing two untruths against one have not only nothing to fear but
will actually gain in strength through such unscrupulous opposition.
Therefore, so long as consciousness of the correctness of the cam-
paign and the purity of the means employed in conducting it
continue, we may not become agitated in any shape or form over
such opposition. But we may be sure of thriving on it. And
when we have positive consciousness of the truth in us and the
strength derived from it, we need never be afraid of being
charged with weakness. He who for fear of appearing weak hesi-
tates to say or do the right thing becomes untruthful in the very
106
act, and therefore it may be said of him that he never had con-
sciousness of the truth in him.
I read through the questions you left with me. I have not
dealt with them because you will find that everyone of the points
is amply covered in the statements already made by me. I wonder
if you have seen my letter to the Editor of the Justice published
on the day of its expiry.
There now remains your question about the conduct of Con-
gressmen in connection with the provincial and district branches
of the Servants of Untouchables Society. They should be identi-
fied with activities of these organizations only in so far as their
services are wanted and no further, even though the work may
appear to them to be languishing. In a service that may take in
the activity of as many true servants who will offer their services,
one need not belong to or work through an organization. Even a
cup of water lovingly handed to a Harijan, giving or procuring
medical aid for an ailing Harijan, giving shelter to a shelterless
Harijan, and innumerable such individual acts are a solid con-
tribution to the removal of untouchability. Therefore the em-
barrassing position that you picture need never arise.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18989
