13. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 17, 1934
CHI. MARY,
I have your letter. In his letter Rajbhoj has used the ex-
pression 'Brahmin' to mean non-Harijan Hindus. The Board does
not consist exclusively of Brahmins; it has non-Brahmins also.
Nevertheless you should remember that the Board contains only
workers and not those who want prominence or cheap credit.
Strange as it may appear, the largest amount of sacrifice is still
to be found among Brahmins, if it is also true that Brahmins are
the stumbling-block in the way of progress of the campaign against
untouchability. But no provincial organization is wholly confined
to Brahmins.
As to the second objection, you will be glad to know that
there is no Harijan Board which does not contain at least one
Harijan, and in several organizations there are many. There
are hundreds of Harijan Boards affiliated to the Central Board.
I can claim no merit or credit for this event. If I could have
helped it, I should certainly have confined all these boards
exclusively to non-Harijans. In the place of the word 'penitents'
read 'debtors'. Harijans are in the place of creditors. Have you
ever heard of a board of debtors containing a sprinkling of credi-
tors? Debtors alone know how to discharge their obligations.
Creditors will be the judges as to whether they will give them
discharge certificates for the payments they will make. But they
would not even be bothered about the meetings of the debtors.
They will have their own meetings, their own advisers and the
like. And I have invited the Harijans to form their own advi-
sory boards which will become irresistible. They will, if they are
compact bodies, dictate their own terms. If you are closely following
the Harijan from week to week you will understand surely the mean-
ing of what I have said. Marvellous work has been done in the
shape of distribution of funds. Harijan Boards are intended to be
swiftly moving organizations carrying out their operations without
fuss. They are not debating societies. To alter their character would
be to turn them into debating societies frittering away time, energy
and substance, whereas I want to save every ounce of these solely
for the benefit of Harijans. Then and then only will there be no
'you' and 'we', but only 'we'.
You have again returned to your proposal about prayer. The
proposal does not appear to me to be feasible. The utmost we
have been able to attain in this direction is that we have Mus-
salman hymns or bhajans as also Christian. You may perhaps
know that every Friday we have a rendering of "Lead, Kindly
Light" in the Ashram and every Thursday we have a very
popular Islamic bhajan. The Ashram Bhajanavali contains several
bhajans from Mussalman sources and you will find also a selec-
tion of Christian hymns. On certain occasions we have Chris-
tian and Mussalman prayers. But to make these prayers a daily
feature would be entirely mechanical, if not also hypocritical.
It would be different if we had a large number of Mussalmans
and Christians in the different ashrams. And if we had an
ashram predominantly Mussalman or Christian, there will natu-
rally be generally only Christian or Islamic prayers. The point I
am trying to make is to show that the ashrams are not theo-
sophical organizations, but they are organizations which have
equal regard for all the religions.
I should expect, therefore,
non-Hindus in an ashram predominantly Hindu to pay equal
respect to the Hindu form of worship. And a predominantly
Hindu ashram should never be deliberately exclusive and would
be expected to pay particular regard to its few Mussalman or
Christian inmates. Ashrams honestly attempt, though they may
ever fail, to reach the ideal of equality and growth from within.
Love.
BAPU
MISS MARY BARR
KHEDI SAOLIGARH
BETUL DT.
From a photostat: G.N. 6029. Also C.W. 3358. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
