163. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 6, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. By trying to give artistic appearance to
the envelope, you spoiled it. This is bound to be the result
when one tries to create beauty which meets no practical need.
Sardar makes no effort to give to an envelope artistic appearance
for its own sake; such appearance is the by-product of practical
utility and, therefore, pleases the eye. If we wish to use again
an envelope which has been used once, the address written on it
should be covered up. For that purpose Sardar stuck over the
written lines finely cut slips of paper of appropriate sizes, and
that gave the envelope an attractive appearance. But he was not
satisfied with this. So now he turns the envelopes received from
there inside out, so that he need not paste slips over them and the
envelopes may look as good as new. You will discover this if
you examine them closely. Your slips with zigzag edges had
half come off and looked very shabby. And they served no
practical purpose. Your labour, therefore, was wasted, and so
were the time and the paper. That was a loss to the public.
Draw two lessons from this: never imitate anyone blindly, and
beauty created for its own sake is no beauty. It is said about
the great cathedrals in Europe that all their beautiful features
serve a practical purpose. Whether this is true or not, there can
be no doubt about the truth of the principle which I have stated.
Your letter this time contained very little besides a criticism
of the Minister. I think it unnecessary to consider whether or not
your criticism is justified, since it can have no effect. The state-
ment "judge not lest ye be judged" deserves to be engraved in
our hearts. I do not know if there is a Gujarati saying with a
similar meaning. If there is any in Marathi, send it to me.
I should like to have a list of the Urdu books. In any case,
send Shibli's volume. I know that Khalifa's biography, too, is
there.
I should certainly like it if you would prefer to die rather
than eat fish. Does that mean that you would not take cod-
liver oil too? You need not consider what I would wish [you to
do]. I have put the question simply to know your own attitude.
155
You should increase milk/curds and/or ghee in your diet. It must
also include occasionally some ripe fruit in place of uncooked
vegetable. Don't you grow papayas there? Or tomatoes? Or
bhaji of any kind? Why should you, yourself, not grow some
tomatoes? And also lettuce-it grows quickly. Unripe papaya
ought not to be eaten in large quantity. Nor should it be eaten
daily. Introduce this change without thinking about the expense.
Keep up Kuhne-baths with hot water. It is very necessary to
massage the spot where you feel the pain. Any girl will be glad
to do the massage.
Vidya's dullness will disappear if you try to teach her with
love. Rambhau's case is a little difficult. There is only one
remedy, however. There are three influences working on him.
If they do not work in harmony, there will be a problem. The
three influences are: Panditji, Lakshmibehn and you or anybody
else who looks after him. Only love will enable you to discover
a way out of this difficulty. In the measure that your love be-
comes wider in scope, in that measure will your capacity to
reform such children increase.
Be generous towards the grown-up girls in the Ashram. They
do not purposely shirk work and sit idle at home; they do not
work because they become helpless. You and I cannot judge
the degree of their helplessness. They alone can do so. Their
judgment may, of course, be wrong. But we should be satisfied
if their motive is not dishonest. Among the grown-up girls, think
about Anandi, Kusum and Nimu. What could all these girls do?
Anandi is not likely to shirk work. Kusum at any rate will never
do so. Nimu is burdened with two children. She hardly knows
how to bring them up, but has already become a mother. How
much work, therefore, can we expect from her? Perhaps you will
be able to think of many more instances. We cannot weigh all
such cases in scales with which we weigh gold and pearls. You
will also see from experience that as you become more generous
you will find it easier to make others work.
I don't know how
far it is true, but it is said [about me] that I have great capacity
for making men work. If this is true, the reason is that I never
suspect anyone of shirking work. I am satisfied with the work
that a person does. I then ask him to do more, and he does.
There are also some who say that there will be hardly anyone
whom people deceive as much as they do me. Even if this assess-
ment is proved correct, I shall not feel sorry. I would be satis-
fied if people give me a testimonial that I deceive no one in the
world. If nobody else gives such a testimonial to me, I certainly
give it to myself.
I hate untruth more than anything else.
I don't believe in the principles of "the greatest good of the
greatest number" and "survival of the fittest". For man the rule
is, the good of all, the progress of all and "the weak first". We
bipeds are human beings, but we have not yet risen above the
nature of quadrupeds. Dharma lies in doing so.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10293. Also C.W. 6741. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
