591. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 7, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the mail from you yesterday, the day of the week on
which I usually get it. I send with this a letter from Vithal. I
have replied to him and told him that he should trust you and
forget Liladhar. If his sense of devotion to his father draws him
towards Liladhar, he may join him and find out some means of
earning. He should not divide his interest between the Ashram
and his father. If you think you should reply to anything in his
letter, you may do so.
I had a letter from Jethalal too. He does admit his mis-
take. But he thinks it was unjust to ask him to leave. I see no
trace of repentance on his part. I have written to him a rather
strong letter and told him that, as long as he does not feel sincere
repentance, I would not advise him to return to the Ashram. But
I have also said that, if he can satisfy you and if you wished to
take him back, I would not oppose you either. I did not wish to
waste your time by sending his letter to you, and so tore it up.
370
Kanti's letter was painful to read. His body seems to have
become very weak. I have, therefore, sent him a wire today and
advised him to go to Rajkot. I have advised in the same wire
that Prema also should get herself operated upon. Remember
one rule of mine. Anybody who gets fever should be given noth-
ing to eat except fruit. If it is necessary that he should be given
some nourishing food, he should be given milk only. If this rule
is not followed and if the fever afterwards turns out to be typhoid,
the consequences can be dangerous.
I also repeat one rule which I have mentioned concerning the
experiments in food which are going on. Anybody who finds that
a certain item upsets him, may stop eating it for a day or two,
and not ask for anything in its place. If this is done, most pro-
bably the thing will agree with him afterwards.
I am sure you must have got Madan's book now.
Chhaganlal has not arrived here yet.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8266. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
