83. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Posh Sud 8 [January 20, 1918]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I am likely to have a battle royal over Mahomed Ali. If India
carries out my plan, the Government of India will be properly
humbled. Hindus and Muslims, never united, will become so,
mother cow will be safe and we shall hear the triumph of non-
violence proclaimed all over the world. Before all this comes to
pass, however, I shall have to go through an ordeal myself. A
power which has till now brooked opposition from no Indian is
sure to fight as if for its very life when defied by a handful of
Indians. Its fury then will be almost unbearable. But I am
resolved to face it all. I mention this to remind you to be careful
that in the storm that will follow we do not lose, whether in our
wisdom or folly, the money that we have received for the Ashram.
I have already told you there should be nothing in my name, at
any place. Keep everything in your name. Transfer everything
standing in my name to yours. The receipt for the money which
Revashankarbhai has deposited in the bank at Bombay is
probably in our joint names, his and mine. My name in it should
be replaced by yours. You should make your will to provide
against accidents, nominating the Doctor your heir and executor.
Your plan of work has been chalked out. You must devote your-
self to weaving and agriculture. You should so train Santok that
she may join you whole-heartedly in this work. Simultaneously
with this and in order that you may succeed in it, you have to
address yourself to the almost superhuman task of moulding
Radha and Rukhi to be ideal girls. For this, you will need to
observe always the highest of dharma. Naturally enough, there-
fore, you will be daily advancing towards moksha, and so in this
work your satyagraha and your patriotic services will find their
consummation. All the money we have is for these two activities
and for the National School. That will also continue to be the
position in law. The amounts that will be transferred to your
name will not become your property, but will be treated as dona-
tions in aid of our activities. But do not rely on my interpretation
of the law. Consult Shri Krishnalal, Mavlankar and others.
Drink deep the draught of love from anywhere and everywhere,
like that cowherd of Dwarka, no matter even if you have to steal
the thing. The more you drink of it, the greater will be your
bliss and you will have had your heart's desire. If the handloom,
which they formerly worked in the pit, had been flourishing today
and if we had been spinning all the yarn we require, we would
not, with all this cotton available, have to face this terrible rise
in the prices of cloth. Here people shiver in the cold for want of
clothes. Every moment I realize the value of cloth. Either I
have to supply myself with plenty of covering so that I may sleep
outside and have oxygen, or for want of such covering suffocate
in a box-like room, swallowing again my own carbonic acid gas.
My only prayer, and my blessing as well, is that you may have
the necessary strength to realize your aspirations and fulfil my
hopes. In all that you do, please consult the Ashram inmates and
the teachers of the National School. I hope to be there at the latest
by the 17th or the 18th of February. But it occurred to me this
morning that I had better write about all this immediately to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C. W. 5726. Courtesy: Radhabehn
Choudhri
