100. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI H. PATEL
Thursday, Phagan 15 [March 19, 1916]
BHAISHRI MAGANBHAI,
I have your letter. You are worked up. You have done
well in expressing to me what you feel deeply. We have to act
only according to our capacity. If therefore you cannot follow
the pattern of life at the Ashram, it is only proper that you
should leave.
It is futile to think about South Africa. You are physically
not fit for a long journey. Then, Mr. Polak is not certain about
himself. He is in an awkward situation. I am sure you can do
nothing there. You cannot join the Servants of India Society
with a view to earning money. There is only one way of earning
money, which everyone else follows. In your case your health is
a hindrance. My opinion is that unless you had resorted to steal-
ing you could not have earned more money openly than you
have been able to earn through the Satyagraha Movement. It
cannot be said that your economic condition would have been
better if you had not joined the struggle. Hence, if you cannot
continue in the Ashram with a firm mind, you must explain the
situation to your father. You must stay at home and agree to
whatever solution your father suggests. You must follow his wish-
es and do as he says, whatever the gain may be. For your
trouble, you should do as he says. In the end even doing
this will take you forward. Even in this kind of self-indulgence
there is spiritual sublimity.
I feel much sympathy for you. It is as difficult for you to
leave the Ashram as it is to continue there. Nobody else is in a
situation like yours. Think maturely. I am abandoning the idea
of going to the Punjab and other places. I hope to reach there
by Saturday evening or latest by Sunday.
We shall talk when we meet about what I have been feeling
about Fakiri's death.
I can understand that your wife cannot work. She has come
this time with an ulterior motive. There really is a snare laid
for you. May God help you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 11008. Courtesy: Suryakant C.
Patel
