286. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 20, 1928
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I have your letter. I am daily making fresh discoveries which
go to show that we may expect nothing from the mill-owners at the
present stage. They will yield only to pressure and the pressure
of the Government is more felt than that of the Congress. But we
may not be impatient. We need not put boycott of Indian mill-
made cloth in the same category as that of foreign cloth. A nega-
tive attitude about mill-cloth will be quite enough to keep the mills
under wholesome check. A positive boycott will only stir up
bad blood without bringing us any nearer boycott of foreign
cloth. We shall never, unless a sudden manifestation of mass energy
comes into being, succeed in reaching the millions. In spite of all
we may do, for the time being the latter will therefore be buying
Indian mill-cloth and, further, there will be keen competition be-
tween Lancashire mills and Japanese on the one hand and Indian
mills on the other. We have therefore to concentrate our effort
on changing the mentality of the townspeople and those few vil-
lagers whom we are controlling and bringing them round to the
adoption of khadi. If we set about doing this, the message of khadi
will percolate the masses. Then both our and foreign mills will
feel the brunt. That will be the time for our mills to come in
line with us. The moment they do so we can complete boycott of
foreign cloth inside of six months. The programme definitely
therefore has to be this:
We leave Indian mills severely alone. We carry on a whirl-
wind campaign for boycott of foreign cloth through khadi, asking
people to count no sacrifice too great in adopting khadi. We must
have faith in ourselves and in our people and believe that they
can make this which appears to me to be small sacrifice. But I
confess that at the present moment I do not visualize the organi-
zation that is needed to carry on the boycott. The politicals who
are in possession of the platform do not mean to do any serious
business. They will not concentrate on any constructive work.
Jawahar in a letter truly describes the atmosphere when he says:
"There is violence in the air." We read and hear so much about
the boycott of British cloth in Bengal, but the letters I receive
almost every week show that there is no real boycott. There is
no organization behind it, there is no will working behind it.
All things considered, what will you advise me to do?
The expected letter from Romain Rolland is due next Tues-
day at the latest. I must after that come to a decision quickly.
Supposing that Romain Rolland predisposes me in favour of the
European visit, what would you have me to do in view of the
talk of the boycott? Would you want me for the sake of the boy-
cott not to go to Europe? I shall accept your decision whatever
it may be. I am not personally keen on the European visit, but
if all is plain sailing in India and if Romain Rolland wants me to
visit Europe, I should feel bound to accept the European invita-
tions. Will you please wire your decision? Jawahar will be with
you and probably you will know Doctor Ansari's mind.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13197
