472. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 8, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have your letter of the 6th.
I have asked Narahari to inquire into the facts regarding
the dairy and let me have his opinion. I will not forget about
this matter.
I am still not able to take sufficient rest. I have again started
getting up at 2.30. The bed itself pushes me out and I welcome
that. It is 3.30 just now. I have started writing this after finishing
one to Jamnalal.
I can't think what to do regarding Chimanlal and Sharda.
One thing is clear to me. Sharda's living with Chimanlal may
not be for her good. If her devotion to her father has become
her sole passion, she may, though ill herself, sacrifice her health
in nursing Chimanlal. We come across many such instances in
Europe. I don't remember to have seen any among us. But the
education which we give is certainly likely to produce girls of this
type.
Such idealism endures only if it grows spontaneously.
If Sharda does not possess this spirit, she should have regard for
her health and leave Chimanlal. She may come and live here.
There are other girls of her age here, and among them there are
ten Gujarati girls even, including Vali. The climate also is ex-
cellent. I, too, shall be here for some time. In any case my head-
quaters will continue to be here. There are good arrangements for
study, too. It is desirable that one who is ill should not nurse
another sick person. Shakaribehn should undertake to look after
Chimanlal. The latter should stop eating solid food and live only
on milk and fruit. A pure milk-diet has been found to have
beneficial effect, but I think such an experiment is too drastic. A
mixed diet of milk and fruit is found best. Even if such a diet
brings on weakness, I would advise Chimanlal not to mind it but
persevere in the experiment patiently. Sharma is at Sabarmati
now. He has renounced everything in order to live with Ramdas.
That is why he has taken Ramdas with him and gone to Sabar-
mati. Ba has gone there to look after Ramdas. You may, if you
wish, consult Sharma [regarding Chimanlal]; I have had experi-
ence of his goodness. I cannot say, though, anything regarding
427
his competence as a doctor. All the same, there can be no harm
in consulting him. Milk and fruit, however, are both food and
medicine. Anybody who is not benefited by them is hardly likely
to be benefited by anything else. Water and sun treatments also
should go on at the same time. The chief thing in my advice
is the suggestion regarding Sharda. Both of you should please
think over it.
My personal needs are being looked after by Prabhavati,
Amtussalaam, Vasumati and Om. Amala also does some work.
But I am really afraid that she will go off her head one day. She
is hardly in her senses. She is growing thinner everyday. And
now she has become impatient to marry. I observe that she is
not free from passion.
In consequence of her trying to suppress
it, it has become uncontrollable. She hopes to be mother of twelve
children. She is 37 at present. Let us see what she does. I don't
have the courage now to send her to you or somewhere else. She
is trying to get a job in some college. I don't mind if she suc-
ceeds by her own efforts. But I don't intend to recommend her to
anybody. I don't worry, but the fact remains that the respon-
sibility of looking after her has become more difficult.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
What has been decided regarding Keshu's marriage?
From the microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8412. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
