111. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
February 23, 1919
It was so good of you to give me credit if only for once for
being business-like. My own opinion of myself is that I am the
most business-like man upon the earth and, so long as no one
can disillusion me, I shall continue to derive pleasure from the
belief and to have a stray certificate from you only adds to the
pleasure. I present you another illustration of my business-likeness.
I know I would wound your vanity, self-esteem, glorious womanli-
ness, whatever you like to call it, by making a friend my carrier
instead of a bank, for this very simple purpose of lending you
money. Had I taken your impractical advice, it would have
taken me much longer to send you the money because you must
know that I am living in India where we do things in a fairly
leisurely manner befitting the climate and the surroundings. Here
bankers are not the servants of their clients but their masters except
when the clients happen to belong to the ruling race and pro-
bably it would have cost you £15 to send £50. You with your
poetic instinct set no value on money, whereas I, a simple prosaic
business-like man, realize that it requires £150 to finish the educa-
tion of someone. Therefore, if I spend away £15, I waste one-
tenth of that sum if I can avoid having to spend it. Q.E.D.
You shall certainly treat what you have received as a loan.
I believe I have already told Mr. Rustomji as much but I cannot
swear as I cannot keep copies of my correspondence as a rule
and I shall accept repayment whenever you choose to send it,
with compound interest if you will, provided that you do not bor-
row to pay me. You will infer from what has preceded that my
health is better. I am still bed-ridden. My head is supposed to
be weak and I may not undertake any great exertion. But the feel
is all right and I am cheerful.
Devibehn writes to me regularly and tells me that you rarely
[do so]. That is not how people treat their goddesses, or had
women the privilege of acting different?
Yes, Harilal has been sorely stricken. Chanchi was far supe-
rior to me. I did not specially write to you as I felt my cable to
Ramdas in reply to his was enough for all. At the time, moreover,
I was too ill to think of writing to anybody. All Harilal's children
are here and are playing about me while I am dictating this letter.
Passive resistance is on the topics regarding certain legislation
that the Government of India are passing through the Council.
The war council meets tomorrow at the Ashram. You may depend
upon it that it won't be a bad copy of similar councils in which
you were both an actor (or actress?) and a fairly intelligent specta-
tress. You won't therefore need from me a description of the
council meeting.
I am surprised at your remark about Ashrams here prohibit-
ing the entry of women. It betrays your lack of interest in the
Ashram. We have so many women here at the Ashram. We are
educating them all, including three girls. The latter are no doubt
our own girls. But that is not our limitation. It is due to the
disinclination of the people to send their girls under the conditions
that we impose. It will delight your heart to see the transforma-
tion that the women undergo here after a few days' stay. The
purdah and all other unnatural restraints fall away as if by magic.
I know you will hug most of them when you come here. Only you
will have to revive your knowledge of Gujarati.
Imam Saheb is today here, and naturally also his daughter
and his wife.
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
