90. LETTER TO H. KALLENBACH
August 10, 1920
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
After how long a time have I the good fortune to write to
you? After the greatest search, I have now got your address.
Never has a day passed but I have thought of you. The first
information imparted to me about you was by a lady in Johannes-
burg. Miss Winterbottom and Polak could tell me nothing.
P. K. Naidu could tell me nothing. Dr. Mehta sent me a cable
to give me your address. I have also a letter from Jamnadas whom
I have asked to see you in Berlin if you could at all be seen.
Jamnadas tells me either he or Dr. Mehta will try to see you.
How I wish I could go over to see you and hug you. For me you
have risen from the dead. I had taken it for granted that you
were dead. I could not believe that you would keep me without
a letter for so long. The alternative was that you had written
but your letters were not delivered to me at all. I wrote to your
camp and there was no reply. I still think that you have written
but your letter has not been delivered to me. I am cabling to
Dr. Mehta to see you. What shall I say of me? I shall forbear
for the time being. Devdas is with me, ever growing in every
way and every direction. I am just now travelling with Devdas
and another faithful companion on whom you would dote. I
have come in closest touch with a lady who often travels with me.
Our relationship is indefinable. I call her my spiritual wife. A
friend has called it an intellectual wedding. I want you to see
her. It was under her roof that I passed several months at Lahore
in the Punjab. Mrs. Gandhi is at Ashram. She has aged consi-
derably but she is as brave as ever. She is the same woman
you know her with her faults and virtues. Manilal and Ramdas
are in Phoenix looking after Indian Opinion. Harilal is in Calcutta
doing his business.
He has lost his wife. And Mrs. G. is looking after his child-
ren. Chhaganlal10 and Maganlal are with me. Medh and Pragji
1 P. K. Naidu, secretary to the British Indian Association, Transvaal
2 Dr. Pranjivan Mehta, M.D., Bar-at-Law and jeweller; his association
with Gandhiji began when he received Gandhiji on his arrival in England for
the first time as a student. He rendered financial help to Gandhiji in his acti-
vities from the days of the Phoenix Settlement till his death in 1933.
3 Youngest son of Khushalchand Gandhi, cousin of Gandhiji
are in India. Pragji remains in touch with me, not Medh so
much. Maganbhai is not with me. You now know something
about most members of the family that you know. Oh! I must
not omit Imamsaheb. He and his are with me, his loyalty is
wonderful. I gave away Fatima in marriage the other day. And
this has made him happy. Andrews I see often. He lives in
Bengal. Anandlal too is with me. I am editing two weeklies.
Both are doing well. I am engaged in a fierce struggle with the
Government. No one can foretell the issue.
And now I shall stop. I was two years ago in death's grip.
If you are free I want you to resume correspondence. My life is
simpler than ever. My food is not fruit and nuts. I am living
on goat's milk and bread and raisins. I am under a vow not to
take more than five things. Cow's milk I would not like because
of the vows I took in London. Salt I do not abjure because I
find that we take inorganic salt in water and inhale it from the
sea.
With love and expectation of seeing your own writing soon.
Yours ever,
UPPER HOUSE
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
