88. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
Thursday night [February 6, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your long letter. It made me sad. I can entirely enter into
your feelings. I will not, therefore, strive with you. I quite see that
you should now proceed along your own lines. And I have no fear,
so long as your heart rules your head. You will come to India when
you feel absolutely impelled to do so. And to Phoenix too you would
come whenever you feel like it and not before. If you want me to
return any of your tools or books, please say so. I should feel deeply
hurt if you did not do so. I have told you that I have not even unpacked
your books and your tools too are still most of them in the box.
My life is becoming harder day by day and I do feel that you
would not be able to bear it even if you tried. Just now I hardly speak
to anybody, so finely cut has my daily programme become. My meals
too are invariably taken whilst I am serving the boys and as a rule
I am finished by the time the boys are finished. There is not a moment's
rest after the dinner. This I find absolutely necessary at least for the
present. Miss West has entered into the thing whole-heartedly and works
away the whole day. I would certainly like you to pay us, when you
feel like it, a visit, examine the working and criticize. I know that in
many things there is room for improvement. Only I cannot see it. I
do need a friendly critic. West is excellent but he has his limits. His
resources are exhausted and he is himself immersed in his own work.
Medh tells me you have advanced him £22. It was perhaps as
well. You were certainly not bound to do so. Only his is an exceptional
case. I hope you will not allow it to be used as a precedent.
Of course when the proper time comes you should remind Naidoo
about the loan.
Can you remember anything about Mr. Doke's father's memoir I
had ? I cannot find it among the books sent here. I should not forgive
myself if the book is lost. What about Just's book ?1 We have to send
it to Mr. Gokhale.
I shall say nothing about the Kaffir boy. I must now watch you
and wait. You are making an experiment with yourself. I can but pray
that you may come out of it quite successful.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Return to Nature; vide also Vol. XI, p. 461.
2 A term by which the native African communities in South Africa were described.
The expression, however, is no longer in use.
110
