21. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
Wednesday [June 1919]
RESPECTED BHAISHRI,
I do not remember to have received your letter earlier. I was
myself wondering if you had forgotten me.
If a person like you would adopt swadeshi, it can be spread in
India in no time. The work which the native states can do in the . . .
condition cannot be done in British India.
I think it is difficult to visit Kathiawar at present.
If one spinning-wheel is plied for 360 days and it is done every
day, 180 lbs. of yarn would be spun, and if one loom weaves cloth
from 360 lbs of yarn and every man (villager) takes 12 yards of cloth
. . . that one loom would provide cloth for 30 persons in a year.
1 Fatima Bibi was married to Saiyad Hussain Miya Uraizee on April 26,
1920; vide Vol.XVII, p.328.
2
Omissions in the letter are as in the source.
3 From the contents; vide Vol.XV, pp.44- and 408.
20
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
The mill yarn which is suitable for khadi costs Rs.37 per maund
at present. This yarn is made from the waste cotton left after
preparing fine yarn. The mill spends Rs.15 per maund for this cotton.
Thus, the mill makes a profit of Rs.22, or takes Rs.22 as spinning
charge for the cotton worth Rs. 15. Cotton for hand-spinning must be
of good quality and it costs Rs.25. Deducting from that figure the
labour and waste, it would come to Rs. 15. Thus, looking at the prices
at present, we have to spend Rs. more. But the cloth made from
hand-spun yarn is twice more durable. There is likelihood of much
difference in this price, because the cotton market keeps on changing
every day.
If good cotton is used for spinning there, the Ashram is
prepared to buy the whole stock of that yarn at the rate of three annas
a seer. I have no provision if the stock is very large. Thus, with the
increased price of cotton, one would get three annas per seer as the
spinning charge. This is the way I get the work done by 200 women
at Bijapur. These women were sitting idle before they got this job.
Altogether, cloth worth Rs.20,000 was prepared in the Ashram or
under the auspices of the Ashram during the last year. It provided
employment to 400 men and women.
Apart from this cloth worth Rs. . . . was ordered to be woven
for the Famine [Relief] Committee. This was done in an atmosphere
of hostility. People are very much attracted by machinery. Hence I
have rarely found help except from the poor people. A couple of
friends have given financial help. It is only now that hand-weaving
has become a 'fashion'. If you can adopt this work for Kathiawar, the
people would be prosperous and they would easily be delivered from
the state of dependence. The nation whose needs are provided from
outside either remains dependent, or it has to be prepared to fight with
force by maintaining an army.
Jaishrikrishna from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have written in pencil. Please excuse me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 4122
