433. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
November 20, 1934
BHAI MAVALANKAR,
You cannot be permitted to engage yourself exclusively in
minting money. I hope you will agree to shoulder the burden
of the Harijan Ashram and the dairy. We must find the expenses
of the Harijan Ashram and of Harijan work in Gujarat from
Gujarat itself. I am sure in my mind that the burden of begging
this sum should not have to be borne by Sardar. He will contribute
something voluntarily, but refuses to put himself to trouble on that
account. My purpose in inviting you, Ranchhodlal and Shankerlal
is that either all of you should pay the expenses or beg for them.
I hope you will not want me to beg from outside Gujarat. And,
besides, how far can I be depended upon? Before long you and
I will know where I am. Please, therefore, spare some time from
the business of money-making and give a little of it to Harijan work
and a little to the service of the cow. If, however, my guess is
wrong and if at present you cannot spare a single moment for
philanthropic work from the task of earning money to payoff your
debt, in case you are in debt, tell me frankly and I will not then pester
you. I have now reached my 66th year making people work
beyond their capacity. How can the old hardened habit leave
completely, although I have now grown somewhat indifferent?
I am leaving the Congress, yielding to the feeling that no one
should work beyond his capacity but I have not yet parted com-
pany from my personal co-workers. To achieve this I must stop
wielding my pen and resort to silence or I must work only through
our journals. But I am not yet powerful enough to work in this
manner. I have not yet completely got over my infatuation, and
so I am driven to write letters such as this. But I warn you not
to have any false sense of shame on my account. I shall be con-
tent if you do whatever you can as a matter of dharma. I have
written, much to the same effect, to Ranchhodlal and Shankerlal.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1240
376
