214. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 7, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I think Rama humbled your pride by making you forget to
complete your sacrificial spinning. I don't count your lapse to
be as serious as you do. It is right, however, that you should
regard it as big enough. I say that Rama humbled your pride
because if we, who are but puppets constantly liable to err, did
not commit a single mistake in doing something, we are likely to
be filled with pride (however subtle it may be). Rama seems to
have treated you in the same way as He-or was it Siva?-had
treated Narad. The incident has had two good results-your pride
has been humbled and you will not make the same mistake again.
I have no comment to make here on the vivid sketches in your
letter. I have never believed that you are hard-hearted. Your
criticisms help me. Everyone of us has virtues and weaknesses.
If you are less inclined to see the virtues of others, try to see
them more often.
There was nothing in my letter to make Narandas ask ques-
tions about himself. He does work in the spirit of yajna. It is not
his fault that I have left him no time to do any body labour.
This, too, is evidence of my lack of organizing ability. If I had
been able to make efficient arrangements from the time that the
Ashram was started, it would not have been necessary for seve-
ral persons, as it is now, to be busy only in general supervision.
We have gone on the way we started. I believe that it is still
possible to change things, but I do not know how, and the Ashram
has still not got a man or a woman who will give more thought
to the problem and enforce the Ashram rules more strictly. Till we
get such a person, we should tolerate the present conditions. Let
us always remember that the Ashram very much falls short of
its ideal, for I believe it quite possible to organize things so well
that everyone in it will do his or her share of body labour and
good order will be preserved. Let us work in this faith. We shall
discover the key one day.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10275. Also C.W. 6723. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
