38. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
April 26, 1933
CHI. MANI,
I got your letter only two or three days ago. Your letters,
no matter how long, will never be too long for us. If, however,
you expect Father or me to write very long letters, we cannot
satisfy you. But I can understand your desire for such letters.
We enjoy quite a number of amenities and even luxuries to which
you in Belgaum are perfect strangers. But we would prove our-
selves unworthy servants of the nation and unworthy parents if
we used them or asked them for any but public purposes. Nobody
would think well of a person who claims to be a father of hundreds
of children and lets his mind soar in the clouds. So, then, we
enjoy all these luxuries to the full and you or Mridula may envy
our good fortune as much as you like. You had already passed a
sarcastic remark in regard to Mirabehn, and have withdrawn
it also. What is a father's duty? Should he give his children
what each needs, or should he give the same to all and thus not
only do great injustice but, maybe, make himself responsible for
the death of one of the children through his attempt to prove
himself just in the eyes of the world or to his immature child?
If, suppose, you are suffering from a disease and have to be given
bajra bread and skimmed buttermilk, does that mean that a
girl like Bharati who would require to be nourished on butter,
honey and light chapatis, should be given the same food as you?
A father is bound to provide all that is necessary for a child's
welfare. He is free to indulge the child and give it more in so
far as it is consistent with such welfare, but is not bound to do so.
It should not be necessary to explain this to you after all these
years. But I have to produce a long letter somehow, and so am
indulging in all this philosophizing. If you were not at all angry
with us, why were you making yourself miserable? Why did you
show such lack of faith? Why didn't you rest assured that one of
us must have written to you? I agree that both should write if
possible. But no one would be eager to write if he found that
the fate of his letters was so uncertain. One letter [a week] is
regularly sent to you, and, you may rest assured, will continue to
be sent in the hope that you will somehow get at least one. Father
has undertaken to give a detailed reply to your letter. He will,
therefore, give you the replies to your messages, and also give the
replies to your queries in detail. I should certainly like to reply
to some of them myself, but I resist the temptation. Anandi's
operation is an old story now. She left for the Ashram long ago
and she is quite well there. She got cold and fever some time ago,
but that was only for a few days. . . .2 came and saw us, . . . 's
hands are swollen and looked like pillars. . . . is taking tender care
of her. He is a husband, a friend, a teacher and a servant in one. At
present at any rate it seems that even her Creator could not have
found a better husband for her. Whether . . . deserves him or
not, God alone knows.
But I myself had pointed out her weak-
nesses to . . . before the marriage, and had written to him and
said that he could break off the engagement without any hesitation
if he did not like it. But, trained under . . ., how would . . . go
back on his decision? Everyone had showered love on her at
the time of her marriage. Everyone gave her some present or
the other. They will not have to spend for quite a long time
anything on household requirements or clothes. Be contented with
this. Our warder is standing before me ready to take me back to
my ward. It will soon be eleven and so I am returning to my
cage. After I have bathed and lunched, I shall be brought back
to the Harijan ward at twelve.
SHRI MANIBEHN PATEL
P.R. No. 10249
BELGAUM CENTRAL PRISON
POST HINDALAGA
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 100-
