374. LETTER TO CHAMPA R. MEHTA
MUSSOORIE,
June 6, 1946
CHI. CHAMPA,
I have your letter. The handwriting does not look like
yours. If it is I will say you have improved it a lot.
I don't remember anything about any freedom I might have
given you in regard to your mode of life there. If I did, you
should have asked me to give it in writing. Human memory
has ever been infirm. And [mine] has now become quite weak.
I do remember, however, that whatever I might have said I
qualified it with the condition that whatever you did should be
with the consent of Chimanlal or Krishnachandra. That is
because I do not have, nor do I want to have, any exclusive
right. How could I then make any concession independently?
Whatever I might have said earlier, make a note of what I
am now writing and conduct yourself accordingly. I only wish
your good. Now indeed you have realized that your upbringing
had not been perfect. Whatever might have been the cause, you
are now saved and you have become aware of things. You cannot
therefore behave irresponsibly on the strength of your wealth.
Besides, the money that you have should be regarded as a
sacred trust and spent accordingly. At the Ashram it would
become you to live in poverty as the others do; only then can
you be accommodated. You cannot spend your money in such
a way that it corrupts others. I cannot tolerate it, nor should
the Ashram. You should therefore sit down with Chimanlal
and Krishnachandra and organize your life as they advise and
make yourself one with the Ashram as sugar dissolves in milk.
Only then will you be happy, and make your children happy too.
It would not befit you to behave in any other way. Although Ratilal
is alive, I am sure you never let yourself forget that you are as
good as a widow. If you cannot act in this way, if you are
made of an altogether different stuff, you had better leave
promptly; go and live where it suits you.
As I don't know when I shall be reaching there, I have
written at length. I know yours is a difficult task.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
298
