339. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised
August 17, 1934
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Your passionate and touching letter deserves a much longer
reply than my strength will permit.
I had expected fuller grace from the Government. However
your presence has done for Kamala and incidentally for Mama
what no drugs or doctors could have done. I hope that you
will be allowed to remain longer than the very few days you
expect.
I understand your deep sorrow. You are quite right in giving
full and free expression to your feelings. But I am quite sure
that from our common standpoint a closer study of the written
word will show you that there is not enough reason for all the
grief and disappointment you have felt. Let me assure you that
you have not lost a comrade in me. I am the same as you knew
me in 1917 and after. I have the same passion that you knew
me to possess for the common goal. I want complete indepen-
dence for the country in the full English sense of the term.
And every resolution that has pained you had been framed with
that end in view. I must take full responsibility for the resolu-
tions and the whole conception surrounding them.
But I fancy that I have the knack for knowing the need of the
time. And the resolutions are a response thereto. Of course here
comes in the difference of our emphasis on the method or the
means which to me are just as important as the goal and in a
sense more important in that we have some control over them
whereas we have none over the goal if we lose control over the
means.
Do read the resolution about 'loose talk' dispassionately. There
is not a word in it about socialism. Greatest consideration has
been paid to the socialists some of whom I know so intimately. Do
I not know their sacrifice? But I have found them as a body to
be in a hurry.
Why should they not be? Only, if I cannot
march quite as quick, I must ask them to halt and take me
along with them. That is literally my attitude. I have looked
up the dictionary meaning of socialism. It takes me no further
than where I was before I read the definition. What will you
have me to read to know its full content? I have read one of
the books Masani 1 gave me and now I am devoting all my spare
time to reading the book recommended by Narendra Deva.
You are hard on the members of the Working Committee.
They are our colleagues such as they are. After all we are a
free institution. They must be displaced, if they do not deserve
confidence. But it is wrong to blame them for their inability to
undergo the sufferings that some others have gone through.
After the explosion I want construction. Therefore now, lest
we do not meet, tell me exactly what you will have me to do and
who you think will best represent your views.
As to the trust1, I was not present. Vallabhbhai was. Your
attitude betrays anger. You should trust the trustees to do
their duty. I did not think there was anything wrong. I was too
preoccupied to concentrate on it. I shall now study the papers
and everything. Of course your feelings will be fully respected by
other trustees. Having given you this assurance, I would ask you
not to take this matter so personally as you have done. It more
becomes your generous nature to give the same credit to your co-
trustees for regard for Father's memory that you would take for
yourself. Let the nation be the custodian of Father's memory and
you only as one of the nation.
I hope Indu is well and likes her new life. And what about
Krishna?
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1934. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 117-
