23. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL SETALVAD
WARDHA,
August 11, 1944
I am writing to you in my mother tongue which I believe
you will tolerate.
The Congress policy has been definite and determined. With
this nothing can be mixed. An independent India cannot entertain
any other stranger in its midst. The consent which I have given
to a particular scheme depends upon the fact that it is
based on a cardinal principle of the Congress. I command an
influence over the masses and therefore I cannot hide that which
I consider against the good of my country. An advantage would
be taken of this situation by my opponents and this was not out-
side the pale of my thoughts. But this fear comes out of the
weakness of our forces.
To remove this fear, the way lies in freely but respectfully
expressing our opinion and only in this way can we conquer and
win; this is my respectful opinion. Permit me to tell you that no
particular work of mine has resulted in any loss to my country.
At least I have never heard that it has. All your writings, I have
read with great patience and care but I have always felt that you
do not examine my side with patience and care. Your time
is occupied mostly in different types of work and this is not be-
yond my constant thought.
In the end it seems to me that the substance of your letters
leads to the inference that India is going to be for very long time
under the rule and sway of the English. From your writings this
appears to be India's destiny. But my firm belief is quite the
opposite of this. Moreover you crush our spirit and make us
appear blind. Our leaders also forget this fundamental differ-
ence in our views. This is the reason I believe why you
are so pessimistic and we so optimistic.
It is my sincere desire that a so-called rash step which I
propose to take may not result in any loss to the country.
Your younger brother,
M. K. GANDHI
SIR CHIMANLAL SETALVAD
MALABAR HILL, BOMBAY
From a copy: File No. 3001/H-P. 129. Commissioner of Police, Bombay
