445. LETTER TO J. H. GARRETT
AHMEDABAD,
April 13, 1931
DEAR MR. GARRETT,
Here is the promised statement about the new Mukhis or
Patels whom we regard as undesirable with a summary of the
evidence that can be led against them.
Babar Chatur Patel, Saijpur, Borsad Taluk:
He armed the outlaw Babar Deva with a rifle and was con-
victed and sentenced to two years' imprisonment but was later re-
leased by the Sessions Court. He has about 60 to 70 decrees against
him. After his appointment, four houses belonging to the old Mukhi
and two to other neighbours were burnt.
Lahri Mangabhai, Vasna, Borsad Taluk:
He was sentenced to six months' imprisonment three years ago.
This Mukhi got Jhaver Gaba appointed as Rakha1, although he
knew that the latter was five times convicted. In his own street,
three houses of Hijratis were burnt. He would not move to help
put out the fire.
Mahomedkhan Nachhekhan, Porda, Borsad Taluk:
He has no stake in the village. He abducted a potter's wife
and ultimately 'sold' her elsewhere. He similarly abducted a
Dhed's wife. He is heavily in debt and there are warrants of arrest
against him in the Gaekwad's territory.
Mirsab Majmudin, Davalpura, Borsad Taluk:
He was dismissed by the Baroda State for bribery. He does
not belong to the village.
Jama Gaga, Palaj, Borsad Taluk:
He has been thrice convicted.
Jhaver Vaja, Ras, Borsad Taluk:
He has been imprisoned for two months for receiving stolen
property. During his incumbency the crops of Ras were looted.
His is a temporary appointment. He applied on the 11th instant
for permanency.
Sandasar:
The Mukhi is a drunkard.
Anand and Boriavi:
These Mukhis had distress warrants against them, but these
were stopped at the instance of the Collector.
Jehangirji Cawasji, Varad, Bardoli:
The affidavits in my possession show that he has a force of
100 Dublas whom he uses for terrorizing the people, he has been
taking bribes, he has a canteen, he severely assaulted a teacher
who was a temperance preacher, and was found guilty by a Board
of Arbitrators before whom he publicly apologized.
Abumia, Buhari, Bardoli:
He was convicted for theft and sentenced to three months'
imprisonment.
Umarmia, (1) Shaku, (2) Ambada, Jalalpur Taluk:
He was convicted for one and a half years.
Dayalji Bhaga, Dandesar, Tarsadi and Quabi, Jalalpur
Taluk:
Drunkard.
Prema Gopal, Tighra, Jalalpur Taluk:
Drunkard.
Govan Rama Akoti, Bardoli:
Several statements. He was guilty of keeping people under
duress and recovering without permission for his use private carts
and bullocks. He has no stake in the village. Also that he refuses
to pass receipt for revenue recovered.
This list is not exhaustive, nor are all the complaints against
the respective parties summarized. I have given a sample list
from the papers before me. There should be a full impartial enquiry
into these cases and similar cases unless the general suggestion
made by me is adopted. Apart from the point of view of peace and
expediency, I have suggested that the appointments which are
admittedly temporary and "until further orders" can in no sense
be regarded as permanent in terms of the settlement. However, the
consideration that generally applies to the appointment of a Mukhi,
viz., that he should be of the people and more or less a re-
presentative enjoying among them a status and influence is lacking
in every case. In any event there seems to have been much dilatori-
ness in the reappointment of Mukhis and Talatis. As to the latter,
I also drew your attention to the fact that in Bardoli several Tala-
tis have not been reappointed on grounds of retrenchment. As
I told you yesterday, there are men acting for these old Talatis.
It is ominously strange that not one of the Talatis in Bardoli has
been reinstated.
CONFISCATED AND OCCUPIED PROPERTY
Property in Bardoli confiscated under the Criminal Law
Amendment Act has been restored practically intact, but in Kaira
District, there are serious allegations of misappropriations. A
number of articles belonging to the Kaira District Congress Com-
mittee are missing (fountain-pens, watch-chain, currency notes
worth Rs. 10/-, etc.). 250 maunds of fuel in possession of the Ras
Chhawni seems to have been appropriated by the Police. In Tranja
in Matar, 20 maunds of cotton and five maunds of tobacco in
Devataj were attached. Both are undisposed of, but lying in the
chora, instead of being restored to the rightful owners. There has
been vexatious delay in restoring confiscated property. There can
be no question of contumacy as the revenue is being steadily
paid wherever possible. Confiscated property should therefore be
returned automatically under the settlement whereas in some
[cases] Mamlatdars have asked for applications from those who
want their lands back. As the sowing season is fast approaching,
it is essential that people should be put in possession of confiscated
property as soon as possible.
ASSESSMENT
As to assessment I have suggested that there should be no
coercive processes and no fines or payments on account of Rakhas
should be demanded. I have suggested that in every case the Col-
lectors should confer with our local workers and come to an under-
standing as to the assessment. A place like Ras where movables
are taken away, locks of houses broken, houses burnt, crops des-
troyed can hardly be expected to pay anything. I brought to your
notice a case in which for Rs. 10/- revenue, Rs. 50/- worth of
grain was removed and Rs. 10/- had been kept for annas 10/-.
Here is another case.
In Ober (Jambusar Taluka, Broach District), lands belonging
to some of the satyagrahis were forfeited and third parties who
offered to pay up the revenue dues in respect of them were put in
possession of the land. They paid the revenue and took the whole
crop. They think that the lands have been transferred to them for
good and refuse to give up possession. On the other hand, the
Talati has passed no receipt to the original owner for dues recover-
ed out of the crops thus made over to third parties and the original
owners are asked to pay up the dues before they can be put in
possession.
One Pragji Vasanji of Ugat (Jalalpur) had migrated during
satyagraha and had not been able to reap his crop. He approach-
ed the Mamlatdar with an application for suspension. The latter
admitted the application, but four days later issued orders for
attachment of applicant's buffaloes which were returned only on
his promising to pay half the assessment within a month.
I bring some of these instances to your notice to show how the
spirit of the settlement is being broken probably unintentionally.
It is possible to bring counter complaints against the people.
I repeat the assurance I gave you yesterday that it is Sardar
Vallabhbhai's and my desire that the settlement should be ob-
served fully by the people. Any case of breach on the part of the
people brought to our notice shall receive prompt attention.
PENDING PROSECUTIONS
There are no less than 82 prosecutions in Borsad pending since
long before the truce. There are several in Bardoli and Anand and
Jalalpur. I append a detailed list. Several cases have arisen, since
the truce, as a result of the lack of information regarding con-
fiscated lands. They are separately mentioned.
There is the case of one Ratanji Dayaram of Bajipura who
with two others was prosecuted under Section 435 I.P.C. and
sentenced to six months' imprisonment and fine. His companions
have been released under the settlement but he is still in jail.
I gave you the name of Babalbhai, a Vidyapith student who
is still in prison for disobeying the deportation order under the
Foreigners' Act. His full name is Balkrishna Pranjivan Mehta. He
has not only not been released, but has been asked, before he can
be released on the expiry of his term, to sign an undertaking to the
effect that he must inform the Dhrangadhra State of his move-
ments whenever he moved out.
There is a similar case of Fakirbhai Dhanjibhai. He disobey-
ed the order before the truce.
SOLD LANDS
I refrain for the time being from saying anything about sold
lands beyond repeating that the least that I am entitled to is the
list of sold lands, their acreage, and the names of the buyers, the
dates when they were sold and how.
Yours sincerely,
2 enclosures.
[PS.]
I was thankful for the conversation of yesterday and hope that
all the matters will be amicably and satisfactorily settled.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
