147. LETTER TO MEMBERS OF WORKING COMMITTEE
Confidential (Not for publication)
BARDOLI,
February 8, 1922
DEAR FRIEND,
This is the third time that I have received a rude shock when
I have been on the eve of embarking upon mass civil disobedience.
The first was in April 1919 the second in November last and now
again I am violently agitated by the events in the Gorakhpur Dis-
trict. What has happened in Bareilly and Saharanpur where
volunteers have been attempting to take possession of Town Halls
has added considerably to the shaking. The civil disobedience of
Bardoli can make no impression upon the country when disobe-
dience of a criminal character goes on in other parts of the coun-
try, both for the same end. The whole conception of civil dis-
obedience is based upon the assumption that it works in and
1 The following are excerpts from the introductory note in the source: "The
civil disobedience at Bardoli, . . . was to have been started on the 12th Febru-
ary, 1922, on the expiry of the time-limit granted to the Viceroy . . . . But
Mahatmaji suddenly changed his whole plan of action on the 8th, and . . .
circulated a private letter to the members of the Working Committee indicating
this change . . . ."
2 Vide Vol. XV.
3 Vide Vol. XXI, pp. 462-.
through its completely non-violent character. I may be a bad
student of human nature to believe that such an atmosphere can
ever be brought about in a vast country like India, but that would
be an argument for condemning my capacity for sound judgment,
not for continuing a movement which is in that case bound to be
unsuccessful. I personally can never be party to a movement
half violent and half non-violent, even though it may result in the
attainment of so-called swaraj, for it will not be real swaraj as I
have conceived it. A meeting of the Working Committee is,
therefore, being called to consider the question on the 11 th ins-
tant at Bardoli, first whether mass civil disobedience should not
be suspended for the time being; and secondly, whether if it is sus-
pended it should not be discontinued for a definite and sufficient-
ly long period to enable the country to do organizing construc-
tive work and to establish an indisputably non-violent atmosphere.
I want to have the guidance of all the friends I can. I would like
you to send me your opinion even though you may not be able
to attend, either by letter, if it reaches in time, or by wire.
I am sending this letter only to the members of the Working
Committee, but I would like you to consult all the friends you
meet and if any of them wishes to come to take part in the
deliberations please bring or send him or them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Seven Months with Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 223-
