25. LETTER TO P. S. TO LT.-GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
P.O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
July 24, 1903
TO
PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
OF THE TRANSVAAL
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
My Association ventures to bring to the notice of His Ex-
cellency a very serious grievance under which the British Indian
community has been labouring since February last.
On the outbreak of plague in Natal, all Indian permits
were cancelled and the entry of British Indians, although refu-
gees from the Transvaal, was absolutely prohibited.
The prohibition lasts to the present day.
The matter was brought to the notice of His Excellency
the Lieutenant-Governor and several representations have been
made but His Excellency has, so far, declined to grant any
relief.
1 Vide Vol. III, p. 439.
2 Vide pp. 30 and 32.
36
My Association even went so far as to agree that any British
Indians coming from Natal should undergo quarantine at
Volksrust.
My Association feels that the community is being very un-
justly treated in the matter. Europeans and Kaffirs are being
allowed to enter the Colony from Natal, so far as my Association
is aware, without any restrictions, although the plague has attacked
all communities.
At present, Durban is practically free from plague, and in
any case, there has been no plague at any time beyond Maritz-
burg.
There are in Natal hundreds of British Indian refugees await-
ing permission to return, and these are dependent, in the mean-
while, for maintenance, on their friends. It is, therefore, a double
hardship. Not only are the men themselves suffering greatly
pecuniarily owing to being prevented from returning and resum-
ing their vocations, but they are also a charge on their friends
in Natal.
My Association ventures to draw His Excellency's atten-
tion to the fact that British Indian refugees, even when the War
was going on, never availed themselves of the Mansion House
Relief Fund that was sent to various local committees for dis-
tribution among refugees. Relaxation has lately been made by
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor in favour of those Brit-
ish Indians who, after having entered the Colony after the War,
had to come to Natal on business and have been prevented from
returning owing to the outbreak of plague.
My Association, therefore, humbly approaches His Excellency
for relief under such conditions as may be considered necessary
as to quarantine.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: LG. 90(2132 Asiatics. 1902-1906
