322. LETTER TO G. K. DEVADHAR
[NADIAD,]
July 2, 1918
MY DEAR DEVADHAR,
I thank you for sending me your report of the Sewa Sadan
work. It is a monument to your industry, nationalism of a con-
structive type and your love of service. The progress is indeed
phenomenal. There is probably nothing quite like it in all India.
If you have a lady teacher whom you can spare, I want one, even
two, to replace Avantikabai and Anandibai from Champaran.
And now for suggestions. A smattering of English is worse
than useless; it is an unnecessary tax on our women. When
we cease to make use of English where we ought not to use it,
believe me, the Englishmen will talk to us in our own language, as
they ought. Lord Chelmsford was quite pleased when I spoke at
the Conference in Urdu. By all means teach a select few ladies all
the English you can so that they might translate the best English
thought to their other sisters. This is what I call economy of
languages. I would therefore replace English by Hindi. The latter
will liberalize the Deccan woman who like the rest of her sisters,
is today parochial and it will add to her usefulness as a national
worker.
Harmonium is only a stage removed from the concertina. I
should give them the vina and the sitar. These are cheap, national
and infinitely superior to the harmonium. Lastly, I would like
everyone to learn cotton-spinning and hand-weaving to the exclu-
sion of fancy work. Through the instrumentality of two workers
I have got 100 rentias working, providing a livelihood for probably
300 women. When India regains her natural calm and quiet dig-
nity, mills will be a thing of the past. We shall then find our
Ranis spinning yarn of the finest count as they used to before. I
would like you to hasten that day. Believe me we shall soon have
a surfeit of these things.
The ordinary tendency is to move with the times. We who
must continually elect and select may not always follow the times
spirit; we may, we should, anticipate the future. He who runs
may see, if he would also think, that the future lies with handicrafts-
manship. Anyway, you cannot go wrong by encouraging the
women to go in for hand-spinning and weaving. They will be
helping to clothe the naked.
I have given you more than you bargained for. Many thanks
for giving Amratlal and Kesariprasad. Tell Mrs. Devadhar I shall
expect her to come and stay at the Ashram for a few days.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
