257. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
Wednesday [August 31, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I have one from Chhaganlal too.
It was good that you observed the Janmashtami fast. I had thought
of doing so, but gave up the idea. I decided it was enough for the pre-
sent if I could keep the Ekadashi fast alone. There is only one simple
way of winning divine grace—that of practising truth and other virtues,
gradually and deliberately, and of concentrating on one attachment
or devotion [to the Supreme] to the exclusion of all others.
Eat the whole body, O crow!
Peck away at my flesh;
But pray consume not the two eyes,
I still hope to see my beloved.
This is said of a lover and his beloved; but in truth it shows the
yearning of the soul to see the beloved in the form of God. He does not
care if the body is lost. If the crow of passion does not eat away the eye
of knowledge, he is bound to meet the beloved.
Chhaganlal's letters are still suggestive of his timidity. What he
writes about Gokaldas makes it appear as though you and all of us are
neglecting our elders. If Gokaldas does not go to India, it only betrays
his ignorance. He has no duty to perform here. He has not even
obtained specific permission from Parmanandbhai to come over here.
Moreover, Parmanandbhai wants only to see him. Gokaldas, however,
does not understand [this] and therefore does not go. All of you have
to serve your parents and you do it even while staying here. That
can be your sole object in earning money. Of course, they might feel
happy if you were with them. But they hardly need you apart from
that. I hold that children who are indifferent to their parents can
hardly accomplish anything in the world. I am quite free from worry
as I do not see in your and Chhaganlal's behaviour anything that con-
flicts with filial duty.
What Chhaganlal writes about the exhibition has been the general
impression. It is a great illusion. What are we before it, when a person
like Sitaji fell a prey to the temptation? This glamorous show is the
product of Western civilization. We can deem ourselves successful if we
are not led away by it. I do not mean to say that Chhaganlal has suc-
cumbed to the temptation. He is, however, greatly affected by it—and
anyone would be so affected at first sight.
I agree with Chhaganlal about not sending Santok. I think she will
not be happy in India. Such is our plight. She will not be able to
live there with that spiritual and physical freedom which she enjoys here.
When, thanks to her stay in Phoenix, she becomes firm in her convictions
and courageous enough to adhere even in India to her ideas and way
of life which she considers right, she will be happy there. Her stay will
be beneficial to India and she will render true service to the country
as well as to herself. I, however, feel that she may be allowed to go if she
is pressed to go as was Chanchi. Veni writes in every letter that in
India she feels as if she were in prison. This is not true of women alone.
Please do not let Chhaganlal know of any portion of this letter even
indirectly. For that might prove harmful. I am constantly pondering
over his letters. I shall write to him myself when I find it necessary.
My criticism too might be due to a misunderstanding. Even so, there
is no need at present to disturb the tenor of his thought. For I have
enough faith in him to believe that whatever he does he will come round
of his own accord.
I have written to you in detail so that you may not be upset or
distressed in any way.
The messenger did not inform me that the watch came from
Tipnis. I have not mentioned his name [in "Johannesburg"] as he
told me that it was sent by you. I shall make the necessary correction
next week if you have not done so already. We have not received
the things sent by Talewant Singh. I shall make enquiries. I fear some
demurrage will have to be paid. He has not even told me what the things
sent were.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4935
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
1 Literally, a golden deer. In the Ramayana, Ravana's maternal uncle, Maricha,
took the form of a golden deer to tempt Sita and entice Rama away so that Ravana
could kidnap her.
2 Wife of Gaurishanker Vyas, a leading Indian of Pretoria and a satyagrahi
