159. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
SEVAGRAM,
November 22, 1945
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,
Since you will certainly not be back before I leave Sevagram,
I am writing you this letter. You should know that the Nagpur
Bank was Jamanalal's, which he had started for the service of the
people. The idea was, and ought to be even now, that it should
serve as a savings bank for the poor. The bank, therefore,
must never crash. In other words, the Nagpur Bank should
crash only when the Bank of England or the Imperial Bank do
or when there is some great natural calamity. That is, it must
have the reputation that it will be the last not the first to crash.
That you are Jamnalal's heir really means that you are heir to
that reputation, and it was because of this belief of mine that
I advised the Jallianwala Trust to let its funds remain in the
Nagpur Bank and to try to transfer still more deposits to it. I
have given the same advice to Kumarappa, namely, that he should
deposit the Village Industries Association's funds in that Bank.
That confidence must not prove to have been misplaced. But
the moment I alighted at the railway station yesterday Bharatan
told me quite the opposite. He of course spoke gently and since
I am the President of the Association, asked for my opinion.
Kumarappa had written to me and asked me whether he should
deposit the Village Industries funds in the . . . .1 Bank. Vaikunth-
bhai had advised in favour of it and, therefore, Kumarappa
had assumed that I also would agree. But I expressed doubt
and did not give my consent. Kumarappa, however, had already
deposited the money. But now we must withdraw it. In that
case we shall lose the interest. And what if, despite our readiness
to lose the interest, we cannot withdraw it. So Bharatan asked
my advice. Kumarappa is not here just now. But I told Bha-
ratan that if the Bank people objected, we must put up a fight
and insist on withdrawing the money, for otherwise I felt the
money was insecure and it would be like killing a buffalo for a
leather thong. I do not know even today what kind of an
establishment the . . . Bank is. I do have some vague idea about
it, of course. But I generally dislike and distrust new banks. I
would not, therefore, readily agree to deposit money in them.
Then the question arose: if not in the . . . Bank, why should
we keep the money in the Nagpur Bank? Is it also not a
comparatively new bank? Comparatively yes. Bharatan then
added that it was being rumoured that the Nagpur Bank would
close down in a month or two because it had incurred losses
and it was feared that the deposits were not safe. He suggested,
therefore, that it would be wise to withdraw the money in time.
I did not believe the rumour and remained undisturbed in my
mind, but I wanted to know what was at the back of the rumour.
Radhakrishna was with me at the time. I asked him. He ex-
plained the position. I felt reassured and told Bharatan that we
must deposit the money in the Nagpur Bank and nowhere else.
However, I felt that I must inform you. Hence this letter.
Think over this and be on your guard. It is no ordinary matter
to be Jamnalal's heir. You are his heir because you are his son.
I am his heir because I am his adopted father. My interest
is to see that his name remains untarnished. You and I shall
have proved ourselves his true heirs only if the ventures he
started are not merely kept up but become models of their kind.
It may be that you will earn a lot of money and be reckon-
ed a millionaire. But what is to happen to the philanthropic
ventures and the Bank he started in the last years of his life?
What is to happen to the cause of the poor cow, of khadi, of the
Village Industries Association? Did I not settle at Wardha at his
behest, ignoring Sardar's anger born out of his love? He could have
easily secured for me ten orchards against one here, but he could
not find for me a Jamnalal there and, therefore, I let go the ten
orchards. And now, I do not wish even to feel that I have lost
Jamnalal. This rests entirely in your hands, in Radhakrishna's
and Janakidevi's. Janakidevi, however, is uneducated and the hope
of her shaping up which I had cherished has dried up after Jam-
nalal's passing away. I therefore cannot explain to her the posi-
tion about the Bank and have not even tried. Radhakrishna is
very clever. He has practical sense but cannot be said to be edu-
cated. You have been to England and have, besides, made some
mark as a business man. As for self-confidence, you have more of
it than is good for you. Be that as it may, as heir to Jamnalal
and head of the family it is to you that I have to look up. I,
therefore, advise you to do the best you can to bring glory to
your father's name as a philanthropist. If you think it beyond
your capacity, be humble and caution me in time. Not all sons
can or do follow in the footsteps of their benevolent fathers. If,
therefore, you also fail to do so, nobody can point a finger at you.
And in any case who am I to do so? But as a grandfather I
should at least advise you and caution you. Having done so, I
would quietly accept what you do. I think I have said enough.
Ponder over it carefully and let me know, at any rate, whether
the advice I have given to Bharatan is correct or not.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3058
