273. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
NADIAD,
August 2 [1918]
MY DEAR HENRY,
You must have duly received my letters passed on to you through
Millie. Among these is a letter from Hassan Imam wherein he says
he is going to fulfil his promise to you and that your complaint must
have been received before he forwarded some funds and a brief
I have a letter now from Dr. Mehta who has promised to do
his share if it becomes necessary to support Millie through your
1 The letter up to here appears in Vol. XIV, pp. 509-10.
2 From the contents; ibid pp. 446, 447 and 507.
263
incarceration. But I do not believe you will ever have to go through
the fiery ordeal. If you have, sufficient for me to say that you need
have no anxiety about Millie.
But I wish to utter a note of warning about your duty towards
Pater. Are you bound to support him in his speculations or in his artificial
style of life ? Do you not spoil him ? And may you do this especially
when the funds you receive are largely received by you in your public
character ? You may not divide the legal profession from your other
activities. Have you not renounced the right to earn more than your
needs including humble family needs ! You are a reformer at home
as well as aboard. Your life must influence the family life or it must
stand separately as a protest against its orthodoxy and present-day
shortcomings. I do not pretend to solve these riddles for you. I merely
point out that they exist for you and me and that you may not overlook
them.
So, Sorabji is no more. These shocks sometimes so shake me that
I do not want to live on this earth. But my faith in the justice of
Providence enables me to regain my sanity. I have cabled you about
Sorabji. You will have read my tribute in the Times and the Chronicle.
You will have sent me the Will and the policy and all the other papers
Sorabji may have left with you. I went over to Surat to meet the widow.
Sorabji has left a most lovely daughter.
I have your cable about the scheme. No one will reject it in toto.
But no one here seems disposed to accept it as it is. There is too
much compromise in it. India is not getting what is right but what is
expedient. Has the Civil Service any rights ? Have the European
merchants any rights as against the indigenous population ? But they
evidently think they have. There must be ceaseless warfare raged
against this preposterous claim. I like the scheme as an honest effort.
I should not care for it without substantial amendment. I should not
weep if it is not passed. I would not be overcautious lest nothing may
seemingly be achieved.
What do you say to my recruiting campaign? It is for me religious
activity undertaken for the sacred doctrine of ahimsa. I have made
the discovery that India has lost the power to fight - not the inclination.
She must regain the power and then if she will deliver to a groaning
world the doctrine of ahimsa. She must give abundantly out of her
strength, not out of her weakness. She may never do it. That to me
would mean her effacement. She would lose her individuality and would
be like the other nations - a worshipper of brute force. This recruiting
work is perhaps the hardest task undertaken by me. I may fail to gain
1 Vide Vol. XIV. pp. 507-.
2 The Montagu-Chelmsford Reform Scheme; ibid., pp. 486-.
3 ibid., p. 447 and 493-.
recruits. I shall still have given the best political education to the people.
As you know, I am building the Ashram on a new site. The building
work is slow. It is so difficult to get men and material.
With love from us all,
Yours,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
