257. LETTER TO S. SADANAND
'DILKHUSHA', PANCHGANI,
July 13, 1944
MY DEAR SADANAND,
Your wire. Though this reply is to you as a journalist, and for
publication, the manner of my reply will be on the basis of your
claim to be my son, a claim which you have often repeated.
You have verbally accepted my amends but in action re-
jected them. Re-read the opening parts of your telegram and you
will understand my meaning. If you do, you will make a public
acknowledgement of the offence you have given me even in the
act of accepting amends.
As a pleasing contrast to this, I may tell you that the four
reporters whom I had the pleasure of meeting yesterday were
graceful enough to accept my amends and to understand fully its
implication.
I have a categorical reply for everyone of the questions you
have asked me. But I very much fear that they are not sincere
but meant to advertise your bravery, and newspaper propaganda
of an unworthy type.
I have read with much pain your writings in your issue of
July 12, 1944. They caption a wicked attack upon Rajaji and
milder one on esteemed public men. You are doing a great in-
justice to yourself and shaming your nationalism by attacking
Rajaji who, to my knowledge, has no axe to grind, has forsaken
everything for love of his country and has risked popularity in
pursuing the dictates of his conscience. Let me tell you that
Rajaji has not discussed his politics with me. My dissent from
his politics, as I understood him in jail, continues.
Now that I have been involuntarily and prematurely drawn
into political controversy, I shall certainly discuss them with him
as I am doing with respect in spite of wide political divergence.
Courtesy towards opponents and eagerness to understand
their view-points is the ABC of non-violence. But you of all
persons should know that they are not likely to deflect me from
the straight and narrow path I have chosen to tread. They can
but strengthen me in my resolve to follow it, never weaken me.
And I should be an utterly unworthy leader or exponent of
non-violence, if I could be led astray by eminent leaders or con-
stant companions like Rajaji.
In a way the honest mistake made by Mr. Gelder, as his
premature publication of an abridgement of the notes of inter-
views with him appears to have been, is a blessing in that the
country once again has an opportunity of knowing the measure of
my compromising nature. I have no reason to be ashamed of it
and I have never considered it a sign of weakness in me but strength.
If you will prove a worthy son of mine, you will revise the
whole of your policy and use your journalistic gifts so as to serve
the country by the way of truth and non-violence.
You have had a fair portion of material goods out of your
journalistic venture. Now dare to be poor, if need be, and in-
stead of feeding the public on sensationalism, give them nothing
but solid gold. And, if you do not know how to do so, accept
a humbler vocation. You will then at least have the credit of
ceasing to do mischief.
I hope that you will publish this without alteration.
Yours sincerely,
This Was Bapu, pp. 152-
