526. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[May 13/15, 1932]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I received two packets from you this time. I follow your
argument that yarn of 16 counts will be cheaper than that of
20 counts. But I think we shall find that on the balance yarn
of 20 counts is cheaper, for in spinning such yarn we shall have
to remain vigilant all the time. The spindle, etc., will have to
be kept in good condition. By "cheap" I do not mean here
merely economical. I give to the word a spiritual sense. If,
therefore, you see no other difficulty, insist on everybody spinning
yarn of 20 counts and do it yourself, and see that the other
conditions are also observed. If you find that this results in
decrease in production for the time being, never mind. Probably
you remember one thing which I suggested to you once or twice.
We should reckon the value of all types of work at the same rate.
In other words, if a person works for one hour, whether he spins
or cards or weaves or does carpentry work or writes accounts or
works on the farm, the value of his work should be the same.
For the purpose of our record, I had suggested that the value
should be one anna per hour of work. If all inmates of the
Ashram above the age of ten, other than those who may be bed-
ridden, have been working daily for an average of eight hours,
I would say that the Ashram was self-supporting. This may
seem just now to entail loss from the economic point of view,
but ultimately the account will balance itself even from that point
of view. Of course, in proceeding on this basis we assume that
all inmates have been honest. Everybody must have used the
time honestly. To make sure of this, we should have considered,
when making the entry, whether the person had done as much
work per hour as everybody doing that work was expected to do,
and whether he had done it with proper care. I did not suggest
that this record should take the place of the usual account that
is kept. It does not require too many entries. The daily figure
will be entered against everybody's name; it may be one in some
cases and two in others, and the figures will indicate the number
of hours for which the person had worked. The figures will be
entered only against those who pass the test in our eyes. I
would call this a spiritual account. If we work in this manner,
whatever the yield of our farm and our dairy I would describe
those activities as self-supporting. Moreover, this plan assumes
that the labourers will be as good as inmates of the Ashram and
that we shall be satisfied with the vegetables, fruit and milk which
we produce in the Ashram. These ideas have not sprung up in
my mind recently. I have been discussing them ever since the
establishment of the Ashram. I may not have discussed them at
length with you, but I used to discuss them frequently with
Maganlal. But till now they have remained as mere wishes. I
am simply pouring out before you the stream of thoughts which
started with reflections on the spinning yajna during the National
Week. I do not wish that you should start implementing these
suggestions right now. You are a steady man, and, therefore, I
do not hesitate to put before you whatever ideas come to me.
I don't wish to confuse your mind in any way or start you
worrying needlessly. There are persons who become impatient as
soon as a new suggestion is put before them, immediately start
implementing it and, failing in their attempt, get confused. In
the result they will have given up the old practice but discovered
nothing to take its place. I believe you do not have this weakness
in your nature and that is why I throw out to you every new
fancy which occurs to me. When you are fed up with this, please
drop a hint and I shall calm down. From here I can give you
no active help in your work, but within my limits I can help you
with suggestions. But this help also I can give only if you
receive the suggestions patiently, put each in the proper cabinet
in your brain and weigh its practicability before acting on it. If,
however, they become a burden on your brain, my sending them
will serve no useful purpose.
Let me return for a while to the question of 20 counts. It
is not quite correct that cloth woven from yarn of 16 counts
lasts longer than cloth woven from yarn of 20 counts. If the
cotton from which the yarn of 20 counts was woven was of suffi-
ciently good quality and was properly carded, and if the yarn
spun from it was strong enough and the weaving was sufficiently
close, the cloth would certainly last longer than the cloth of 16
counts which we have with us now. The fact that the latter lasts
longer only means this: Both the varieties of yarn which we
spin, 16 counts and 20 counts, are weak. But the yarn of 16
counts is likely to be less weak comparatively, and such yarn can
be spun even from cotton of inferior quality without its quality
being affected.
Hence the cloth woven from it may appear
stronger than the cloth woven from the yarn of 20 counts. If we
cling to this belief, we shall be responsible for spreading the
notion that cloth woven from yarn of 16 counts is stronger than
cloth from yarn of 20 counts, and, if my argument about yarn
of 20 counts is correct, we shall also be responsible for encourag-
ing work of bad quality. Up to a limit, the finer the count of
the yarn which we are able to spin the better shall we be
able to serve the poor, because that will raise the prestige of
khadi.
I think we shall be able to demonstrate that it is not difficult
to spin fine yarn which can be used for weaving cloth. Just
now I give all my attention to learning to spin on the Magan
spinning-wheel. But Mahadev has been experimenting with the
slivers sent by Chhakkaddas. He has made some changes in the
spindle-bearer, and these changes by themselves have enabled
him to spin without any difficulty yarn of 36 counts from the
slivers which he has been using all along. Previously he could
spin yarn of 20 counts, then of 25 counts and now he can spin
yarn of 36 counts. In the letter which I wrote to Lakshmidas
yesterday I have explained how this improvement took place.
Get that letter from him and read it. It is true, however, that
Mahadev's speed has decreased a little. When he was spinning
yarn of 25 counts, his speed was 300 rounds per hour; it was
240 when the yarn was of 32 counts, and now for yarn of 36
counts it is 210 rounds per hour. This decrease does not alarm
me in the least. When the count of the yarn becomes fixed, I
am sure his speed will increase a little. My point is that by
gradually learning to spin yarn of finer count, we are helping
the cause of khadi.
It seems you celebrated Maganlal's anni-
versary in a most befitting manner.
Panditji, Lakshmibehn, Yashvant Prasad and Mathuri came
and saw me. Manibehn was the oldest among the party, and
hence I gave the letter to Harilal to her. While giving it I asked
her and was told that all of them would return to the Ashram
on the same day. I sent the letter with her, thinking that it
would reach you earlier than by post. I feel helpless. I got one
more letter from Harilal. In both letters I see pure insolence
and total lack of shame. I don't see in Bali the faults for which
he blames her. She has been like a mother to Manu, and, there-
fore, it would be a cruelty on Manu to remove her from her
charge. However, I cannot have in prison the information which
you may get there. After knowing my views, therefore, do what
seems best to you whenever you have to decide what to do.
There is no cause for worry about my hand. It pains when
I work, but not at other times. If I feel that milk will help to
cure the pain, I will certainly start taking it. The pain was there
even when I used to take milk.
I see that Ratilal is a heavy responsibility on you. I have
had two letters from Champa. She seems to have felt hurt for
some reason. See what you can do to pacify her. She says that
her younger brother wants to stay in the Ashram. If you think
he can stay in the Ashram, take him in. Write to Harihar
Sharma and ask him if he will take away Ratilal. I am afraid
that even if he goes to Rangoon he will not stay there without
Champa. And the latter does not wish to go there. I believe
that she has good reasons for not wishing to go there.
Grant the permission desired by Ranganath Kulkarni to make
a Marathi translation. None of the papers sent by Jethalal
Govindji were reports about Anantpur. But I did get one letter
from him. The prison authorities tell me that the reports must
have been received, but that they seem to have been misplaced.
Please, therefore, obtain their copies from him.
There is probably much exaggeration in the complaint you
have received regarding the women.
I will, however, inquire
about the matter.
I sent to you the five names of intending visitors which were
approved. The other names which have been approved are as
under:
Indu Nehru, Jehangir Vakil (of Poona, Indu's tutor) and
his wife, Hemprabha Devi, Raihana, Hirawanti Mansukh-
lal,
Chhaganlal,
Rama
(Ranchhodbhai's),
Prabhashankar
(Champa's father), Behram Khambhatta and his wife, Manjuke-
sha, Sushila (Pyarelal's sister), Sushila (Premabehn's friend),
Dinkar Mehta, Puratan Buch. You need not write to them. If
Puratan comes to the Ashram any time, you can tell him that he
may come whenever he wishes. I have given the list only for
your information. If you know of any other persons who wish
to visit and if they come within the conditions laid down by the
Government, please send their names to me.
There is a letter from Mahavir. He writes in it that all of them
are keeping good health and that, therefore, they should be per-
mitted to stay on for a few months more. I think that they may
be permitted to stay on. It would be advisable to fix the upper
limit of their expenditure. I should like them to take up some
work in Darjeeling. If you can think of any, please suggest it. I
think you did write to me and tell me what their monthly expen-
diture was, but I have forgotten the figure. I think it would be
good if they marry Maitri to someone in Darjeeling. She has
certainly reached marriageable age. They wished to get her
married to Khadagbahadur. But I don't think he will agree. I
have written directly to Maitri about this. Read that letter. If
in the end they decide to stay permanently in Darjeeling and
Mahavir starts earning, that would certainly be good. If you have
thought about any suggestions in this regard or if any suggestion
occurs to you in future, please let me know.
Ramdas writes and tells me that he has deposited some of
his money in a certain bank and he wants the amount to remain
where it is. I heard that Gopaldas the Vidyapith graduate,
has received serious injuries. Inquire about him and let me
know the facts. If he is able to write, ask him to do so. Ask
Chandrashankar to send me by registered post a copy of Magan-
bhai's Mimansa . He should also write how he keeps.
Did Ba get my letter? I have had no letter from her at all.
Did you read what Jamnadas said about Harilal? I am afraid
the latter has misled you. Many persons write to me and tell me
that he has abandoned all restraints. Haridas Gandhi's health
is fairly good. He is being treated properly. His illness, however,
is mental. Does his father visit him? Where is Kamala?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8226. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
