173. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 8, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
If you have not been sending to Chhaganlal and others sum-
maries or copies of my important letters, please send them. I see
that Chhaganlal doesn't know anything. Probably it must be the
same with Vinoba. Make some arrangement for copies being made.
You will find enclosed a letter from Mary Barr. If she re-
turns there, welcome her.
The other letter is from Nandlal Bose regarding Dhiru. It seems
from it that Dhiru will not be able to go before July. In July
he may certainly go. The letter refers to Rs. 15 as boarding
charge. I couldn't understand exactly what it means. However,
nothing need be done just now. If I come through the fast and if
it is necessary, I will write and get a clarification. Otherwise you
may do so. I am sending the letter so that Dhiru may have
patience. For the time being, let him do what he can in the
Ashram. He should purify himself during these three weeks.
You will have to give more time to N. Try and under-
stand what is in her heart. If any letters are received for her,
open and read them. She is not likely to hide anything deliberate-
ly. But she has little control over her mind. I see that she
has had a large share in persuading me to undertake this fast. I
did not know this. If there is anything which can give her strength,
it will be this fast, and, if I have made any mistake in sending her
there, the fast is the only thing which can undo it. I think that it
will save many young men. If she is pregnant, the cause is one
Harijan priest named . . .1. It is difficult to judge as to who temp-
ted whom. According to me, if she is pregnant and if she can
accept the prospect calmly, the experience will or can change her
life and save her. Shower on her as much love as you can and
rear the plant.
Margarete has left and gone away to Madras. She has held
out a threat that she will go on a fast there. If she fasts, that
will certainly do her health good. She will lose some of the
excessive fat on her body.
Duncan's belief is completely mistaken. I will explain the
matter to him.
Please carry out my suggestions about the kitchen and the
dairy if they have appealed to you.
Even if you don't make changes in the prayer, you should
divide it into three parts, namely, the recitation from the Gita,
the Sanskrit verses and bhajans. Only those may attend the
recitation from the Gita who are ready to join in it. There is no
moral obligation at all on the others to attend. However, those
who wish to attend should give their names. The Gita should be
followed by the Sanskrit verses. In this also only those who wish
to join and who can recite the verses may attend. Then should
follow the bhajans and Ramdhun. Each of these three things, if
done properly, will take ten minutes. Thus the only part of the
prayers which all should attend is the last one. If all the persons
give their names for the parts which they wish to attend, you will
know who keep their resolutions. A lamp, a tall desk and a register
should be placed near the gate and everybody who comes should
put a cross or sign his name if that is preferred, in the appropriate
column. Those who do not have sufficient faith in prayer to join
even in the last item should not be eager to remain in the Ashram.
Anybody who lacks faith in what is an inseparable part of the
Ashram will get no benefit from the Ashram and will be able to
contribute nothing to it.
Nobody should stay merely from a wish to be useful to the
Ashram. A son or daughter who consciously thinks 'I may be
useful to my mother' will not serve her. Only those who look
upon the Ashram as their mother or their all in all, should stay
in it. If everybody in the Ashram reflects sincerely in this man-
ner and decides to stay, the coming three weeks will be well
spent there. It is the Ashram which can make the best use of
this period and benefit from it, and it ought to do so. I want
everybody to maintain perfect truth. If you feel short of workers
for carrying on the activities of the Ashram, you may engage paid
men and women, look upon them as your own brothers and sisters,
share their joys and sorrows and be one with them. Probably such
a relationship will be more natural. Any activity which can be
dispensed with may be stopped. However, the cultivation of fruits
and vegetables, as also the dairy and the agricultural work connec-
ted with it, ought not to be stopped. All the processes relating to
spinning are forms of yajna. You may stop admitting children.
The entire Ashram is a school. I, therefore, cling to the view
which I have expressed before. We should be able, and we are
able, to give the necessary training required for living as a
labourer. It should be enough to make sufficient provision for
this. It is because we have not understood the full significance
of this idea that we remain discontented and all the difficulties
arise. If we but realize that our children are labourers and that
it is our aim that they should grow up as such, I believe many of
our problems would disappear. The training imparted for this
purpose is bound to be different from the ordinary type of edu-
cation. This is enough for the present. Even from this, accept
only as much as you can and throwaway the rest.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8378. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
