427. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Silence Day, October 17, 1932
This is just 4.20 a.m. after morning prayer. I got your
letter of the 7th instant yesterday. The value I attach to your
letter you will perceive from the fact that I am devoting to the
reply my most precious hour. The value lies in that it is an ex-
pression of your love and sincerity. It has little or no value as
an agency designed to carry conviction. If I have erred, I should
love to have the conviction even after the event since it would
serve to protect me against repetition of the error. But I miss
that conviction.
I see that though our mutual love remains the same, our
view-points have become different, our way of approaching
things has also become different. We have therefore to agree to
differ.
In this matter I had thought that even if everybody else
would not understand my action, you and Millie would instinc-
tively perceive it and become my shield. But that pleasure was
not to be mine. I derive however the richer pleasure that our
love can persist even in spite of political and spiritual differences.
I was unprepared for the latter. But I see that political, social
and the like are inextricably mixed up with and derived from
the spiritual outlook. Therefore when we have sharp political
differences, the odds are that they are traceable to the
spiritual.
You seem to have missed the very core of the fast. You have
to go back to my speech at the Minorities Committee. It was
not a prepared speech. The end of it came irresistibly. The fast
was an inevitable result of that solemn declaration. I little knew
how that declaration was to find fulfilment. I say that the decla-
ration was from God and so was the fulfilment. If it was so, all
argument is useless. If it was a hallucination, friends who believe
it to be such are bound to drive home the truth to me with all
the love and persistence they can summon to their assistance.
Everything that happened since confirms me in the opinion
that the fast was a God-given trust.
Not the Premier but Sir Samuel was the vehicle through
whom the message of the fast had necessarily to go. But if you
had followed all the statements I have made and even my letter
to the Premier you would have seen that the fast was addressed
to the millions who had faith in me, and who had surrounded
me with their undying affection whenever I went in their midst.
They understood the fast with all its implications without any
argument. For them, the political part of it was trivial; internal
reform was everything. The latter is still going on. And remem-
ber the fast is only suspended, it may have to be resumed if
people go off to sleep. When a lover fasts to prevent the
loved one from going astray, it is not blackmail, it is the cry of
an anguished heart ascending to heaven. Of such, in your lang-
uage, is the music of the spheres made. My fast was a whip
administered to lethargic love.
You ask why it was not administered ten years ago. The
answer is: God did not call me to it. He comes to wake you
up when you least expect Him. His ways are not our ways. You
will of course believe me when I say that I had then the same
capacity for sacrifice that I seem to have now.
Lastly, you should accept my judgment based on much ampler
data than yours that the same settlement could not have been
arrived at in London and that the Premier was not called upon
in any way to decide on any question outside the Hindu-Muslim-
Sikh tangle.
Love to you all.
BHAI
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 148-
