315. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday evening [October 16, 1930]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the letters sent by you. I write this letter specially
regarding Amidas. It will, therefore, be immediately cleared.
Will Amidas agree to take raw eggs? There are two kinds of eggs,
one to which exception may be taken and the other unexception-
able. The former are those which ultimately produce chicken, and
the unexceptionable are those which produce no life. Hens lay
such eggs without their having been inseminated by cocks. This
is a well known fact. Parnerkar will probably know about it.
Such eggs are available in the market. Mostly Europeans look
after the production of such eggs. There is a farm for this pur-
pose near Miraj. You will find some correspondence on this sub-
ject in my file. You need not, however, search for it. Many
Parsis in Ahmedabad will be able to give you information about
where such eggs are available. Personally I believe that eggs of
this kind are less objectionable than milk. In eating them, we do
not deprive any creature of its food, as we do by taking milk.
If Amidas agrees, obtain such eggs immediately. They are to be
used in this manner. Break an unfertilized egg, mix its contents
with eight ounces of water and keep the mixture in a bottle. Give
him an ounce of this mixture every hour. He will soon gain
strength. The mixture will completely serve the purpose of milk.
I can say that Manu's life was saved by this mixture. Such
eggs are a hundred times better than cod-liver oil. Tell Amidas
that if there is any sin in acting upon this advice, I take it upon
myself. I have not publicly advocated the use of such eggs be-
cause, when self-indulgence is on the increase and all kinds of
medicines are being consumed without hesitation, I did not think
it proper to add one more to the list. Amidas's case is quite
different. I hope Parnerkar has recovered.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Please reply to this soon.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I; also Bapuna Patro-9:
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 144-.
