19. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
April 14, 1913
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 5th instant, in reply to my telegram of the 2nd instant, re-
garding the recent judgment given by Mr. Justice Searle.
I am to submit that it had never, before the judgment of
Mr. Justice Searle, become clear to the community that non-
Christian marriages not registered in South Africa would not be re-
cognized by the South African Courts. Mr. Justice Wessels' judg-
ment delivered sometime ago, went perilously near such a pro-
nouncement, but his judgment turned rather upon the legality
or otherwise of bigamous marriages than upon the validity of
marriages celebrated according to the rites of the various great
Indian faiths. As the Hon'ble the Minister will have noticed,
Mr. Justice Searle's decision was not based upon any precedent,
but was an original pronouncement upon the Marriage Law, the
case before him having been considered a test-case.
Moreover, up to now, Hindu, Mahomedan and Parsee mar-
riages have not been questioned, and the Masters of the several
Divisions have recognized them. But, since the judgment referred
to, the Master of the Natal Provincial Division, my Association
understands, has questioned the validity of a Mahomedan marriage
in connection with the succession of the widow of a deceased
Mahomedan to his estate.
My Association is grateful to the Government for giving the
assurance that it is not their intention to apply the law in a harsh
or arbitrary manner, but, in view of the judgment in question,
I hope that the Government will understand the attitude of the
community represented by the meeting in considering the assurance
as not sufficiently meeting the requirements of the situation. In
the eye of the law now, Indian wives of non-Christian persuasion
are not wives but concubines. I feel sure that the Government
will appreciate the position of the community if it resents, as it
1 this was signed by A. M. Cachalia.
2 This is not available.
3 Vide Vol. XI, pp. 243- & 262.
4 Vide "Janubie Case", pp. 19-20.
does resent, such a humiliating reduction of the status of Indian
wives and, as has been already pointed out, the legal consequences
of the judgment, which, it is apprehended, it is not within the
power of the Government by administrative action to remedy, are
serious enough to warrant an alteration of the law.
My Association, therefore, ventures to hope that the Govern-
ment will be graciously pleased to give due consideration to the
feelings of the Indian community in the matter, and take the op-
portunity that the introduction of the new Immigration Bill offers
to remedy the evil created by the unexpected judgment of Justice
Searle.
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913
