337. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAJ
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 29, 1928
DEAR LALAJI,
I have your characteristic letter. I am glad you had an ocu-
lar demonstration of what form untouchability takes in the south.
I wish you could have been there longer to see the unapproach-
ables and the invisibles face to face, and to talk to them.
And in this connection let me tell you what an important part
khadi is playing in reaching even the unapproachables and invisi-
bles, because it is khadi that makes it possible to establish contacts
which before were impossible or unthinkable. However this is
by the way and written not to influence you in favour of khadi
through a side issue.
I am therefore glad that you are making a serious study of
the subject. And I am glad, too, that you are determined not to
come to any hasty decision. Whatever conclusions you may ulti-
mately form, I would like you to feel about them as you feel
about untouchability. No argument against untouchability from
the so-called sanatana quarters or any quarter could possibly dis-
lodge you from the position you hold. I would like you therefore
to make a thorough study of the problem before coming to any
conclusion whatsoever.
I want you for khadi. I know what a gain it would be. But I
do not want you as a patron on whose certificate I may trade. I
want you as a fellow-worker who will not be dislodged from his
position and who would be working for the cause of khadi to the
best of his ability. For the present, therefore, I would like you,
after your study, to discuss the subject with me if you have any
doubts before you commit yourself. By all means carry on corres-
pondence with me or those who may be hostile to khadi, but I
would like you to promise that you will not commit yourself be-
fore discussing with me the criticism that may appear to you to
be convincing and unanswerable. Let me assure you that there
are in the khadi movement people who have made a thorough
study of the subject and who will leave khadi without a moment's
hesitation if they found that the premises on which they proceeded
were insupportable.
Yes, indeed, Maganlal's death is the heaviest blow I could have
received. But in the battle for freedom, we have little time to
shed tears over the departure of the dearest.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13597
