660. LETTER TO PANNALAL JHAVERI
March 29, 1933
CHI. PANNALAL,
I have received both your letters. You have been hasty in
passing judgement on Narandas. The decision about Mahavir
was not his; it was mine. Considering his rudeness, the lies that
he resorted to and his financial bungling, any other decision was
impossible. Behind the seemingly harsh decision, there is only pity.
Krishnamaiyadevi did not know the truth. Even then, after
Narandas gave his opinion, Panditji, Totaramji and Chimanlal
conducted an inquiry. They gave their views separately and their
conclusions were the same. Only then were Mahavir and Krishna-
maiyadevi asked to leave the Ashram. I had not been inclined
to have women [in the Ashram]. But Narandas showed courage.
I have very little to do even with the help that is to be given.
I had only suggested that they should be enabled to reach
Darjeeling and provided with expenses for two months.
Narandas found this course difficult and found an easier
way. The Ashram was under no obligation to accommodate the
Giri family. In having them there, I had saddled Maganlal with
a great burden, and had stretched the rules of the Ashram.
It was with great difficulty that we passed these many years.
I have no regrets about it. But if I go on witnessing violations
of the Ashram rules, there certainly will be reason for me to
regret. Now if Mahavir continues with his tales of woe, that
will be one more reason why he should go. He is not as inno-
cent as you think. Thinking him innocent I am not prepared to
make him helpless. If you have the time, go deeply into the
matter and if you find you are mistaken correct the mistake.
If not, and if you think I am in the wrong, show me how.
Do not judge anyone in haste, certainly not your colleagues.
You have written to me that you heard many complaints against
Narandas. Let me know whatever you have heard.
Let me know your programme if you can. Where is Ganga-
behn at present? She has not written to me at all after she
came to meet me. It is long since I had any letter from
Nanibehn.
We are all doing well.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
As you have forgotten to write the address, I am sending
this to Harjivanbhai.
[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari-Pannalal Jhaveri, pp. 30-31
