243. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 2, 1909
DEAR HENRY,
I shall probably write two letters to you this week. The present
one is in connection with Phoenix.
I have already told you that I had long chats with Dr. Mehta, and
that he had given £15 for the school. I have got some books out
of the £15 for the library; you have the list; some more have been
bought. There is still a balance of about £12. There may be some
books there of value, which might be purchased out of the balance
left. You may consult Chhaganlal and others.
Dr. Mehta, however, has promised much more. He intends to give
a scholarship that would cover the expenses of educating and boarding
an Indian lad at Phoenix. I have told him what the expenses might
be—anything from £1 to 25/- per month. He has also placed at my
disposal the expenses of educating one Phoenixite in England.
The
idea arose from his desire to take over the training of one of my own
boys. I told him that I could not accept any such thing, but I would
be pleased to accept the expenses, to be used for the best person in
Phoenix, and that, if I considered that Manilal was the most suitable for
the purpose, I should not hesitate to send him also. All this makes me
think that you might do some such work there. Mr. Petit is a moneyed
man. There are others also, if you could convince them that Phoenix
is intended to be a nursery for producing the right men and right Indians.
You might induce some of these men to give scholarships to be used
either for use generally or restricting them to Indians only. We should
accept them either way. They might also give us donations, earmarking
them for buying books and other educational material. The chief
thing would be for you to convince them that whatever energy is put
forth in Phoenix is not so much taken away from India, but is so much
given to India, and that, in some respects, Phoenix is a more suitable
place for making experiments and gaining proper training. Whereas
in India there may be undesirable restraints, there are no such undesir-
able restraints in Phoenix. For instance, Indian ladies would never
have come out so boldly as they are doing in Phoenix. The rest of the
social customs would have been too much for them.
with Lord Crewe. I wrote to you last night advising you to do so if you had not heard
from him. Please let me know what answers are given to the questions in the House
of Commons. The Press, as you know, often omits to publish them."
I have here given you enough to enable you to enlarge upon the
idea and do whatever you think is necessary. You may be able to get
Adamji Peerbhai or his son to give a scholarship either for the Indian
boys generally or for training Mahomedan boys. You may get them to
give you prizes also. It will be well to collect prospectuses from the
different educational institutions in India, for purposes of reference.
Mr. Omar has the century dictionary and various other important books
of which he has not the slightest use. In my letter which I enclose here-
with, I have asked him to let us have this dictionary and any other books
he could spare. You may speak to him in the matter.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5042
