202. LETTER TO VICEROY
SIMLA,
July 21, 1931
I have your kind letter of 20th inst. inviting me on behalf of
the Prime Minister to be a member of the Federal Structure Com-
mittee as also a member of the full conference. Whilst I appre-
ciate the invitation and would like to respond, as I have already
conveyed to you, I have serious difficulties in the way of my pro-
ceeding to London. I came to Simla in the hope that the diffi-
culties would be removed. But our protracted conversations have
not advanced matters so as to enable me to come to a positive
decision. I feel that the way things are moving in India at the
present moment, unless they improve, make it impossible for me
to leave India. Reports pour in upon me from every part showing
that Congressmen are being harassed without any justifiable cause.
In some places they say that they are being harassed much more
than during the civil disobedience campaign. I know your diffi-
culty especially when things are being done under cover of law.
I have suggested several ways out. But I am sorry that they
have not commended themselves to you. In the circumstances the
most I can say is that I must watch events and if I find that
things have not taken a better turn I must reluctantly come to
the conclusion that I must not go. I need hardly say that I seek
no protection for any Congressman from prosecution for manifest
breach of the common or the statutory law of the country. My
complaint is about acts manifestly outside the law and processes
which are demonstrably vexatious. It grieves me that I am not
able to send you a better letter. But I am helpless.
After much cogitation I have come to the conclusion that I
should send my son Devdas Gandhi to the Frontier Province. I
would feel ill at ease if I could not send anybody at all especially
after the information that Mr. Emerson gave me. As I said to
you during our conversation he will be asked to refrain from
making any speeches or accepting any addresses. My sole object
in sending him is to promote peace and to avoid a catastrophe
178
if it is at all possible. His presence would also insure Khan
Abdul Ghaffar Khan responding to the Commissioner's invitation.
Young India, 20-8-1931
