81. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
Posh Sud 6 [January 18, 1918]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I am dictating this letter to you and not writing it myself, for
otherwise there may be none at all. You are right in what you
say about things being dear. To keep oneself away from relishing
food even while living in daily company with it is a great vow
to observe. Only an exceptional man can do so and moksha is
for such a man alone. We may, as yet, only make the attempt.
Keep the vow as best as you can. I think I am myself unworthy
at present to speak with any very great authority on this subject.
Prof. Kripalani went to jail the day before yesterday and we obser-
ved a fast. The joy I knew on that day is not mine today. I broke
the fast yesterday and had fruits to eat; they were sweet enough,
but I ate them without zest and so was full of joy; however, less
[than on the previous day]. I know that, trying to find pleasure
in food that is not particularly savoury, I ate too much today and
in consequence I am ill at ease in my mind, not happy. Thus,
despite the fact of my diet being limited to five articles [during
the course of a day] and altogether devoid of the savours which
make food tasty, the palate continues to extract its pleasure and the
atman suffers. If, at the age of 49 and despite this effort at discipline,
I have not succeeded in bringing my palate fully under control,
what may you do, in the prime of youth and living surrounded
by all manner of dainties. I can guess the answer well enough.
To be sure, it is my intense desire that you and other young men
who have understood the importance of self-control in this matter
and are endeavouring, in my company, to achieve it, may outdo
me. You can. I have struggled long to attain complete mastery.
More than this, I shall write when I am worthy enough to do so.
lt is quite likely that earth will have no effect on a deep
wound. Keep up patiently the treatment you are following, that
of inserting a cloth plug. If you cannot manage the insertion
well, take the Doctor's help. The wound should not remain unheal-
ed for very long now.
You may put me any questions you like. I shall reply when
I find the time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Mahadev Desai's hand, signed by Gandhiji:
C. W. 5725. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
