52. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
SABARMATI JAIL,
March 17, 1922
CHI. MANILAL1,
Tomorrow I shall be sentenced. I shall hardly wish to write
letters thereafter.
I shall be content if you take care of your health, and occupy
yourself in some good work anywhere. While I am in jail, it is
not necessary that you must come here. Now that you have made
I.O. your own, I think you can come here only after you have
placed it on a sound footing. I see no one whom I can send to
you from here. Every good worker is needed here.
It seems you have not yet sent the account from there. If
you have not, please do so.
Imam Sahib's wife, Haji Sahiba, died suddenly of heart fail-
ure on reaching the port of Porbandar. Imam Saheb is filled with
grief. He had been to see me yesterday.
Now about your personal problem. Both Naidu and Ramdas
tell me that I should write to you about your marriage. They
believe that deep down in your heart there is the desire to marry,
but that you would marry only if I absolve you from your promise.
I do not consider you to be under any promise to me. It would be
proper for every man to be under binding to himself. One is one's
own enemy or friend.
You have bound yourself and you alone can free yourself from it.
It is my opinion that whatever peace you get is because of your
self-imposed binding. You can be sure about this. As long as
you do not think of marriage, you stand absolved from your past
sins. This atonement of yours keeps you pure. You can stand
up as a man before the world. The day you marry you will lose
and in jail with Mahadev Desai as a result of Government's action against that
paper. He also edited Young India for some time.
your lustre. Take it from me that there is no happiness in mar-
riage. To the extent Ba is my friend, I derive happiness from her,
no doubt. But I derive the same happiness from all of you and
from the many men and women who love and serve me. I
derive more [happiness] from the man or woman who understands
me. If, at this moment, I get enamoured of Ba and indulge in
sexual gratification, I would fall the very instant. My work would
go to the dogs and I would lose in a twinkling all that power
which would enable one to achieve swaraj. My relation with
Ba today is that of brother and sister, and the fame I have is
due to it.
Please do not think that I got this wisdom after I had my fill
of pleasure. I am simply painting before you the world as I find
it from experience. I cannot imagine a thing as ugly as the inter-
course of man and woman. That it leads to the birth of children
is due to God's inscrutable way. But I do not at all believe that
procreation is a duty or that the world will come to grief without
it. Suppose for a moment that all procreation stops, it will only
mean that all destruction will cease. Moksha is nothing but
release from the cycle of births and deaths. This alone is
believed to be the highest bliss, and rightly.
I see every day that all our physical enjoyments, without
exception, are unclean. We take this very uncleanliness to be
happiness. Such is the mysterious way of God. However, our
purushartha lies in getting out of this delusion.
Having said all this, I regard you as quite free [to act as you
please]. I have written this merely as a friend. I have not given
any command as a father. "Be you good", this is my only in-
junction. However, do what you wish, but not what I wish.
If you simply cannot do without marrying, do think of marriage
by all means.
Please write to me in detail what your innermost thoughts are.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Please send here all my manuscript papers, correspondence
files, books of newspaper-clippings, etc., which are lying there.
Also, all the books which you think are not needed there.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1116. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
1 Goal of human life
