293. LETTER TO ALI BROTHERS
LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
May 23, 1919
MY DEAR FRIENDS,
I write with a heavy heart, for I see that I have disagreed
with you on these things and my disagreement must pain you, as
it has already considerably pained me. I wonder whether Mr.
Ghate ever received my letter which was meant for you, and
whether if he did, you got it. That letter explains my position
regarding your memorial to the Viceroy. I shall try briefly to re-
explain it, as having received no reply from you, I fear that you
have not seen my letter to Mr. Ghate.
I consider that your memorial was too undignified for the
great cause you are espousing and of which I have felt you are
pre-eminently the embodiment and for which you have suffered
without a murmur all the long years and are still suffering. Your
language was inflammatory and too full of declamation for a memo-
rial. Your statement of the Mohammedan claim instead of represent-
ing an irreducible minimum was an exaggeration. I am sure,
you do not propose to raise questions affecting issues that were
rightly or wrongly settled long before the war. You have a right
to claim the restoration of the temporal status of Islam as it existed
at the time of the outbreak of war. I would like you even now to
redraft your memorial, make a reasoned and logical statement
that must arrest and command the attention of the world. The
success of any cause naturally necessarily depends finally upon the
will of God. But that will is almost conditioned by the manner
in which we who approach the throne of the Almighty conduct
ourselves and nothing avails there but cold reason sanctified by
truth, humility and strictest moderation. In the new memorial,
I would omit all mention of personal suffering. It stands as a
living record speaking for itself. If you adopt my proposal, I would
love to revise your draft.
The two other things in which I have disagreed with you are
your two letters sent to the Press for publication. You now know
why I stopped the publication of your first letter. The second
letter just received has also been stopped for the same reasons, but
the additional reason for not printing it is that your plea for
Mr. Nazim is unmerited. When the crucial movement came,
he stood not for truth but for untruth. I am sorry for him, but
I cannot feel with you that the action [the] authorities took was
wrong. He made a deliberately false statement, when he was
challenged and when it was his special duty to make a correct
statement. I will not weary you with the full particulars of this
painful episode.
I must confess too that I do not like your half disobedience
of the order of the internment. I do not know that you got my
message sent to you, after my discharge at Bombay, that you need
not disobey the order of internment and I would like you, if you
could summon up the courage, to recall the notice of disobedience
and tell the Viceroy that upon mature consideration and for the
sake of the cause for which you stand, you have decided not to
disobey the order for the time being.
You may not know that in my recent confidential letters to the
Viceroy and the Governor of Bombay, I have definitely raised the
Mohammedan question confining it to Khilafat and the holy
places. Please remember me to Aman Sahib and ask the children
— I forget the names of the blessed ones—to write to me as they
did before.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 6622
