98. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
March 14, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
I have been very slow in sending you the draft constitution.
Now I have your telegram. I was ready with it only last Sunday
and then it awaited the dictating of this letter when your tele-
gram was received. You will see what labour has been put into
it. The draft as it comes to you is the 3rd draft prepared by
Mahadev. I was simply supervising and suggesting. I think I
told you that I read it first and found that it required a lot
of re-drafting and thinking out. It was then handed to Shastri.
Shastri went through it carefully and made suggestions. Then
Mahadev tackled it. So, you may say that it is the result of
the joint labours of three persons. Before it is printed, it should
be passed by the Committee of the Society. I feel that Hariji
should apply his legal mind to it and, as a lawyer, make what
amendments and additions he may think necessary before it is
considered by the Committee. If he cannot give it the necessary
time, it should be put in the hands of some lawyer who is expe-
rienced in drafting constitutions for societies such as ours. No
labour now given to it will be a waste of time and effort if the
Society is to grow into a big and efficient organization. Constitu-
tion alone will not do it, I know, it will be the workers who will
perform the trick. Nevertheless, without a good workable con-
stitution we will not be able to bind together the different units
composing the organization and its branches. After you have the
final draft for passing, if there is any time, I would like you to
send me a copy of that draft, for, you should know that I have
not examined the enclosed draft in all its details.
I am anxious to receive your impressions in detail of your
Punjab tour, your experience of the Harijan leaders. Swatma-
nandji appears to me to be an able man. He is a polished
Hindi writer and seems to have original ideas. He tells me that
1 Vide pp. 17-22.
2 R. V. Shastri, editor of Harijan
3 Hridaya Nath Kunzru
4 Swatmadas; vide "Letter to Amritlal V. Thakkar", pp. 93-.
87
he met you. He has sent me a copy of the representation that
was submitted to you by his Society. As you have seen from his
report which I have sent you he has no faith in the chief caste
Hindus working the different anti-untouchability organizations.
We have to give him as much satisfaction as is possible, and if there
is nothing whatsoever in his charges, we should be able to tell
him so and support our statement with convincing evidence.
I know I have deprived you of the only secretary who was
giving you the fullest satisfaction. If you had pleaded your in-
ability to part with Shastri, I should have managed somehow. I
have not the courage now to say, "You can have Shastri if you
wish". At the same time I know that you must not remain with-
out an efficient secretary. Would you like me to make a search?
If you will, let me know your exact requirements and what you
are prepared to pay.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 1113; also S.N. 20576
