427. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
[Prior to June 24, 1905]
[TO
THE HONOURABLE DADABHAI NAOROJI
22 KENNINGTON ROAD
LONDON, S. E.
SIR,]
I send herewith copy of Indian Opinion. The leading article shows
to what extent it has now become possible under Law 3 of 1885 for the
1 The original is not available. We reproduce here the extract quoted by Dadabhai
Naoroji in his letter of June 24, 1905 to the Secretary of State for India.
Indians to own land. The Supreme Court decision practically leaves
them free, so long as they can get a European friend to become a trustee,
to own fixed property. I draw your attention to the fact so that, in
any legislation that may be drafted there, it may not be taken for granted
that, under Law 3 of 1885, it is impossible for the Indians to own property.
From what has been going on here, it appears that the new legislation
to replace Law 3 of 1885 will be as much as possible on the lines of Law
3 of 1885, that is to say, it is not the intention of the Government here
to give any greater rights than [those] enjoyed under Law 3 of 1885.
Just as, therefore, Mr. Lyttelton has taken up the stand, saying that he
would not, in view of the Supreme Court decision, consent to restrict the
trading rights of the Indians, so also should he now refuse to sanction
any legislation which would restrict an Indian's rights to own landed
property.
The anti-Indian legislation that is at present being considered by
the Natal Parliament is dangerously symptomatic. Almost every Gazette
contains something about it. Indians are to be brought under the Native
Department regarding the holding of fire-arms.
Their occupation of rural land, unless they are owners, is not to be
accepted as such for the purpose of levying a land tax.
The Durban Town Council is asking for powers to impose licences
on store-holders and bring them within the Dealers' Licenses Act.
The Municipal Corporations Consolidated Law is intended to deprive
the Indian of the municipal franchise.
The latest Bills published in the Natal Government Gazette are intended
to bring within the Dealers' Licenses Act Native Eating House-keepers,
and to restrict the scope of Hawkers' Licenses to the magisterial divisions
within which they have been issued (hitherto a licence to hawk outside
municipal boundaries entitled the holder to hawk throughout the Colony
excepting the municipal areas).
All this legislation is unnecessary and insulting. I, therefore, venture
to think that, as stated by Lord Curzon in his Budget speech, it is time
that the next step was taken, namely, to suspend indentured Indian immig-
ration to Natal, unless the Natal Government would cease their anti-
Indian activity and amend, at any rate, the Dealers' Licenses Act so as
to give the aggrieved party the right to appeal to the Supreme Court.
Colonial Office Records: 417, Volume 414, India Office.
