331. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
NEW DELHI,
July 14, 1947
CHI. BHANSALI,
I have your letter. You cannot leave the Ashram in this
manner. All of us are responsible for any sin committed in the
Ashram and we should all become more vigilant in our own
conduct. . . .1 has not been guilty of immoral conduct. He as-
sures me that he has been guilty of no lapse. He has enter-
tained no impure thoughts. We should not, therefore, take any
extreme step merely on suspicion. When the time to wind up
1 Omissions as in the source
the Ashram comes, I myself will give the call. There is room
for much purification in us all. All vows have the same impor-
tance. Violation of anyone of them amounts to violation of all.
Relations of men and women attract our attention immediately.
Moreover, we condemn such relations in a great many cases, but
we ought not to assert positively that they really deserve our
condemnation. All depends on the purity or otherwise of the
mind. If my mind becomes affected by the sight of a woman's
picture, I have committed adultery. But though I used to sleep
with . . . by my side, my mind remained unaffected and so I
could claim that I committed no immoral act. That my claim
might not be accepted by others would be a different matter.
That I should give up such practice if my co-workers cannot
put up with it is also another issue. The point I am making
is that we ought not to pass judgment on any action merely
on the basis of suspicion. Though all the vows are of equal im-
portance, some of them may be easier to observe than others.
The vow of ahimsa seems to me the most difficult of all. Any
thoughtless remark constitutes violence. Getting angry with any-
body is violence. You can think of many other similar instances
and calm yourself. You will find that, though you have risen
high, you have still further to climb. Be calm and continue the
watch.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 822. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave
