128. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 14, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
I have your letter of the 13th instant. I understood from
our talks that you were in no hurry for my answer. I was, there-
fore, taking the matter in a leisurely fashion, even hoping
that as our talks proceeded and as cordiality increased, mutual
clarification would come of itself and that we would only
have to record our final agreement. But I understand and ap-
preciate the other viewpoint. We should take nothing for granted.
I should clarify your difficulties in understanding the Rajaji
Formula and you should do likewise regarding yours, i.e., the
Muslim League Lahore Resolution of 1940.
With reference to the Lahore Resolution, as agreed between
us I shall deal with it in a separate letter.
Perhaps at the end of our discussion, we shall discover that
Rajaji not only has not put the Lahore Resolution out of shape
and mutilated it but has given it substance and form.
Indeed, in view of your dislike of the Rajaji Formula, I have,
at any rate for the moment, put it out of my mind and I am
concentrating on the Lahore Resolution in the hope of finding
a ground for mutual agreement.
So much for the first paragraph of your letter.
As to the second, I do hold that unless we oust the third
party we shall not be able to live at peace with one another.
That does not mean that I may not make an effort to find
ways and means of establishing a living peace between us.
You ask for my conception of the basis for a provisional
interim government. I would have told you if I had any scheme
in mind. I imagine that if we two can agree it would be for
us to consult the other parties. I can say this, that any provi-
sional government to inspire confidence at the present moment
must represent all parties. When that moment arrives, I shall
have been replaced by some authoritative person, though you will
have me always at your beck and call when you have converted
me or I you, or by mutual conversion we have become one mind
functioning through two bodies.
As to the third point, the provisional government, being the
appointing authority, will give effect to the findings of the Com-
mission. This I thought was implied in my previous answer.
Rajaji tells me that 'absolute majority' is used in his Formula
in the same sense as it is used in ordinary legal parlance wherever
more than two groups are dealt with. I cling to my own answer.
But you will perhaps suggest a third meaning and persuade me to
accept it.
The form of the plebiscite and franchise must be left to be
decided by the provisional interim government unless we decide
it now. I should say it should be by adult suffrage of all the in-
habitants of the Pakistan area.
As to the fourth, 'all parties' means you and I and everyone
else holding views on the question at issue will and should seek
by peaceful persuasion to influence public opinion as is done
where democracy functions wholly or in part.
As to the fifth, supposing that the result of the plebiscite is
in favour of partition, the provisional government will draft the
treaty and agreements as regards the administration of matters of
common interest, but the same has to be confirmed and ratified
by the governments of the two States. The machinery required for
the settlement and administration of matters of common interest
will, in the first instance, be planned by the interim govern-
ment, but subsequently will be matter for settlement between the
two governments acting through the agencies appointed by each
for that purpose.
As to the sixth, I hope the foregoing makes superfluous any
further reply.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
