209. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 14, 1919
DEAR MR. MAFFEY,
You will not consider that I was discourteous in not sending
even an acknowledgment of your last letter. The fact is that I
have treasured that letter as worthy of you and the friendship
that I hope will ever exist between us, no matter what differences
of opinion and standpoint there may be between us. I did not
wish to send you a mere acknowledgment, I wanted to reach a
decided stage before writing to you again, and I have also reached
more than a decided stage, and in the place I have made my
abode I find utter lawlessness bordering almost on Bolshevism.
Englishmen and women have found it necessary to leave their
bungalows and to confine themselves to a few well-guarded houses.
It is a matter of the deepest humiliation and regret for me. I see
that I over-calculated the measure of permeation of satyagraha
amongst the people. I underrated the power of hatred and ill
will. My faith in satyagraha remains undiminished, but I am
only a poor creature just as liable to err as any other. I am
correcting the error. I have somewhat retraced my steps for the time
being. Until I feel convinced that my co-workers can regulate
and restrain crowds, and keep them peaceful, I promise to refrain
from seeking to enter Delhi or the other parts of the Punjab. My
satyagraha, therefore, will, at the present moment, be directed
against my own countrymen. I do want, however, to say that
it was a grievous blunder of the Government of India to have serv-
ed those orders on me. Surely they knew me too well to make
such a mistake. I could not disregard my Pledge and I was not
going to Delhi or to the Punjab to create any disturbance. Wher-
ever I have gone, my presence has had a demonstrably restrain-
ing and soothing influence. I was going to Delhi, Lahore and
Amritsar—to the latter places, if certain conditions of mine had
been fulfilled —for the purpose of insuring peace, and though the
events at Amritsar are, so far as I can see, unconnected with
satyagraha and my arrest, I feel sure that had I been able to
proceed to these places, the awful occurrences could have been
avoided, and I think there would be perfect agreement with me
when I say that the mad incendiarism that has taken place in
Ahmedabad would have never occurred, if the orders had not
been served upon me. I venture to suggest therefore that the
orders may be withdrawn. Rightly or wrongly, I seem to com-
mand, at the present moment, in an excessive degree the res-
pect and affection of the people all over India. The non-withdrawal
of the orders would be resented by them. In order that the
resentment may not grow by reason of any avoidable action of
mine, I have even refrained from describing them and the man-
ner in which they were served. I have even not corrected the in-
accuracies that have appeared in the Press—inaccuracies which are
designed to make light of my arrest.
So much for the orders. I know you will accept my assu-
rance when I tell you that ever since my being brought to Bom-
bay, and liberated there, I have done nothing but assist in secur-
ing order, first in Bombay and secondly in Ahmedabad. Even as
I am dictating this letter, visitors are pouring in at the Ashram
at my invitation. I hope to send you, if not with this letter, under
separate cover, by the next post the text of my address to the
Bombay meeting and to the meeting to be held here today.
I would like, too, to place before you my reading of the
situation. The ferment among the Mahomedans is too great to be
checked for ever. It may burst like a torrent at any moment and
behind the present disturbances are to be traced the results of
extreme dissatisfaction. It is not confined to classes, but it most
decidedly permeates the masses. I venture to submit that it will
be a most disastrous thing if the questions affecting Islam are not
settled by the League of Nations in accordance with enlighten-
ed Mahomedan opinion, and I suggest that the Brothers Ali may
be invited to give their opinion. You cannot do better than having
the Brothers in London to give the Home Government the bene-
fit of their advice. They are amongst the honestest of Maho-
medans. They are independent and able. It is their opinion and
that of such Mahomedans which will count in the end with the
vast masses of the Mahomedan population. I have not hesitated
to tell the Mahomedans, whom I meet, that rather than harbour
discontent, ill will and finally hatred, and depend upon methods of
violence, it behoves them to depend on the peaceful and royal way
of satyagraha. My reliance upon satyagraha is so great that I do
not despair of securing its acceptance by all the classes and commu-
nities of India on the one hand, and Government on the other.
For to me it is the rule of life to which we subscribe, more or less,
consciously or unconsciously, often even against our will.
Lastly, the Rowlatt legislation has passed the stage of contro-
versy on merits. In my opinion, everything happening in India
today points to the desirability of the withdrawal of that legisla-
tion, and the Government will only enhance its prestige by defi-
nitely announcing its withdrawal out of regard for Indian opinion
so definitely expressed. I felt that I should pass these thoughts
on to you. You will do what you like with them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 6534
