246. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 8, 1928
MY DEAR JAWAHAR,
I have your letter. I do not remember Father having told me
that he would be back in Bombay to confer with the mill-
owners during the last week of this month. But he and I discus-
sed the question of foreign cloth boycott at length and he had
a conference with Seth Lalji, Shantikumar, Seths Ambalal,
Kasturbhai and Mangaldas. It was a good conference, but nothing
definite was done. I have now heard that the mill-owners are go-
ing to start their own Swadeshi League which means of course
that we are not coming to any terms.
I had a long discussion with Lalaji today, for he was here for
two days. He is enthusiastic about boycott of foreign cloth. I have
supplied him with literature. He even suggested that I should
invite a few leaders and confer with [them] about boycott. I told
him I had not the courage to do so. He is of opinion that if in-
tense boycott propaganda is to be taken up, I must not go out of
the country, wherein of course I agree; but I cannot take up
intense propaganda unless politically-minded India is whole-
heartedly with me and unless the agitation about temporary boy-
cott of British cloth, principally British cloth, is given up. We have,
therefore, come to this provisional arrangement that if anything
concrete takes place by spontaneous action on the part of the known
leaders, I should give up the idea of going to Europe. On the
other hand [if] nothing of that kind happens and if otherwise I see
my way clear, I should proceed and that Lalaji and others who are
minded like him should cultivate an atmosphere for intense propa-
ganda about foreign cloth boycott with or without the assistance
of mills. I therefore suggest that you should confer with Dr. An-
sari and others. I suppose they will all go to the Punjab and pass
the resolution about foreign cloth boycott through khadi. I would
warn you against any mention of indigenous mill-cloth. You can
simply say: 'Whereas the only effective means of immediately
demonstrating the united strength of the nation lies through
boycott of foreign cloth, this Conference urges all concerned com-
pletely to boycott foreign cloth and adopt hand-spun and hand-
woven khadi even though such adoption may necessitate revision
of one's taste about dress and some pecuniary sacrifice.' You will
also let me know the result of private discussions you may have
with friends and advise me as to whether I should give up the
idea of going to Europe. Dr. Ansari should really be able to decide.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13179
