355. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
21-24, COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER, RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 1, 1905
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
C/O INTERNATIONAL PRINTING PRESS
PHOENIX
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letters. I have not been able to write to you for some
time. I sent you Gujarati matter yesterday. I would like you to tell
me whether what I send is enough; if not I could send more, in which
case I should really have The Indian Review and some Gujarati papers
sent to me.
I sent with Shah two loaves of Kuhne, biscuits, sweets, cake and
papad. The loaves were for Bean and West, one each, the rest for you.
I wonder whether you got all these things. Did you send the sweets from
Durban? If so, please do not repeat the experiment. It is totally un-
necessary, and I am anxious not to introduce complex dishes in the house.
You may send me the first part of Pope's Grammar. See that it
is in both English and Tamil. Is it a new edition published? If not,
don't buy it. A new edition was published, I think, last year. If they
will give it to you on approval, then you can send all the three parts,
deposit 30/- and if I find them not useful, they should refund the money
and take the books back. I have already got a Tamil-English dictionary
from Mr. Simon. All I now want is a good grammar.
I hope you have discussed the matter of Tamil and Hindi with Kit-
chin, and told him that neither can be rejected at the present stage. I
have written to M.C.C. & CO. regarding the P/Notes they want. Here-
with statement for the Press to date. I shall be interested to know how
the English work is done this week in the absence of Mannering. Is Rug-
beer gone altogether? I am extremely sorry for him. Have you knocked
off night work?
Please put down Edward B. Rose, Esq., 45, Great Ormond Street,
1 Dry, crisp and paper-like, it is made from a variety of pulses and spices.
2 The firm of M. C. Camroodeen & Co.
3 This is not available.
Bloomsbury, London, on the complimentary list. You may begin with
the current number.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.] I see [the] sweets were brought by Desai.
1 Enclosure: Statement.
From the typewritten original: S. N. 4234.
