1. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 1, 1932
CHI. MIRA1,
Your letter arrived today.
I have now decided to stop the interviews from next week
if the decision is delayed. They will be resumed if the decision
is favourable.
The left elbow has proved worse than the right hand. All
work with the left elbow has stopped and presently it will be
packed in splints. Doctors are sure that it is nothing but the
strain caused by the uninterrupted working of the wheel from
day to day. I am thankful that I have now acquired full control
over the Magan wheel. Spinning, therefore, continues and will
continue merrily, unless the right elbow strikes from sympathy.
You will be glad to learn that today I weighed 106½ lb.
This is a good record. So you see that there is not the slightest
cause for worry even on account of the elbow.
Your saltless experiment is producing interesting results. I
should, however, wait before ascribing all the good results to the
absence of salt.
I wrote to Verrier last week care of Khambhatta. I hope
he got my letter. Yes, it is a good idea, his going to England
for recuperation. The sooner he goes the better. It was very
wrong of Shamrao to have had that fever. Have you seen him?
I am sorry about Damodardas. The enclosed is for him.
It is a superstition to think that saltless is tasteless. Salt kills
flavour. I have known people not touch things with salt in them.
Taste is a matter of habit. I suppose you do take butter and
bread. These do contain salt. Your experiment is one of reducing
the quantity of free salt. The effect produced on you, therefore,
is due to reduction, not entire absence of salt in your food. But
that does not matter. Nor need you worry that you are taking
some salt somehow. Let well alone. Do you ever see Manilal?
Or is he still not there at all?
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Verrier suggested that we should sing a Christian hymn every
Friday at evening prayer. So Mahadev began "Lead, Kindly
Light" in Gujarati. And this we shall continue every Friday.
Please tell Verrier this if he has not yet got my letter.
From the original: C. W. 6224. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9690
