4. LETTER TO KARSANDAS CHITALIA
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
January 28, 1929
BHAISHRI KARSANDAS,
You have been writing regularly. I am not worrying as
Kusumbehn writes to you.
I had a long and pleasant conversation with Sulochana-
behn. She thinks, and I agree with her, that she is not yet
mentally ready to join the Sangh. In order to know where she
stands, I feel she needs to join some organization and gain
experience as an ordinary worker. She agrees with this and for
the present is thinking of doing something of that kind. Her
idea of the Sangh was quite different. She thought that a Sangh of
the women office-bearers of the existing organizations should be
formed and they should meet for an exchange of views. I tried
to explain to her that this would serve no useful purpose and I
think she was convinced. I have formed a good impression of
her.
It is difficult to say anything about . . . behn. This, how-
ever, is certain that . . . behn and Sulochanabehn cannot carry
on together. Their temperaments are absolutely incompatible.
Sulochanabehn will find her own way . . . . It is doubtful if. . .
behn will be able to find hers. It is also doubtful if she will be
able to render much service independently. She keeps good
enough health . . . . But I cannot judge how she will fare in
future.
The idea of a separate Sangh will have to be dropped for
the present. I do not think we have enough means even for
constructing a building. Sulochanabehn has decided to do some
introspection for the present and estimate her strength. . . . behn
is incapable of coming to a decision. I think there has been too
much hurry in asking for the security. I also think that you
have been a little hasty in your judgment of . . . behn. Think
over this carefully, discuss it with Kishorelal and write to me.
Let us not do anything which may seem ridiculous. The fruits
of patience are sweet. We can take the plunge even if one
woman comes forward to dedicate herself. But I see no such
woman at present.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32577/45
