344. LETTER TO "THE OUTLOOK"
[Prior to April 22, 1905]
A REPLY TO MR. HILLS
TO
THE EDITOR
The Outlook
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
Mr. W. Hills has made in his letter to The Outlook statements which
are hardly borne out by the facts. The Editor has not supported a policy
"which would hand over the Transvaal to a parasitical race". Mr. Hills
himself admits, by implication, that the British Indian is very industrious
and hard-working. It is scarcely fair to call a race of such men parasites.
Mr. Hills says his opposition to Asiatics is not due to "colour pre-
judice but to economic considerations"; and in support he states the ex-
perience of all Natalians. Now the experience of all Natalians it is difficult
to know. The experience of some, who, moreover, are accepted as represen-
tatives of the people of Natal, is on record. The late Mr. Saunders, the
late Sir Henry Binns, the late Sir John Robinson, the late Mr. Escombe,
the present Colonial Secretary, Mr. Maydon, Sir G. M. Sutton, Sir James
Hullett, and many others, have testified to the usefulness of the Indian
in Natal. The late Sir Henry Binns said, in giving evidence before a
Commission, that it was when Natal was on the brink of bankruptcy that
Indian immigration was thought of. Sir James Hullett, only a few months
ago, giving his evidence before the Native Affairs Commission, said emp-
hatically that Natal owed its prosperity to the presence of the Indian
immigrant, and that it could not do without him. The greatest proof,
however, in support of the statement that Natal requires the Indian is given
by Mr. Hills himself. If the Indian population in Natal has doubled since
1896, what is the cause? It is simply that more and more Indians are being
required in order to keep going the chief industries of Natal, namely, sugar,
tea and coal. It should be remembered that the Indian of whom Mr.
Hills is thinking is not an intruder, but that he is actually invited to the
Colony for its benefit. There are still 18,000 applications before the Indian
Immigration Trust Board which have to be dealt with. The demand
for indentured Indian labour is much greater than the supply. Verulam
always had a large Indian population. Mr. Hills, in regretting that it
has become an Indian township, forgets that it had either to become an
Indian township or cease to be a town at all. The north coast of Natal
takes in the largest Indian population. It has to be developed either by
Indian labour or not at all. The Natalians have thought better, and have
not hesitated to cultivate the coast land through Indian labour, and the
palatial mansions which the white men occupy even on the north coast,
let it be remembered, are due entirely to the assistance of the Indian immig-
rant, and are owned by the employers of Indian labour, so that the example
of Natal is all in favour of the Indian, and the "economic considerations"
on which Mr. Hills lays so much stress have compelled the Natalians to
resort to Indian assistance.
Again, Mr. Hills makes a mistake when he states that "the law, under
the late Government as interpreted for 15 years, confined Asiatics to
Locations". It is a well-known fact that, under the late Government, the
Indians lived outside Locations with absolute impunity, and, it is because
they were able to do so, that the present Government find it difficult to oust
them. It is true that, as they had British protection then, it could hardly be
withdrawn now, and it should be again remembered that, during the Boer
regime, there was no restriction against Indian immigration, whereas, to-day,
as the Chief Secretary for Permits has shown, only those Indians who
were settled in the country before the war are allowed to re-enter, and
then, too, after much questioning and delay. Although Mr. Hills talks
about the white population in general and its good, in applying his prin-
ciples, he only takes notice of the Indian licences to trade. Is it, then, that
he objects only to the Indian traders? Mr. Hills again makes the mistake
of supposing that the South African Coloured people are refused licences,
whilst the Indians received them freely. Under the Supreme Court's
ruling, the Government dare not prevent any Coloured people, as such,
from getting licences, and if Mr. Hills' objection is, after all, as it evidently
seems to be, against the trade of the Colony falling entirely or even largely
into the hands of Indians, there is not much difficulty in sympathising
with him, nor has the Editor of The Outlook suggested that such compe-
tition should not be regulated by a statute of general application. But
to thus regulate Indian trade, and to hound the Indian out of the Colony
by all kinds of vexatious legislation, are two different things. With the
one, every sensible Colonist will be in perfect agreement, so long as vested
interests are not touched, and licences are not refused to Indians as such.
But it is scarcely in keeping with justice and fair play, for instance, to pre-
vent the Indian from walking on foot-paths, from owning landed property,
from living, subject to strict municipal regulations, or from building a
mosque, anywhere he likes. Such restrictions are meaningless, if they
do not proceed from colour prejudice, and it is questionable whether
those who fan the flame of such prejudice would be doing any good to
posterity. The facts must be taken as they are. India is part of the British
Empire, like the Transvaal, and there ought to be a policy of give and
take, whilst there certainly should be nothing done to needlessly wound
the feelings of these men, who are, after all, subjects of the same King,
and are a people with remarkable traditions and a wonderful ancient
civilisation.
Two simple bills are likely to solve the whole difficulty. One would
give to the Local bodies control of all trade licences, subject, in exceptional
cases, to review by the Supreme Court, and the other would regulate
immigration into the Colony after the manner of the Cape Immigration Act.
One more statement by Mr. Hills needs correction. After the corres-
pondence that appeared in The Star, challenging the statement that there
are 49 Indian, as against 13 white, store-keepers in Pietersburg, some cau-
tion, at least, is necessary. The British Indian Association has stated
definitely that there are only 23 Indian stores in that town. Mr. Kleinen-
berg, whom Mr. Hills has copied, has not been able to refute that state-
ment. It is, therefore, necessary for Mr. Hills to ascertain from Mr. Kleinen-
berg whether the figures he gave The Star could be verified. So far, the
British Indian Association has had the last say. It is of the utmost impor-
tance that those who are responsible for guiding public opinion should
have facts and nothing but facts before them.
Indian Opinion, 22-4-1905
