166. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[September 2, 1930]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the Ashram packet on Thursday. If you get the dis-
courses printed, send one or two copies here. It would help if I
had with me a copy of the previous discourse. Send me also the
set of Ashram rules. If Surendra, Madhavji and Madhavlal have
still not written to me, ask them to write. Others, too, should
write. Kusum's hand must be all right. Has Mrs. Zaulinger calm-
ed down a little? Try to win her over.
I remember to have written to someone and given permission
for a translation of the Autobiography in Swedish. Accept the sum
of £ 11 and credit it in whichever account you think proper.
You utilized the occasion of Rakshabandhan very well. Take
care of Lilavati. If she gets fainting fits, she should come over to
the Ashram and rest. If you come to know Devdas's weight,
mention it in your letter. In that place he should improve. You
can get a garland made from yarn spun by Jamnalalji. The spin-
ning-wheel gives me no difficulty now. The speed has not increas-
ed much, but it is good enough. This is a portable spinning-wheel
and it required a thin mal. If anyone knows a simple method of
making a mal, he should write to me. Abbas had explained it to
me, but I have forgotten it. One packet of cotton has been ex-
hausted. Together with what I can make from the second one, I
shall have enough slivers to last a month. But someone is bound
to visit Kakasaheb. Send one packet with him. Vallabhbhai,
too, has a visitor once a week or fortnight. You may send the packet
with one of the persons. If neither course is possible, send some cot-
ton by post as you did previously. There is no hurry at all. Along
with it, send some pieces of leather for repairing the heels of my
sandals. If no such pieces are available and if you can find my pair
of sandals, send that. There was an extra pair during the march.
Kanti will probably know about it. There was one in the Ashram
too. Kusum may know about it, or the person to whom she has
handed over charge of these things.
FEARLESSNESS. As every reader of the Gita knows fearlessness
heads the list of the divine attributes enumerated in Chapter
XVI. Whether this is merely due to the exigencies of metre or
whether the pride of place has been deliberately yielded to fearless-
ness, is more than I can say. In my opinion, however, fearlessness
richly deserves the first rank assigned to it. For it is indispensable
for the growth of the other noble qualities. How can one seek Truth
or cherish love without fearlessness? As Pritam says: "The path
of Hari is the path of the brave, not of cowards." Hari here means
Truth. And the brave are those armed with fearlessness, not with
the sword, the rifle and the like. These are taken up only by those
who are possessed by fear.
Fearlessness connotes freedom from all external fear, fear of
disease, bodily injury and death, of dispossession, of losing one's
nearest and dearest, of losing reputation or giving offence, and so
on. One who overcomes the fear of death does not surmount all
other fears, as is commonly but erroneously supposed. Some of us
do not fear death, but flee from the minor ills of life. Some are
ready to die themselves, but cannot bear their loved ones being
taken away from them. Some misers will put up with all this, will
part even with their lives, but not their property; others will do
any number of black deeds in order to uphold their supposed pres-
tige. Some will swerve from the straight and narrow path which
lies clear before them, simply because they are afraid of incurring
the world's odium. The seeker after Truth must conquer all these
fears. He should be ready to sacrifice his all in the quest of Truth,
even as Harishchandra did. The story of Harishchandra may be
only a parable; but every seeker will bear witness to its truth from
his personal experience and, therefore, that story is as precious
as any historical fact.
Perfect fearlessness is almost impossible to cultivate. It can
be attained only by him who has realized the Supreme, as it
implies freedom from delusion. One can always progress towards
this goal by determined and constant endeavour and by cultivating
self-confidence. As I have stated at the very outset, we must give
up all external fears. But the internal foes we must always fear.
We are rightly afraid of animal passion, anger and the like. External
fears cease of their own accord when once we have conquered
these traitors within the camp. All such fears revolve round the
body as the centre, and will therefore disappear as soon as we get
rid of attachment for the body. We thus find that all external
fear is the baseless fabric of our own vision. Fear has no place in
our hearts when we have shaken off attachment for wealth, for
family and for the body. "Enjoy the things of the earth by re-
nouncing them" is the sovereign precept. Wealth, family and the
body will be there just the same; we have only to change our atti-
tude towards them. All these are not ours, but God's. Nothing
whatever in this world is ours. Even we ourselves are His. Why
then should we entertain any fear? The Upanishad, therefore,
directs us to give up attachment for things while we enjoy them.
That is to say, we must be interested in them not as proprietors
but only as trustees. He on whose behalf we hold them will
give us the strength and the weapons requisite for defending them
against all usurpers. When we thus cease to be masters and reduce
ourselves to the rank of servants, humbler than the very dust under
our feet, all fears will roll away like mists; we shall attain ineffable
peace and see Satyanarayana, the God of Truth, face to face.
Kakasaheb had not so far taken a categorical vow of spinning;
he has done so now. The vow is that he will spin for not less
1 Ishopanishad, V. 1
than two hours and not less than 160 yards daily. He has also
started carding. He spends most of his time in physical activities.
He maintains good strength. For the last four days or so I have
given up raisins and dates and eat instead boiled vegetables, raw
tomatoes, etc. If this diet does not meet my needs, I shall add
fruit. I have made the change in order to overcome constipa-
tion. If the change proves economical, so much the better. I
will not be obstinate about any item.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 58 letters.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8123. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi; also
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 112-
