140. LETTER TO F. G. PRATT
SABARMATI,
February 28, 1918
DEAR MR. PRATT,
Your frank talk of yesterday encourages me to send you this
letter.
The following is the position throughout India. A new order
of things is replacing the old. It can be established peacefully or
it must be preceded by some painful disturbances. What it will be
lies largely in the hands of civil servants like yourself, more than in
those of the King's representatives quite at the top. You desire
to do good, but you rule not by right of love, but by the force of
fear. The sum total of the energy of the civil service represents to
the people the British Constitution. You have failed, probably not
through any fault of your own, to interpret it to the people as fully
as you might have. The result is the people dread your power to
punish and they miss the good you desire to do. The home-rulers
so named have become impatient of your authority. They are a
rapidly increasing power. They find no difficulty in showing to
the people the dreadful side of the civil service rule. The people
welcome them as their deliverers. With nothing but love of the
land and distrust of the officials to guide them, they spread ill will.
The order you represent knows this only too well and it naturally
resents this insult. And so the gulf widens. I presumptuously
believe that I can step into the breach and may succeed in stopping
harmful disturbances during our passage to the new state of
things. I want, at the end of it, to see established not mutual dis-
trust and the law of force, but mutual trust and the law of love.
I can only do so if I can show the people a better and more
expeditious way of righting wrongs. It is obviously bad if they
submit to your order through fear and harbour ill will. It is
worse if, misguided, they resort to violence. The only dignified
and truly loyal and uplifting course for them is to show
disapproval by disobeying your orders which they may consider to
be unjust, and by knowingly and respectfully suffering the penalty
of their breach. I venture to think that advice to do so can
be safely tendered in almost every conceivable case of a felt wrong,
provided that all other recognized remedies have been previously
tried. I wish you could see the viewpoint submitted by me.
You will, I know, forgive me for my presumption in writing this
letter. Of course, I have written this irrespective of the Kaira
trouble. It is highly likely that I shall have the privilege of work-
ing with you on a more non-contentious platform. But I feel that
it is better that you should know me with all my limitations.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
