14. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
Bhadarva Vad 1, September 24, 1915
RESPECTED KHUSHALBHAI,
I realized after meeting Narandas that you repent having given him the
permission and the chief cause for remorse is that I have admitted a learned
dhed 2 [to the ashram] . That would have hurt the feelings of Santok too. In
fact, no one should feel bad about it because in Phoenix we shared food with
everyone. But the same thing is viewed differently here.
There is no need for you to feel sorry. Narandas has taken a very good
step. If I was not worried about the unhappiness of my sister-in-law, I would
have boldly asked Narandas to come here. However, on considering everything,
I thought it was better for Narandas to go to Madras with his wife. There
Tamil. . . . 3 Santok and the two girls are going.
1 Chhaganlal, Maganlal, Narandas and Jamnadas
2 Dudhabhai Dafda
3 A few words are illegible here.
LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
15
Maganlal is accompanying them to Bombay today.
By doing so, Narandas, Jamna, Santok and the girls would not be caught
in the storm that threatens the Ashram. They would not be banished from
the caste and so their sorrow will be a little less. Jamnadas is no doubt there.
There is no need for him to come here.
It is Chhaganlal's duty to stay on in Phoenix. Now remain Maganlal and
his children. Let him be caught in the storm along with me. Those who live
with me, should never expect that they will never have external problems
because those who live with me should learn to welcome problems and realize
that purification lies in that. I have told Maganlal that he should go to Madras
for a short period if he wanted to. There is no objection if Maganlal goes to
Madras and Narandas comes here. I have asked the two brothers to do what
is convenient to them.
I am going to fulfil your desire once Narandas is relieved from his job.
I do not think that a more satisfactory arrangement can be worked out.
It contains truth and dharma indeed is included in it.
I wish that you should be at peace.
I do want that Maganlal should go there.
Respectful prostration by
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33105
