54. LETTER TO BAPUBHAI NARANJI VASHI
Kartika Sud 14, 1983, November 18, 1926
BHAISHRI BAPUBHAI,
I am giving in Navajivan the reply to the last paragraph of
your letter. I do not wish to give there the reply to the rest of
your letter.
Every Hindu should have nothing but respect for Rishi
Dayanand's life. Satyartha Prakash is disappointing but it is better
not to search and find out why it is so. We should exalt the
virtues of great men. We may take note of their imperfections, if
any, but a devotee should not probe into their causes.
I have deliberately decided not to give extracts from Satyartha
Prakash. The person for whose sake I wished to give the ex-
tracts has already called on me. I showed him the extracts. If,
further, I were to give the extracts [in Navajivan], this great man
would be maligned, and his virtues lost sight of and a controversy
might start; hence I decided not to give them.
I find the use of the word 'Arya' artificial. Whatever may be
the origin of the word 'Hindu', it carries naturally that meaning
which is forced into any other word.
By birth we all are low. It is only when we acquire virtuous
qualities that we become dwijas1; this is the purport of one verse.
Others emphasize the importance of birth. Each view is valuable
from its respective point of view. We take birth according to
the sanskaras of our previous births. New sanskaras modify them
to some extent. There is humility and conservation of strength
in allowing ourselves to be known as we are born.
What we call prarabdha is nothing but the fruit of deeds in
our previous births. Human efforts mean our attempts to make
desirable changes therein. Sometimes one acts in opposition to
the other, while at other times they run together harmoniously.
Hence it cannot be said that one is always stronger than the other.
We cannot disregard prarabdha; we cannot give up human effort.
This explains the importance attributed to effort free from
attachment.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19965
