507. LETTER TO P. N. SANKARANARAYANA IYER
April 19, 1933
MY DEAR SANKARANARAYANA,
You will please forgive me for not attending to your pamph-
let before this. I was helpless. As soon as I had a few moments
to spare I took up your pamphlet.
You have asked me to offer remarks, suggestions, guidance
and to give you my blessings. Blessings you have if you deserve
them. Whether you do or not I cannot judge, because I have
no personal knowledge of your activity. But I can certainly see
your earnestness in your report.
I have gone through all the passages that you have specially
marked. It is difficult for me to offer useful criticism.
Your hit at the turmoil of the temple-entry movement and at
the great national leaders betrays somewhere irritation, impatience
and ignorance of facts. If you had simply said that the Hari-
jans that have come under your notice do not care for temple-
entry, that would have been quite a fair statement to make;
but to belittle a great religious movement without even studying
it was not right. Just see what it is. In September last, represen-
tative Hindus in a public meeting entered into a solemn pledge that
among other things temples should be thrown open to Harijans.
From that moment it became their duty to strain every nerve to
secure the opening of Hindu temples to Harijans. It is irrelevant
whether Harijans want to make use of these temples or not, just as
it would be irrelevant to the question of opening public schools,
public wells and giving them all the other rights hitherto denied
to them whether they want or do not want these rights. It is
the simple duty of the suppressors to remove the weight of suppres-
sion from the heads of the suppressed. The suppressed may have
become so stunted that in spite of the lifting of the weight they
might not even appreciate the fact that it was lifted. But that
would be no excuse for the suppressors to continue the suppres-
sion.
If you admit the justice of the argument you should have no
hesitation in owning your mistake. More than this I think I
need not say. Every little thing done for the sake of Harijans
cannot but be welcome to me, and I think that the field of service
is so vast that workers can well afford to do that service without
criticizing or belittling the efforts of others except of course where
the other effort is mischievous, immoral or selfish.
In the 6th paragraph of your letter you tell me that you
wrote to the local Seva Sangh offering your co-operation and
service but that you had received no reply. I have now written
to them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. P. N. SANKARANARAYANA IYER
No. 1 3RD STREET, GOPALAPURAM
CATHEDRAL POST
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20969. Also C.W. 9677.
Courtesy: P. N.
Sankaranarayana Iyer
