101. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Friday [April 25, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Manilal has taken out your things. He will pack them and send
by goods. He does odd things only in the morning, hence the slow
progress of the work.
You will be pleased to know that Devdas and Fakiri ran to the
station and back in 35 minutes and Sivpujan in 29.
Gokhale had a nervous breakdown. Beyond the letter you saw he
has not written to me, either, as he promised to on the work itself.
But why should you even for his sake mislead people ? If you feel
that he should have written and he has not, you could certainly say
you expected a letter but had not received one. You cannot hide behind
the shelter of the statement that you belong to the majority and I to
the minority.
Do you remember the story of Dr. Primrose in The Vicar of
Wakefield? He used to give a horse to the guest whom he did not
want back. He lost both the horse and the guest and was satisfied.
This is a fine illustration of returning good for evil. Geevers asked me
just when he was to go to the station and I to my work for the money.
I asked, I think, exactly two questions. They did not satisfy me. But
not to give would have caused delay, waste and irritation. I thought
the best thing was to give even from the fund I have and be done
with. It was the penalty I paid for having countenanced him at first
and then having inflicted him on you. Am I clear ? You may pursue
the subject still more when we meet.
I may leave here on Monday, though I am not sure. I may stay
a day or two and go to Cape Town.
From Phoenix the resisters will be Mrs. Gandhi, Chhaganlal, Mrs.
Chhaganlal, Mrs. Maganlal, Jeki, Hanif, Coopoo, Manilal, Govind,
Ramdas, Sivpujan, Sam and Solomon. I may have omitted a boy's name.
The women's names are for your use only. Miss Schlesin knows I
think that Mrs. Gandhi and Jeki will join. But I do not think I wrote
about the others. I have sketched out an elaborate programme which
I have not the time to set forth here.
1 From the reference to Gokhale's nervous breakdown, to which reference is made
by Gandhiji in his letter to Gokhale dated April 19, 1913; vide Vol. XII, p. 41. The
Friday following this date fell on April 25, 1913.
121
Hoosen Doud's son has arrived a wreck vomiting blood. Perhaps
you would like to write a word of sympathy to him or Doud.
I hope Albret will pardon me for not writing in reply to his advice.
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
