336. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
STUPID DAUGHTER,
You are no longer stupid, because you have abandoned your
stupidity. I like to hear you say that in the end, it is I who will
understand. If that happens I shall dance with joy. But if I had time,
I would answer every assertion in your letter. Not today. Some other
time. I say that in the end you will admit your foolishness. You see
everything where I see nothing.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
233
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
179
though the mind appears calm on the surface, it is not in fact calm.
That there are visions of things not related to experience, means, in
my view, that apart from memory, there are many other things
involved.
Q. 3 When work of service makes demands of one, sometimes it is not possible to
pursue devotional activity. Is this harmful? What should be considered more
important - service or recitation of God's name?
A. Whether it is the demands of work or even sterner demands, the
recitation of the Ramanama may never be stopped. Its outward
expression may be modified depending on the circumstances. Even
if one does not count the beads, can Ramanama which is inscribed in
the heart, be abandoned?
M.K.GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
237. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
1. There is life and there is death. Freedom from all bondage is
moksha.
2. He who considers himself in bondage is a bound person. It is
attachment. He is bound by the bonds of attachment. Knowingly or
unknowingly, he seeks freedom from it.
3. Freedom that needs replenishing is not freedom. He who is free
is the best.
4. There is not the slightest external difference between a bound and
a free man. A free man recognizes himself. Even while doing, he
does not do, for he never yearns for reward. He does his deeds by
force of the previous sanskaras
1 Posed by Maganbhai Shankerbhai Patel
2 This is followed by a quotation in Sanskrit, which is not clear in the
source.
