9. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
DETENTION CAMP,
February 12, 1943
DEAR COL. BHANDARI 2 ,
You have told me that the Government have instructed
you to convey to them urgently any wish I might have to
express. You have also given me a copy of the instructions of
the Government about the regulating of friends' visits. This is
my submission about the visits:
1. It is not fair to leave the initiative to me. In the present
state of my mind I have no initiative about such visits.
If, therefore, the Government wish that I should receive visi-
tors, they should inform the public that, if any member of the
public specially desires to see me, they will give him the per-
mission. Their names need not be referred to me. For, I will
not thwart the wish of any friend to see me. It is highly pro-
bable that my children and other relatives as also inmates of
the Ashram and other friends who are intimately connected
with me through one or more of my many activities may want
to see me. If Rajaji, for instance, who had already applied to
the Government for permission to see me in connection with
the communal problem, wants to see me about that matter or
any other, I should be glad to see him. But even regarding
him I would not take the initiative of submitting his name to
the Government.
2. If the visitors are permitted to see me without any
restrictions as to the matters they might discuss with me, the
object of discussions would be largely frustrated if the discus-
sions cannot be published. I would, of course, always and in
every circumstance, myself rule out, without needing any ex-
ternal pressure, any discussion that can, by any stretch of ima-
gination, be helpful to the Fascist powers, including Japan. If
visits contemplating discussions are to be allowed, the declara-
tion I have suggested to be made by the Government should
obviously be made forthwith so that such visits may take place
in the early stages of the fast.
3. It is possible that those who have been serving or nurs-
ing me in the Ashram or those who were attending on me
during my previous fasts may want to stay with me to take
part in the nursing. If they should so wish, they should be
permitted. I see difficulty in the way of making public announce-
ment on this point. If my proposal commends itself to the
Government, I suggest their addressing Shrimati Janaki Devi, the
widow of the late Seth Jamnalal Bajaj telling her that if any-
one desires during my fast to take part in serving me, he
would be permitted to do so on her submitting their names
to the Government. She knows all those who have served me
before.
Then there are two other matters. I have been most anxi-
ous all these months to know all about the state of health of
Shri Mathuradas Trikumji, ex-Mayor of Bombay, a grandson
of one of my sisters long since dead. The Government may
either let me have the information or they may permit Shri
Mathuradas Trikumji himself to write to me, or if he is physi-
cally unable to do so, anybody may be allowed on his behalf
to give me the fullest information. When I was arrested, his
life was almost despaired of. I read in the papers, however, that
he had undergone a successful operation.
The other thing is in connection with the news that ap-
pears in The Bombay Chronicle received here today, that Professor
Bhansali has embarked on another fast, this time out of sympa-
thy with me. I would like, in order to save time, the Govern-
ment to convey the following message to him by express wire
or through telephone, whichever may be the quickest way:
"I have just read about your sympathetic fast. You have
just ended your very long fast over Chimur. You have made
that your special task. You should therefore quickly rebuild
your body and fulfil the self-allotted task. Leave God to do
with me as He likes. I would not have interfered, if you had
not just risen from a fast that might have proved fatal and
if you had not imposed on yourself a special duty."
If the Government would comply with my request on this
point, I would like them to send the message without any altera-
tion and further to let me correspond with him if my message
does not produce the desired result.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10381. Courtesy: India Office Library. Also
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 44-5, and The Transfer of
Power, Vol. III, pp. 665-
