183. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 20, 1926
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I was reading up your article on the coming conference in
South Africa for Young India yesterday and I felt that the article
was not well-considered. You have evidently felt it yourself and
so, in order to tone down the impression left on your readers,
you have added six lines in your own hand. But that has merely
made the position worse. Your theme is that the cause of prejudice
in South Africa is solely colour. If you will review the whole of
your experience, you will find that this is only half-truth. If it
was the whole truth, Round Table Conference would be no remedy
for it. We must then, whilst there is yet time, clear every
Indian from South Africa. It is due to the whites and it is due to
ourselves. If the sayings that you have quoted of two Europeans
are the typical and almost universal sentiment amongst the ave-
rage white man in South Africa, is it right to resist that sentiment?
Can the Government, no matter how powerful it may be, do
otherwise than pass progressively drastic legislation? The senti-
ment may be altogether bad. But, can a man overcome his preju-
dice? And, if the average white man in South Africa, more espe-
cially in Natal as you say, has that prejudice, isn't it the duty of
those like you and me who want to serve truth before anything
else to face that fact squarely in the face and pave the way for
a dignified and honourable withdrawal of every single Indian
from South Africa? If I was convinced, as you are convinced, of
this colour prejudice, I would certainly advocate withdrawal even
if mine was the only voice. But, of course, I do not share your
conclusions. In the first instance, I do not regard human nature
in South Africa to be so badly debased. I think that the preju-
dice is very much mixed. As a matter of fact, if the prejudice
was as great as you imagine, the Europeans would make it so hot
for Indians that they could not possibly live there for a single
minute. No legislation would be needed for that purpose. Remem-
ber that even now Indian trade is dependent upon European
patronage. The colour prejudice is no doubt universal in social
life. That is a barrier which time alone will break. No legislation
is necessary for breaking that barrier. For that matter that bar-
rier is far worse, perhaps, here than in South Africa. But I do
not want to carry the argument any further. All I want to say
is you should put a curb upon your pen, for, anything you write
must have and has its effect. This article of yours is so terrible. I
return it to you so that you can refresh your memory. If I am
wrong, you will correct me. I have suppressed also the article
you sent me on 'Opium'. That article was too hurriedly written
to be of any value. It was too scrappy, did not even give suffi-
cient information. But both these articles indicate extreme fatigue
of mind. Will you not restrain yourself a bit, or, do you think
that it is God's call that your pen must be ever running? Gregg
has summed up this writing disease of yours in one single line.
He says, 'The insect bite poisoning was a godsend for you, be-
cause, it obliged you to put away your pen.' Anyway, I absolve
you from all obligation to write for Young India till you have had
some rest. And, if you want such discharge from the other news-
papers, I undertake to procure it for you. And I give you my
assurance that the world will not go to pieces for the suspension
of your writings, because, there is hardly a paper I am opening
in which I do not see long articles from you on the same subject.
If they cannot exist without you, let them die. I feel grieved to
find that you must be continually writing when there is no neces-
sity for it.
With deep love,
Yours,
REV. C. F. ANDREWS
SANTINIKETAN
From a photostat: S.N. 19670
