403. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 6, 1933
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
POONA
DEAR SIR,
Government's reply that my request for permission to resume
anti-untouchability work is under consideration but that decision
cannot be given by Monday next has been just conveyed to
me (10 a.m.).
In thanking Government for the reply, I would like to state
that there are three matters which do not admit of delay if my
work is not to suffer seriously.
The Editor-in-Chief, Sjt. Sastri, of Harijan is bed-ridden and
on sick leave in Madras. The paper is in charge of two men un-
trained for the work. For last week's issue, I had made arrange-
ments beforehand and sent some manuscripts from Sabarmati
last Monday. Whilst therefore Government are considering my
request, I should be permitted to see Sjt. Anand Hingorani or
Kaka Kalelkar-the two persons in charge, and to send manu-
scripts for next week's issue.
The second is a letter from Dr. Tagore which was given to
me on Friday last. I enclose it herewith. It demands an immediate
reply.
The third is this: I have four Europeans under training for
Harijan service. They were at the Sabarmati Ashram. They are
Miss Mary Barr, N. Devi, Dr. Margarete Spiegel and Mr.
Duncan Greenlees. They have been sent to Wardha where they
would be in unfamiliar surroundings. N. Devi and Dr. Spiegel
are comparative strangers to India and otherwise require delicate
attention. I should like to be able to write to them and to Sjt.
Vinoba who is in charge of Wardha Ashram and who is to look
after them.
There are other matters no less important, but which can
await a few days' delay. I venture to hope therefore that pend-
ing their decision, Government will grant me by tomorrow the faci-
lities requested about the three matters I have mentioned.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3897; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(14), Pt. V, pp. 89-91
