280. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 4, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have read your letter to Mahadev. Why so much lamen-
tation now? Having taken the decision I am now absolutely at
peace. Even Mahadev is calm as far as I can understand him.
I am not worried about Sushila either. You are there. That
particular incident has nothing to do with my decision. Although
it provided the immediate pretext I have justified it indepen-
dently of that incident. Even if Mahadevand Sushila had been
proved guilty instead of innocent, I would still consider my
decision right. Since they have been proved innocent my deci-
sion is of course correct. My decision is not at all by way of
expiation. Whatever blame I am taking upon myself appears to
me justified. It may well not be so. But even if the cause of
the incidents of the 9th and the 14th is proved to be purely
imaginary the legitimacy of my decision holds. Very often, a
decision becomes necessary to open our eyes. Hence, let us
stop lamenting. Let us forget the past and look after the present.
Sushila therefore does not have to come to pacify me or to
find her peace of mind. I would certainly like to have Sushila
by my side. I would take service from her in so many ways.
But I would be afraid to let her come alone. She is a chain
that binds. I would not willingly permit you to keep out. I wish
your presence even without her. I would be very happy if she
too accompanied you. That is why I have sent a telegram
today to let you know my state of mind. Now decide what
seems right after taking into consideration what needs to be
done there. I am in fine fettle.
What Sushila's instrument says or what the urine test indi-
cates only Sushila or you will know.
But I am sleeping well
and eating well. My diet includes 10 to 12 oz. of milk, roti,
vegetables, garlic, onions and fruit. This is sufficient. I am not
taking jaggery for the present. In the afternoon I take juice
of raw mango or lime with soda. I have a tub-bath in the
morning. I rub ghee on the soles of my feet twice a day. I
massage my head with oil at night. As usual, I apply mud-
pack to my abdomen morning and evening. This is for two
to two-and-a-half hours altogether. I take light walks. I in-
variably sleep in the afternoon.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
