311. LETTER TO ALI BROTHERS
BOMBAY,
June 5, 1919
I have your letters and I was delighted to receive them. I am
surprised that Mr. Ghate never received my letter. I quite
agree with you that so long as I cannot convince you, you must
act according as you feel right. I can only add to what I have al-
ready said that I have discussed the contents of your letter to the
Viceroy with several friends and they all practically without excep-
tion agree that the statement of claim does not represent the ir-
reducible minimum and that withdrawal from India is not a prac-
tical step. With your permission, I shall venture to discuss the
Koranic precedent you are using to the support of your proposed
withdrawal from India. The circumstances that attended the
Prophet's flight were totally different from those that attend your
contemplated action. He took with him the whole of the Maho-
medans to Medina Sheriff. It was his satyagraha against the un-
believers of Mecca Sheriff. The plant of Islam was then extremely
delicate and required protection from storms from within and from
without. Rather than court what might have been certain destruc-
tion for his little band of stalwarts, he withdrew himself and them
to a safe retreat till the ignorant wrath of the unbelievers of Mecca
had spent itself. I can see absolutely no parallel between the case
of the Prophet and yours. But I must not presume unduly upon your
kindness. I have no right whatsoever to enter into a religious dis-
cussion with you based on an interpretation of the Koran. I can
claim no intimacy with its teachings that you rightly possess. I have
made bold to say as much as I have because I am fortified in my
interpretation by the agreement of some of our common friends.
Do please however give the matter further prayerful consideration.
I need hardly assure you that I shall labour for a proper adjust-
ment of the Mahomedan claims as adumbrated in my letter to the
Viceroy and I have little doubt that if all the leading Mahomedans
unitedly presented the claim in becoming language, it will create
a world opinion in its favour such that the League dare not resist
it and England must surely press before it.
I hope you are all keeping well.
With my love to you all.
N. A. I. : Home: Political: September 1919, Nos. 406-28-A (Confi-
dential)
