66. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
June 18, 1932
I got your letter. I think it would be better not to write
about the Lothian report1, though I see nothing wrong in princi-
ple in doing that. Personally, I would not even wish to write
about it. I would always feel that I didn't have sufficient data
for the purpose. Why, then, waste mental energy and also time
in trying to write about it?
Devdas has taken ill. The fever is receding now and there
is no cause for anxiety. Manilal, Sushila, Sita, Pragji and his
daughter, all of them had caught virulent fever in Natal, but the
latest news about them was reassuring.
I had never thought that you would write a play. Your
thoughts are turning towards ultra-modern reforms.
I do believe
that within certain limits divorce should be permitted, but I
would not at all care to propagate that idea. Generally we are
such slaves of the psychological forces in us that no one will wager
that his mind will be in the same state tomorrow in which it is
today. I, therefore, feel even now that a marriage tie voluntarily
entered into ought not to be broken without a very strong reason.
If I had divorced Ba on the difference over untouchability, surely we
would never have known the beautiful relation between us which
exists today. Who can say in what condition Ba would be living
and with whom I would have rushed into marriage? But the
idea that there can be no divorce was ingrained in us, and so
the crisis passed and only its memory is left now. I hope, there-
fore, that you have not advocated in your play unfettered free-
dom for a husband or a wife to divorce either party at will.
If it were man's duty to gratify his carnal passion, I would
certainly understand the necessity of artificial means of birth-
control. If, however, we regard gratification of passion without
a desire for progeny as sin—and according to me it should be
so regarded—it would be putting a premium on sin to prevent
progeny by artificial means. It is Nature's eternal law that one
shall reap as one sows. If man indulges his carnal passion, let
him bear the burden of progeny. The question why the woman
should bear it does not arise, since we regard her as completely
free. The adoption of artificial means of birth-control in the
West is already producing one result, namely, that the sanctity of
marriage is disappearing and men and women gratify their lust
without any restraint. It is not many years since these means
came into vogue, and yet the bond which had been held as sacred
all this time is losing its strength. Advanced thinkers in the West
now look upon marriage as a superstition and see nothing evil
even in a brother and a sister feeling passion for each other and
gratifying it, but, on the contrary, regard it as completely nor-
mal. I don't look upon these views as the swinging of the pendulum
to the other extreme. I think that they are the direct and natu-
ral result of the same attitude of mind which lies at the back of
artificial birth-control. It is possible that the bonds of marriage,
etc., which we now regard as spiritually uplifting may actually be
spiritually degrading. But I simply cannot go beyond conceding
such a possibility for the sake of argument. All such talk in the
name of ethics and science seems extremely dangerous to me.
These new ideas are raining from the fountain of false compas-
sion and impatience and of the thinkers' experiences limited to the
hour of pleasure. I wish that we do not get drenched by this
rain. Moreover, having regard also to the conditions in India we
have no use whatever, for these artificial methods. Millions are
ruined in health and have become weak in minds. If they start
gratifying their passion as soon as it is aroused, there would be an
end to all possibility of our progress. Some of the men who have
been using these means are almost impotent. Cast a glance at the
advertisements which appear in newspapers. I am writing all this
from wide observation. I wrote the articles in Nitinashane Marge
in reply to letters received every week from enfeebled students
and teachers. The youth of India need just now to learn the lesson
of self-control, however painfully it may be. The condition of
girls, too, is most extraordinary.
How strange that a girl like
