512. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 9, 1932
Bismillah
CHIRANJIVI RAIHANA,
Please do not laugh at the sight of this! Remember I am
writing a copy-book, I am trying to learn to write exactly as
children do. Just when, tired with other work, I had started
writing this, your much-awaited letter arrived.
Father and
Mother are both very clever people and they know that my views
very much resemble theirs. That is why they ask you to follow
my advice. They have thus contrived to deprive you of your
freedom. And this innocent, crazy girl is now a prisoner of old
people. Let us see what happens. After all, it does not matter that
1 Vide the preceding item.
49-27
people like you and me are always drawn into their net. The
visit to Mount Abu seems to have done you no good.
I hope this is enough for today. I take a great deal of time
to write even such a hand as this. God has given you the gift of
singing bhajans. Go on doing that, serve your elders as best as you
can, and live contented. Contentment also is a form of service in
itself. Send me what Pashabhai has written. There is no harm
in his going to America. It will be enough if he takes every
step after careful thought. Moreover, you are there to guide
him. Tell Hamida to write to me as soon as she leaves. I had
expected a letter from Rohini. Many blessings to Kamalmiyan.
Many . . .2. I hope some day to give him a slap or two. My
bhrrr to the white beard.
Tell all that we think of them
every day. Some topic or other always crops up. It is like what
Hazarat says in his ghazal. Even if one tries not to think about a
thing, one does think about it. Some things one cannot remem-
ber though one would like to, and some others one cannot forget
though one tries to. He never lets our wishes be fulfilled. I was
glad that you wrote the ghazal in the Gujarati script.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Uncle Sardar has made it his occupation to add to the coun-
try's wealth by making such envelopes. Did I tell you this
before?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9642
