172. LETTER TO DIWAKAR SINGH
March 22, 1933
MY DEAR DIWAKAR,
I have your letter. No doubt the less demonstrative you are
the better and more permanent your work will be.
Your last paragraph makes bad reading. You say, "Sweep-
ing of public roads has become irregular."
That's wrong.
Having started the work you should have done it with scienti-
fic precision and regularity. Your irregular scavenging will pro-
duce no effect on the public. You saw with what trumpeting
the work was inaugurated and I read with pleasure that you were
thinking of constructing special carts or wheelbarrows for remov-
ing the refuse. But this can be necessary only if you are doing your
work thoroughly. Your energy will be frittered away if you will
jump from work to work without doing anything completely. What
will happen if after having half-finished a table, a cabinet maker
began a chair and so on? Will you not call it all a waste of
effort? That is precisely what happens generally to philanthro-
pic undertakings. I would like you to guard yourself against that
error. If you will do the street-cleaning then you must have a map
and a programme according to the number of volunteers you have,
and after you have begun a street, you may not leave it till its
dwellers have taken up the cleaning themselves. In order to im-
press them with the necessity of so doing, you will have to be
gentle and patient with them, and your cleaning will have to be
so thorough as to excite their pleasure and admiration, and when
that happens you will see that the thing will work, but you will
have to concentrate your attention wholly upon one single piece
till outsiders who are the sole judges are able to say, "It's well
done".
I am not able to appreciate your presentation of the football
to the Harijan boys. For a country like India a ball that costs
Rs. 4 to Rs. 5 is an expensive thing. Harijan boys will have foot-
balls given to them by patrons. Servants have got to exercise the
greatest care and discretion in their service, especially when it
is they who have to make the choice.
Your having shifted to servants' quarters is undoubtedly a
very fine idea, and if you will try to live as simply as the Harijans,
consistently with your health, it would be a good thing.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
KUNWAR DIWAKAR SINGH
HOLLAND HALL
ALLAHABAD
C.W. 9656. Courtesy: Municipal Museum, Allahabad. Also S.N. 20658
