45. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, NATAL
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
July 6, 1899
TO
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PIETERMARITZBURG
SIR,
With further reference to your letter dated the 13th ultimo,
in view of the correspondence that is going on between the Im-
perial and the local Governments, it may not be amiss to show
how far the fears expressed in the "Dealers' Licenses Memorial"
have been realized. I have not been able to collect accurate
information from all the places, but so far as the information has
been received, it is of an extremely discouraging nature.
In Dundee, the licences were first refused and on an appeal
they were granted under certain qualifications endorsed on the
back of the licences, viz., "This licence is granted upon the dis-
tinct understanding that it will not be renewed in the present
buildings. By order of the Board. (Sd.) Fras. J. Birkett, Licen-
sing Officer and Town Clerk." In answer to an enquiry, several
of the licence-holders said that they thought the licences were so
granted because their stores were wood-and-iron buildings. It
appears Messrs Handley & Sons and Harvey Greenacre & Co. in
Dundee have a brick front but the rest of their stores is wood-
and-iron. Messrs Taylor & Fowler, merchants of Dundee, have
their store entirely of wood and iron. In Newcastle the licences
refused last year have been refused this year also. The Town
Council were good enough to give some time to two of the appli-
cants in order to enable them to sell off their stock, but this
could hardly act as a remedy against the loss occasioned to the
parties concerned. One of them, Abdool Rassool, had a large
business and owned a wood-and-iron store. It was pointed out
to the Council that the building which represented to him a value
of £150 would fetch practically nothing if it had to be sold.
In Verulam, I understand, two applicants who held a li-
cence last year have been refused their licenses this year and the
men as well as their servants are now comparatively reduced to
poverty.
In Ladysmith, one M. C. Amla, who has been trading there
for several years, has been deprived of his licence on the ground
that the place where he was trading was situated in the chief
street of the Township and that it was suitable only for a Euro-
pean trader. The owner applied for a licence with reference to
another building immediately near an Indian store and owned
by the owner of that store. That application, too, has been re-
fused on the same ground. I might be permitted to mention
that there are other Indian stores in the same street.
In Port Shepstone, two large Indian merchants have lately
sold their businesses to two other Indians. These applied for li-
cences and the Licensing Officer refused them. An appeal was taken
to the Licensing Board with no better result, and the parties are
now considering what to do.
It is humbly submitted that it is a serious matter when one
man, because he is an Indian, cannot sell his business to another,
also because that other is an Indian, for the refusal to grant the
licence in such cases is tantamount to forbidding a purchase and
sale unless it were done in an underhand manner.
An Indian, who had sold out his premises to the Dundee
Coal Co. and had therefore entirely wound up his business, came
down to Durban and purchased a previously licensed store on the
Umgeni Road and applied for a licence for himself. The Licen-
sing Officer, after the man had made several applications and
after he had gone to the expense of engaging an eminent counsel
in Durban at a heavy cost, granted the licence and then only for
a limited period in order to enable the applicant to sell out the
goods he had already bought in anticipation of receiving a licence.
These are some of the cases where vested interests have been
prejudicially affected. But cases where thoroughly good men with
capital have been refused licences because they were Indians who
did not hold a licence to trade the previous year are too numer-
ous to mention.
The Indians have noticed with satisfaction and gratitude the
fact that the Government are anxious to see that the vested Indian
interests are not injured, in that they have addressed letters to the
several Town Councils and Town Boards to the effect that unless
they took care not to touch vested interests, legislation giving
Indians right of appeal to the Supreme Court might become
necessary. I am, however, to point out that such an appeal to
the Boards may not have a permanent effect, if at all, and would
still leave the Indian traders in a state of dreadful suspense. The
alteration suggested by the letter above referred to would indeed,
in my humble opinion, be only a small measure of justice, but
extremely desirable in the interests of the Indian community,
already settled in the Colony.
I am to request that the contents of this letter may be com-
municated to the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies.
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: Memorials and Petitions, 1899
