39. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 10, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter.
If you find it impossible to write the Khadishastra Praveshika,
you may give up the idea. But the fact that your brain doesn't
work on this subject may perhaps be indicative of some deficiency
in you.
I was not satisfied with the few lines that Jayantilal wrote.
I got the impression that he had forced himself to write. The dis-
cussion with you doesn't seem to have given him a new light.
That is, [he believes that] spinning and the other activities are
conducted not as a means of intellectual development but only as
training in crafts side by side with intellectual training. I hope
you understand the difference between the two. If a carpenter
teaches me his craft and I learn it mechanically, my hand will be
able to use the carpenter's tools but there will hardly be any
intellectual development. If, however, an expert on carpentry
teaches me the craft, my intellect also will develop fully in the
process. That is, I shall not only be a good carpenter but will
also become an engineer, for while teaching me carpentry the
teacher will have improved and embellished my language. He
will have taught me the history of wood and, while explaining
where and how wood is grown, will have taught me geography.
He will also have taught me a little about agriculture and
will have likewise taught me to make illustrations of my tools.
While teaching me the economics of carpentry, he will have
taught me arithmetic and geometry. All this will make up a
course of some seven years. Maybe you do not link up spin-
ning and the other crafts which you are teaching with intel-
lectual development. Perhaps you consider knowledge of the
alphabet and reading as the only means of such development. If
this is not so, the writing of the Praveshika should be an easy job
for you. I know that I have not previously explained these
thoughts in the manner in which I have explained them in this
letter. But I have been explaining in Harijan the ideas which are
coming to me these days, and this idea is the first and foremost of
them all. I have hitherto also said that there should be training
32
in crafts along with training of the intellect and that such train-
ing should occupy the primary place in a scheme of national
education. What I am now saying is that an important means of
intellectual training should be craft-training. I feel that talents
are being wasted and the fact that thousands of young people who
leave schools are good for nothing except clerkships is indicative
not of intellectual development but of intellectual waste. True
education is that which trains all the three abilities, spiritual,
intellectual and economic, simultaneously. No boy on leaving
school should have to ask himself: "What shall I do now?" His
education should be a kind of insurance guaranteeing him a liveli-
hood. I have dictated all this for you to think over. If you have
followed what I have said, you will have to examine the art of
spinning from a new point of view and also devise a new method
of teaching it.
Please read again from this point of view my
recent articles in Harijan.
Shankaran's is a painful case. I am of course writing to him.
You needn't do anything at present.
I will make some arrangement from here for Kamala's
mother.
How is Kumi?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not been able to revise any portion.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II Also C.W. 8534. Court-
esy: Narandas Gandhi
