271. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[ JOHANNESBURG,
Prior to December 24,1904]
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
SIR,
May I venture to trespass on your courtesy with reference to a veno-
mous attack made by Mr. Loveday, M.L.C., on the British Indians, when
he delivered his address to the anti-Asiatic meeting held at Potchefstroom
on Saturday last. Mr. Loveday condescended to reply to my address
to the Indian mass meeting, and, in the course of his heated remarks,
allowed himself to descend to abuse and statements, the recklessness of
1 This was published in Indian Opinion under the heading "Mr. Loveday and the British
Indian Association".
2 Held at Johannesburg on November 17. Vide Indian Opinion, 19-11-1904.
which I have never seen surpassed in a person holding the responsible
position of Mr. Loveday. He has not hesitated to charge me with having
made "deliberate, wilful, and wickedly false statements, and Oriental
duplicity". However, I have no wish to descend to Mr. Loveday's
level, but I repeat again every statement that I have made in my
address, and withdraw nothing, and with your permission, I would end-
eavour to give some of the many proofs in support thereof. Mr. Love-
day resents that portion of the address wherein I have complained that
he omitted to state at the National Convention, when he was giving the
history of the Convention of 1884, the fact that there were at the time
British Indians in the Colony, and that Law 3 of 1885 was passed on
misrepresentation. If you and your contemporaries reported the honour-
able gentleman at all correctly, my assertion is perfectly true. Mr. Love-
day is reported in The Star to have said as follows:
When the 1881 Convention was concluded, there were no Indians in the
Transvaal, and there is little or no doubt that the Asiatic side of the question
never presented itself to the authors of that document sitting in Pretoria, and
a study of the whole of the provisions of that document clearly shows that the
white race and the natives resident in the country alone, were contemplated.
It was only after the arrival of the first Indian traders, and after the 1884 Conven-
tion had been substituted for that of 1881, that restrictive legislation was pro-
posed.
Thus, Mr. Loveday, if he is correctly reported, has contended that, as no
Indians had arrived before 1884, the words "other than Natives" could
apply only to the Europeans, whereas the fact is that there were already
Indian settlers in the country before the Convention of 1884 was passed.
I have taken the trouble of comparing your report with that of the other
newspapers, and it is substantially the same. So far, therefore, as I am
concerned, my complaint, that Mr. Loveday omitted a material fact in
stating the history of the question, is completely justified. As to the mis-
representations on which Law 3 of 1885 was passed, I quote the follow-
ing from one of the several petitions that were used by the late Govern-
ment in order to induce the British Government to sanction legislation
embodied in Law 3 of 1885:
the dangers to which the whole community is exposed by the spread of leprosy,
and the like loathsome diseases engendered by the filthy habits and immoral
practices of these people. . .
Again,
as these men enter the State without wives and female relatives, the result is
obvious. Their religion teaches them to consider all women as soulless, and
Christians as natural prey.
These petitions were signed by responsible and representative men,
and it was due to these gross, unfair, and untrue statements that Law 3
of 1885 was accepted. Mr. Loveday has thought fit again to reiterate
his statement that an Arab tradesman spends not more than £40 per
annum. He has quoted the report of the Asiatic Traders' Commission
in support, but the Commissioners have said no such thing. At Potchef-
stroom, he was more emphatic. I, therefore, again deny the assertion,
and can only state that I ought to know better than Mr. Loveday as to
how much an Indian tradesman spends. Some have to pay in rent alone
even as much as £40, not per annum, but per month. Does Mr. Loveday
know a single Indian trader? Has he ever examined their books? Has
he studied the report of the Asiatic Commission? Will he now go through
the books of 20 Indian traders, which I shall have much pleasure in sub-
mitting to him? I deny the statement that the Indian employees do not
receive more than 20s. per month, and I am in a position to place before
him names of Indian employees receiving more than £100 per annum
over and above their board and lodging expenses. Mr. Loveday again
states that my statement, that no new Indians were allowed to come into
the country, was "wickedly false". If I have erred, I have erred in the
company of the Chief Secretary for Permits, who, you will recollect, only
a few months ago, reported to Lord Milner that no new Indians were
allowed to enter the Colony, and that permits were only sparingly granted
to bona-fide refugees. Mr. Loveday, in refutation of the statement, cited
Pretoria and Potchefstroom, and he says the population of the Indian
Location at Pretoria had been doubled since the war, and, whereas before
there were from 15 to 20 traders, there are now between 90 and 100.
This is utterly without foundation. The Indian population of Pretoria
has certainly increased, but not doubled. The increase is due to the influx
of Indians from other parts of the Colony, who are unable to get licences
or otherwise to get a living. According to the Permits Officer, there are
in the Colony not more than 10,000 Indians. There were in 1896 nearly
10,000 Indians in the Transvaal, and it will not be doubted that the Indian
population had increased considerably in 1899. "In Pietersburg," the
honourable gentleman says, "prior to the war, they had 13 Indian stores;
today they had 49". As against that, I venture to state that there were
23 Indian stores before the war in the town alone, and that there are to-
day 28. Then, again, Mr. Loveday has stated:
The Indians had told them that they had certain rights, what they called their
'Charter of Liberty', but was there any social intercourse between Indians and
whites in India? None whatever.
The question is gratuitously brought up. The Indians have never
claimed any social intercourse here. All they have claimed is the elemen-
tary right of reasonable facilities for trading, reasonable facilities for immi-
gration under general restrictions, freedom of locomotion and of owner-
ship of property; but, for the information of Mr. Loveday, I may state
there is a measure of social intercourse also between Indians and Englishmen
in India. The balls given by the Maharaja of Kuch Behar attract the best
European society. Functions and parties are given by the Viceroy and
the Governors, where Indians of all classes are invited. The levees held
from time to time in the chief cities in India are open as well to the Indian
subjects as to the English subjects of the King-Emperor. If I state this
fact, I do so merely to show the lamentable want of knowledge on the
part of our oldest legislator, and not in order to excite the slightest desire
on the part of my countrymen for a share in any of the social functions.
We have no wish to thrust ourselves into the social economy of the white
settlers in the Colony. I need hardly go any further with this, to me a
painful subject. It was impossible to allow the honourable gentleman's
statement at the Potchefstroom meeting to go unchallenged, but if he
has not rendered himself utterly incapable of seeing things in their true
light when the question of colour is under discussion, I would appeal to
his sense of justice and fairness, and would merely ask him to study his
history and his facts, to study also what I venture to consider are the
very reasonable and moderate propositions of the British Indian Associa-
tion, and then to ask himself whether he is not wasting his energy, mis-
leading the people over whom he exercises so much control, doing an in-
justice to the responsible position he holds in the country, and also doing
a disservice to the Empire to which he professes he is proud to belong.
I am, etc.,
ABDOOL GANI
Indian Opinion, 24-12-1904
