160. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
SECUNDERABAD,
April 1, 1919
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I am dictating a letter to you, it seems, after ages, and I
might not have been able even now, but for an accident that has
befallen us. We left Bezwada early this morning, hoping to catch
the Bombay Mail at Wadi Junction. Our train reached Secun-
derabad too late for the special train which it joins in order to
take the train at [sic] Wadi Junction. And so we have to bake
here for 24 hours. Secunderabad is like an oven, but the vexa-
tious delay has its amenities. (I do not know that I have used
the word amenities to correctly express what I mean. Can it mean
"relieving features"?) It is no small thing to me to be able to give
you what I hope will turn out to be a love letter.
You fill me with grief by the news about Gurudev's health.
What is the matter with him? I do hope, he is much better now.
I reach Bombay on Thursday morning, i.e., the 3rd instant. I hope
to pass the month practically up to the 22nd instant between Bom-
bay and Ahmedabad and I wish we could meet during that time.
Meanwhile, I must try to explain to you what I mean by the
Pledge. It somewhat surprises me that you have missed its obvious
meaning. The signatory undertakes to break, if necessary, all the
laws that may not enunciate eternal verities. But as a check upon
individual extravagance, he surrenders his judgment to that of
experts as to the selection of such breakable laws and the order in
which they are to be broken. That surely is not a matter of con-
science. If the committee which is bound by the same Pledge that
binds the individual satyagrahi commits an error and selects laws
whose breach will be inconsistent with satyagraha, naturally, the
individual signatory who conscientiously thinks so refrains from
breaking such a law. In all satyagraha organizations, this final
liberty is understood. Is not my meaning clear? The entrustment
of selection to the committee is the happiest part of the Pledge.
But for that there would have been confusion worse confounded.
Take the Sindh incident. There the Police Commissioner prohi-
bits an innocent procession. The satyagrahis obey because they
are bound by the Pledge not to commit disobedience except
where authorized by the committee. Their first impulse would be
to disregard the prohibition and the consequences of such hasty
disregard might be most serious. In South Africa, they surren-
dered to my judgment as to the selection of the laws and the time
of breaking them. Here the committee was thought of at my ins-
tance. But of every such committee, I am the President. I hope,
you find time to read the cuttings I have been sending you. I must
now end this letter as visitors are waiting to see me.
I am most anxious to publish something from Gurudev and
something from you if both of you can give it.
With love,
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 6489
