333. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BETTIAH,
[May, 1917]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. You did well in writing to respected
Khushalbhai. If you have faith in our common kitchen and no
less in Khushalbhai, it is bound to be rewarded. You may even
go further and tell him that we may introduce any rules of cleanli-
ness he suggests. You should explain to him politely but firmly that
dharma does not consist in these notions about being defiled by
contact with this or the other thing. As Akha has sung : "That
one may be defiled by touch of others, like a superfluous limb is
this notion." Here, I am being showered with love. There is no
end to people's suffering. I am getting a wonderful experience of
villages.
If Mavji is otherwise a good man, fix a pay for him. It is
necessary that such men get trained and pick up everything about
weaving, so that we can employ thousands of them.
Show all the accounts to the gentleman who has come forward
to pay the expenses of the Ashram. If he does, I see nothing wrong
in accepting what he gives. I am writing to Prabhudas to tell him
that he may now come here if he wants to. It is quite true that,
had Chhaganlal been late this time, he would have been too late
to be of any help. As things have by chance come off in time
at the last hour, one feels as if everything has been all right.
You want to know when my work here will be over. From
the magnitude of the task, it would seem that it might take years.
If I go by my faith, I think it will take six months. I have here
men of sterling worth to help me. More are likely to join. I
continue to have God's mercy in abundance. It is not true
that Prabhudas's brain has grown dull for want of milk. Chi.
Chhaganlal wonders if this is so. The reason is to be found in
Prabhudas's passing from one phase of growth to another. When
passing through an important change of this kind, many people
feel disturbed in one way or another. Moreover, as I could see
while teaching Prabhudas, he worked very hard competing with
Devdas. He has some excellent qualities. He has exerted himself
beyond his limits, considering his age and capacity. He feels
exhausted now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5711. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
