344. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
DELHI,
December 11, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got the letters of you both. Which remarks of mine hurt
so much? I don't remember what I said to Kishorelal, but I
have never thought you timid or cowardly. On the contrary, I
have always been proud of your courage. But I do think that
you are too dependent on others, that you do not have sufficient
capacity to think for yourself. But that is not your fault. Partly
it may be mine. You have nothing to feel ashamed about. I
wrote a long letter to you by the last mail, from which you will
be able to know clearly my views in this regard. Even your
seeking my advice from here is a sign of your feeling of dependence.
If you make a mistake, I will not blame you even in my
thoughts. I would do that if you betrayed the trust reposed in
you. I do wish that you should keep the promises which you
may have made to the people or to friends. I am not at all
afraid of your present course. At the most the result would be
your financial ruin. Let it be so. But don't let people think
that you acted foolishly. If you feel that you have made a mistake,
admit it and free yourself. It is not as easy for me to give advice
in this matter as you seem to think. If it were so, why wouldn't
I advise you immediately?
And now regarding your expenses. My remarks were not
meant as criticism nor did they express my pain. I only wished
to say that, having lived there in a certain manner, you could not
easily change your mode of life here.
I don't wish that you
should try our manner of life here at the cost of the health of
all three of you. You yourself have calculated your monthly re-
quirement at Rs. 150. I have put it at Rs. 200. But now even
Rs. 150 can be obtained only as a favour. I would rather that
you lived on plain fare than that you should depend on any-
body's favour. In short I am not satisfied with your way of life.
I know that Sushila is much more careful than you in this matter.
After reading your letters, I even felt like sending a cable to you
asking you not to worry. But with whose money would that have
been? How can a poor father send a cable to reassure his son? I,
therefore, content myself with this letter. Have no fear of me,
either of you. Live as both of you may think proper. Even if you
cannot continue to live there despite your sincere efforts and come
over here, God will provide you means of livelihood. Do what-
ever you do after independent thinking.
Nimu is pregnant again. Ramdas feels extremely miserable.
I have tried to comfort him. A man and a woman cannot succeed
in this aim without hard effort. But Ramdas is a weak man and
thinks too much, so that even his weakness makes him unhappy.
Probably you know that Lakshmi also is pregnant. I came to
know these facts about both of them only recently. I come to
know about such things only after some time. Ba is happy in
jail. Manibehn is with her. I am all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4812
