383. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
MUSSOORIE,
June 7, 1946
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
I have your letter. All your questions are such that you should
find the answers there itself. For example, the problem of Ha-
rihar Sharma. What should I-or could I-do about it from here?
I realize it was a mistake on my part to have invited him to
the Ashram. Even then I have included in my letter to him
all that you wrote. If you approve of this letter, pass it on to
him. It was all right that you gave him coffee. Continue to
give him some. If, however, we are required to give to all
whatever is given to one, it will lead to the break-down of
the Ashram. Why, I should myself disband it. It is our duty
to offer things according to a man's needs. I have often said
that the Ashram should be like a hotel. The difference is that
the boarders in a hotel can ask for anything they like and on
payment they get it. Whatever we would give a person taking
into consideration his bodily needs should be in the nature of
a medicine. If we give quinine to one man, can everyone ask
for it? We must not regard quinine and coffee from different
angles. We have to offer rice to a South Indian, bread to a
Punjabi, fish to a Bengali, beer and beef to an Englishman.
It is another thing that we may not give meat and fish even
as medicine, generally not even rice. But if we admit such
persons then it becomes our dharma to let them have [what
they need]. But we may not offer all the four things to all
four of them at the same time. Now meat and fish are out of
the question, but how can we refuse to give wheat, rice, coffee,
tea, etc., which we have once given? Think over all this and do
as you deem proper.
As for prayers, everywhere I am sticking to the old order,
but if you think it right to have some change at the Ashram
you may make it. For that consult the old colleagues like
Chimanlal, Balvantsinha, etc., or postpone it till I reach there.
I have written to Champabehn. I understand what you say
about mango seeds, and also about dogs and mice.
Do what is proper about wood.
I propose to reach there in the beginning of August.
If Lilavati is there tell her that if she wants to abide by
my word she has my permission. If she wants to act within the
limits imposed by time, she hasn't much time, has she? She
will have to think over all this herself.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 4559
