95. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL PATWARI
AHMEDABAD,
Vaishakh Vad 13 [June 10, 1915]
RESPECTED SHRI RANCHHODBHAI,
I wrote to you yesterday in the midst of many preoccupations.
I think some of your questions I should answer right now. I have
a little time on hand today and, since I leave for Poona in the
evening, I set down a few things this very moment.
There need be no congratulations on [the award of] the Kaiser-
i-Hind medal. One may get it and also lose it. I do want a
medal, but of a different kind altogether. There is no knowing
when I shall get it, if ever.
The English article which is sold as flour is often no flour but
a mixture of other things. There is fraud in [the sale of] this
article. The retailer, being a third party, may not perhaps be
involved in it. Handloom cloth is only an example. The vow of
swadeshi implies that every article should be swadeshi. Kindly
permit me to say that the observance of this vow has a subtle
moral bearing.
Arithmetic will certainly include oral sums and Indian accoun-
tancy.
It cannot be that Gujaratis will never look outside Gujarat.
They will go everywhere in India. They are to serve the nation.
If they do not know the languages of Madras, they can have no
contact with the people there. As for English, it can be of
service only to those who know English. Shankar had learnt all
the languages of India. Vallabh4, who belonged to the land of
the Dravids, had learnt Gujarati. There are at present hundreds
of Gujaratis in Madras who know Tamil. [In] Europe, people in
the various countries know four or five European languages. It is
very easy to acquire such proficiency in languages. The time
wasted over English will, if saved, be sufficient for the purpose of
these other languages.
Pupils are to receive education which will incline them to do
nothing but national service when their studies are over. If, on
growing up, they leave the Ashram, the education will have failed
to that extent. Should any occasion of the kind arise, the student
will be free [to follow his inclination]. It is not the aim, how-
ever, that the students should return to their parents and get lost in
the sea of practical affairs.
I have had bitter experience that, when provision is made for
exceptional circumstances, parents conveniently fall ill. While
they are still in the stage of brahmacharya, students must not go
to attend marriages. They are to be surrounded with a new kind
of atmosphere and I always feel that, if there is frequent breaking
away from this, building of character is impossible.
As for dress, a single uniform is prescribed for the present, it
being necessary to do this for several reasons.
I think I have given very deep thought to the subject of milk.
It is a legacy of our non-vegetarian past. It is objectionable from
so many points of view that it ought to be avoided altogether.
Quite a number of boys have gone through the experiment for seve-
ral years and I have observed no ill-effects on their health. More
[about this] when we meet.
I shall try to respect people's sentiments in every way I can
without compromising the aims of the Ashram.
We have secured four teachers. One of them will stay with us.
Others live in the neighbourhood and come over daily for teaching.
If a teacher is not a man of character, he will be of no use to us.
Respectful greetings from
MOHANDAS
For washing clothes, I use for the present an Indian soap which
is free from fat. I am looking out for a substitute.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 2792; also G. N.
4117
