397. LETTER TO COL. R. J. BAKER
LONDON,
October 13, 1914
DEAR COLONEL BAKER,
I thank you for your note of today's date, supplemented by the
message sent by you, verbally, through Mr. Venkatraman who was
good enough to take [my] note to you.
I am aware that strict military discipline requires that all
complaints by members of a Corps should be sent to the com-
manding officer through section leaders. I am also aware of the
fact that, in the military sense, I am no more than any other pri-
vate, but I have been under the belief that in the interests of the
Corps, and unofficially, I would be allowed to act as a humble
channel of communication between you and the members of the
Corps, so as to avoid any friction or stiffness, especially in the ini-
tial stages, when the members who have never undergone military
discipline are likely to misunderstand experiences which may be
quite new to them. I also thought that you would not mind
recognising my representative capacity as Chairman of the Volun-
teer Corps, and would not resent my approaching you in the
matters affecting the Corps, and it was in that belief that, being
entirely a cripple, I took the liberty of inviting you to my room
so that we could have a mutual discussion, which I have always
known to be far more satisfactory than letter-writing, and if you
think it worth while, I would still ask you to favour me with a
call.
Meanwhile, and in any case, here are the complaints so far
as they have been brought to my notice.
First, grievous dissatisfaction has been caused by the appoint-
ment of section leaders without reference to the feeling of the
members of the Corps. They are disappointed, and I share their
disappointment, that they were not in any way consulted as to
the appointment. The leaders appointed mayor may not be desir-
able persons, and I hardly know any of them, but I think that the
efficient and smooth working of the Corps demands the appoint-
ments of officers who are likely to be popular with its members.
I, therefore, venture to suggest that the appointments already made
may be recalled, and that the members of the Corps may be invited
to elect section leaders and other officers whose appointment would
depend entirely upon you, and in the event of your not approving
of the choice made by the members, that they should elect others
in the place of those rejected by you.
The other complaints are of minor importance. The blankets
supplied are not considered enough, nor of sufficient length. The
quantity, as also the kind of rations, requires revision. There are
still some other matters with which I will not burden this note,
which is, I fear, too long as it is.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten office copy signed by Gandhiji: S. N. 606gB
