90. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
WARDHA,
October 31, 1935
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Enclosed is a letter from Parikshitlal. You seem to have read
it. I think I was wrong in giving my consent. Before I correct
myself, however, I must have a clear idea of the situation . I
think that, if Harijans are physically ill-treated in a place and if
they cannot get redress in any other way, they should leave that
village and we should encourage them to do so. I have accepted
and followed this policy for many years, both for individuals and
groups. I started advocating it in 1906 and gave expression to my
views in writing in 1908, and since then I have given the same
advice on all occasions. When the Harijans of Talaja and of the
villages near Meerut were terrorized, I gave this very advice. In
Talaja, Pattanisaheb intervened on behalf of the Harijans. In
the village near Meerut, there was a court case which dragged
on for a long time and the Harijans lost it. The lawyers and other
advisers were lukewarm and the matter was not pursued. Possibly
there are special reasons in the case of Kavitha which make mass
migration inadvisable. But what is the harm if the Harijans, all
or some of them, leave the place after serving notice on the caste
Hindus? If you differ with me about this, please explain your
point of view to me. I don't know if there are any special circum-
stances in Kavitha. You have been there and so will be able to
throw plenty of light on the situation. We should not treat the
Kavitha chapter as closed. We do not hear that the kind of
things which happen in Gujarat ever happen in the other provinces.
In Tamil Nad the relations between Nairs [sic] and Harijans
are equally bad, but I have not heard of such things happe-
ning anywhere else. We must find some remedy.
Valchand is thinking of coming here and bringing Ambedkar
with him.
They have asked me about the programme to be drawn up
during my visit there. It should include a tour of the Bhil areas
and a tour for public collections for the Harijan Fund.
If the operations are necessary, you should get them done as
soon as possible, unless of course the doctors think otherwise.
Deodhar is on his death-bed in Bhajekar's hospital. Write to
him.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
DR. KANUGA'S BUNGALOW
ELLIS BRIDGE, AHMEDABAD
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 190-
