364. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NAVAGAM,
Thursday [July 25, 1918]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
You have been frightened by Raojibhai as he was by me.
He read too much into my words.
No, my ideals have not changed. Despite my bitter experiences
in India, my conviction remains the same as ever, that we have
but little to learn from the West. The evils I have seen here have
made no change in my fundamental idea nor has this war. The
old idea has developed into something purer. I have certainly not
come to feel that we shall have to introduce Western civilization.
Nor do I suppose that we shall have to take to drinking and
meat-eating. To be sure, I have felt, in all seriousness, that
Swaminarayana and Vallabhacharya have robbed us of our
manliness. They made the people incapable of self-defence.
It was all to the good, of course, that people gave up drinking,
smoking, etc; this, however, is not an end in itself, it is only a
means. If a smoker happens to be a man of character, his
company is worth cultivating. If, on the contrary, a man who has
never smoked in his life is an adulterer, he can be of little
service. The love taught by Swaminarayana and Vallabh is all
sentimentalism. It cannot make one a man of true love. Swami-
narayana and Vallabh simply did not reflect over the true nature
of non-violence. Non-violence consists in holding in check all
impulses in the chitta . It comes into play especially in men's rela-
tions with one another. There is not even a suggestion of this idea
in their writings. Having been born in this degenerate age of ours,
they could not remain unaffected by its atmosphere and had, in
consequence, quite an undesirable effect on Gujarat. Tukaram
and Ramdas had no such effect. The abhangas of the former and
the shlokas of the latter admit ample scope for manly striving.
They, too, were Vaishnavas. Do not mix up the Vaishnava tradition
with the teaching of Vallabh and Swaminarayana. Vaishnavism is
an age-old truth. I have come to see, what I did not so clearly
before, that there is non-violence in violence. This is the big
change which has come about. I had not fully realized the duty
of restraining a drunkard from doing evil, of killing a dog in agony
or one infected with rabies. In all these instances, violence is in
fact non-violence. Violence is a function of the body. Brahma-
charya consists in refraining from sexual indulgence, but we do not
bring up our children to be impotent. They will have observed
brahmacharya only if, though possessed of the highest virility, they
can master the physical urge. In the same way, our offspring must
be strong in physique. If they cannot completely renounce the
urge to violence, we may permit them to commit violence, to use
their strength to fight and thus make them non-violent. Non-vio-
lence was taught by a Kshatriya to a Kshatriya.
The difference between the West and the East is what I
have explained it to be, and it is a great one. The civilization
of the West is based on self-indulgence, ours on self-control.
If we commit violence, it will be as a last resort and with a
view to lokasangraha 2 . The West will indulge in violence in
self-will. My taking part in [the movement for] a Parliament
and similar activities is not a new development; it is quite an old
thing and is only intended to ensure a check on these bodies. You
will see this if you read my article on Mr. Montagu's scheme. I
simply cannot bring myself to take interest in the movement, but
I can spread my ideals by working in it. When I saw that I
could continue in it only by sacrificing my ideals, I decided to retire
from the movement.
I think you have your reply in what I have said. I cannot
explain much when I am there for a day and so I have set down
the thing in writing. This will enable you to think and ask me
questions, if fresh doubts occur to you.
I continue to be in Navagam. I wanted to leave here today,
but perhaps I may not be able to do so.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
