396. LETTER TO RAMSAY MACDONALD
August 18, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
There can be no doubt that Sir Samuel Hoare has showed you
and the Cabinet my letter to him of 11th March on the question
of the representation of "depressed" classes. That letter should
be treated as part of this letter and be read together with this.
I have read the British Government's decision on the repre-
sentation of minorities and have slept over it. In pursuance
of my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare and my declaration at the meet-
ing of the Minorities Committee of the Round Table Conference
on 13th November, 1931, at St. James' Palace, I have to resist
your decision with my life.
The only way I can do so is by declaring a perpetual fast
unto death from food of any kind save water with or without
salt and soda. This fast will cease if during its progress the
British Government, of its own motion or under pressure of public
opinion, revise their decision and withdraw their scheme of com-
munal electorates for the "depressed" classes, whose representa-
tives should be elected by the general electorate under the com-
mon franchise no matter how wide it is.
The proposed fast will come into operation in the ordinary
course from the noon of 20th September next, unless the said
decision is meanwhile revised in the manner suggested above.
I am asking the authorities here to cable the text of this letter to
you so as to give you ample notice. But in any case, I am leaving
sufficient time for this letter to reach you in time by the slowest route.
I also ask that this letter and my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare,
already referred to, be published at the earliest possible moment.
On my part, I have scrupulously observed the rule of the jail
and have communicated my desire or the contents of the two
letters to no one, save my two companions, Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel and Sjt. Mahadev Desai. But I want, if you make it possi-
ble, public opinion to be affected by my letter. Hence, my
request for their early publication.
I regret the decision I have taken. But as a man of religion
that I hold myself to be, I have no other course left open to me.
As I have said in my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, even if His
Majesty's Government decided to release me in order to save
themselves the embarrassment, my fast will have to continue.
For I cannot now hope to resist the decision by any other means.
And I have no desire whatsoever to compass my release by any
means other than honourable.
It may be that my judgment is warped and that I am wholly
in error in regarding separate electorates for the "depressed"
classes as harmful to them or to Hinduism. If so, I am not
likely to be in the right with reference to other parts of my
philosophy of life. In that case my death by fasting will be at
once a penance for my error and a lifting of a weight from off
those numberless men and women who have childlike faith in my
wisdom. Whereas if my judgment is right, as I have little doubt
it is, the contemplated step is but the due fulfilment of the
scheme of life, which I have tried for more than a quarter of a
century, apparently not without considerable success.
I remain,
Your faithful friend,
M. K. GANDHI
THE RT. HON'BLE J. RAMSAY MACDONALD
PRIME MINISTER, LONDON
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-9-1932
