140. LETTER TO AMBALAL SARABHAI
THE ASHRAM,
July 11, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your long letter. I read the whole of it with care. I
am glad that you wrote it. I liked it very much, since you have
poured out your heart in it. I take it, moreover, as a sign of friend-
ship that you took all this trouble to arrange your ideas and
put them compactly before me. I, therefore, welcome your letter
from every point of view. I am replying in Gujarati, since I shall
never have the courage to write to a Gujarati in English, and I
am dictating the letter since otherwise you would find difficulty
in reading my handwriting and I would be going against doctors'
advice that I should do as little writing as possible with my hand.
Please rest assured that the views I had formed about you long
ago remain unaltered. You have not changed; if anyone, I have
changed, though I think I too have not. How could all that
was in me come out at one time, without the circumstances to
draw it out? Circumstances made me a non-co-operator. To
others, that may appear as a change in me. But so far as I am
concerned, I was being true to myself and, therefore, my non-co-
operation was but a manifestation of my real self in relation to
particular circumstances. One may see me bare-bodied in summer
and wrapped up in clothes in winter and might think that I had
changed. The truth is that I have not changed at all. I merely
responded in the appropriate manner to changed circumstances.
However, no matter what differences of opinion arise between us,
I shall always feel the attraction of your virtues which first drew
me towards you.
From some of my actions you have reached the conclusion
that I would use any means to gain my end. It is absolutely
against my nature to act in that manner. I have stated time and
again, and proved through my actions, that I believe means and
ends to be intimately inter-connected. That is, a good end can
never be achieved through bad means. I had given the most
careful thought to the problem of the Khilafat before making the
cause my own. If I had not believed in its justice, I would never
have lent my support to the Muslims. This of course does not
mean that it was, or is, necessary for me, for the sake of my
dharma, to support the Khilafat movement, but I certainly held,
and I still hold, that the Muslim claim was just from their own
point of view and that, from the standpoint of morality, there was
nothing objectionable in it. I, therefore, believed it to be the moral
duty of every Hindu to stand by them in their suffering. I still
cling to these views and do not repent having helped the Mus-
lims in their fight for the Khilafat. Nor do I believe that Hindus
have suffered by having helped them. I think in the same way
about non-co-operation. It is a great principle. We do not yet
understand its full significance. If, however, we are ever to see
an era of peace, it will be through non-violent non-co-operation.
I have not relaxed my non-co-operation in any particular. Even
during the days of the non-co-operation movement, I used to
meet the Governor, as I did this time. Even at that time I
used to get documents registered, as I do now, and likewise used
to advise a court suit against those who misappropriated Congress
funds just as I do now. The reason is that non-co-operation was
and is, limited in its application. The fact that perfect non-violence
is impossible to practise while one lives in this body does not viti-
ate the principle itself. And so about non-co-operation. I have
never felt ashamed in admitting my errors, and if I believed that
the non-co-operation movement was a mistake and that it has fail-
ed, I would follow Mr. Roy's advice and certainly proclaim my
errors publicly. I am, however, convinced that that movement
has done the country untold good and that, if we look deep, it
has not failed. It is true that we have not won swaraj in the sense
of political power, but I attach little value to this fact. That
people's ideas have changed, that they have become more critical
and have acquired courage, is no small gain. The value of the
movement will be appreciated in the future. Being too near it as
yet, we cannot judge it aright. This being my view, what am
I to confess in public? It is of course possible that my view is
wrong. But so long as I am myself not convinced of the error of
my view, how can I, if I love truth, admit any error? I aim at
self-purification even through my political activities; I wish to
follow dharma through them, and everyone's dharma is but what
he can see for himself. No one has yet discovered absolute dharma
which everyone will recognize to be so. Such dharma is beyond
our power to understand and explain. Each one of us has but a
glimpse of it, and describes it in his own way. Our power is
1 Gandhiji met the Governor of Bombay on May 18, 1926 in connection
with the Royal Agricultural Commission.
limited to the choice of means and I, therefore, believe that our
success lies in preserving the purity of our means.
About the Congress, too, I feel that you are labouring under
a misapprehension. It is not for one person to decide who should
and who should not remain in it. If I could mould the Con-
gress according to my ideas, it would be a different body. More-
over, if the Congress were controlled by one person and public
opinion was ignored, it would be not a popular body but a one-
man show. There is much else I should like to write. It is pos-
sible to reply to your arguments about the other issues which you
have raised. I have picked up only the more important points
and tried to meet your arguments. Even so, I shall not be dog-
matic and do not assert that I am right and you are wrong. We
can both be right, each from his own point of view. If we claim
to follow the path of truth, how can we say today who is right
in an absolute sense? The future alone will show who is right;
but one thing I have learnt from my varied experience of life, and
that is that, though all of us cannot be of the same view, we can
learn to tolerate one another's views. If we do so and if we
discuss our views with one another, we can remove all the mis-
understandings which may have arisen. It is for this reason that
I have valued your letter and felt prompted to reply to it.
I read your letter to Sastri. It did not please me as much as
your letter to me did. I feel that it would have been better if
you had not written as you have done at this time when he is in
difficulty and that too in reply to a request from him. I have pass-
ed on to him the cheque which you sent to me, and have made no
mention of the copy of your letter to him which you have sent
to me. If I had known that you held the view about the society
which you have expressed, I would not have written to you for
help. I value the gift you have made though holding the views
which you do, and did not, therefore, hesitate to send on your
cheque to Sastri. Your letter to Sastri, too, seems to me to have
been written with the best of motives.
SHRI AMBALAL SARABHAI
MALDEN HOUSE
MARINE LINES
BOMBAY
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19928
1 V. S. Srinivasa Sastri
2 Servants of India Society
