202. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
ON THE WAY TO LAHORE,
March 2 [1921]
MY DEAREST CHARLIE,
I thought of you the whole of Monday but was not able to
reach the letter. I wanted to write to you. I wanted to tell
you how forcibly I felt the truth of what I have said in one
sentence in my Tibbia College speech. The crime against the
untouchables I feel, the exploitation of the dumb millions I feel,
but I realize still more clearly our duty to the lower animal
world. When Buddha carried that lamb on his back and chas-
tised the Brahmins, he showed the highest measure of love. The
worship of the cow in Hinduism typifies that love.
And what does that love demand? Certainly not hospitals
for cattle ill-treated by fellow-beings, though they are not to be
destroyed, but promotion of kindness to beasts. Our love consists
in our getting off the necks of our dumb fellow-creatures. The
more helpless the lower life, the greater should be our pity.
Thus thinking I see a newer meaning in the spinning-wheel
and my statement that its destruction marked the subjection of
India and her decay. The work among the poor will be profitless
and devoid of religion without the spinning-wheel. We must help
the poor to feed and clothe themselves. We can never succeed
unless we reintroduce the spinning-wheel. No other industry can
solve the problem of the mass poverty in India.
I have given you my thoughts at random but you will probably
have no difficulty in seeing my meaning. I am trying to answer
the difficulties that underlie some of your questions. I feel that
you have not seen clearly the message of the spinning-wheel or the
working of the spirit of non-co-operation. Somehow or other the
women of India appear to have caught it instinctively.
I appreciate Gurudev's rebuke but I do not feel guilty.
Somehow or other I imagine that with my knowledge limited as
it was at that time I did right in not judging the Government.
My hearty association up to the time of the Amritsar Congress
has given me a confidence and power which I could not have
possessed otherwise—nor was there a spirit of bargaining behind
it. I did what I held was right without bargaining for reward.
In Lahore I may have to stay a week. I shall know on
reaching.
Mahadev is at Sabarmati installing Vakil as Sub-editor for
Young India. Lalchand leaves Young India. I wanted a more
capable man. Lalchand is a good, honest worker, but does not
understand his limitations. Mahadev will return after he has
done.
I do hope you are keeping better health now.
Please give my respects to Baro Dada. It is a great comfort
to me that he is so whole-heartedly with me in this struggle.
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 960
