2. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON REPATRIATION OF
SOUTH AFRICAN INDIANS
July 1, 19201
I have just read the interim report of the South African
Commission published in Indian Opinion recently received. As it
reads, the report seems to be harmless. Even the word "repatria-
tion" does not occur in it. It is a cautiously-worded document.
And as there seems to be no opposition to the recommendation
from the resident Indian population, I am not inclined to oppose
the proposal of the Commission. At the same time there is no
mistaking its intention. Indeed they have not even attempted to
conceal it, for, they ask His Excellency the Governor of South
Africa "to appoint an official well acquainted with the Indian mind
and their methods to act in a sympathetic manner and lay before the
Indians the advantages of immediately returning to India". The
case for the scheme is that the Indians are anxious to return and
that the scheme satisfies that anxiety whereas the anxiety seems to
be all on the part of the Commission and their return is to be
stimulated by placing its advantages before our sorely tried country-
men. The working of the scheme will, however, require ceaseless
watching. There should be no compulsion of any kind whatsoever
and no forfeiture of rights of domicile. I was pleased to notice
absence of any reference to such forfeiture in the interim report.
One however never knows what undertaking may not be taken
from the poor returning Indians against the grant of a free pass-
age. If the scheme is benevolently intended to relieve the present
distress the Union Government will simply facilitate the return of
those who are unable to support themselves in South Africa, without
bargaining for the forfeiture of domicile. To insist upon the loss
1 Released on this date through the Associated Press of India; vide The
Bombay Chronicle, 2-7-1920.
2 It contained a scheme of voluntary repatriation of Indians from South
Africa to be carried out under Section 6 of the Indians' Relief Act, 1914; vide
"Uncanny", 14-7-1920.
3 Appointed by the South African Government to enquire into the ques-
tion of Asiatics trading and holding land in South Africa. The Commission
was assisted by Sir Benjamin Robertson on behalf of the Government of
India.
of that valuable right would be to take a mean advantage of the
distressful condition of some of our countrymen in South Africa.
Young India, 7-7-1920
