99. LETTER TO BARJORJI F. BHARUCHA
September 17, 1932
BHAI BARJORJI,
I was not surprised to get your wire. But the truth is that
no person can resolve on an indefinite fast relying on his own
strength, and that if he does so he must be an ignorant man. For
myself at any rate I can say that I did not take the vow, but
that God inspired me to take it. The date too was fixed by
Him, and so also the conditions under which the date could be
changed. Your appeal is not covered by those conditions. What
can I do now?
Another simple thing is this: a prisoner cannot himself com-
municate anything to the world outside. Hence, it would have
been a sin for me, a satyagrahi, to convey indirectly to the nation
even the slightest hint of what I had in my mind. A satyagrahi
prisoner voluntarily obeys prison rules and, if it becomes neces-
sary for him to disobey any of them, he can only do so openly.
Thus, the notice given by me as a prisoner to the Government
should be regarded as a notice given to the people also. That is,
it was for the Government to decide whether it would inform the
public about my intention. If the people did not know of it
earlier, we should interpret the fact only to mean that God did
not intend the people to know it earlier. How can I postpone
the date of the fast in order to give time to the people? Why
should not those who have faith in God rather think that if it is
His will that I should serve more yet, He would in spite of the
fast spare my life for as long as may be necessary? And you
certainly have faith in God. You should, therefore, try to under-
stand what I have said in this letter and explain it to the men
and women who get agitated over my decision and give them
courage. My co-workers' duty at present is to go on vigorously
with the work that now faces us. The result is in God's hands.
Remember this, that my fast cannot be, and certainly is not,
intended for putting pressure on any party. Its purpose is only
to see that what is in the best interests of the Antyajas themselves
is done. If what seems proper to me does not appear so to others,
they should indeed continue their opposition. Such pure fast for
a public cause should aim at bringing about an awakening in
the nation and should not, at any rate, be used ignorantly to
lead the people on a wrong path. If, in my ignorance, I try
through a fast to make the nation agree to an improper demand,
I am sure that the nation ought not to yield to such a demand
merely for sparing my life, no matter how much it is convinced
of my services to it in the past. Not only the good of the
nation, but my own good too, lies in its not yielding to an im-
proper demand by me.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 33-
