336. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BETTIAH,
Jeth Sud 11, Samvat 1973 [June 1, 1917]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
The friend Kishorelal about whom Chandulal wrote has arrived
here. But his health is not too good and I am sending him back.
He is a fine man. I have suggested to him that he may join the
school. I take it that you will let him join.
In the letter I posted this morning, I could not complete the
point towards the end. If Fulchand and Narahari were not inclu-
ded among the inmates, the idea was to suggest that, at the criti-
cal hour, they should be free to get some experience of jail here if
they so desire. It is because of Sankalchand that the school has star-
ted. Even if he wants to, he cannot come here. I cannot imagine
the school without Kaka at present. Sankalchand cannot run it
by himself. And so Kaka must remain. He doesn't have anything
more to learn here. I think he is a veteran. He can work hard
enough. What he has to learn is to serve, tied down to one spot,
and he has now such an opportunity. Mama can work half the
time in the school and half on the loom or he can work all the
time on the loom. He is much in the same position as Kaka. All
that is to be learnt here is to suffer, when the hour comes, and go
to jail. Mama has passed the test in this school. Without Chhota-
lal, how could you run the loom by yourself? For him, moreover,
going to jail is a kind of indulgence, so to say. Jail is no hardship
to him. If there is hardship anywhere, it is there. That, too, he
bears and will go on bearing. If Santok remains there, the girls
will be looked after and Vrajlal can also be free of the kitchen.
Chhaganlal can be spared if Khushalbhai has gone over there.
Punjabhai will then keep accounts as well as he may. Who will
be asking for them? This is the arrangement that occurs to me.
No one from among the teachers is obliged to join in work of this
kind, nor do I expect them to. All that I have suggested is that,
even if any of them want to join, only two can be spared. For the
immediate present, however, I don't see the need for anyone besides
Devdas to come.
When you, Mama and Chhotalal have ac-
quired full mastery over the loom, you yourselves will take up the
fight, without depending on me, for the uplift of handloom wor-
kers. When Sankalchand and others are in full command of the
National School, the teachers will themselves take up the struggle
for the spread of that type of education everywhere. If I am a free
man and alive, I shall join in that effort too. If not, this struggle
will have shown the way to you all.
One-pointed is the intellect
that functions with a purpose, son of Kuru!
Many-branched and infinite are the movements
of the intellect devoid of purpose.
This covers everything.
Once we have decided what we want and are resolved not to
be deterred by anything that may follow, the developments will
show us the way. There is not much to be learnt in how I listen
to people's tales [of suffering] and take their statements. This con-
tains a reply to Mama's letter too. Show him the whole letter. It
seems you have forgotten about the letter to Narandas, or the one
from him, that you were to send to me. You may employ any
labour that may be necessary except for weaving. As to the
charges, we can go as far as reasonable market rates. What you
say about the plan of the house seems all right to me. If you
go to live there, put up the hedge immediately. What it will
be of, you may consider and decide. I have already given the
plan I should like. See that the verandahs around the house
are wide enough. It will be all right to have the teachers'
rooms in front, as also those for Lalji and others. I can't think
[about the arrangement] for respected Khushalbhai. You may
do so yourself. It also remains to be seen what he decides in
response to my letter. I think we shall have to spend up to
Rs. 20,000 on the buildings; we can manage that. We shall
be receiving Rs. 2,000 annually from Doctor Saheb. He has
not so far paid the sum [for this year] but I take it that he will
do so now. Let him know your needs. I am treating the land as
a separate item. If you think it necessary to use full-baked
bricks for the construction of the buildings, do so. The Executive
Engineer there is Mr. Tyobji. He will help you. Punjabhai was
with me when he took me to see the jail.
Yes, it is quite right to pay the salaries from the Ashram
reserves. We shall see what to do when some one donates money for
the school. The teachers' quarters will also be constructed out of
the Ashram funds. They should, if they can, pay rent at the
rate of six per cent, or any other rate which may be considered
reasonable, on the cost of the land and all the other expenses. This
answers all your points.
Blessings from
BAPU
What Chhaganlal says about Jivanlalbhai having been paid
up to the 15th is not right. I have already arranged that a fortnight's
salary should be remitted to him in advance and that subse-
quently he should be paid on the first of every month. You can
make sure by looking into the cheque book and consulting Ful-
chand. It is not our idea that we should meet our expenses in the
future out of the interest. As far as possible, we shall live within
whatever we receive, unasked, for the expenses. But, to the extent
that we fail in our tapascharya, we shall appeal for donations. This
is the way all great undertakings in the world are carried on.
Institutions which are maintained out of interest lose vitality in
the end. People will maintain any institution that they need.
If the Shriji [ temple] were without its rich wealth, the priests
would be more concerned with their spiritual state. The teachers
need not get alarmed by this view of mine or by the proposed
arrangement. In the notes lying with Shukla Saheb and Reva-
shankarbhai, there is sufficient reserve to meet their needs for four
years. I have, all the same, written to the Doctor asking him to
undertake the responsibility of meeting all the expenses for the
present, and I think he will. Send him a complete estimate for the
year. When I am outside [jail] the question does not arise.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5713. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
