342. LETTER TO TOWN CLERK
JOHANNESBURG,
February 6, 1907
TO
THE TOWN CLERK
P. O. BOX 1047
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
The Committee of the British Indian Association has seen the draft
of the by-laws for licensing and regulating Asiatic tea-rooms or eating-
houses. My Committee respectfully submits the following for the
Council's consideration, in connection with the by-laws.
It appears that the necessity for the by-laws has arisen on account
of the large, indentured Chinese population and the catering for that
population which has been undertaken by various persons. But, under
the definition of the term, "Asiatic tea-room or eating-house" is evidently
included any place where Asiatics are catered for, and it would, therefore,
include the small British Indian restaurants which are conducted in
Johannesburg. They are very few, and have very few visitors, the
British Indian population being all permanently resident, and not
requiring any houses for feeding it. My Committee, therefore, ventures
to suggest that the definition should not include those of British Indians.
At the same time, my Committee has no desire to protect the few small
British Indian restaurants in Johannesburg from inspection with regard
to sanitation, etc., but, in the humble opinion of my Committee, the
ordinary public health by-laws are sufficient for the purpose.
In the humble opinion of my Committee, the procedure laid down
for making application for a tea-room or an eating-house licence is
cumbersome and costly, and could only be justified if there were large
remunerative establishments. The fee fixed for the annual licence,
too, in my Committee's humble opinion, is almost prohibitive, and is
greater than the fee charged for either European restaurants or Kaffir
eating-houses, the fee for the former being £7.10. only and for the
latter £5. Moreover, the definition of an "Asiatic eating-house"
includes a tea-room. Therefore, whilst a general tea-room carries with
it a licence of £3, an Asiatic tea-room will require a licence fee of £10;
and the fee of £2 for transfer of licences is, in my Committee's humble
opinion, a heavy charge.
My Committee, therefore, ventures to trust that the Town Council
will be pleased to favourably consider the objections herein raised to
the proposed by-laws.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 16-2-1907
