91. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
[BOMBAY,]
January 27, 1919
I have followed your letter read out to me. I very much like
your writing frankly. I am replying, expecting that you will
write further. My vow, in its broadest sense, can only mean what
you say it does. And so, the day I resolved to take goat's milk, I re-
marked that the zest with which I kept up the vow would be no
more. I cannot experiment with milkless diet any more, nor can
I pride myself upon not taking any food of animal origin. All the
same, even after following your letter, I don't feel that my vow
has been violated. It appears to me that the restricted meaning of
my vow is as I have given it. When I took the vow, goat's milk
was not in my mind at all. And I would even go so far as to maintain
that the fact of big loopholes having been left in both my vows is evidence
of their utter sincerity. As for the vow [restricting me to only] five
articles [during a single day], going to any foreign country, as it
turns out, will release me from it; in regard to the vow con-
cerning milk, the goat has proved a mother to me. There are many
instances in our scriptures of vows having been kept, though inter-
preted in a restricted sense. I understand the significance of
these instances better now. It is to be preferred that a person
placed as I am should be known to have kept a vow of his in its
literal meaning, at any rate, rather than to have violated it al-
together. I believe I shall be able to keep myself going on goat's
milk. However, there are those who say, and there will be many
more to say it, that I shall not regain complete strength without
taking cow's milk. I shall certainly not, for that reason, take cow's
milk. Nor, again, am I likely to get goat's milk at every place. Thus,
even in the literal observance of the vow, some inconvenience will
be there. At the moment, however, the question I am putting
before you and me is not that of convenience or inconvenience.
We have only to consider whether my vow can bear the restricted
meaning I am giving it. If it can, it is my duty in this difficult
situation to accept such meaning, relieve my friends and save my
body. Personally, I feel that so long as a person sees no error or
sin in his vow, he is not free to violate it on anyone's account. If
once it is allowed that a vow may be broken, no vows will ever
be kept and they will lose all their significance. Even so, I don't
see any harm in placing upon a vow every sense it will bear and
using the fact to one's advantage. It is not self-deception when
people persuade themselves that they have kept the ekadashi, using
rock salt in place of common salt on that day. Common salt is
of course forbidden; but anyone who, finding it impossible to do
without the savour which salt imparts to food, substitutes anyone
of the other available salts and keeps the ekadashi that way, has yet
exercised a sort of self-control. One day he may give up even rock
salt.
I shall not make this reply any longer. Think over what I
have said and, if there is anything to write, do when you have the
time.
We shall all learn something by this exchange of letters and,
if I have been making a mistake, I shall know what it is.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
