122. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
January 20, 1933
I have seen your statement convening a Conference of sana-
tanists. I had purposely refrained from worrying you over the
question of temple-entry. Much as I stood in need of your invalu-
able assistance, I knew that you were preoccupied with matters
of the highest moment, and I felt that the least I could do, as
also the most that was possible, was deliberately to forgo that assis-
tance. Friends in Kerala pressed me to ask you to go to their
rescue. I refused to do so, and I warned them against troubling
you. But now I see that you have yourself taken the initiative and
a tremendous responsibility. I hope and pray that great good will
come out of the Conference.
I wish that it had been possible for us to meet before the
Conference, or that we had exchanged ideas before you pro-
pounded your suggestions about temple-entry. I feel, however,
that I should submit to you my own position.
If the Bombay Meeting, during and immediately after the fast
week that passed the resolution was representative of Hindu
India, it is up to every Hindu to make good that resolution in
its fulness. That resolution, as you know, has definite reference
to temple-entry. It prescribes no conditions. The whole trend of
the resolution is that temple-entry and the use of public institu-
tions by Harijans on the same terms as the other Hindus is a
debt long overdue by caste Hindus. I feel that it would be wrong,
if not a manifest breach of faith, to import any conditions specially
applicable to Harijans. Naturally, Harijans would be expected to
conform to the conditions that are implied in Hinduism and have
to be observed by everyone who enters temples. But that is a
different thing from laying down special conditions to be ob-
served by Harijans by way of penance. Most of the things that
are included in your suggestions can be enunciated in a different
and perfectly harmless manner, that is to say, by saying that it
is the right of Harijans to enter all public temples under the same
conditions that are applicable to all Hindus, irrespective of their
caste or status, that is to say, (here may be described these general
conditions, such as, daily bath, recitation of Dwadash or other
mantras, abstention from carrion or beef, intoxicating drinks, if the
latter abstention is enjoined in any of the current Smritis and
Puranas).
From all the discussions that I had with the Shastris who
favour the present movement and who are hostile to it, I have
gathered that there is no warrant whatsoever for untouchability
as we now know it. There is perfect confusion as to whom, of
all the people classified as untouchables in the census books, the
verses oft-quoted apply. Untouchability by birth seems to be
utterly non-existent. There is no proof whatsoever to show that
any single one of the untouchables so classed is the progeny of a
Brahmin woman through a Shudra man or that he is a descendant
of such a union. I would, therefore, beg of you not to surrender
on the matter of principle. I would far rather that the refor-
mers were left to plough the lonely furrow than that they should
be called upon to lend themselves to an unworthy surrender. The
surrender, in my opinion, of the highest type I have suggested
in my compromise proposal, where the most delicate suscepti-
bilities of a minority, however small it may be, have been taken
into consideration. Even that has cost me much criticism, but
I am unaffected by it, because, in my opinion, it is perfectly
honourable and satisfies all sincere and religious-minded refor-
mers and dissenters.
If I am obscure, you will, I know and hope, use the wire freely.
I am most anxious that God may make you the instrument
of purifying Hinduism and keeping faith with the Harijans.
Harijan, 18-2-1933 Also C.W. 7922a. Courtesy: G. D. Birla.
1
