67. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON,
April 7, 1937
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. I am replying to you at the Rajkot
address. Paparamma was not in a position to go to Belgaum.
Ramachandran is quite ill. He had an attack of pleurisy. He
is better now but is taking rest. His nerves also have become
weak. He did not permit Saraswati to come because he is
still afraid that her studies may be disturbed.
It is surprising that your thumb is still not cured. Did
you try mud treatment? If the thumb is bandaged while writing,
you will find it much easier to write. I myself had tried a mud
bandage as help in writing with the tired thumb, and I had been
able to continue working.
Manu has spared you and so it will not be necessary for
you to come to Belgaum just for the sake of the wedding. But
you probably know that Ba herself is coming there. If, there-
fore, your stay there for a few days is likely to satisfy your aunts,
you can come to Belgaum. And from there you can go to
Mysore. If it can be arranged this way, you can be present at
the wedding and, after the function at Belgaum is over, you can
go to Mysore.
Devdas's letter is all right. I do not remember to have
used the word 'strong', though I cannot say, either, that I didn't
use it. Even if I did, what is the harm? Even if your desire
is no more than a simple wish, there is no harm in satis-
fying it. Going to Mysore should depend on your own will. It
should be enough if Devdas gives his consent. If you do not
wish, why should you go? I am firm in my view. I personally
prefer Mysore to Bombay, both from the point of view of the
climate and of peace of mind. I do not know whether educa-
tion there will be of the standard of Wilson College. But ac-
cording to me that depends more on the student. I have come
across many dullards educated in Wilson College and very intel-
ligent Mysoreans who have never gone out of Mysore. But the
60
best course is that you should go to Mysore and see things for
yourself and then decide as you like.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7319. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
