64. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 27, 1928
MY DEAR RITCH,
I was glad to receive your long letter though a business letter.
Unlike you, I am going to commence with domestic business. I was
distressed to hear from Miss Knudsen, who by the way is staying
with me at the present moment, that you had lost one of your legs.
But she was unable to give me the reason for it. You shall give
it. And how is Mrs. Ritch doing? And what about Erick and
Harold? The daughters' names I forget. I hope they won't accuse
me of want of chivalry. What are they all doing? For me, I am
dictating from a sick-bed, not that I feel anything particular
within me, but doctors have warned me against exerting myself
either physically or mentally for some time yet. Mrs. Gandhi is
keeping quite well. Harilal has practically forsaken me. He
1 From the postmark
drinks, eats and makes himself merry. But he is a brave boy in
one sense that he makes no secret of his vice and his rebellion is
an open rebellion. If he had not done his creditors down, I would
not have minded his other lapses as I mind this betrayal of his
creditors. Manilal you know is in Phoenix and Ramdas and Dev-
das are assisting me in my work. Polak is in India just now, travel-
ling about his business. I met him for a few minutes in Madras
and he is likely to call at the Ashram before he re-embarks for
London. Andrews is a frequent visitor to the Ashram and he is due
here about the third of March. This Ashram is a big, growing
affair. We are at the present moment supporting a population of
about two hundred, quite a little village by ourselves. And not
only do we go through all the processes of cotton till it comes out
as cloth, we are conducting a little dairy, a little tannery and we are
having a little bit of farming. We have some fruit-trees and we
grow our own vegetables. We grow some grains and enough fod-
der for cattle. We have as a rule one or two Europeans with us
and there is a constant stream of such visitors. Life is very simple,
and yet not simple enough for the Indian setting. You can't have
any notion from that distance of the grinding poverty of the masses.
And if we could only sustain ourselves well enough for our work
in less, I would straight way reduce our expenses which amount to
a pound per month on an average including clothing but exclud-
ing rental. Of course we are paying no rent. We have nearly 75
boys and girls for whom we are conducting what I may call a model
school making tuitional experiments.
Now for business. My own opinion is that neither Andrews nor
Sastri could have got more than they have. I quite agree with you
that these Union Ministers will be driven to getting out of the
bargain. But if Sastri is permitted to remain in South Africa for
any length of time, I am inclined to think that his correct, that is,
his righteous, diplomacy will triumph over the crooked diplo-
macy of South Africa. If we are to achieve the full result of the
struggle of 1906 to 1914, we must act on the square and cleanse
our stables, and I feel sure that if those who have entered surrepti-
tiously will cease to be greedy, will make a clear confession and
truthfully, not encourage any single fraudulent entrant in future, the
position can be saved and the condition of the resident population
steadily improved. If, however, the desire is not only to cover sur-
reptitious entries already accomplished, but to leave the door open
for more, I think that the community will be unable to remain in
South Africa with any degree of self-respect. It will hold on some-
how or other I have no doubt, it will be difficult to wipe out such
a large and resourceful community, but it would be a sordid exis-
tence; whereas I would like the Indians of South Africa to play
an honourable part not merely for the up building of South Africa
but for the upbuilding of India itself. If we play the game in
South Africa, it is possible in course of time to secure full rights
of citizenship. You may share this letter with any friend you like.
With regards to you all,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 11965
