9. LETTER TO F. S. TALEYARKHAN
BUCKINGHAM HOTEL,
MADRAS,
October 18, 1896
DEAR MR. TALEYARKHAN,
I have your important letter for which I thank you.
Your inquiry is certainly very pertinent. And you may
depend upon it that I shall answer it most frankly.
I start with the assumption that we work in partnership.
Starting on your own account at once will be out of the ques-
tion.
There are cheques lying in my safe at Durban for about
£300, the retainer for 1897, ending 31st July. These I propose
to withdraw from the partnership to pay liabilities incurred here
and if possible to pay the expenses that are now being incurred in
connection with my office. I say if possible, because the balance
may not cover the expenses at Durban.
If past experience is any guide for the purpose, then I think I
am safe in saying that the joint earnings for the first six months
will be at the rate of £70 per month. As against that I place
the joint expenses at £50 per month, i.e., if we share the same
house. That would leave a clear profit of £120 to be divided
equally between us after six months. This is the lowest estimate.
And I should expect to earn that amount single-handed doing
the Indian work side by side. It would not surprise me how-
ever if we earned £150 per month.
This much I can promise. You should pay your own pas-
sage to Natal. Your expenses of admission will be paid out of the
office. The expenses of your board and lodging also will be
defrayed out of the office earnings. That is to say, if there is any
loss during the six months' trial it shall be borne by me. On the
other hand if there are any profits you share them.
Thus at the end of six months if you do not gain in money
you will have gained considerably in experience of a different
kind from that available in India. You will have realized the
position of our countrymen in that part of the world and you will
have seen a new country. I have no doubt that your connection in
Bombay is such that a six months' absence from Bombay would
not mar your future career there if you are disappointed in
Natal. The six months' loss in Bombay will be requited by what
I have stated above.
In any case, I cannot be too plain in saying that no one in
our position should go to South Africa with a view to pile
money. You should go there with a spirit of self-sacrifice. You
should keep riches at an arm's length. They may then woo you.
If you bestow your glances on them, they are such a coquette
that you are sure to be slighted. That is my experience in South
Africa.
As for work, apart from pecuniary considerations, I promise
that there will be more than sufficient to feed your activity—that
too legal work.
Boarding together might present a slight difficulty. If you
could manage with vegetarian food, I could place on the table
most palatable dishes cooked both in the English as well as
the Indian style. If, however, that be not possible, we shall have
to engage another cook. At any rate that cannot be an insurmoun-
table difficulty.
I trust I have stated the position clearly.
If there are any points requiring elucidation you have only
to mention them. I do hope you will not allow pecuniary
considerations to come in your way. I am sure you will be able
to do much in South Africa—more indeed than I may have been
instrumental in doing.
I have been seeing here the great men. The Madras Times
has given its full support and it came out with a rattling good
leading article on Friday last. The Mail has promised it. The
meeting probably comes off on Friday. After the meeting I go to
Calcutta and thence probably to Poona. Professor Bhandarkar has
promised his full support and I think he can do some good. I
halted for a day at Poona on my way here.
I think I wrote to you that the Immigration Bill has received
the Royal assent. (Events follow in such quick succession that I
forget them soon.) This is an unexpected and terrible blow. I
am now renewing the prayer for suspension of State-aided im-
migration. The Natal Agent-General's diplomatic contradiction,
about which you must have read in the papers, shows the neces-
sity of the agitation in London also. There I am positive you
can do much more than I can.
It will be a very good thing if you could accompany me
to Natal. I may mention that if the S.S. Courland is available by
that time I might secure you a free passage.
I remain,
yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I received your letter only today.
M. K. G.
From the original. Courtesy: R. F. S. Taleyarkhan
