388. LETTER TO SARAT CHANDRA BOSE
NEW DELHI,
March 23, 1939
MY DEAR SARAT,
Your letter makes me sad. I have shown it to the Sardar
and Kripalani and asked them to give me their reaction. I am
on the train taking me to the Maulana who wants me and who
is too disabled to come to Delhi. I am going to show it to him
and Jawaharlal also and ask them to let me have their reaction.
You shall have their statements.
With so much that you have to say against your erstwhile
colleagues and they against you both, how can I act, what can
I do? Do you know that I have no official notice of the
resolution? I have not even seen the full text. But even if I
had official notice, what could I do so long as the terrible mutual
distrust lasted?
I therefore suggest either a meeting of all of you so that you
can pour out your hearts to one another and come to an under-
standing or, if the poison has gone too deep to be eradicated, I
suggest Subhas's (when he is restored to health) telling the
A. I. C. C. that he cannot work with the old Working Committee
and that he should be relieved of the command or be left a free
hand to choose his own cabinet.
In any event I think an early meeting of the A. I. C. C. should
be called to consider the situation. I feel too that something
should be done for the interim administration. What that some-
thing should be, I do not know.
You say I had said to Subhas that I would advise the
Sardar and others not to obstruct Subhas. I did say so to
Sardar. The Sardar when he read your letter flatly denied that
there was any obstruction on the part of old colleagues. On the
1 Presumably of March 21, 1939, complaining against "some of the ex-
members of the Working Committee" who, he alleged had carried "malici-
ous" propaganda against Subhas Chandra Bose at the Tripuri Congress;
vide Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru, Vol. 9, p. 527, fn. 2.
2 For Jawaharlal Nehru's reactions,op. cit., pp. 527-32.
244
contrary, he says there was every attempt made to smooth
Subhas's way. I am sorry you are also ailing. I hope you will
rest and be soon your old self again.
I have assumed that your letter represents Subhas's senti-
ments also.
Love.
BAPU
Status, June 30, 1985
