245. LETTER TO HANUMANPRASAD PODDAR
July 21, 1932
BROTHER HANUMANPRASAD,
Received your letter as also your telegram today. I shall not
feel anxious about Devdas since you are there. Moreover Dev-
das had written to me that you treated him in a very loving
manner. The doctor is really a good man. I shall always expect
to receive letters from you from time to time.
The man who resorts to falsehood with a view to acquiring
worldly goods or for some other reason is full of attachment and
hatred; he cannot possibly reach God. 1 And I consider the other
example you have cited as impossible. To tread the path of
truth and at the same time to remain aloof from worldly affairs,
i.e., from pravritti is a thing which is impossible like a flower in the
sky. How can one tell what path one follows who keeps away from
pravritti? To tread the path of truth in itself involves entrance into
pravritti. Without pravritti there is no occasion for treading or not
treading the path of truth. The holy Gita in its several verses has
made it clear that a man cannot exist even for a moment without
pravritti. The difference between a devotee and one who is not a
devotee is this, that the first remains in pravritti with an eye to the
highest good and while living in pravritti never lets go his hold upon
truth and weakens attachments and aversions, while the other
lives in a state of infatuation with pravritti and does not even try to
remain aloof from such demoniac actions as falsehood, etc., while
pursuing his object. These worldly affairs are not a thing to be
looked upon with contempt. It is only through worldly affairs that
a vision of the Lord is possible. Those worldly affairs that create
infatuation deserve to be looked upon with contempt and always
shunned. This is my firm opinion and experience.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 323, and Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. 11, p. 401
