169. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
ASHRAM, WARDHA,
December 2, 1928
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. You are right in what you say about
labour and your method of counting the payment is also correct.
When such paid labour is required, those who can put off their
other work may offer to do such labour after finishing the work
which they do as sacrifice. They may let go their study on that
day and utilize the time in labour. The labour which they put
in should be of a useful nature, otherwise it would amount to
our giving them some charity out of the Ashram funds.
Here, too, it has rained. They say it is normal in this part.
You did right when, having missed the post, you did not send a
telegram and thereby saved 12 annas.
My letter had two sheets only. You should not have found
the continuity broken at any point. I put down the figure 3
for the third page. I do not write the page number on the
back, but keep it in mind.
I know that the cloth-lined envelope is very costly. I have
not succeeded in getting Subbiah, Pyarelal and Mahadev to use
it, but this is how it should be used. It should be opened with a
knife and closed every time with a fresh slip of thick paper. On
the side on which the address is written, a piece of thick paper
should be pasted afresh every time. If used thus, we can make
such an envelope last a long time. Do you not know that in pri-
sons some such device is followed in order to save expenditure
even on ordinary covers?
If you are not troubled by the question raised by Shanker-
lal, I certainly am not. If Narandas works in obedience to you
38-10
and the organizational set-up, our purpose and that of the orga-
nization will be met. When Shankerlal raises the question with me,
I shall discuss it. The question before me is not how to satisfy him
but how to satisfy you. You should be able to do your work smoothly
and may ask me for whatever help you need for that purpose.
It was good news that Shankerbhai has recovered. Tell him
that he should not fall ill again.
Have you given any sewing work to Gangadevi? If you
have not, please do.
I got today's post in the afternoon. Chi. Narandas is upset.
I send his letters to you. If all of you agree, let them all re-
main [in the Ashram] on the basis suggested by Chi. Narandas
and let Radha's name be counted for payment. I have objection
against this arrangement, too, but I do not wish to be obstinate.
I would certainly not hurt Narandas.
I thought it was decided to retain Shanabhai. If there is
nothing more than suspicion against him, it would not be pro-
per to ask him to leave.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 18-
