341. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[February 9, 1933]
CHI. MIRA,
Your weekly letter came in, in due course. And just two
days before that was given to me your special letter describing
your condition. Whereupon I sent a letter to the Government
requesting your transfer to Yeravda and also an examination by
specialists. I have done what I thought was my duty to do from
every point of view. No prisoner has a right to demand transfer.
He has to submit to the condition in which he is placed except
under extraordinary circumstances. When I think of the prison
life of Howard's days and I look at today's, I marvel at the better-
ment in the condition. And yet to prisoners who find themselves
in for conscience's sake, there should be no difference whatsoever
between that life and this. They must be prepared cheerfully to
submit to the life of Howard's days. For to them conscience is
dearer than the ease of body and the pleasure of communion
through physical means with the nearest and dearest ones. There
should be therefore on the one hand every honest and permissible
attempt to keep the body in good condition and to obtain the other
amenities, on the other to receive disappointment with perfect
detachment. You should continue to report the whole of your
condition to the Civil Surgeon and give him the history of your
previous glands. I wish you had written about them before to
me. Anyway now the matter is in the Government's hands and
more in God's hands. 'Not a blade moves but by His will.'
The passage you quote from the Gita refers to moderate habits.
That is not what I had in mind. The passage I had in mind
occurs in the last chapter, 52nd verse. I should translate it thus.
"Who prefers solitude, who eats meagre food, who has under
perfect control thought, speech and action, who is intent on medi-
tation, who is free always from attachments."
1 The source has "9-1-1933" which is evidently a slip as the "special
letter", was dated 28-1-1933; vide "Letter to Home Secretary, Government of
Bombay", pp. 237-.
2 John Howard (1726-90), prison reformer
248
You have no reason to complain of the quantity of your food.
You dare not go by the abstract measurement. Double your
quantity would be really meagre for many of our friends. The
condition of your own body should be the sole guide as to the
quantity without reference to that taken by others. All we should
recognize is that voluntary meagre eating is one of the most
difficult things in the world. It is a perpetual fast much more
difficult than the complete periodic fasts. Meagre food voluntarily
taken must lead to perfect poise, i.e., perfect health of body and
mind. We can but make the attempt.
My food and weight remain what I described them to be
last week. The elbow continues as before. I do not think any
more about it. I thought I told you that I had resumed spinning.
I did it, I think, Tuesday last week. I do it whilst I am receiving
visitors. I have fixed no minimum. I have not yet reached
even 160 rounds. Yesterday's was the highest, 141. The count
is over 40.
What you say about Devdas is true. His must prove a very
happy marriage. Lakshmi too seems to be blossoming. It appears
to be a case of pure love with high motive behind it. Devdas
has always liked to serve Rajaji whom he regards as his English
teacher. He could not have found a better.
I am, we all are, just now very busy over the forthcoming
Harijan. I have a very good editor and an equally good manager.
The press belongs to the Servants of India Society with which I
enjoy what may be called spiritual relations. I have therefore not
to worry about the details of management. God is great and
compassionate if He is also terrible.
Love from us all. It is now 5.15 a.m.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6262. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9728
