252. LETTER TO N.
March 28, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
I have your letters of 23rd and 24th. I expect that you left
for the village on Sunday as you had intended. May Truth take
care of you there!
I know from personal experience how difficult it is to wash
heavy khadi if you do not have plenty of water. Generally washing
comes before sewing, but if it is the same cloth that requires wash-
ing and sewing, the sewing undoubtedly precedes, because you
thereby save time. Washing will tear the cloth more at the point
where it requires mending, therefore more time has to be given to
sewing if it is done after the washing. Your dress itself may require
a little alteration when you have got rid of all the ornamental part
of it and made it just so as to protect the body and satisfy the sur-
rounding convention. The quantity required is very small, the
convention being the convention of the poorest.
I am glad you heard from Sir Todd Hunter.
I am not at all satisfied with R.'s letters. There is still
the old infatuation lurking, and as I read them, a disposition
to justify the past. I have written to him gently drawing his at-
tention to the inadequacy of his letters. Durgadas's letter I like
still less. The mode of address is unpardonable. He can be no
guide, friend and brother to you, who, although on his own show-
ing he knew that you were a fallen woman, did not lift his little
finger to save his sister. There is no question of your resuming
your correspondence. Your correspondence just now must be with
God of Truth and yourself. Nothing should come between you
and Him. I come in because I am witness to the promise that you
have made to your Maker and because I want to be able to claim
you as a permanent co-worker in the service of the Harijans, in
my opinion the most suppressed in the world, but neither I nor
you can render that service unless that direct touch with Truth
is completely established and the utmost purity attainable by a
human being has become the exclusive passion.
You must beware of cold.
If you can procure whole wheat meal you ought not to take
any rice at all. You should learn how to make chapatis. It is
an incredibly simple performance. Take 4 ounces of clean wheat
meal, mix in water and knead it well, roll it on any smooth sur-
face, wooden or stone, with a rolling pin-even a clean ruler will
serve the purpose-and roll it slightly thinner than a cardboard
piece and bake it on a flat iron disk, turning the sides while it is
baked. Out of 4 ounces you can make six of these chapatis, 6
inches in diameter. These would be perfectly digestible. I am sure
that the lady of the house or hut where you are to stay knows all
this simple cookery. Pulses should be avoided altogether. Of
tender coconut you may take one whole per day if it is very tender,
and of course you use all the water in the coconut also. You ought
to procure some fruit and green vegetables, not potatoes and the
like, but leaves, marrow, cucumber, pumpkin, etc.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20733
