471. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
October 23, 1932
CHI. BHAU,
You should not despair. We ought to be able to overcome
a simple complaint like constipation. It can be cured by deter-
mined effort. One should not neglect it, nor worry about it.
The argument you had with Dr. Talwalkar was unfortunate. I
am writing to him. Read the letter and understand it. Narandas
will show it to you if he thinks fit.
Bhaji is certainly worth trying. Try the suggestions I made
in my last letter to Narandas. Fast for three days or more.
Take short walks when fasting and do some light work. Drink
as much water as you can, mixing in it, if necessary, a few drops
of sour lemon. There will be no harm if you drink with water
the juice of two or three lemons in the course of the day. Eat
or drink nothing else. Take an enema every morning. Take in
2 pints (2½ lb.) of lukewarm water, putting in it 40 grains of
soda bicarb and 20 grains of salt. Retain the water for 20
minutes if you can. You should take the enema lying on the
floor. If you do not pass stool even then, you may repeat the
enema in the evening. Do not worry if you still do not pass
stool. Take an enema in the same way next day. Take Kuhne-
bath at noon. If you do not feel too weak and the tongue is
still coated, continue the fast. If you begin to feel weak, break the
fast with fruit juice, such as orange juice, juice of sour lemons
with honey, juice of black raisins. They should be soaked over-
night in water and squeezed the next morning, and the juice
should be strained. It would be better to warm the juice. On
the first day drink as much juice as you can. You may also eat
grapes if you wish. The next day you may take bhaji, gourd or
some other vegetable. Let two days pass in this way. Pro-
bably, you will pass stool in the natural course. If you don't,
you may have recourse to the enema again. Thereafter begin
taking milk. Milk may be taken with green vegetables. I mix
with gourd or pumpkin the milk I wish to take and eat the
dish. Start bread or rotli only after you begin passing regular
stools. Fasting in this way will most probably overcome consti-
pation and, in any case, it will do no harm at all. If this does
not help you, we will think of some other way. You are right
in deciding not to take the medicine prescribed by Dr. Talwal-
kar. You should not think at all of leaving the Ashram whether
at Sabarmati or at Wardha (they are not distinct from each
other). A person who wishes to serve others, whose thoughts are
pure and who works to the best of his ability, should never think
that he is a burden on others. Write to me regularly and in
detail. I shall not weary of your letters. Carry out with faith
whatever measures I suggest from time to time.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6739. Also C.W. 4482. Courtesy:
Bhau Panse
