151. LETTER TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
January 29, 1935
DEAR KHAN SAHEB,
By the courtesy of the authorities I was able to get your
prompt reply. I have now come to Wardha. Here I shall be for
some time at least.
I was obliged to leave Mehrtaj with Dr. Khan Saheb in
Delhi where he has taken a house for the Assembly session. Mrs.
Khan Saheb has arrived. Both she and her daughter are quite
well. Your letter was translated to Mehrtaj, but she will not come
to Wardha. Her difficulty is this: She is so gentle and wants to
be so appropriate that she would not take advantage of the facili-
ties that are offered to her. She wants to live in Wardha as the
others are living. She is physically and mentally unable to do so;
and she won't live as she would like to although she knows that
she has the fullest liberty to do so. In Mariam she has a com-
panion of her age and habits. So she would not leave her. And
she had become fast friends with Zohra who has showered all her
affection on Mehrtaj. She had under Dr. Ansari's roof all the
little things to which she was accustomed and she had no hesita-
tion in taking them, because the whole family also did as she
was doing. It was, therefore, impossible for Mehrtaj to tear herself
away from the surroundings she liked and return to those which
she did not like . We all therefore felt that for the time being it
was best to leave Mehrtaj with Dr. Khan Saheb. Urdu tuition will
be provided for her. She has promised to write to me regularly.
I hope that you will be satisfied with what I have done and that
you will not worry about her. After all, God acts through children
as through grown-up people, and we can but try gently to lead
girls like Mehrtaj who are still growing.
Nor need you be anxious about Ghani. We are doing every-
thing that is possible in the circumstances. You will be pleased
to know that through Jamnalalji's effort Sadullah Khan was
engaged to Sofia Somji. The engagement was announced on the
26th instant. We have all wired our blessings. Sadullah is still
in Bombay. Jamnalalji's ear is not yet quite healed. Granulations
continue to form. He will have to be in Bombay yet another
month. You will please send me any instructions you wish to about
Mehrtaj and Ghani. Lali is also with Dr. Khan Saheb in Delhi.
I shall let you know later what is fixed up for Lali.
KHAN SAHEB ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
B CLASS PRISONER
CENTRAL PRISON, SABARMATI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
