30. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
JOHANNESBURG,
December 31, 1909
MY DEAR MILLIE,
Nowadays I come to the office between 7 and 8. I have a quiet
half hour just now which I wish to devote to writing to you. You are
dearer to me than my widowed sister Gokuldas' mother, whom as you
know I worship, though in thoughts a gulf divides us. You are dearer
because there is so much in common between us and because I have
entered so much into your and Henry's lives - I hope for our common
good and the good of humanity. Your brief letter haunts me. It fills
me with sorrow and admiration for you. You have written it in love,
grief and resignation. I wish you had sent me the other letter also that
you wrote.
No, no, my dear sister, you are not going to live away from Henry
for ever. Your wondrous imagination has carried you much further,
I am sure, than Henry could ever intend you to go. How I wish I
was close by you to comfort you and show how wrong you were.
In reply to that letter of mine which you read, Henry wrote to me
and told me he was writing to you. I wish you had sent his letter
to me. You have cut a deep wound in my heart by telling me that
your brief letter is to be the last for many weeks. You will not treat
your only (am I) adopted brother in that fashion? If I am your brother,
you must 1 let me share your sorrows.
You are Henry's better half No path can be considered right for
him along which he cannot carry you. Will you not have sufficient faith
in him to know for certain that he is incapable of creating a gulf between
you and himself? I ask you to trust me never to carry Henry along
any route without your approval. A gift given or a sacrifice made
grudgingly and not cheerfully is no gift or sacrifice. You have often
given me the privilege of analysing you to yourself. You have heroically
sacrificed yourself on the altar of duty. But you have done so in
bitterness not always free from resentment. Your noble nature and your
mad regard for truth should free you from that error. Why should not
duty be pleasure? I hope you follow me in what I am writing.
Will you not, for my sake, shake yourself free from that little
morbidity of your nature? It ill becomes a character like yours. I want
a perfect sister and am anxious for Henry that he should have a perfect
wife. It is because it is in you to be perfect that I venture to draw
attention to what in my opinion is lacking in you.
'Take no thought for the morrow' is a sound maxim of life. You
know exactly what this means. Why then worry !
Now do tell me what you will have me to do? At any rate let
me know if you will be a true sister to me, what is running in your
mind, what it is that Henry intends doing, what has caused you such
a severe shock. I trust you, on the strength of a brother's love, to
tell me fully, frankly and freely where you are.
With love,
Yours,
'BROTHER'
[PS.]
I return you your letter to enable you to understand this better.
M. K. G.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
1 & 2 Words supplied in italics here and elsewhere in the text of a letter
(other than those italicised as per editorial style) are underlined in the original,
evidently for emphasis.
