432. LETTER TO SIR MALCOLM HAILEY
ON THE FRONTIER DOWN MAIL,
August 28, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I know you will not consider me to be discourteous because
I did not acknowledge your wire in reply to mine from Bombay.
The reason was simple. I did not know what reply to send at
the time. It is only now that I can send a reply, and this I
am doing during the few moments I can get on the train that is
taking me to Bombay. You will not mind my saying that your
telegram was capable of being read as a promise of hope or of
none. I propose now to read in your telegram a promise of
hope. I am not aware of the legal position but I do know that
you have a reputation of being able to find a way out of every
difficulty, that is, if you are convinced that a way should be found
out of it. The chief difficulty in U.P. as it seems to me is the
evictions already obtained and the evictions that are still continu-
ing. They may all be lawful but there is something wrong in a
system which allows of so many evictions. You have said in your
telegram that the evictions this year do not show any excess over
last year. That may be so. But I hardly think you will justify
them on the score of a bad precedent. With the tremendous awaken-
ing that has taken place all over India there is a sensitiveness to
wrongs which was not felt 12 months ago. I would ask you there-
fore to recognize this sensitiveness and deal with the wrong. And I
venture to suggest that you cannot make a better beginning than
by sending for Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and establishing a direct
touch with him. Seeing that the Settlement continues I venture
to suggest that Congress may be trusted and all necessary help
requisitioned from it. I am certain that the trust will not be mis-
placed if the cause is common as I take it is the case between us.
I have written freely because there is no other way of strength-
ening bonds of public friendship as of private. I hope therefore
that you will not resent my letter as a presumption.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR MALCOLM HAILEY
NAINI TAL
From a photostat: G.N. 8811; also S.N. 17608
