223. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
[KASHI,]
Saturday [January 8, 1927]
CHI. MANI,
I have your letter. It is good that you are studying with Valji-
bhai's help. You will learn much from him.
I do not know why you have been relieved of your teaching
work, for I could not understand the reasons from the letter in
which the news was conveyed to me. You yourself should be bold
and ask the reason. I thought that the reason must have been ex-
plained to you. I remained unconcerned by the news because, ir-
respective of whether or not you teach, you continue to stay in
the Ashram, and the salary, or whatever you name it, will continue
to be paid to you. The responsibility for you is mine. You should
not get angry with the teachers. They have to run the institution,
and so they may act as they think proper. But you have a right to
know the reason, and you shall know it.
You should now get ready to learn spinning. You should learn
everything that goes with it, that is to say, repairing the spin-
ning-wheel, recognizing the different varieties of cotton, ginning,
pressing, carding, spinning, moistening the yarn, making skeins,
joining the broken thread-all these processes. You should learn
to make a mal and to wind the sadi round the spindle. Moreover,
wherever you go you should learn what else you can besides these
processes, and as part of this programme of studies you should
improve your proficiency in Hindi and Sanskrit. In studying
Sanskrit, you should know the meaning of every verse in the
Gita along with its syntax. And of course, you should learn to
spin on the takli. There was a telegram from Karachi to say that
your name has been sent to the Board. I am happy.
Write to me regularly and go on working very cheerfully.
Now, from the 2nd to the 8th I shall be in Gondia, Nagpur,
Wardha, Akola and Amaravati. I am not certain about the towns
on the programme. It will be better to address your letters to
Wardha.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 45-
