64. LETTER TO THE PRESS : THE LATE A. M.
KACHALIA
October 20, 1918
TO
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
SIR,
It is my mournful duty to bring to public notice another
South African Indian whose death has been just cabled to me. He
bore the honoured name of Ahmed Mahomed Kachalia. He was
for a number of years President of the British Indian Association
of the Transvaal. It was during the passive resistance campaign
that Mr. Kachalia suddenly leapt to fame and acquired among the
Indians of South Africa a prestige unequalled by any other Indian.
It was on the 31st day of July 1907, under the shadow of a tree in
the holy mosque of Pretoria, that Mr. Kachalia hurled defiance at
the might of General Botha and his Government. Mr. Hosken had
brought a message from the General to be delivered to the great
mass meeting that was held in the mosque compound, to the effect
that in resisting the Transvaal Government, the Indians were
breaking their heads against a stone. Mr. Kachalia was one of the
speakers. As I am dictating these few words of humble tribute,
his voice rings in my ears. He said : "In the name of Allah, I wish
to state that though my head may be severed from the trunk, I
shall never obey the Asiatic Registration Act. I consider it un-
manly and dishonourable to subscribe to a law which virtually re-
duces me to slavery." And he was among the very few who never
flinched through those long and weary eight years of untold suffer-
ings. Mr. Kachalia was by no means amongst the least of the
sufferers. He felt that as a leader his sacrifice should be striking,
and that he should stop at nothing if thereby the honour of this
country might be saved. He reduced himself to poverty. He said
good-bye to all the comforts of life to which he was used, and night
and day worked for a cause he held sacred. Naturally he acquired
a wonderful hold over the Indian community throughout South
Africa and his was a name to conjure with amongst them. As may
be imagined, there were often disputes among Mahomedans and
Hindus and other sections of the community. Mr. Kachalia held
the scales even between the conflicting interests and everyone knew
that his decisions would be absolutely just and sound. Mr. Kachalia
was practically illiterate. He was a self-made man. But his com-
mon sense was of the rarest order. It always stood him in good
stead and he was able to command the confidence and respect of
many Europeans who came in contact with him.
The loss is irreparable and it would be doubly felt by the
community, coming as it does, closely after Mr. Sorabji's death.
May God Almighty give this noble soul the rest and peace which,
I am sure, he fully deserves.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 21-10-1918
