763. LETTER TO C. RAMACHANDRA RAO
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
6 TODIWALA ROAD, POONA,
October 27, 1945
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA RAO,
Yours of the 13th to hand.
1. Booklet on health is still undergoing revision. It was sus-
pended after my premature discharge from jail and I never had
the time for finishing it. When it is finished you will know of
this new publication. You can certainly publish a translation. It
will not be called a new edition. It will be, if it is ever published,
a new thing altogether.
2. There are many claimants for service of labour. Unfortu-
nately, Congress monopoly tacitly recognized by all is broken.
But if the Congress is challenged I suppose the Congress will say
we are the only real servants of labour. Who will establish the
claim finally is in the womb of time.
My participation in the
affairs of the Working Committee is very slight and, I fancy,
growing slighter. Therefore, don't expect me to do anything in
the matter of the flag designed by you.
3. SWEEPERS. You and a few others may recognize my
claim to be the first sweeper, but I will cut a sorry figure in
a sweepers' conference. The so-called sweepers will themselves
repudiate my claim as many do. My sympathy will be with
them in such repudiation. The fortunate position of a self-styled
man, however, is that he does not require any outside recogni-
tion of a style adopted by himself. Therefore, I must not bear
the burden of having the conference even when the choice of the
venue is left to me. What is more, I have neither the time nor
the wish to carry more burdens than I have. You should there-
fore go on without counting on my service even in the way of a
message. Cultivate the belief that every bona-fide service carries
with it its own recognition.
4. MATERNITY HOME. Are you not principally dependent upon
Government grant and recognition? The record you mention is
certainly very good but it loses in public dignity and value. No
Government or Government-aided institution suffers for want of
funds. All are crowded, some even to suffocation. Whether they
really serve the needy poor is a separate question. This criticism
is independent of the fact that I have to ask you to be merciful
and excuse me from the obligation you seek to impose on me.
If I do succeed in visiting Madras for the Hindustani Prachar
Sabha, I must ask friends who know me to extend to me their
co-operation by imposing upon themselves restraint in the way of
saving me from further burdens.
5. "Up FROM SLAVERY" : I would love to write a line on this.
But seeing that you have waited all these years I would ask you to
wait a little longer and remind me when I have settled down
after the tours I have in mind.
Yours,
BAPU
SHRI G. RAMACHANDRA RAO
SEVAGRAM
GUDIVADA (KISTNA DISTRICT)
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
