217. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
LAHORE,
Wednesday [December 10, 1919]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I got your letter.
Chhotalal is not able to move about. He has a boil on his
thigh. Actually it was only a pimple. It has been opened. He will
be all right in a day or two. I am put to no inconvenience.
Harilal has come here. He will leave tomorrow. He has
only come to see me about his business.
The Ashram inmates have not at all grown strong enough
in body yet to satisfy me. I feel worried. Personally, I take full
care of my health. I have no doubt about this at all. If I exer-
cised greater control on myself, I think I could be fitter still. I eat
twice a day, for that is the only way I can keep the body fit. I
have realized from experience that, when under pressure of work
or touring, eating less does no harm to the body at all. We cannot
run away from work which comes to us unasked. If a man is being
burnt to death, we should run to his help even at the risk of our
life. If a serpent runs towards a child to bite it, we would even
sacrifice our life to save it. Only a body which has been put
to use in this manner and has survived can be of any service. The
Ashram inmates have a duty to build up sound health. I have
done so and now I use the body, but with due care. We may take
only as much care of it as is consistent with its full use. If I exer-
cise self-control so as to be more regular still and thus save time,
I can safeguard my health better. That requires plenty of courage.
I must be blunt with the people and tell them that I have had
enough. This is not always possible. This. . . . 1
I think it impossible, and improper as well, to meet each and
every need. More, you may decide yourself.
I thought we used to get some money from Krishnamma,
rather than the other way about. I see no objection to his being
given sixteen rupees. Give it on the Ashram account. Manindra's
also should be on the Ashram account. However, make a note
about those who work in the press and draw according to the fixed
rate of payment, so that the entries balance. Anything given in
excess of what a person has earned through his work should be
drawn from the Ashram.
I think we cannot give more than ninety rupees a month to
Shamaldas. So long as he has not written to me, I do not write to
him. Do what you think best. I shall certainly write, if you wish.
I understand what you say about the buildings.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 7021
