251. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
July 21, 1925
DEAR RAJENDRA BABU,
I must write to you in English to save time. My right hand
refuses to work. To write with the left would take much time.
I am, therefore, just now taking shorthand assistance. In fact, I
commenced it only today. I am afraid it will not be possible to
hold the meeting of the A.I.C.C. in Patna. The people from
Maharashtra and Madras, and especially the latter, complain
bitterly, and there is much truth in their complaint.
So all
fixed upon Bombay. This time we want a full meeting. Very im-
portant resolutions to be taken making changes in the constitution
and policy. I would like the resolutions, whatever they are, to be
taken in a full house. But if you can have me in Bihar in the
beginning of September, I could come and I would like to take
as little as possible for Bihar. But if you must have a whole
month, you can have it. As a matter of fact, as you will be having
me in Purulia, and as all the workers will be coming there, per-
haps it would be unnecessary for you to take me to many centres
at the present moment. But you shall be the sole judge. I have
sent word with the messenger who came with your first note that
you will find me in Purulia on the 12th. If, however, you will
have me earlier, please let me know in any case. You must so
arrange as to enable me to reach Bombay on 30th September.
And all the members from Bihar should attend the A.I.C.C.
meeting. As to the circular about the charkha, I have not yet
read it, but I hope to do so in the course of a week and write
about it for next week's Young India. Yes, all-India Memorial
notice will be now out. Jawaharlal has already written about
it. It will be solely devoted to the propagation of the spinning-
wheel and khaddar and, though it is not stated in the appeal,
naturally the monies collected in the provinces will be disbursed
in those provinces so far as possible. But the operation will take
place through the All-India. . . .1
From a microfilm: S.N. 10679
