230. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Silence Day, 5.25 [Before March 8, 1933]
CHI. NARANDAS,
Send Prabhavati the volume of Speeches. She has written to tell me that
she had asked for it but has not received it.
Probably you know Parachure Shastri. He has once stayed in the Ashram.
He is suffering from leprosy, but the symptoms may be considered to have
dried up now. He is in jail and will be released on the 8th. He is a good
man, a man of renunciation. He knows Sanskrit, is married, and has three
children. The children are foolish. The wife is weak in the brain. She had
once been admitted to a lunatic asylum. I think we should keep him. Give
him one room. Kaka says he should be given Mirabehn's room. The wife
will of course live in the women's wing. The children could be kept anywhere.
Parachure Shastri will observe the modem hygienic rules for lepers. That is,
he will not touch anyone and will keep his clothes separate. It will be
necessary to send his meals to his room. Probably he will live on milk and
1 An inn
2 The letter does not bear the date of writing, but in his letter to addressee dated
March 8, 1923, Gandhiji says : "I have replied to Parachure Shastri. Everything will
depend on your wire." Vide Vol. LIV, p. 14. Evidently, the wire expected by Gandhiji
would be in reply to this letter. Again, in his letter to the addressee dated March 10,
1933, Gandhiji says, "I just received your wire about Parachure Shastri. I had been
waiting for it before asking him to go there" Ibid., p. 43.
LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
173
fruit, or on a mixture of fresh milk and neem leaves. He can do a great deal
of work sitting in his room. He will teach Sanskrit. He can teach even Marathi
there. He will arrive there by the 10th or the 12th. He will presently go to
see his wife. I will know from him what he intents to do if his wife is against
his joining the Ashram. He spins a great deal. He has spun quite a lot in the
jail. He will spin there, too. He was in fact a teacher in Chinchavad. I do
not think I have any further suggestion to make. I take it that no one will
take fright by this news. Leprosy does not spread through the air. Personally,
I doubt if it is contagious. In our country, lepers freely move about everywhere.
But we should observe the prohibition about physical contact with a leper
since that would be the right thing for us to do. We cannot completely ignore
modern science. Shastri himself willingly observes that prohibition. If he
employs the remedies I have suggested, he may even be cured of his leprosy.
I have assumed that you yourself will not be reluctant to take him in. If,
however, you are, send me a telegram. Ask the Managing Committee, too. It
is better to consult the other permanent inmates of the Ashram as well. In
fact I feel that it is my dharma to ascertain the opinion of every member in
this matter. I took this step only after all of us here unanimously agreed on
it. But I do not worry about it. I felt it is to be my clear dharma to take him
in. He had in fact arrived with the purpose of living in the Ashram but had
to leave because his wife was against it. I think we cannot reject him.
However, there may be room for difference of opinion in this matter. Since
he had left the Ashram once, we cannot say without further deliberation that
it is our dharma to take him back again. Hence, on getting this letter, think
over the matter. First yourself, then the Committee, and after that the rest. If
your own view is against taking him in, I should not sent him there, nor if
the Committee is against it, nor if the old-time members are against it. I would
not consider it essential to seek the consent of those who have joined the
Ashram only for a short period. However, it would be proper to discuss the
matter with all the members. I feel that I have abused the freedom which I
obtained from you. Such things come naturally to me, but I have no right,
without the co-workers' consent to send anyone who might be a burden on
them. I followed the same rule at Phoenix. Once, when I was practising there,
someone suffering from a dangerous disease turned up and I made Ba nurse
him. I am nearing the end of my life doing such things but have still not
changed my ways. That is, I act on the assumption that the co-workers,
particularly those who are very close to me, will as a matter of course do
what I do. Let us believe and hope that this will prove to be my last misdeed.
I will settle the matter perfectly well with Parachure Shastri. Hence nobody
should come to decision on the basis of my assurance to him. After considering
the matter independently and examining the Ashram's dharma in this case,
174
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
send me a telegram whether the decision is 'yes' or 'no'. Let no one believe
that I will be shocked, whatever the decision. I had expected that I would
have to give but one sheet of paper to this subject, but now it seems that I
would instead be giving five. I went on writing as ideas came to me one
after another. In the matter of observing one's dharma, taking a decision in
a hurry is harmful and ought to be avoided. It implies self-conceit. You will
see from this something of the present state of my mind. My fitness to think
about anything except what relates to Harijan service seems to be fast leaving
me. To think about other things or to do anything or speak about anything
else has become painful to me. I am going through painful experiences which
I find impossible to describe. Even if I wished to describe them, I have no
time to do so. But no more of this now. I feel perfectly at ease in pouring
out my heart to you. I believe you have the capacity to respond to such things.
If you have followed all I have said and wish to give the letter to others to
read, I will have no objection. If you feel that what I have written is strange,
keep the letter with you after reading it. I will explain it if we meet some
day. What I have said is nothing mysterious. It is easy enough to understand,
but it gives a glimpse into what agony one, who unswervingly follows the
pat of dharma, has to endure. I do feel that if someone who has not associated
himself with my life were to read this, it would do much harm.
Tell Parasaram firmly what your decision is. I am writing to him. If he
wants to leave despite your being straightforward in dealing with him, let
him do so. If he wishes to stay in spite of it, no objection need be made.
There is no room for charity in the sphere of dharma. It would be easy to
acquiesce in it if we transgress the proper limit of ahimsa. But it becomes
difficult to do so when in the name of ahimsa one shows undeserved
compassion and is thereby guilty of a subtle form of violence. Just as we do
not indulge an invalid's fancies so also we need not indulge the fancies of a
person who violates the rules. This is the way to put an end to Parasaram's
noisy complaints.
I think it will be difficult to arrange for Kusum's trip to Almora. At
present, there are just no such facilities there. I think it will be difficult to
look after her there. We cannot put the burden of doing so on Prabhudas,
nor on Navin. If her disease gets aggravated, who will look after her there?
It might be possible to send her either to Deolali or Matheran. Whether or
not she can be sent to Deolali, will have to be considered. I do not think it
proper for the whole family to go. Beyond this my brain refuses to work just
now.
I have already written to you about Lakshmi. Lakshmidas will certainly
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
175
come there. Perhaps Devdas also will come. Devdas, Rajaji and Shankerlal
are here at present.
BAPU
[PS.]
Monday, 5.25
One thing was left out in the letter for the children. Some of them write
to me to say that they have tired of the agricultural work. Tell them that this
does not become them. A duty once undertaken cannot be abandoned. Even
music tires one so long as one has not learnt it well. Those who have learnt
agricultural work well, do not give it up. If agricultural work were not
interesting, millions in the world would not engage themselves in it. It does
require hard work, but hard work is interesting, not indolence. Moreover, the
hard work is only physical. But our bodies love ease and comfort and therefore
we avoid hard work and in consequence suffer from diseases. I therefore hope
that the children will not tire of agricultural work. Besides, the mother Gita
also teaches us that it is in doing our duty that we find pleasure and
agricultural work is one of our duties. I have looked into the result of the
yarn-test competition. It is disappointing. Only one sample bears the mark
'excellent'. The mark against two is 'bad'. All other samples fall short in
both respects. This defect must be remedied. Ask those whose yarns have
gone through the test and the others also, to be vigilant. Spinning good quality
yarn that is even and strong, requires nothing more than careful attention. If
the sliver is of inferior quality, the yarn may fall short in respect of. . .1 but
it will certainly not be uneven or weak. I still consider the count of the samples
low. The quality of slivers is likely to be at fault in that. It does not matter
if we produce a smaller quantity of slivers and yarn, but what we do produce
must be of the finest quality. Pay attention to this subject and induce others
to do the same. Wake up all of them. In. . .2 for achieving perfection, everyone
must acquire speed and. . . 3 It would be good if they acquire speed in carding
and ginning also.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33383
