125. LETTER TO V. V. DASTANE
November 15, 1945
BHAI DASTANE,
What can poor Akka or Vatsala tell you? All your daughters
are good and wish to give you the minimum trouble. At the
same time they want to take the minimum obligation from others.
But I know the way they depend on you unknowingly. Of course
I don't blame anyone. Our circumstances often are such that
we cannot get out of them. That is why I advise you that you
should take up grihasthashrama and the more you purify it and
remain pure yourself the better will you serve the country.
Today we are all intoxicated. Intoxication is not always due to
liquor, ganja or opium. I have seen that being intoxicated with
vanity or the craze for swaraj is at times worse than the intoxica-
tion of liquor. To know our swadharma and to be engrossed in
it is our supreme dharma. That is why, let me add, I can only
discuss things with you but I cannot think as you do. Do take
as much as you can digest from what I say and go ahead.
I would suggest you have a talk with the members of the
Working Committee. I cannot go very far. My position is like
that of a 'tenant at will'. The difference is great. I am what
I am without any conscious effort on my part, and the poor
tenant at will desires to stay for ever. I came across a sloka by
Bhartrihari, "In fact one who is attached to sense-objects and
one who is free from them are both in the same position. The
latter voluntarily gives up sense-objects and enjoys bliss, while
the self-indulgent one too has to give up his sensual pleasures
every now and then and earns only misery." Bhartrihari has
crammed a great deal of wisdom into this. Let us all drink that
nectar and attain bliss.
I have communicated to Kripalaniji some of my ideas about
the elections. I am discussing things with Shankarraoji. Now
it is time for me to go for my walk. I shall take a stroll with
him and shall tell him what I think about the elections.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI VASUDEV DASTANE
VAKIL SAHEB
BHUSAWAL
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
