428. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILLS,
June 3, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letter. It fills me with both sorrow and joy;
sorrow because for the time being at any rate that Ashram has
fallen in my estimation, and joy because you are so gentle and
yet so brave. You become a shield both for yourself and Gangu.
That you committed the initial mistake of accepting the invitation
to witness the bhang preparation dwindles into insignificance in the
face of your subsequent firmness combined with gentleness. Your
acceptance of the invitation was as good or as bad as acceptance
of an invitation to watch the manufacture of brandy in a brewery.
But that acceptance itself was due to your great anxiety to please
Maharajji and not out of any unpardonable or improper curiosity.
On reading your letter, my first thought was to wire to you for
you, Valunjker and Gangu to leave the Ashram at once. I then
said to myself that that would be wrong especially when you had
proved your presence of mind and bravery in the face of a wret-
ched situation. I therefore decided to write to you and give you
my reflections and then let you act as you thought proper in the
circumstances.
I regard the scene you have described as highly improper,
even immoral, on the part of those who sought to tempt you and
almost force the vile stuff down your throat and poor Gangu's,
and then as you turned your backs upon them, to sprinkle the dirty
water was more like a scene in a tavern than in a brahmacharya
Ashram, where service of God and man is supposed to be the
goal and where brahmacharya is strictly enjoined. Your fast was
good for your purification. It has washed you clean of the initial
mistake, and if they will take it, it is a gentle warning to the
managers of the Ashram. It seems to me, however, that you
should follow up the action by having a firm conversation with
the Rao Saheb and other inmates, and, if you wish it, with the
Maharajji himself. Whereas in a previous letter I told you that
it was no business of yours to rid the Ashram of the bhang habit,
now in view of the developments described by you, it becomes
1 Vide "Letter to Mirabehn", 28-5-1927.
your duty either to end the bhang or to end your presence there.
I regard it to be next to impossible, both for men and women,
to remain without sensual agitations whilst they are under the
influence of bhang even though they may be able to exercise out-
ward bodily control, though from my own experience of it, it
seems to me that when I was under the influence of bhang any man
or woman could have played fast or loose with me. And now
that your eyes have been opened, it would be improper to lend any
countenance to that Ashram unless they are sincerely ready to
reform their ways. You may not co-operate with the Ashram even
to gain a kingdom or even if it was the only place where you
could finish your Hindi course. You may tell them that you are
not there to impose your views, but as a friend you were bound
to draw their attention to the evil which had forced itself upon
your attention, and that unless the evil was eradicated-and that
too not for your sake but out of conviction-you could not remain
there to receive personal courtesies and personal favours in the
shape of Hindi teaching. If therefore they could not see eye to
eye with you about the evil of bhang, you would still be friends
with them but you couldn't possibly remain in the Ashram, nor
Valunjker and Gangu who are also under the same discipline as
you. You may read this letter to whomsoever you like. Discuss
first with Valunjker-for, he is a wise man-the propriety of the
step I have suggested, see what he has to say, see also what Gangu
has to say. She is like a simple glorious child. But wisdom often
comes out of the mouths of babes and her intuition may be better
than our reasoned judgement. And then if you feel like referring
to me, do so by all means. If you wish to consult Jamnalalji,you may
write to him also. I am sending him your letter and a copy of this
so that you don't have to say much to him. Do nothing in a hurry,
nothing in a huff, certainly nothing in anger; but take whatever step
you wish after humble prayer and with the greatest deliberation.
I am perfectly at ease having dictated this letter. Such
experiences, when they come to us unsought, are precious trials
that God sends to those who would listen to the "still small voice"
within. If I have read more into your letter than you meant
and have been guilty of any injustice to the people at the Ashram,
you will not hesitate please to correct me.
I hope the two fasts have not overtaxed the body. I expect
to hear from you again. Occasions for fasting may occur again
and I may not be near you; in that case, and when you are feel-
ing weak and exhausted, do not attempt to write yourself but ask
anybody who may be near you to write to me to dictation or to
write according to the sense of what you might have told him or
her. God be with you always.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5233. Courtesy: Mirabehn
