195. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
October [9], 1934
CHI. KANTI,
I got your long letter. Nobody else will read it. I understand
your feeling. I have arranged the money for you from Ramachan-
dran. My relations with him are such that I need not hesitate
about this and this is quite the right thing to do for you as well
as for me.
When he is there it does not look nice to send
money direct from here. I shall certainly return it to him so you
may draw the money without hesitation. If you do not find it
enough, write to me. It is very good that you keep account of each
and every pie. I understand the state of your mind which you so
vividly describe. Don't force yourself to do anything. Place your
foot only where you can plant it firmly knowing all that is hap-
pening around you. It has been my experience throughout that
nothing that is done in an unnatural manner endures, but that
instead there is only increase in hypocrisy. That is why I am
fighting to get out of the Congress. I shall be satisfied if only one
quality at any rate endures among you all. Let no one give up
worship of truth. He who clings to truth will in time come to see
his errors. He will correct them and go ahead.
Nowadays I receive letters from Harilal regularly. I have
been trying to help him. He has come to Rajkot. He had asked
for your address which I have sent to him. If you wish to read
his recent letters to me, I shall send them to you. Contrary to
my practice nowadays I am preserving his letters. If the present
improvement does not prove temporary it would really be a great
thing.
Your decision to do [regular] spinning is no doubt a good
one. The new method with the takli is very good. 400 rounds can
be spun per hour by adopting this method. A speed of 200 rounds
per hour is common with this method; do try it. You must have
read the article on the subject. That you should ask for slivers
from here is contrary to logic. It is like a shave costing more than
a head. You ought to do your own carding. All the tools are
available in Nagercoil. Perhaps you might get them at your
place too. Ramachandran must know because he was connected
with khadi work. No doubt good quality cotton is available there.
The best cotton is grown in Tinnevelly and it is not far from
Nagercoil.
You might have started taking ghee and milk. Let me know
what effect it has on you. Let me know also how you find the
food and climate of the place.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Ramdas is better now. But he is still in the hospital.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy:
Sabarmati Sangrahalaya
