96. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA,
July 27, 1907
TO
THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
My Committee have learnt with regret that applications for regis-
tration of Asiatics are being received by officials late at night and in
private stores or other places. My Committee have also learnt that this
method has been adopted on the strength of representations made to
the Government to the effect that British Indians desiring to make appli-
cation under the Act are threatened with physical injury, etc.
My Committee disclaim all knowledge of any such threats having
been used by any responsible member of the community. The activity
1 This was presumably drafted by Gandhiji.
of the Committee has been confined to vigorous propaganda work in
the way of showing the degradation and disadvantage involved in accept-
ing the provisions of the Act.
The volunteers, it will be admitted, have simply performed mission-
ary work. My Committee have publicly and emphatically informed
British Indians that any member wishing to make his application will
not only be left unharmed but that he will, if so desired by him, be
escorted to the Registration Office.
In the humble opinion of my Committee, those Indians who have
applied secretly and at night time have done so in order to conceal from
British Indians what they, too, in common with other members of the
community, have believed to be an act derogatory to their honour.
In the humble opinion of my Committee, secret registration after
office hours and in private stores, even if it be not illegal, can hardly be
considered a dignified proceeding. In any event, my Committee beg res-
pectfully to assure the Government that the Indian community in what
is to it a life-and-death struggle has no intention to resort to intimidation
or methods which may in any way be considered even reprehensible.
I have, etc.,
HAJEE HABIB
HONORARY SECRETARY,
BRITISH INDIAN COMMITTEE
Indian Opinion, 3-8-1907
