119. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
After Morning Prayers, January 15, 1931
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
It is good that you sent me . . . 's letter. He also may write
to me direct. I agree with you that he should discuss the whole
matter with Kakasaheb.
As far as I have been able to understand the situation, it seems
to me that he should make . . .2 free. It is unlikely that she
will marry again, but in her heart of hearts she will welcome her
freedom. If even now she is leading an immoral life, . . . will not
be able to reform her, just as he cannot reform any other woman
like her. He should not mind what effect his action, right in itself,
produces on society. He should get rid of the idea that she belongs
to him. And if he sincerely repents having married a second time,
he should regard . . .3 purely as a friend and live with her ac-
cordingly. But one cannot force oneself to act in such a manner.
If he cannot live thus, he should humbly live with . . . as her
husband, exercising as much self-control as he can. There are
many other issues which arise from this, but I do not wish to dis-
cuss them here.
The criticism about camps in your letter is a painful story.
Truth and non-violence have not yet found a place in the hearts
of people. They are accepted only as policy. Hence, even public
workers have not realized that truth and non-violence in social
life depend upon their practice by individuals, that is, upon self-
purification by them. The Ashram was established to demonstrate
the truth of this idea through actual practice. Our duty is to go on
serving, unaffected by the atmosphere round us no matter how
polluted it is. This is true about women workers too. All of them
should be as strong as Khurshedbehn, who will never fall in any
atmosphere however evil it may be. It is true that we have not
yet reached this level. We have got this golden opportunity of
testing our strength. Maybe some of us, both men and women, will
receive burns in this ordeal. Let that be so, if it cannot be helped.
If on the whole our effort in the Ashram is sincere, God will pro-
1, 2 & 3 The names have been omitted.
88
tect us. The prayer-song of the turtle and his wife is worth medi-
tating over in this connection.
The second part of your letter also is interesting. What can I
say in reply? Work as hard as you can but not at the cost of
your health. We ought to preserve good health, and not merely
refrain from sacrificing the body unnecessarily.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5498
