423. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
WARDHA,
March 19, 1935
MY DEAR SHANKERLAL,
I have already handed to you Messrs Kirloskar Bros. letter of
14th instant addressed to me.
I commend their letter to the earnest attention of the examiners.
As Messrs Kirloskar Bros. have permitted me to give my own
opinion, I do so for the guidance of the examiners. The numbers
against the following paragraphs refer to those in their letter.
(2) The trial at Wardha is not yet complete. In so far as it
has gone, I can say that a capable worker did succeed once or
twice in spinning over 8,000 yards in 4 hours. There never has
yet been an output of 16,000 in eight hours at Wardha. No
woman has worked at it for eight hours at a stretch here. My
trial of it is still proceeding. I should like to try it for SIX
months before pronouncing an opinion on its average capacity.
But if the examiners are satisfied on this point, absence of a con-
clusive opinion from me need not in any way delay or otherwise
affect the examiners' award.
(5) I am unable to subscribe to the opinion that the machine
"has fulfilled all the important and major conditions of the com-
petition". I have up to now only applied myself to two conditions,
viz., 1st and 4th.
I do not regard the 1st condition as to handiness as a minor
one. Indeed it is in my opinion the one unalterable condition.
Without that condition, there would surely be no difficulty in produ-
cing a machine that would give more than 16,000 yards in 8 hours.
Handiness has to be proved with reference to the crores of cottages
scattered in 700,000 villages of India. Accepting Webster's defini-
tion of 'convenient', a mere look at the machine would convince
one who has any knowledge of Indian cottages and conditions that
the machine cannot be called handy in any shape or form. For
an Indian cottage it is without doubt a cumbersome piece of
machinery.
As to conditions 5 and 6, I am wholly incompetent to pronounce
an opinion.
As to condition 2, it is yet too early for me to pronounce an
opinion.
I understand from Shri Kale as also from the members of the
firm who were good enough to visit me that the machine is not
capable of being reduced in size any further than it is already.
I am quite satisfied that the machine cannot be accommodated in
an Indian cottage of the average size. The firm's suggestion that
cottages should be specially built in order to house the machine
is too unpractical to need refutation.
In my opinion, therefore,
the machine does not satisfy what to me is one of the vital conditions
of the prize.
But it may not be considered as more than the
evidence of a witness before the judges.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SHANKERLAL BANKER
AHMEDABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
