49. LETTER TO THE BRITISH AGENT
PRETORIA,
May 18, 18971
HIS HONOUR THE BRITISH AGENT
PRETORIA
SIR,
With reference to the interview you were good enough to
grant with reference to the British Indians in this Republic,
whereat I ventured to submit that, in the event of a test case
being brought by the Indian community here as to the
interpretation of the Law No. 3 of 1885 the expenses should be
paid by Her Majesty's Government, I have to request you on
behalf of the deputation to telegraph to the Right Honourable
the Secretary of State for the Colonies as to whether Her
Majesty's Government would defray the cost of the conduct
of the case. The following are the grounds for such request:
1. The test case has been rendered necessary owing to the
award of the Chief Justice of the Free State and the arbitration
was agreed to by Her Majesty's Government without reference
to the feeling on the matter of the Indian community in the
Transvaal whose interests were at stake, and in spite of their
respectful protest as well against the choice of the arbitrator.
(Blue book C. 7911 of 1895, p. 35, paragraph 3.)
2. The Telegraphic despatches published in the above Blue
book, pp. 34 (No. 9) and 46 (Enclosure in No. 12), show that
Her Majesty's Government contemplated bringing a test case.
While the case will be entered in the name of a member of the
Indian community, it is, I submit, reasonable to infer that
the cost will be defrayed by Her Majesty's Government.
3. The British Indians have already incurred heavy expen-
ses in their struggle against degradation and disabilities sought
to be placed upon them in the Transvaal in spite of the protec-
tion afforded them against such degradation and disabilities
by the 14th Article of the Convention of 1884, and, comparatively
speaking, their pecuniary position is not such as to bear any
strain put upon their purse. I venture to hope that in your
telegram you would mention a summary of the grounds on which
the request as to the costs is based.
Personally and on behalf of the deputation you were kind
enough to receive today, I beg once more to tender my
thanks for the courteous manner in which you received us and
the patient, sympathetic hearing you granted us.
On behalf of the deputation,
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: South Africa, General, 1897
