56. LETTER TO JHAVERBHAI PATEL
August 23, 1944
1. In the social order of my conception, as much production
as possible would be located in the villages, and that too through
the power of people's hands and feet. But this ideal cannot always
be realized. We have to accept compromise at some point.
Experience alone can decide the limits of such compromise. Every
worker can decide the limit for himself; but when he works as a
member of some institution he has to submit to the limit accepted
by the institution. He helps the institution and accelerates its
progress towards its goal if he further narrows the limit accepted by
it, as Vinoba has done. I cannot go further than this in my reply.
But you will perhaps be able, on the basis of this, to formulate in
fewer words a policy befitting or supporting my conception. Try
to do it and if you frame any such formula, please show it to me.
2. For me, India begins and ends in the villages; that is,
what I find possible in one village I would apply to all villages
in similar conditions. If I think, and can persuade the institutions
concerned to think, about paper-making from this point of view,
we might find it easier to reach our goal. If the people of a
village can produce energy from some source in the village
itself so that they can invent a device whereby, instead of
every person making paper, a few hands are able to produce
all the paper needed, I would welcome such an invention. If
the attempt to produce everything through the power of man's
hands and feet puts such constraints on him that further
development of his triple faculties would be completely arrested,
I would regard such an arrangement as faulty. By triple faculties
I mean those of the body, the mind and the spirit.
3. If I have understood the third question correctly, you
will see that it is implied in the second. If you do not, please
put it up to me [accordingly]. I have deliberately compressed
the language to enable persons like you to solve more easily the
problems that arise in the course of their work.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1357
