287. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[April 29, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Your letters bring fresh news every day. When a war is
going on, that is bound to happen. Life is an unending war.
Sunk in ignorance, we believe that it is not so. It is all to the
good that the . . . episode has made us more aware of the war.
I have sent a wire to Narandas to tell him that he may cer-
tainly leave. I have sent a similar wire to Ramniklal. You will
probably see the wire to Ramniklal. It would be good if he acts
as I have suggested in the wire.
My advice to you is this: let them who wish go. We have
pressed people as best we could to stay on; we have gone far
to make compromises. Make this one change immediately. Rent
out some part of the Ashram land and lay down no rules to res-
trict its use. We should trust in the goodness of those whom we
know from experience. They and we should be bound by one
month's notice on either side. Budhabhai is subject to no res-
triction of rules, and still we like him as a neighbour. We should
believe the same about those to whom we rent the land. We may
not give the facility of provisions from our store, etc., to any
person who comes along and starts living. If that friend from
Vadaj maintains a store on his own responsibility, by all means
let him run it. If he does so, we shall stop our store and buy
provisions from him. This, however, is for you to consider.
I should like it if the entire management of the goshala
is independent of the Udyoga Mandir or the Ashram. We may
set apart for it the necessary land and give it on nominal rent.
Let Parnerkar then run it on his own responsibility. "On his own
responsibility" means that he himself will have to think about the
rules for its running. As for money, he may enjoy all the facilities
which are available today. He will, however, be free to employ
men of his own choice. He may, if he wishes, appoint a committee
to help him. In other words, he may take up the work if he is
ready to dedicate himself to the dairy. He should supply milk, etc.,
to the Ashram and to others if he can manage. If any of the per-
sons who belong to the Ashram wish to work with him, they may.
Some should join even in order to help him. It should be left
to Parnerkar's choice whether or not he should continue to live
as an inmate of the Ashram. If you wish, you can make this
change before I return there. You will require for that purpose
the consent of the Cow-Service Society. But there will be no
difficulty in getting it.
It does not matter if, as a result of this, the scope of the
Mandir becomes smaller. It would not matter even if it should
break up altogether. I shall not feel ashamed in publishing any
part of this. Truth is never ashamed of itself anywhere in the
world. When truth feels ashamed of itself, you may be sure that
it is not truth but falsehood.
If, by acting thus, you find yourself left alone, do not feel help-
less. Do then what the captain of a ship does. He first sees every-
body else sinking and then drowns himself, or, if any part can be
saved, he saves it and himself along with it. If he cannot save
himself, all sink.
There is no room here for feeling that those who leave are
bad and those who remain are good. Your conclusion that you
can remain only if you are better than Mahadev is wrong. If he
does not have the strength to remain, he may leave. If you have
that strength, you may remain. There can be no competition in
this matter.
Never think that you would be hurting me by anything you
do. I shall feel the least hurt if everybody acts according to his
strength.
Do what you think necessary about the women's section. If
they can remain, so much the better. If they cannot, I have al-
ready suggested to you that they should be set free. Take that
as a standing instruction.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11792
