317. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
NEW DELHI,
October 10/11, 1947
CHI. KAKA,
I gave to Kamalnayan your letter of the 8th. Naturally, I
did not have the time to talk to him. I wanted to talk to
Jawaharlal and also to Shaheed Saheb. I could read the whole
letter only in the morning. In connection with (the memorial
to) Dharmananda you have to collect an amount of Rs. 25,000.
Kamalnayan may do the collection, if he can, without putting
you to any trouble. Otherwise I am in any case going to take
up the burden. You should, therefore, remain completely free
from worry. The entire amount should be received at one time.
Please note that the same applies in the case of the Hindu-
stani Prachar [Sabha].
It will be all right if Kamalnayan can
do it without bothering you. Otherwise I am mentally prepared
to take up this burden too to the extent of Rs. 50,000. You
will have to worry about it if my eyes close before that.
I am glad that finally you had to come to the conclusion
that the headquarters of the Hindustani Prachar [Sabha] can-
not be shifted to any other place. We should carry on the work
taken up by Jamnalal where he had launched it. If that can-
not be and if it can be accommodated in another place without
any difficulty, I will not be inconvenienced in any way by the
transfer. I shall try to lay my hands on some person from
around Delhi if I come across one.
I do believe that we should hurry up with the reorganiza-
tion of linguistic provinces. But the atmosphere here is so vitiated
that no work can be done speedily. I am vigilant all the same.
There may be an illusion for the time being that different
languages stand for different cultures, but there is also the pos-
sibility that with the establishment of linguistic provinces it may
disappear. I shall write something [about it] if I get the time.
Here again, I believe, we are not going to gain anything by
rushing through it. I am not unaware that a class of people have
been saying that linguistic provinces are wrong. In my opinion,
this class takes delight in creating obstacles. I don't remember
in what context, when and what I had said about the culture
316
of the Bengali-speaking population. What is the use of recalling
it? Even if I, who believe in the unity of India's culture, were
to deliver myself of a contrary statement in some context, it
ought to be regarded only as a seeming contradiction. We
cannot but accept the sub-divisions of one culture.
I don't like what you say about Gangadharrao Deshpande.
What does it matter whether people applaud him or forget him?
Contentment or discontent are only products of the mind. Please
ask Gangadharrao to wake up and know his own self. This is a
new age in which new people will come to occupy positions and
the old will be eased out. There is no reason to be happy or
unhappy about it.
Politics will and ought to have a non-polluting relationship
with the constructive programme. The fact is that neither the
people nor the Congress ever digested the programme. Had they
been able to do it [they would have realized that] it included
politics. There is no question of the constructive programme
being dependent on anything. And if it is it will not survive.
What you say about the Navajivan Trust is true, but we can
do nothing about it. If changes are to be made in an already
established trust, they can be made only according to the proce-
dure laid down in the trust deed.
If the Hindustani Prachar Sabha had any source of income,
it would have been its undoing. Either the institution has public
utility or it hasn't. If it has, the public should support it. Many
instances can be cited to prove that whenever such institutions
possessed funds of their own the very purpose of the institution
was defeated. The case of Anandji Kalyanji is much too well
known. What does he do [now]?
Do what is necessary for Sushila Pai. You should see that
she is not embarrassed. I know from my experience in Noakhali
that she can do a lot of work. I have now fully replied to
your letter.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
