345. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
KAVALI,
May 10, 1929
MY DEAR JAWAHAR,
What a weight upon your mind to have both Kamala and
Krishna with the severe attacks you have described. I suppose
these domestic troubles must also be taken as part of national
discipline. I am glad that Krishna does not require an operation.
You may not know that Andhra Desha is noted for nature-
cure men and some of them are really brave fellows, brave in the
sense that they relentlessly pursue the search without counting
the cost. This remedy has in many cases answered where every-
thing else has failed. And it has the merit of simplicity combin-
ed with perfect harmlessness even where it may not result in a
cure. I wish you would turn your attention to these cures. Of
course in this strict dieting plays a most important part. Where
patients do not submit to the dietetic prescriptions, the treatment
becomes valueless.
I take it that in spite of Bengal's desire for a postponement,
A. I. C. C. will meet on the advertised date.
I had your telegram about Almora. I shall hope to leave
Ashram after the tenth of June so as to reach Almora on the
15th.
Yes, you can have me for U.P. and the Punjab and Delhi
for the whole of September and October, if October is also want-
ed. About the Allahabad Municipal Board, you shall decide. I
am fed up with addresses. You may therefore accept on my be-
half if there is any political or other advantage to be derived from
it. If I have received any communication from the Board I have
no recollection of it.
Andhra P. C. C. has asked for extension of time up to June
on the plea that most of the Congress workers are busy in their
own districts with arrangements for the tour and hence are un-
able to supply the information I wanted. This fact in itself is an
evidence of the chaos that reigns supreme in our house. For
what I see throughout Andhra is true almost of every province.
I have failed to get any satisfaction from Utkal.
I expect the Tamilnad Secretary on Sunday at Nellore.
I have written to Ghanshyamdas Birla instead of Ramjeebhai
to find an auditor of repute for auditing Bengal P. C. C.'s
accounts.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1929. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
