435. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
April 12, 1933
THE SECRETARY TO THE
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,
I have just read the Government's reply to my request con-
tained in my letter of the 1st instant.
I am thankful for the correction that it was not in 1922 but
in 1923 that I was permitted to see two fellow-convicts in the
Yeravda prison who were fasting.
I am sorry for the decision of the Government on the issue
raised by me.
Technically the Government are right in their reply. Natu-
rally every concession lapses with the end of the prisoner's in-
carceration. The limits of the current concessions I have not
questioned, though I did not like them in so far as the inquiry
about the treatment or conduct of other prisoners was concerned.
Happily there was no occasion for definitely raising the point.
My endeavour has been to avoid, as far as possible, occasion of
conflict with authority. I have been content to live, as becomes
a prisoner, a hand-to-mouth existence in the hope that with the
march of time my conduct would inspire the Government with
confidence in my desire to tender and promote prison discipline
to the best of my ability and thus make my way smooth for hu-
manitarian work that was possible for me even as a prisoner to
do. And I may be pardoned for referring to a policy once esta-
blished by the Government and pleading for its continuity.
But the Government would on the contrary seem to repent of
past concessions and to want to curtail them. For the communi-
cation under reply says, "Government are unable to extend this
concession so as to cover direct communications between him and
prisoners in jails other than Yeravda." Does this mean that I am
not now to exchange communications which I have hitherto carried
on with prisoners in jails other than Yeravda, and that in
cases such as Seth Poonamchand's I am not to be permitted to
offer friendly intervention? I can only hope that the Govern-
ment do not mean to curtail or restrict the concession already
granted to me. I request an early reply as even the concession
granted in the matter of Seth Poonamchand has not, in my opi-
nion, been properly given effect to.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (3)A, p. 195; also G.N. 3888
