299. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
TITHAL, BULSAR,
June 3/[5]1, 1937
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I have liked your letter. It is indeed true that my statements
contain several implications. Therefore, the meaning that you
have read is possible. But the statement also implies the other
meaning that you have suggested. Truth need not be made bitter.
Nor need it be embellished. If one person wounds another with
a sword and a witness describes the incident, such description by
itself is not bitter, though the consequences of the testimony may
be bitter for the assailant. But that doesn't make truth itself
bitter. If, however, the description of the assault was full of
exaggerations, we might say that truth had been made bitter.
After saying this, I may add that if I had to make a choice, I
would certainly prefer bitter truth to untruth. I wouldn't, there-
fore, mind if you can't learn to express truth agreeably. If, in
trying to change bitter into agreeable language, you are likely to
kill truth, you had better stick to bitter language.
You have always been unlucky in the matter of helpers.
You have never had a really good man. But you have got a
good helper in Sushila. I wonder how you could have man-
aged to pull on if you didn't have her. Even from the point of
view of self-interest, therefore, Sushila must improve her health
with good food, exercise and water treatment.
Mr. Kallenbach has at last arrived. He is fine. For the
present he is here. Tithal may be described as a small village
about six or seven furlongs from the sea-coast. We are staying in
that village. We are leaving on the 10th, and shall reach Segaon
on the 11th.
I have just got a letter from Harilal. I am enclosing it as
a sample.
I have gone through the Phoenix Trust. There is no need
to make any changes in it. But if you have any suggestion to
make, it can perhaps be carried out. So it is you who should
draft something and send it to me, instead of my drafting any-
thing. I had a talk with Kallenbach. He says that there is
no need to make any changes in the trust-deed or to increase
the number of trustees.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
A copy of an account of Khushalbhai's beautiful death is
enclosed.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4863
