144. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 9, 1906
DEAR MR. POLAK,
I am sending you all the cuttings I can. I will not enumerate them.
The interview with Lord Elgin yesterday was exceedingly good.
Sir Lepel Griffin spoke very nicely. You may read this letter to the
members of the Association. I may be able to let you have the official
copy of the proceedings next week. I have applied for it. Sir Muncherji,
Mr. Naoroji, Mr. Ameer Ali and Mr. Rees spoke: they were all precise
and to the point. The support we have received is beyond expectation.
Everybody considers that a stronger deputation on Indian affairs has
never yet waited upon the Government. There seems to be every reason
for hoping that Lord Elgin will grant a commission and if he does, it
will be exceedingly good. We have now asked for an interview with
Mr. Morley; that Deputation will also, I believe, be very strongly
supported. The meeting of the Members of the House of Commons
was very enthusiastic and sympathetic. Some of the Members thought
that it was unprecedented! Nobody had expected that over 100
Members would attend. The speakers too at the meeting vied with one
another in showing their sympathy.
We saw Lord George Hamilton today: he gave us half an hour.
He said he felt convinced that an injustice was being done. He has
promised to study the Representation to Lord Elgin. There was, how-
ever, an attitude of non possumus about him.
We sent you a long cablegram yesterday. The more we see, the
more we feel that a permanent committee is absolutely necessary, if
the work of the Deputation is not to be frittered away. Sir Muncherji
is very emphatic on the point. It is, therefore, vexing that no cablegram
has yet been received from you. This is not to blame you. I can quite
understand the difficulties you are going through. This is not to blame
you. I simply state the fact that delay is dangerous and hope that
tomorrow there will be a cablegram from you. I need hardly say that
Mr. Ally is in thorough agreement with this view. We are both getting
on very nicely.
You will be pleased to learn that Mr. Scott, your father's friend,
played an important part in bringing about the meeting of the Members
of the House of Commons and that your father devoted the best part
of last Monday to seeing Mr. Scott and others for this meeting. His
assistance to me has been very valuable in more ways than one. Your
mother has promised to try earth bandages for her neuralgia. I tried
to dig up some clean earth from your yard but it was not to be had.
Your father was to procure some from elsewhere. I shall know more
next Sunday as I am to pass almost the whole of Sunday afternoon with
your people: having, however, found out Mrs. [Freeth's address,]
I shall have to take away 2 hours from them.
I am not sending any article this time; I may write something if the
spirit moves me. My outside activity has been so great that there has not
been much time left for contemplation: anything, therefore, that I should
1 Held on November 7. Vide p. 105.
2 Not available
3 The repetition of this sentence is due perhaps to an oversight.
4 The words here are overtyped and illegible. Vide letter to J. W. Macintyre,
(p. 142) who was asked to send her address.
give you would be purely superficial. You may, however, give an article
on the papers regarding the activity of the Deputation which I am sending.
Mr. Mukerji will send you some cuttings and you may deal with the
Representation by Godfrey and others, as also the House of Commons
meeting and the Deputation. As I am dictating this, I now fancy that
I may give you a leader on Lord Elgin's reply to clear away some of the
points.
You should not take anything from this letter about the Deputation
to work up an article because the proceedings of the deputation are
supposed to be [private]. The cablegram sent to Lord Elgin must be
shocking!!! I suppose it is Dr. Godfrey. We have asked Lord Elgin to
give us the text of the cablegram and the name of the sender. We may
then give an explanation.
Yours sincerely,
[Enclosure]
H. S. L. POLAK, ESQ.
Box 6522
JOHANNESBURG
SOUTH AFRICA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4530
