139. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 13, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. Whenever a letter from me is delivered
late to you, you should examine the postmark and let me know
the date [of its clearance].
To what term has Kisan been sentenced? Where is she kept?
You can certainly open the trunks. If they contain books,
they must be taken out and kept in the right places, and, if they
contain any other material, all the items will have to be listed and
properly disposed of. If you do not know what to do about
them, send the list to me. I will then be able to tell you what
to do. Even if some of the books belong to other people, it does
not matter. If they bear the names of their owners, they can
easily be kept separately from the others. If they bear no names there
will be no harm if the Ashram stamp is put on them. If, after-
wards, these books are claimed by any persons, they should be
handed over to them. Our duty is to take all possible care of
the books while they are in our possession.
Which statement of mine did you interpret to mean that,
according to me, the Ashram had nothing to do with education?
My view is this: literary education -formal education-is given
a secondary place in the Ashram. That is why the Ashram could
92
not be made a Vidyapith. But such education is certainly useful
and necessary, and that is why the Vidyapith was established.
The Ashram and the Vidyapith supplement each other. Because
of this limitation of its sphere of activities, the collection of books
in the Ashram should be restricted. The Vidyapith can have no
such restriction. The restrictions on it relate to its internal ex-
periments. The Ashram has a big name and certain extravagant
notions have come to be formed about it, so that it receives
books on all kinds of subjects and in many languages. The Vidya-
pith is the right place where they can be preserved. The
Ashram, on the other hand, should have only such books as relate
to the subjects which we study. What books fall in this class,
you and others can easily decide. Whenever you cannot decide
you may consult me. Personally, however, I don't see what
difficulty you can experience in this matter. After so many years
of the Ashram's existence, we should be able to tell immediately
what kinds of books we generally require. If at any time we
require some other books, we can take advantage of the collec-
tion in the Vidyapith. We should not regard the Ashram and
the Vidyapith as two independent institutions. Their spheres of
activity are different, but the two have much in common between
them and that area is gradually expanding.
If you do not understand any point in this, ask me again.
I am sure I do not consciously refuse to hear or observe
anything against a person about whom my views are formed. I
always hear what others say, but my views may not change. I
think it would be wrong for anyone to change, quickly, views form-
ed after careful observation. It would, of course, be obstinacy
never to change them. Hence, that too would be wrong. But
there should be a sound reason for changing such a view. Often
I require the evidence of proved facts. I cherish this nature of
mine, which has saved me from many dangers and kept my
relations with people unclouded by suspicion.
You are, therefore, free to ask me what you like. You will
not get such an opportunity again.
The distinction you have made is correct. The writer of
articles in Young India is one person, and the man whom the
inmates of the Ashram know intimately is another. In Young India,
I might present myself as one of the Pandavas, but, in the
Ashram, how can I help showing myself as I am? I am, more-
over, a votary of truth and can make no attempt consciously to
hide my weaknesses. Hence, the Kauravas dwelling in me make
their presence felt in one way or another. Haven't you said that
a conflict is always going on in me between the divine and the
demoniac? I feel, however, that the Kauravas are being van-
quished. But one cannot yet be positive about that. As Solon
has said, the final judgment about a man can be expressed only
after his death. I have known cases in which crores were re-
duced to a cowrie in a moment. I have, therefore, no pride
in me at all. And what does pride avail one?
Remember that I do not revise the letters after writing them.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10272. Also C.W. 6720. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
