49. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
JOHANNESBURG,
February 22, 1908
DEAR MR. SMUTS,
In accordance with the permission given by you, I now take the
opportunity of sending you a draft Bill to amend Immigration Restriction
Act No. 15 of 1907. The draft, in my opinion, meets the situation
entirely. The time is ripe for me to submit it, inasmuch as there is
every evidence now of the Asiatics loyally accepting the compromise.
You will see that some of the rights given by the Asiatic Act have
not been availed of by the draft; for instance, Asiatics who were in the
Transvaal on the 31st day of May, 1902 are, under the Act to be
repealed, entitled to registration, whereas, under the draft now submit-
ted, they are not. I have omitted them advisedly, because it exposes
Asiatics to temptation. I have assumed that those who were in the
Colony on the 31st day of May, 1902 must have by the time voluntary
registration is completed availed themselves of it. There could not be
many outside the Colony who were in it on that day and have not yet
returned. If, however, there are any exceptional cases, they can be
dealt with under the last clause of the amendment of Paragraph g. On
the other hand, I have ventured to specifically protect Asiatics who paid
£3 to the old Government before the war, because, although they are
not mentioned in Act 2 of 1907, it always was the intention to pro-
tect them, and holders of such certificates who are without the Colony
cannot now number more than one hundred.
The clause about temporary permits has been taken over from Act 2
of 1907. I have ventured to import into the draft Bill a section
dealing with the Church Street property held by the late Aboobaker
Amod. As you are aware, the section in Act 2 of 1907 proved abortive.
A section of that description may not appear in its place in an Immig-
ration Bill but, as the law repeals the Asiatic Law Amendment Act,
the relief sought to be granted under that Act might well be granted in
a repealing Bill. I am sure that you would be pleased to restore to
the heirs ownership of their inheritance. As you may be aware, the
property is leased to a European firm and is being entirely used by
Europeans and the building thereon is in every way a credit to the
principal street of Pretoria.
I have omitted to take over from the Asiatic Act the section sup-
posed to give relief with reference to liquor. I, personally, think that it
is perfectly useless and should never have formed part of the Act.
I know that you are going to amend Section 6 also of the
Immigration Restriction Act . I was almost going to submit a draft
amendment, but, on second thoughts, I considered that it was not my
place to do so. May I, however, suggest that the power of removal be
changed into authority to the Magistrate to convict persons who may
disobey the order to leave and to imprison them until they would leave
the Colony of their own accord and at their own expense. I think that
that is the utmost that a civilized Government can possibly do. If Section
6 is amended in the manner above indicated, Section 11 and Sub-Sec-
tion f of Section 15 will require corresponding amendment.
There now remains for me to point out that, according to my
reading of the Immigration Restriction Act, Malays and Cape Coloured
people become prohibited immigrants. I hardly think that such was the
intention of the Government. I should imagine that they would be
protected the same as descendants of the aboriginal races of Africa,
as per clause h of Section 2.
In my opinion, no further amendments would be necessary in order
to carry out the main purpose of the Asiatic Act in the way of
inspection and in the way of restriction of licences only to those who
1 Vide Vol. V, pp. 267- & Vol. VI, p. 118.
2 Vide Vol. VI, p. 118.
3 For provisions of Immigration Restriction Bill, vide Vol. VII, pp. 492- and
for the Immigrants' Restriction Act, vide Appendix I of this Volume.
are not prohibited immigrants, because both these are already more
than provided for under the Immigration Restriction Act. Every person
applying for a licence will have to prove that he is not a prohibited
immigrant and the officers appointed under the Immigration Restric-
tion Act will have the power to put to proof any person suspected
of being a prohibited immigrant.
If there are any Asiatics who do not avail themselves of the
voluntary offer, I do not think, in view of the amendment suggested
by me, that you require the use of the Asiatic Act to deal with them,
because they will ipso facto become prohibited immigrants and would,
therefore, be liable to an expulsion order. Those who are outside the
Colony and are because of their former domicile entitled to re-enter,
although they may not possess educational qualifications, are, as you
will notice, under the draft submitted by me, required to take out a
registration certificate according to the voluntary form within seven
days of their arrival.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
GENERAL J. C. SMUTS
COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT IMMIGRATION RESTRICTION BILL TO AMEND
ACT NO. 15 OF 1907
1. Section one of said Act is hereby repealed and replaced as
follows: "The Peace Preservation Ordinance, 1903, the Asiatic Law
Amendment Act No. 2 of 1907, and Sub-Section (c) of Article two of
Law No. 3 of 1885 as amended by Volksraad Resolutions Article 1419
of the 12th day of August, 1886, and Article 128 of the 16th day of
May, 1890 are hereby repealed, provided that nothing done under
the said Ordinance, Act, or Law, before such repeal shall be affected
by such repeal."
2. Paragraph (g) of Sub-Section one of Section two is hereby
repealed and replaced by the following: "Any Asiatic who has obtained
a certificate of registration under the Asiatic Law Amendment Act,
1907, or any Asiatic who has obtained before the . . . day of . . . a certi-
ficate as per form hereto attached and described in Schedule A, or
any Asiatic who, not being within the Colony, is in possession of a
permit or registration certificate lawfully issued to him and of which he
is proved to the satisfaction of the Immigration Officer to be the lawful
possessor and who shall within seven days after entering the Colony
apply for a certificate as per Schedule A, or any Asiatic who is consi-
dered by the Minister as eligible for such certificate and who does not
come within the scope of Sub-Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 of the definition
of 'prohibited immigrant' as in the said Act 15 of 1907."
3. The Minister shall have the power from time to time to issue
temporary permits to enter and remain in the Colony to any "prohi-
bited immigrant".
4. Portion of Erf No. 373 Church Street, Pretoria, which was
registered in the name of the late Aboobaker Amod and which is at
present registered in the name of Henry Solomon Leon Polak may be
transferred in favour of the heirs of the late Aboobaker Amod notwith-
standing anything to the contrary in Law 3 of 1885 as amended by
Volksraad Resolutions Article 1419 of the 12th day of August, 1886
and without payment of further transfer duty.
Indian Opinion, 4-7-1908
Also India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08
