625. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
November 11, 1932
MY DEAR CHILD,
I have your latest letter telling me how in ecstasy you would
have run to the telegraph office to wire to me and how you subse-
quently realized that that would have been wrong if only because
we are poor people and all the money we had, had to be held in
trust for God's service. And I had your long love letter which
you had sent to the Ashram address.
Well, the fast was well worth it even for enabling Menon to
give up smoking. The value lies in having given up a thing
which had so possessed him. I know that many young men and
young women, old men and old women were moved to such rest-
raint and self-denial during the fast week. It shows that it was
from God.
I saw and we all admired the group photo with Andrews
in it. It was very good. And the bare-bodied Tangai. She looks
a perfect picture.
I expect in your next letter to see the account of your visit to
the diseased sister.
I had a long letter from the Sunfield School people giving
me an account of the new buildings.
You must not trifle with your body by putting into it
things that will not suit it. You cannot build your body on
pulses. You do not need them at all. Your diet must consist
largely of milk, eggs (since you do take them and it is well you
do) and whole-meal bread and fruit and green vegetables, salads,
tomatoes, spinach, marrow and the like. Even as a soldier keeps
his arms clean and in order so must we keep our arms (God-given
bodies) clean and in perfect order.
I have almost regained my strength and am taking normal
food. Mira writes regularly every week and is keeping well.
Devdas is much better but is overworking himself and so is Pyare-
lal. Mahadev of course is with me. Tilakam is at the Ashram.
He is a good young man. He is not strong in body.
Enclosed is a letter for the young friend from Denmark.
Ba is at the Ashram. I think she has aged more than I have,
though she is wonderfully active. Her mind gets easily tired.
She worries too much.
Love to you all and in addition kisses to the children.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 115. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also
My Dear Child, pp. 95-
1 This is not available.
