269. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,
April 26, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,
Do not be alarmed. Though I reply to your letter so pro-
mptly, it is not by way of courtesy, but for pleasure; for, I do
not yield to you in my zeal for dietetic reform. Only my lot
having been during the last 20 years cast in a rigid mould, I have
not been able to wriggle out of it in spite of my intense desire
to prosecute dietetic research. But now that nature had laid me
low, the appetite which was never eradicated, but was only under
suppression, has become active and I go for everything in this
direction with avidity.
Now to the point. For the last two days I have made one
important change prompted by a fellow crank. He suggested my
taking the juice of fresh neem leaves by mixing it with milk. He
says my case is not one of blood-pressure but of flatulence. Blood-
pressure there certainly is; but I am inclined to agree with this
friend, that blood-pressure is a temporary effect of flatulence which
is the root cause, and he thinks I could deal with the latter by
taking the juice of neem leaves with my meals. These leaves are
bitter. He says they contain the necessary vitamins. I am watch-
ing their effect now. Your letter was received yesterday and the
change I have made today is to take unboiled milk. This was
suggested by some medical friends at Amboli. But I was not re-
sponsive. But your letter has evoked the necessary response. My
hosts have brought some goats on to this hill and they are milked
under supervision. Milk was therefore brought this morning fresh
from the udders. It was mixed with neem leaves juice and hot
raisin water was added to the milk. This in accordance with
your letter gives me the vitamins from the milk and in accordance
with that friend gives me the vitamins from the neem leaves. I
am therefore at the present moment omitting fresh vegetables be-
cause I am not yet satisfied that these vegetables are necessary
especially as I am taking those bitter leaves and unboiled milk. At
what point are vitamins destroyed when you boil leafy vegetables?
What is the virtue of vitamins? What is the quantity of leafy
vegetables one should take in order to get the required measure
of vitamins? What quantity of unboiled milk will give the vitamins
required? Is it true that mere heating the milk does not destroy
vitamins? Or they are only destroyed when milk is brought to
the boiling point?
I have tried the nuts in the manner you suggest. I had
them reduced to butter. The pulp was as fine as butter. I had
almonds turned into milk. But I could not cope with it, no
matter how far you pulverized the nuts. They must, it appears,
pass through the double process of digestion like all non-flesh
foods. It is only animal food which does not tax the large in-
testines. Before nuts, therefore, can attain the digestibility of milk,
the first process of digestion must be gone through outside the
human system. I was told when I was in London, that melted
nuts had that effect. I do not know how far this is true. I
want to succeed in non-milk experiment because I am convinced
that milk, apart from mother's milk, is not human food, nor is
cooking essential. A perfect food therefore for human needs has
yet to be found. From the spiritual stand-point, I have a horror
of animal milk, and that it is goat's milk I am taking does not
lessen the horror. It merely enables me to respect the letter of
my vow, though I know that the spirit of it is hardly kept if
not already broken. I have reconciled myself to goat's milk under
the delusive belief that I must live for my work on the earth
in this body and so I cling to it at the expense of my innermost
conviction. He, therefore, who can wean me from milk, will be
in a way a deliverer. There are spiritual experiences which I
know have been interrupted because of my taking milk. When
I was living rigidly on sun-baked fruits and sun-baked nuts without
using fire and this was for several years-the animal passion was
not merely under conscious subjection and control, but it was, so
far as my memory serves me, thoroughly absent and I believe that
I had almost entirely conquered it. All that has been changed
since my return to milk diet. I can no longer claim that im-
munity. I can only say in all humility that though I am con-
scious of that passion, I can keep it under subjection and appear
before the world a respectable human being from whose lust no
woman need fear. But it costs me all my strength to keep the
brute in me under disciplined subjection and control. I am posi-
tive that a full-grown man does not need all that effort to keep
his passions under check. On the contrary, the energy that is set
free when the passions are kept under control can, if he wishes,
be transferred into unconquerable power for the good of mankind.
But somehow or other, I fancy that I shall never attain that free-
dom, that personal swaraj, so long as I have to struggle against
the effect of the highly exciting unnatural food; whereas, nuts are
fine muscle builders without being stimulants in the sense in
which I have used them. Now you can understand why I reply
to your letter so promptly.
It is a great pity that you have not yet got rid of your piles.
No mere dietetic change will give you relief. Medicine will be
only a palliative. I am making explorations into which I must
not enter now, because, I am merely on the threshold of them.
I am collecting round me friends who have experimented. I
shall give you a report if I see any signs of real success. It hurts
me however to think that you did not have an operation for want
of means. Dr. Ansari is a first-class surgeon. I could send a
note to him if you don't know him. He will, I am sure, gladly
perform the operation and put you either in his own house or in
some place where you will have to pay nothing. You could also
have the operation performed by one of the cleverest of surgeons
in India, that is, Dr. Dalal in Bombay. There are not one but
more than one hospitals that I know will admit you with greatest
pleasure. You may not know that Dr. Dalal operated on me,
Devdas, Mrs. Jamnalalji and, last but not the least, Andrews. You
have only to let me know what arrangements you would like and
they shall be made. Do not hesitate please to write to me of
your discoveries about the spinning-wheel and machinery. Of
course I am interested in your scholastic researches, and, as a matter
of fact, this enforced rest gives me just the time to read letters
and to reflect upon topics in which both you and I are interested.
From the length of the dictated letter you can infer that I am
not badly off though I need to lie on my back as much as possible.
There is no difficulty about dictating letters and even sitting up
for a time to write as I did yesterday, it being my silence day.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
R. B. GREGG, ESQ.
CARE OF S.E. STOKES, ESQ.
KOTGARH, SIMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 12571
