21. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]
April 15, 1913
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 10th instant, in reply to mine of the 1st instant, on the
question of Indian marriages.
With due deference to the Hon'ble the Minister of the
Interior, it is respectfully submitted that the Searle judgment, if
my reading of it is correct, lays down a definitely new principle.
Hitherto non-Christian Indian marriages have been recognized both
by the Immigration Department and the Master of the Supreme
Court. Issue of persons married according to the rites of their
respective faiths, but not before Marriage Officers, have been hither-
to accepted in intestate estates as lawful heirs. But such issue
could not, according to the Searle judgment, be now so recognized.
The Master of the Supreme Court, Natal Provincial Division, has
already, as will appear from the report enclosed herewith, raised
the question.
I am aware that the marriages registered before Marriage
Officers have not necessarily to be Christian marriages. But the
vast majority of non-Christian Indian marriages have never taken
place before Marriage Officers. All these and the marriages cele-
brated and considered by the Indian law to be legal in India, of
Indians lawfully resident in the Union, seem to be adversely affected
by the Searle judgment.
I trust that the Government do not expect that these marriages
should be solemnized or registered before Marriage Officers in the
Union, in order that they might be accepted as valid in the eye
of the law here. I gratefully acknowledge the consideration that
the Government propose to show by directing Immigration Officers
not to disturb the existing practice. But the relief that would be
thus afforded would not sufficiently meet the case if only because
no administrative action can deal with the legal consequences that
are sure to arise from the Searle judgment.
In my letter, I did not raise the question of plurality of wives.
That question does not affect vast issues as the one raised by the
Searle judgment does. But as your letter seems to imply that
South African law does not recognize plurality of wives, I may be
permitted to draw the Minister's attention to Act 2 of 1907 (Natal)
which countenances the practice among indentured Indians. I
refer to Sections 6 and 7 of the Act which I copy and enclose here-
with for the information of the Minister.
In my humble opinion, the issue raised by the Searle judgment
can be effectively dealt with only by amending the marriage laws
of the Union so as to legalize marriages celebrated according to the
rites of non-Christian religions and performed before non-Chris-
tian priests.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5768
