218. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 25, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I send with this the letters written by . . .1 to . . .2 which
have come into my hands. All of them were received in one enve-
lope on the same day. You may read them if you wish. I send
them for . . .3 to read. After he has seen them, send the letters
to . . .4. I have kept copies with me. I have promised to return
the letters to . . . . Only so is it our duty to send them back to
him. Otherwise he has no right to them. It is only a question
of keeping my promise.
The wound which has been inflicted on me has still not healed,
but I do not brood over the matter either. I cannot think much
about anything just now except the work for the removal of un-
touchability. It helps me to forget all my sorrows. But whenever
I have to think about . . .'s conduct, the wound revives and
reminds me that it has not healed.
Though . . . wrote such letters, he says that he did not wish
to marry . . . , but only wanted to cure her of the desire to
marry him. He admits that the evidence of the letters proves the
contrary but says that he will prove his statement by his future
conduct. I have lost my trust in him, however, and that is what
pains me most.
I have now told . . . that he should return to the Ashram
as soon as his health has improved and in future scrupulously
observe all the rules of the Ashram. I have also told him that he
should stop enjoying whatever freedom he enjoyed till now, and
that he should excel all the others in observing the rules. He has
unreservedly promised to do all this. If he does not keep his word,
he cannot continue to live in the Ashram. I know that you can keep
a strict watch in such matters. Do so. Give him whatever work
you like. He should always have his meals in the common kitchen
and should have no relations with any girl.
This is my personal view. . . . has proved by his conduct
that he is not fit to live in the Ashram. But he will not reform
outside the Ashram nor can we know whether he has reformed.
I do believe that we should give him the opportunity which he
desires. But it is possible that all of you there hold a different view.
I think it is our duty to respect . . .1' s wishes in this matter. If he
feels that there is a risk in letting . . . remain in the Ashram, the
latter certainly cannot remain. I would not at all be pained if he
thought so. But even if he agrees with me, do consult the Com-
mittee and, if all of you feel that my view is morally correct, let
. . . remain. I have had a frank talk with . . and he has pro-
mised that he will take . . . with him and return to the Ashram.
Even if she falls ill there, he will not take her anywhere else. He
believes that we should be content with whatever treatment is pos-
sible in the Ashram. It goes without saying that I fully agree with
this view. That is the only course which is in keeping with our
vow of poverty. . . .3 will, therefore, have my fullest support. But
this means that both . . . and . . . will live in the Ashram. . . .4
has no objection to that. I also see no danger. I don't think . . .
will make a mistake again. And, moreover, everybody will be
vigilant now.
Let all the boys and girls learn a lesson from this episode, and
the grown-ups too. If any of them has impure feelings towards
another or if any two have secret relations, they should confess to
you orally or in a letter. We respect the privacy of everybody's
correspondence. But I think it absolutely essential for the ideal of
the Ashram that nobody should have secret relations with any-
body. It has been my experience over many years that such rela-
tions militate against purity of character. I hope you have shown
all my letters on those subject to . . .5. Other senior inmates also
may read them.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8341. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
