226. LETTER TO DR. ABDURRAHMAN
[LONDON,]
August 23, 1909
DEAR DR. ABDURRAHMAN,
Please accept my sympathy as also congratulations in connection
with your mission; my sympathy because you have got nothing sub-
stantially; my congratulations because no deputation deserves success
as yours did, on account alike of the inherent justice of your cause and the
solid work that you put forth. Mr. Schreiner has undoubtedly worked
sincerely and like a giant.
That no amendment would be made in the Draft Bill was a fore-
gone conclusion. One may derive whatever satisfaction is to be had from
the fact of almost every member having regretted the insertion of a racial
bar in an Imperial Statute-book; neither you nor I can live upon
regrets. You are busy, so am I. Were I not busy, I should certainly have
come down to you to offer what consolation I could, and yet I know
that real consolation has to come from within. I can but recall to you
the conversation we had on board. You are disappointed (if you are);
you expected something from the Parliament or the British public, but
why should you expect anything from them, if you expect nothing from
yourself.
I promised to send you Thoreau's Duty of Civil Disobedience. I
have not been able to procure it; I am writing for it to-day and hope
to send it before you are off.
All I can add is a prayer that you may have the strength for it and
ability to continue the work in South Africa along internal reform,
1 This meeting was to take place on August 21; vide "Letter to H. S. L. Polak",
p.362.
and, therefore, passive resistance, even though, in the beginning, you
may be only a handful.
If you can possibly look in, please do so. Come down tomorrow
if you are free and we shall go then to the Vegetarian Restaurant to-
gether and talk away. You will also be introduced to Dr. Mehta of
Rangoon, who is staying at this hotel. We shall wait for you until
5 minutes to one at the hotel.
Yours sincerely,
DR. ABDURRAHMAN
38, LONGRIDGE ROAD
EARLS COURT, S.W.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5024
