185. LETTER TO PARAMANAND KUNVARJI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Asadha Sud 10, July 20, 1926
BHAISHRI PARAMANAND,
I have your letter. I understand your point about the use of
words and am well aware of the value of precision. The use of
the same word in different senses leads to a good deal of misunder-
standing, but I think it is not difficult to understand the general
purport of my writings.
In regard to Madhuri, you are to blame. Having placed our
children in a certain atmosphere, is it not surprising indeed that
we believe or wish that they will remain untouched by it? I come
across instances of this everywhere. You should now remove
Madhuri and place her in an atmosphere of simplicity, if you do
not wish her to become fashion-loving. But to keep her where she
is and then insist that she should not wear foreign cloth has a
strong smell of coercion about it.
On the issue of principle which you have raised in connection
with Madhuri, my view is that parents should exercise control over
children. We cannot let them do everything they will. Our wis-
dom lies in keeping them under control with the least restraint over
them. If a child runs in the direction of a well, or wants to eat
a rich and stimulating preparation or would indulge in over-
eating, if it asks for bhajiyan 1 and puri 2 when it is running a tempera-
ture-in all such instances we should resist the child's wish. This
is also true about matters involving moral principles.
But the problem of husband and wife is on a different footing,
and an extremely difficult one to solve. What happens when, in a
non-vegetarian family, the husband becomes a vegetarian as a
matter of religious principle? Should the wife follow, against her
will, what the husband has accepted as his dharma? I think
that the husband, if he has overcome his lust, should maintain an
attitude of detachment and even help the wife to have her non-
vegetarian food. If the wife cannot go out to buy such food for
herself and if the husband, though still not free from lust, has given
up meat-eating, etc., as a matter of religious principle, the latter
may, because he has not been able to impose discipline over him-
self in regard to the first matter, cut off relations with his wife and
provide her with money to enable her to live apart from him. If
she wants to marry some other person belonging to their own
religion, the husband should not oppose her but, on the contrary,
help her. This is what my creed of non-violence suggests to me.
Such a course of action will satisfy many principles simulta-
neously, but we can deduce all of them from the principle of
non-violence.
It is now easy to see how a husband, who has adopted khadi
as a matter of religious principle, should act towards his wife who
does not follow him. This is not the end of the matter, though.
In Hindu society, the husband is regarded as his wife's friend, and
also as her teacher and guardian. If he understands his duty in
that capacity, his duty as a husband which I have explained above
will have to be modified somewhat. But I need not enter into a
discussion of that.
PS.
I have put the matter so briefly here that I should not like
public use to be made of this letter.
SHRI PARAMANAND KUNVARJI
137, SHARAF BAZAAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10966
