187. LETTER TO W. V. HULSTEYN
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 17, 1907
SIR WILLEM VAN HULSTEYN, M. L. A.
P. O. Box 46
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
16th instant regarding the letter addressed to you by the Assistant
Honorary Secretary of the British Indian Association on the 14th instant.
You have been pleased to advise the community represented by my
Association to assist in carrying out the laws of this Colony. I beg to draw
your attention to the fact that, hitherto, the community has always done
so, and it will continue to do so, whenever such laws do not put on the
community an unwarranted affront and do not wound its religious sus-
ceptibilities. To the Asiatic Registration Act, British Indians have un-
doubtedly been advised by my Association not to submit, because, in
my humble opinion, it is their duty first to submit to a higher law, namely,
that which dictates to mankind an idea of self-respect and respect for
declarations solemnly and sincerely made. To accept the Registration
Act, in my humble opinion, takes away every vestige of manliness from
Indians and would make them godless, and it was in order to invite
your attention to this fundamental issue that the letter of the 14th instant
was addressed to you. It would be childish for any responsible British
Indian to advise the community to enter upon a life-and-death struggle
and to be prepared to sacrifice all their material wealth for the sake of
avoiding finger impressions.
My Association is quite aware of the threat you have seen fit to
use in your address—the subject-matter of this correspondence—and to
repeat in your letter under reply, but I hope you will pardon me for
saying that it loses its force on those who have never concealed from
themselves the fact that the Government is not only strong enough to
enforce the Law but that it has declared its intention so to do. Whether
such enforcement of the Law will redound to its credit, or whether, if my
countrymen remain firm, all the credit will be due to them for undergoing
unmerited suffering is a question which can safely be left to posterity
to decide.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
HONORARY SECRETARY,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 28-9-1907
