251. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[April 19, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I tried to write to you yesterday but could not. I had to
devote all my time to Young India.
Do not hesitate to give me even the smallest details about
developments there. I must know them. Maganlal did not write to
me every day. Sometimes he did not write to me at all. He knew
my ideas; and I also see that, out of false pity for me or for other
reasons, he did not acquaint me with many of the defects in people.
We need not, however, copy anyone's shortcomings. Maganlal's
unwavering faith, his burying himself in the Ashram and his cease-
less vigilance, etc., were virtues worthy of emulation. We know
the truth now. Think it a sin to keep back anything from me.
What more shocks can I feel now?
I have already written to you something about M. I
wished to write immediately he came and saw me but did not. He
declared his innocence on oath, and so I remained quiet and
told him: "You may now work as you wish and on your own
responsibility. Having told you of my suspicion, I have done my
duty."
You should, therefore, entertain no suspicion about M.
now. He is a mature and experienced person; he may do
what he thinks best. If he makes a mistake or sins, others will be
free from guilt but will be stained in some measure because M.
is a co-worker. We need not keep that girl in the Mandir. The
experiment of the Mandir is full of dangers, so is that of M.
Yashodabehn should certainly leave, if you have no doubt
about her being guilty of falsehood. If Surajbhan presses you and
you let her stay, I will not find fault with you. I wrote to you
the day before yesterday. The ideas expressed in that letter have
become stronger. Let Surajbhan and Yashodabehn live together,
as Nanubhai and Dahibehn do. Both should work. I suggest that a
similar arrangement should be made for Sitla Sahai and Sarojini-
behn. You may, if you wish to, resolve not to admit any more
couples. If you admit any, they may live together on condition
that they promise to observe brahmacharya. If they wish, they may,
though living together, sleep in separate beds and avoid being alone
with each other; if they do not wish to do that, we should not lay
down a rule that they must. If they fall, they will leave.
You are right in deciding that the buildings which fall vacant
should be given to some others to occupy. It is also right that
the tenants should try to observe the rules. We should not bind
ourselves to supply them milk, provisions, etc., nor to keep watch
to protect their residences. We may supply them milk if we can
spare any. In brief, I see no harm in letting the buildings to these
new tenants on the same condition on which Budhabhai lives as
our neighbour. I see that we shall have to narrow the Mandir's
field. That is also to the good. I have written this after only a
moment's reflection; you should, therefore, fill in the details which
may have been left out. Discuss the matter with Mahadev who is
there.
I am surprised by Mahavir Poddar's letter. He himself had
asked for more khadi to be sent. I will write to him. Mean-
while, don't send him any more khadi now. You should tell him
that it was at my instance that you had sent him what you did.
There is a wire from Mahadev today saying that he has written
a letter. I shall think over the matter after I receive the letter. I
will not force even him to remain. That would not be for his good.
Only those who will remain even after others have left should
think of staying on. Do not discuss even this among yourselves.
We have discussed things long enough. I suppose you have read
the story of the Pandavas' final journey. One brother after an-
other became exhausted. It is a wonderful story. In our Ashram,
too, those who get exhausted will remain behind. Nor will it be
that those who get exhausted are on a lower level and the others
on a higher. Everyone should act according to his strength. Before
you take in more cows, ask Parnerkar what his mental state is. If
he is unperturbed and if he has courage, he may certainly have
more cattle.
I am not at all disturbed by reading about the theft of yarn,
etc. I have not been foolish enough to hope that the Chhaganlal
episode will set everything right immediately.
I send you the tour programme. Show it to Mahadev.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5559
