133. LETTER TO J. GHOSAL
SABARMATI,
March 9, 1918
DEAR MR. GHOSAL,
I had a visit early this morning from some of the Kathana
cultivators. They brought with them a batch of chothai notices. I
was somewhat taken aback as I had felt that even though you
might insist upon collection, no chothai or khalsa orders would
be issued. I have no justification for this except the feeling
that as you permitted me to continue my negotiations about
the crops in Kaira District no coercion would be used even if
finally collection was decided upon where postponement was
urged. I have therefore telegraphed appealing for cancellation of
the orders above referred to. I hope my appeal will have a
favourable reception from you. I have taken the liberty, too, as
the matter is so very important, of sending a telegram to the
Secretariat at Bombay.
I now come to Wadthal. I thank you for your letter in reply
to my query as to the deduction of double-cropped area. If
for a field which normally grew a kharif as well as a rabi crop
the assessment was based on this fact, in my opinion the crop
would be only 16 annas for that field or a group of similar fields
in a village, if it gave 16 annas both of kharif and rabi.
The process of deducting the double-cropped area could only
be justified if you held that the field that gave 16 annas of kharif
crop should be estimated to have given more than 16 annas to
the extent of its rabi crop thus leading to the reductio ad absur-
dum suggested by my letter of the 6th instant.
I wholly accept the argument that in finding the annawari
there can be no fieldwise calculation except as a sample. And on
that ground I venture to suggest that the rabi crop as a rule ought
not to be taken into consideration, because it is not a general
crop. If 90 fields of every 100 grow only a kharif crop and have
no rabi and if the rabi crop, where grown, be 16 annas, it would be
a false average annawari for the hundred fields if the rabi crop for
the purpose of annawari is a negligible quantity. The staple
crops are undoubtedly kharif crops and in my humble opinion,
agriculturists get less than justice when in order to collect revenue
assessments annawari is forced up by taking the rabi into account.
Indeed my observations supported by my fellow-workers now cover
nearly 350 villages and they lead me to think that the cultivators
pay their assessment from the kharif crops and not out of the
rabi. No intelligent observer can escape noticing as he passes from
field to field that the rabi crops are like an oasis in a big desert.
It may be added that not all the fields of individual culti-
vators can be laid under rabi cultivation. The season and crop
report for the year 1914-15 shows that the rabi crop was only a
twelfth and for 1915-16 twentieth of all the other crops. I would
venture to suggest too that crops such as spices, vegetables, variali,
etc., which are grown only by a few cultivators ought not to be
taken into account. I would put cotton, too, in the same cate-
gory until it becomes a general crop among the agriculturists.
It would be obviously unfair to put up the annawari of the
village because a big land-holder carrying on bold experiments
has succeeded in growing special crops. I desire, too, to protest
against the strip grass being included in the calculation. I am
told that it is not usual to sell this grass, but that people have
as a matter of necessity to keep the borders to allow their cattle
to turn about at the end of every journey from one direction to
the other. If the object of arriving at the annawari, viz., relief
to the average cultivator if his crops have not yielded . . .1 be
kept steadily in view, I submit that this argument would appear
to be unanswerable.
I had indeed begged of you to visit Wadthal and test the
valuation for yourself. But I had at the same time begged that
I should accompany you. I would then have been able to place
before you the cultivators' standpoint as I had seen it. For ins-
tance, I would certainly have matched Mr. Muljibhai Amin's
testimony and shown that his could well be treated as biased. I would
have brought you face to face with the . . .2 who would have
told you that the annawari arrived at by them was 3 during
the month of December last. I would have got the people to
produce for your inspection juvar pods in abundance to show you
1 & 2 The source is damaged here.
3 Heads or panicles are meant.
that they were not only eaten up by rats but that they were
attacked by some serious disease. The juvar in some of the fields
does indeed look tall and majestic, but an examination of the pods
tells a different tale.
It gives me pleasure to confess that you have bestowed much
pains on the production of your report. But I respectfully sub-
mit that based as it is originally upon the Mamlatdar's figure its
does [not] do sufficient justice to the cultivators. In my humble
opinion the mamlatdar's annawari is totally at variance with the
almost universal testimony of the villagers some of whom have
a reputation to lose. It is impossible for me to impute either
untrustworthiness to them or thoughtlessness. I am strongly sup-
ported in my view by Mr. Batukshanker of Nadiad who is himself
a considerable land-holder and who is one of the most respectable
straightforward men in the Kaira District. He has not said any-
thing about Wadthal but his land is in a condition no less advan-
tageous than the best in Wadthal and yet his annawari brings
him under the suspension rules. I cannot help remarking
that your annawari of tuwar, kodra, rice, bavte, sherian, tobacco,
divela and gram is too high. I venture to suggest they are . . .1
4, 2, 2, 5, 4, 6, 5, 2, 4. Acceptance of my figures brings the
annawari under the suspension rules. And if you accept my submis-
sion that only the staple crops should be valued, retention of your
annawari in respect of them brings the average to less than 6.
Again if the double-cropped area were not deducted the annawari
would be less than 6 retaining . . .2 figures. Thirdly, if the rabi
crops and the uncommon crops were exempted from the calcula-
tion as submitted by me the annawari would be under 6. I
have before me a list carefully prepared in consultation with the
villagers giving the actual yield of all the crops and the normal
yield. It will be admitted that if the figures are correct it will
be the most absolute test. The annawari for this village arrived
at by this process is 2.. I adhere to my suggestion that the rabi
crop including the other standing crop can be easily utilized for
testing the accuracy of the figures given by the cultivators. I
have suggested to the people of Wadthal that they should not
remove the standing crops from the threshing-floors except after
duly weighing them in the presence of independent witnesses. I
venture to submit that it is worth while your testing the Wadthal
crops in this fashion.
Might I also draw your attention to the fact that the
annawari for the kharif crops arrived at by the Hon. Messrs. Go-
kuldas Parekh and Patel and also Mr. Deolker and his party was
under 4 annas. So that if my contention about the kharif crops
be accepted for purposes of finding the true annawari, you have
the results of my investigation for nearly 350 villages corrobo-
rated by two other independent investigations. You will observe
that my investigation embraces all the talukas and covers a large
number of villages in each taluka, and I have no hesitation
in asking for full suspension in respect of all but a few of . . .1
cases the first instalment have already been paid and here I
wish parenthetically to draw attention to the fact that in some
villages even though half-suspension orders were issued both the
instalments were collected from small holders. I therefore sug-
gest that the villages where the first instalment had already been
received, suspension order should be issued for the second instal-
ment. Though you may be precluded from considering any cause
for granting suspension other than the failure of crops to the
extent of 12 annas I would suggest for the consideration of the
Government the fact that the people of the District have been
hardest hit perhaps by the plague which is raging furiously in it,
which has decimated many a home and which has driven many
people from their houses on to temporary grass structures, built at,
for them, considerable expense. In my humble opinion, your
argument about the high prices is not fair to the people. It is
common cause between us that last year has been very poor for
the cultivators. They have not certainly had much grain for sale.
Whilst therefore they have received little or no advantage from
the high prices they have been considerably disadvantaged by them
as they had to buy food and clothing. Taking therefore everything
into consideration even if full suspension be not granted I hope that
the Government will be pleased to grant at least half suspension in
every case, and if these orders are passed I shall try my utmost
to secure without coercion payment of the first instalment from
the villages which have hitherto held out.
There still remains the case of the Daskroi villages. There
can be no doubt whatsoever that flood did an irreparable da-
mage to their crops and they are entitled to relief under the
Local Calamities section. You were pleased to tell me that you
were not inclined to grant suspension where the cultivators had
grown rabi crops. I repeat what I submitted to you at the inter-
1 The source is damaged here.
view that if you exempt from suspension orders those who have
grown rabi crops you would be punishing industry. They have
told me and I believe their statement that those who have
grown rabi are actually out of pocket and are therefore worse off
than those who never grow it at all. I have inspected the rabi
crop and I have no hesitation in saying that though the patches
of green look tempting to the eye, closer inspection shows that
the crops are diseased and will yield very little and in any case
I presume you will admit that it is only on limited areas that
the occupants have grown rabi crop on their fields.
I admit that the Kaira District is naturally "rich and pros-
perous", its cattle are in a good condition, it has great wealth in
its majestic trees. But I fear very much that the District has been
progressively going down in prosperity. Their ill-kept, dilapidated
houses, their empty barns, and probably the awful destruction
that is going on of trees and evidence I possess of the sale of
their cattle unmistakably point to the decline in their prosperity.
A few more lean years can certainly undo this fair land.
I do not know how far the failure of crops is responsible
for the destruction of mohwa trees and how far it is due to
the Mohwa Act and how far it is due to the greed to get high
prices for coal and wood, for both of which the Mohwa tree is
so handy. Whatever may be the cause I do hope that the Gov-
ernment will remove from the people at least for the time be-
ing the fear of the Mohwa Act. I wish further to suggest that
during the summer season and during the monsoon hundreds of
people in the District would be hard put to it for food and it
would be an act of simple justice to permit the fullest use of
Mohwa flowers for their food. It would be cruelty to enforce the
Act during this year. To recapitulate,
(a) In my opinion by a variety of ways your minimum
annawari for Wadthal has been successfully challenged and it is
less than 4 annas; the case for the large majority of the villa-
ges in the District is similar to Wadthal and therefore the culti-
vators are entitled to full suspension;
(b) If however my suggestion as to annawari be not ac-
cepted I pray that the Government may be pleased to grant
half-suspension all round in view (1) of the admittedly partial
failure of crops and (2) of the distress caused amongst the people
by the plague and the high prices, and if this relief is granted
I am prepared to advise holders of sanadia lands and others who
are well off to pay both the instalments voluntarily. This will
confine the relief only to those who are in actual distress;
(c) For Daskroi villages over and above the relief by way
of suspension, the Local Calamities section should be fully ap-
plied to them;
(d) The operation of the Mohwa Act should be suspen-
ded and the fact widely made known to the people so that in
so far as the Act is an inducement to cut down the trees they
may be saved, and so that they may be enabled to make use
of Mohwa flowers for food.
May I request you to pass this letter on to the Govern-
ment with, if possible, favourable recommendation from you.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10647. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
