173. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
September 20, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I got your letter only yesterday whilst I was talking to the
friends who came to see me. I am now replying to it at the
earliest opportunity. I thank you for your letter.
My position is this: My fast has reference only to separate
electorate. As soon as that is withdrawn the letter of the vow
will be satisfied and I would be bound to call off the fast. But
a very heavy responsibility will then lie upon me of having a
substitute that is infinitely superior to separate electorate.
If you will not resent my saying it, I would like to say that
as I am a "touchable" by birth, I am an "untouchable" by choice.
And it was in this dual capacity that I wrote to Sir Samuel
Hoare and then the Prime Minister. It is that dual capacity
that has compelled the fast. Looking at the matter in this light
I must say that I am not in love with the idea of statutory re-
servation. Whilst it is not open to the same objection that sepa-
rate electorate is, I have not a shadow of a doubt that it will
prevent the natural growth of the suppressed classes and will
remove the incentive to honourable amends from the suppressors.
What I am aiming at is a heart understanding between the two,
the greatest opportunity of repentance and reparation on the part,
of the suppressors. I am certain that the moment is ripe for
the change of heart among them. I would therefore favour
widest possible franchise for the suppressed and establish a con-
vention between the two sections for securing proper election of
representatives of the suppressed. I have drafted a rough ten-
tative scheme which I handed to the friends and which I ex-
plained fully yesterday to my son Devdas. But to me this is
not the largest but it is the least part of the reform I want.
Nothing will satisfy me till the last vestige of untouchability is
gone. I would therefore insist on a statutory declaration that all
public places of worship, wells, schools, etc., should be open to
the suppressed precisely on the same terms as the suppressors.
This is roughly my idea. If, however, the representatives of
suppressed classes will not look at my idea, they are at liberty
to have statutory reservation of seats. I should not fast against it
but you will not expect me to bless any such scheme. Nor is
my blessing essential to its acceptance by the Government. If I
get the opportunity, I should certainly try to create public opi-
nion among the suppressed against statutory reservation.
If my position is not clear or satisfactory, I would be delighted
to meet you and other friends including R. B. Raja and Dr.
Ambedkar by appointment. As you are aware this has become
possible only now.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 783. Also The Epic Fast, pp. 168-
