248. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
5.30 a.m., Silence Day, December 2, 1929
CHI. MIRA,
I am writing this after having taken the weekly silence. I
have all your letters and wire. I have also your notes for Young
India. One will appear [in] the coming issue. It was crowded
out this time.
That you are now keeping normal health gives me relief. I
hope there will be no setback now.
Mathuradas has introduced a new method of carding. I am
trying to learn it.
Dr. and Mrs. Sherwood Eddy and Mr. and Mrs. Kirkley
Page are coming tomorrow. I wish you could have met them.
I expect to find them extra-good.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
You are likely to meet Mahadev before this reaches you.
Then he will give you all the news.
I have read your two notes-railway travelling and violence .
You have begun the second on the same sheet where the first
ends. This is inconvenience for me and the compositor. A sepa-
rate note should be commenced on a separate sheet. Tom-tom is
a drum, a gharry is called and spelt turn-turn. The two notes
will go in. In one place I have corrected what appeared to me
loose thought, in another an irrelevant mention of events. You
will perhaps detect both the corrections. There are a few minor
ones. Though the notes are going, they are not for you up to
the mark. There is ample room for improvement. Perhaps
when you see yourself in cold print, you will realize it yourself.
Therefore do not attempt to be regular. Concentrate on what you
want to write and rewrite it ten times if you like, till at least you
can say to yourself you can make no further improvement. For
the time being you must write not to relieve my immediate pres-
sure, but to replace me in future.
The pressure is already re-
moved. Valji has given me matter of which I am able to take for
the current week only one-sixth. Coomarappa's and Mahadev's
contributions you have seen.
BAPU
[PPS.]
You are quite correct in having decided for yourself about
Monghyr.
From the original: C.W. 5382. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9438
