83. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
January 6, 1919
I suppose I must get used to having ups and downs and
not feel any the worse for them, because it appears that before I
have done with this protracted illness I am likely still to have
many ups and downs. Just at the present moment I seem to be all
right. The hypodermic injections to which I thought I must
reconcile myself are producing the expected results. They are
intended to whet my appetite and I must confess that my food
today is the envy of a gourmand, both as to quantity and quality.
But no one knows when I may have a set-back. I dare say a careful
observer could even cast a table and prognosticate the next re-
lapse and the others to follow. I am under the hands of a very
eminent doctor. He wants to give 15 injections out of which he
has given four. The prospect before me is therefore by no means
very pleasant and the needle-pricks are decidedly unpleasant.
What are we not prepared to bear in order that we may live?
I observe that the Bishop of Calcutta is dead. It must be a
great wrench for you, but I suppose it is well that he is free from
pain. So far as my convenience is concerned your having sent
Miss Faering to Bolpur was all right. But I did consider your
action impulsive. As you assure me that she entirely filled your
place I can have nothing more to say. But I felt upon Miss
Faering's letter that she could not very well take the higher
English classes, or for that matter, even the lower classes at
Shantiniketan. I suppose there is nothing insurmountable for one
possessing the faith that Miss Faering does abundantly and she has
succeeded where thousands would have failed. Has she taken her
discharge from the Danish Mission, because you talk of her com-
ing to me after her finishing Bolpur. If she has got her discharge
without causing any bad feeling it is a great thing. I am in
Bombay at least up to the 15th. I shall then have to consider the
propriety of my going to Colombo. You need not worry about
my election as a Congress delegate. I have not come to any final
conclusion. When the actuality faces me, I know that the way
will be as clear to me as the blue skies. I am, therefore, "careful
for nothing". I am not anxious to go as a deputee, but I shall
not avoid the task if I must perform it. I hope you are doing
well.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
