60. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
August 26, 1911
MY DEAR HENRY,
The same mail has brought letters from you and Or. Mehta about
the incident described by you. But like you, Dr. Mehta too mentions
that the little storm blew over. I will therefore not comment beyond
saying that I hope you will practise what you in your letter have desired
— to enter into other people's feelings. You will need to do that more
and more as we progress.
You may spend up to £800. That I think will be enough. I am
not without some anxiety as to your Indian tour from a health point
of view. But by a careful dietary, you should all be able to keep good
health. The cold weather season in India is certainly not bad. What
I dread is your laziness and easy-going nature when there is no
resistance. You brought a corporation with you as a result. Many people
will invite you. You are not the person to walk to your hosts, nor could
you with the children. And you would hardly resist dishes made of
Kosher food. Can Millie alone then resist? With you two gone, Heaven
help the poor children. If you will therefore make a promise to
yourselves as to what even in the Kosher department you would avoid,
you would save a lot of trouble. Don't you say to yourself 'vows for
the weak'. That is a prompting of the devil. All the greatest men have
adopted vows. Believe me, to be able to take a vow denotes a high
degree of strength. I do not care to enter into details. But generally
let the children and indeed you yourselves live principally if not
entirely on fruit and farinaceous foods avoiding entirely pulses and sweets
1 Presumably, Bhartrihari Shataka, a collection of three hundred stanzas by
Bhartrihari, a celebrated Sanskrit poet and king; vide also Vol. XI, p. 142.
whether European or Indian. I see death in chocolates. There [are]
few substances so heating as the abominable chocolate - that cursed
product of devilish slave labour. To give tea and coffee to children
in India is to give them poison.
I know that all of us cannot possibly give time to schooling. It
is likely that you may not be able to do so. But if we have more
hands than enough for the press, some of us could easily give time.
So long as I am in S.A. and free from the turmoil of passive resistance
and the miserable business of law, I should be able to give the main
part of my time to education as I am now doing. Purshottamdas has
given certain hours steadily to the work. Chh[aganlal] is now giving
I think an hour per day. Miss West could be entirely spared for the
purpose not of teaching but of looking after the boarding pupils. West
certainly is anxious to give a certain portion of his time. Miss Schlesin
may come only for that purpose. Maganlal could qualify. And later
Harilal and Manilal are possibilities. Miss Schlesin has accepted a
temporary post as a teacher in the Government school at Mayfair. More
when you are here and fairly settled. The Trust Deed has already been
sent to you.
With love to you all,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
