416. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
December 25, 1933
BA,
You must have got the long letter which I wrote to you last
Monday. This Monday we are in Sitanagaram. It is situated
on the banks of the Godavari. It is a small village, in Andhra-
desha, and has an ashram in it. Being a village, it is complete-
ly peaceful. We came here in a boat. The river is quite big and,
therefore, small steamers can sail on it. We visited Madras and
spent three days there. Sastri was of course there. I met Jethalal.
Gangabhabhi lives in the city itself. I met Jethalal's wife,
too. Both are in good health. Jethalal gets a pay of Rs. 150 and
is, therefore, quite happy. I met Urmiladevi's son also. There was
a large number of visitors. Lakshmi is quite well. Papa also is in
Madras. Lakshmi stayed with me all the three days. She was
happy in the company of Mirabehn, Kisan and Om. We shall
be meeting once again, for my tour of that part is incomplete. My
health is all right. I was again examined by two doctors. There
is, therefore, no reason at all for you to worry about me. Have
397
Dahibehn's teeth improved? Do you get the Jam-e-Jamshed?
You asked for something like a discourse. I think I must give
you one today.
The chapters of the Gita recited today were IX, X, XI and
XII. In Chapter IX, the Lord says that those who worship Him
attain to Him. In Chapter XII, He explains who should be called
a bhakta. 2 The beauty of the description is that it does not con-
tain any quality which even the most ignorant person cannot culti-
vate. Any man or woman who strives unaided by another can be-
come a bhakta and be one with the Lord. The qualities mentioned
are these. The bhakta has ill will for nobody but is a friend of all
and has compassion for all; he has no feeling of personal attach-
ment towards anything or anybody, is devoid of ego, is equal-mind-
ed to happiness and unhappiness and is of a forgiving nature. He
is ever contented, is self-controlled and keeps his vows; he has dedi-
cated his mind and reason to God. He causes pain to none and
has no fears and worries, desires nothing, is pure in mind and
heart and skilful in work, has renounced everything and treats
friend and enemy with equal regard, is indifferent to respect and
disrespect, bears heat and cold, is unmoved by praise or censure,
looks upon wherever he happens to be as his home, that is, has
no home of his own, doesn't speak unnecessarily and has a steady
mind. Such a person [says the Lord] may be described as my
bhakta. If all of you reflect over this deeply, you will realize that
anybody who wants can become a bhakta without help from any
other person.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 3-
1 IX. 29
2 XII. 13 to 20
