212. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 7, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I infer from your second postcard that you must have return-
ed to the Ashram. I hope you got my postcard despatched from
here yesterday. Through some visitor, send again a piece of lea-
ther for the soles. I observe that there is one sole every month to
be repaired. There is no urgency about the leather. Both the san-
dals have been re-soled only recently, so that they will require
no attention for two months at least. It was only in order that
it may be handy in case of necessity that I have asked you
so early to send one.
All inmates of the Ashram who may be described as 'non-
political' will be permitted now to visit me. It is left to me to
decide which of the inmates should be treated as 'political'. But
whom the Government would class as 'political', I can know only
when I receive its definition of the term. I have, therefore, asked
for such a definition. Meanwhile, anyone who wishes to come from
there and whom you permit may come and see me, since, accord-
ing to me, there is no one in the Ashram at present who may be
described as 'political'. If nobody is particularly eager to come,
it is not necessary for any of you to come merely to make us feel
happy. If, however, anybody wishes to come, I would not say
'No' to him or her. The Government has asked for a list of
'non-politicals' not living in the Ashram. I will draw up such a
list after I receive its definition of the term 'political'.
Do you get any news about Prabhavati?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Tell Valji that I have revised his translation of my letters on
the Ashram vows and written out the preface . I will keep them
with me now.
Manilal will probably arrive there during this week. If pos-
sible, the two should come and see me.
There are 37 letters, in addition to this one and the remini-
scences of Imam Saheb.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8213. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1 Vide "Letter to M. G. Bhandari", pp. 182-.
2 Vide p. 181.
3 Presumably Manilal Gandhi and his wife, Sushila
4 Vide the preceding item.
