66. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 23, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
The insects about me tell me that I should not do such night work-
not that I should put up a perforated screen to ward off the insects.
However, that is another story.
I have your letter and the report of the interview with Maude. I
am not surprised that Maude has impressed you. He is a true man.
But his reasoning is bad. Modern civilization has had its trial thousands
of years ago. It was tried at the time of the Tower of Babel and
found wanting. It was tried in India and failed. It is again on its trial
and is already tottering. What trial can it want ? What does it propose
doing ? It either rejects the divinity or seeks to find it outside of
ourselves. In both of these systems, it is hopelessly wrong. His rejection
of the doctrine of non-resistance to evil takes away everything from
the praise he bestows on Tolstoy. If Tolstoy was the greatest reformer
of his age in Europe, he owed it to his doctrine of non-resistance[sic].
The illustration he takes is far-fetched. A non-resistant will not find
himself in the circumstances he describes as probable on a ship. We
might as well cease to be vegetarians because Icelanders must eat
meat. I fancy that as vegetarians we do not go to Iceland at all. And
who knows that the sinking of a ship by the pranks of a mad man
might not be a proper deliverance for the men on board. Those who
flew from the danger of the Jameson raid 1 courted certain disaster at
Glencoe. I think I told you that I honoured Maude as a true man,
i.e., a man who tried to act up to his beliefs, but I do not accept
his qualified acceptance of Tolstoy's teaching. Of course, there must
be rules for the guidance of voluntary associations. Only it must be
borne in mind that Tolstoyan belief does not contemplate huge settlements
in states. Neither men nor animals are expected or intended to roam about
the earth. If I serve my neighbours whom I reach by walking to them
I serve the world. When I attempt to do more, I not only do not do
1 An abortive attempt, in December 1895, led from the Cape Colony by
Dr. Jameson, Administrator of the British South Africa Company, to annex
the Transvaal by taking advantage of a projected Uitlander uprising which did
not materialize. Jameson was captured, tried and convicted. The Raid and the
failure of the British Government to repudiate it unequivocally were among
the causes that led to the Boer War; vide also Vol. II, pp. 50, 57 and 69.
80
anything good, but I positively disturb the economy of nature in the
same way that a man abuses nature by trying to make money upon
money. Both arise out of conceit.
Your next letter should give me a vivid account of your meeting
with Dr. Mehta. I am looking forward to it.
You have asked me to give you not much account of the Farm,
in order to spare me. I however propose to continue the custom. It
is no trouble to me. The 3rd bore-hole was completed yesterday. The
machinery was dismantled yesterday afternoon. The hole is over 260
feet deep. Water was found at 220 feet. It is 60 feet from the surface.
The hole gives over 68,000 gallons in 24 hours. Logan has been
instructed to remove to a school about 10 miles from here. He will,
therefore, probably leave some time next week.
In spite of most strenuous work by Albrecht, floor-laying is not
yet finished. It is a long job. He allowed the school-room floor to dry
for a week. We came to the school only today.
A Johannesburg solicitor (a Jew), with some English friend, came
in today to inquire about the bore-hole, etc. He has just taken over
a farm near Lenz. He was interested in our ideals and I gave them
to him. He and his friend had our coffee and bread which they liked
very well. Medh and Desai are still here. They are both working very
well. Medh, Desai, Albrecht and I are restricting ourselves to only one
meal per day for the next eight days. This is that portion of the Hindu
year when millions of Hindus go in for this fast. Of course, we still
remain saltless.
I have read your official letter to Miss S [chlesin]. Indeed I opened
it. She has not even seen it. I will not go into the letter with you.
I shall attend to it. Both the accounts have been kept religiously separate.
I am sorry I do not send you a weekly balance-sheet. But I have
no time and seeing that I personally attend to the matter, perhaps it
is not necessary. If I am making mistakes which you could check if
I sent you a weekly balance-sheet, I think the mistakes should be put
up with. After all I am not likely to err grievously during your absence.
At the same time, as soon as Schlesin returns to the office, I shall
ask her to prepare a statement for you. But I propose to continue
to attend to the thing personally even when she returns. Hilt has not
yet paid the arrear rent. Lapin wrote to me saying Hilt told him he
was going to send it. But Hilt is hardly reliable. I shall ask Lapin again
and press for payment.
1 The reference presumably is to the fasts during Navaratri.
SV-VI : 6
Chhotalal often answers 'Mr. K[ allenbach] has gone to Germiston'
and then corrects it to 'Germany'.
Herewith Call's letter which you would like to see. I telegraphed
to him and wrote also asking him to come to the Farm if he wished
to. His calling Isaac 'Irish' shows that the poor man's mind is still
defective. Mrs. Goldstone never came.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
