73. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY FOR PERMITS
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 1, 1905
TO
THE CHIEF SECRETARY FOR PERMITS
P. O. Box 1199
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
My Association has been informed that a new rule has been intro-
duced in the Permit Office whereby British Indian refugees are required
to furnish two European references instead of any two known references,
as hitherto. My Association submits that the proposed rule is, first, an
insult to the British Indian community in that it implies want of faith
in Indian testimony, and secondly, is impracticable in that there are few
Indians who are known to the European residents by name. Store-keepers,
assistants, salesmen and domestic servants in the employ of British Indians
rarely come into contact with Europeans, and to expect them to produce
European references would be tantamount to rejection of their applica-
tion for a permit. Thirdly, it would put a premium on perjury, as it
is quite conceivable that a few unscrupulous Indians will not find it diffi-
cult to find a few unscrupulous Europeans who would be prepared to
perjure themselves for a consideration.
My Association, therefore, submits that the only safeguard is to be
found in the respectability of references, irrespective of race or colour.
Even then it is quite likely that some cases of perjury would happen, but
that would be purely a matter for action against those who would lend
themselves to such practices. One or two successful prosecutions would
certainly do away with them. At the same time, my Association draws
your attention to the fact that such questionable practices in the face of
enormous temptations have been comparatively rare in connection with
the permits. It is indisputable that there were over 15,000 British Indian
male adults resident in the Transvaal before War. Only about 12,000
appear on your register. It is reasonable, therefore, to presume that most
of the men who have received their permits are pre-War residents of the
Transvaal.
My Association respectfully trusts that the rule will be withdrawn,
and that the refugees who are now awaiting permission to return will
have their applications granted without delay, as, in accordance with the
information in possession of my Association, they are suffering very severe
inconvenience and loss.
I have &C.,
ABDUL GANI,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: L. G. 92/2132
