87. LETTER TO A FRIEND
SABARMATI,
September 11, 1924
DEAR FRIEND,
Mahadev has handed me both your letters for which I thank
you. I am under no delusion. The Liberals mayor may not
join. The Swarajists mayor may not join. What I feel is that
we are non-co-operating among ourselves. This we must avoid.
The rest will take care of itself. So much for the first letter.
As for the second. I have made it clear that the surrender,
if it has to be made, must be your own act. You know the situa-
tion best. I can only suggest principles that flow from non-vio-
lence. Dastane and Devdhar did say many things in Juhu. They
have indeed affected me but not in the way you fear. From all
their talks I gathered that all the principal members did not
believe fully in non-violence or the khaddar work. Take for
instance Mr. Bapat. He was the leader of the Mulshi Peta Cam-
paign. I have read his pamphlets on satyagraha. He is no believer
in non-violence. Take Mr. Nimbkar. He certainly does not
believe in non-violence. I have listened to his speeches and read
his writings, too. There have been repeated complaints against
him. But these are matters that call for reform within, not sur-
render. The idea of surrender was evolved long after the A.I.C.C.
meeting. It came to me when I saw some poisonous writings. If
we were all angels, I would still have us to surrender. To assert
our principle is to surrender office, not principle. The latter has
to be lived. Though it has a political consequence, the conception
of satyagraha is purely spiritual. Humanity is its essence. It is
never polemical. It grows on your opponent unperceived, if
your conduct is correct. If you surrender, you will do so so as
to do more and better work. The way is so totally different from
the ordinary. I do not make my language purposely ambiguous.
What I think is original, that is, the method. I have not the lan-
guage to give life to it, hence the ambiguity. But this much is
easily understood. Do not hold on to office if it means the breed-
ing of hatred. Do retain if it comes to you unsought, if it comes
to you because public opinion is overwhelmingly in your favour.
I have no manner of doubt that the people of all the provinces
will be with those who are out and against the present Government
and who are prepared to sacrifice themselves to the uttermost for
the sake of their service. It matters little whether the servants
are in the Congress or outside.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
