48. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
September 3, 1918
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I am daily getting better. Please have no anxiety for me.
Though we do not meet in the body, communion of the spirit is
ever there. Just at present I am doing a bit of reading. The
book I am reading is a collection of remarkable essays on religion
by Prof. Anandshankar Dhruva of the Gujarat College. You
have seen him. The essays are pure gold. He is one of the great-
est Sanskrit scholars of this Presidency. These essays have given
me great comfort and they help me more fully to realize the mean-
ing of communion of the spirit and it is in that deeper and fuller
[meaning] that I use the expression regarding ourselves.
As I have said before, I would not have you leave Bolpur
on any account whatsoever. Your work is there and nowhere else
at the present moment.
Why did you write that wretched introduction of yours to the
Hindi book on emigration to the colonies? I have only just glanced
at it and I feel that you have given an undeserved certificate. You
do not want to give currency to inaccuracies, fulsome flattery and
advertisements. I propose to go through the book carefully and
note down for your edification some of the glaring inaccuracies
contained in the work. There is really no merit in an author re-
maining unknown. He does not remain unknown to those who he
wishes should know him. The introduction does credit to your
heart. You are an Indian and, as Lord Willingdon will say, you
are always afraid to say "no". I would far rather that you retained
the English characteristics and said "no" when it is "no" which
should really be said. I suppose it is sometimes the privilege
of love sternly to say "no". I do not want to sermonize, but you
must really reform yourself in this matter. Otherwise I must pass
on to you all the rascals I meet. You will then settle your accounts
with Gurudev and them.
With love to you all,
Yours,
MOHAN
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
