107. LETTER TO "THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE"
[Before October 5, 1921]
THE EDITOR OF
THE [BOMBAY] CHRONICLE
SIR,
Persistent rumours supposed to be well founded were brought
to me in Madras and have been repeated with greater emphasis
in Bombay that my arrest is imminent. If the rumour is well-
founded, the Government will certainly deserve congratulations for
consistency after the arrest of the Ali Brothers and their co-
prisoners, for, now the battle is being waged not against violence,
so-called or real, or incitement thereto, but against the very
principle of non-co-operation for which the Congress and the
Khilafat Committees stand, and that principle is promoting dis-
affection against the established Government and promoting non-
co-operation with the Government by all classes, including civilians
and soldiers. The success of that propaganda, it is obvious, means
the dissolution of the existing system of Government and it would
be unbecoming for those who are avowed non-co-operators to
question any steps that the Government may take in order to crush
the movement, and I cannot conceive a more logical step than to
arrest the author of the movement, unless the administrators of the
system intend to change it in accordance with the wishes of
the non-co-operators. The country has shown by its dignified calm
attitude after the arrests of the Ali Brothers and others, that it
has realized the necessity of non-violence. I expect the retention
of the same non-violent atmosphere after my arrest or that of any
other worker. The people will show their true courage and appre-
ciation of non-violence and of imprisonments for the sake of one's
religion and one's country as an honour to be prized not only
by remaining absolutely peaceful but by refraining from hartals or
any such demonstration. Any hartal following the arrest of myself
or any other worker would be a breach of discipline, and, there-
fore, no mark of respect or affection for the arrested worker. The
only way to show one's regard is to demonstrate greater zeal in
prosecuting the Congress programme of swadeshi and hasten the
advent of swaraj thereby. I would certainly expect, in the event of
my arrest, every man and woman in India who believes in the
message of swadeshi, but through laziness or weakness has not
yet discarded foreign cloth and taken to hand-spinning and
hand-weaving, to discard all foreign cloth and take up the
spinning-wheel and the handloom. I would expect the Hindus
on no account to relax their efforts for the Khilafat or barter it
away for so-called swaraj, for swaraj, without the conciliation of
the Mussulmans, is, In my opinion, an inconceivable thing.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 5-10-1921
