38. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
KOHAT,
October 21, 1938
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I have replied to your telegram. Even if you go to Tra-
vancore as a private citizen, you will succeed. Meet the pris-
oners. There is a good deal of falsehood in the air. I have
received heaps of telegrams from the Congress totally denying
the charge of violence by it. But there are other telegrams, too,
which say that there has undoubtedly been violence. The truth
can be ascertained only if somebody goes there personally. You
know the attitude I have adopted. The people should withdraw
the allegations against C. P. or make them the main issue. If
they adopt the latter course, then there is no need for satya-
graha. It is for the local workers to make the choice. If C. P.
offers to invite a judge from outside to try the cases, the people
should accept the challenge. If they refuse to do that, the fight
will lose its moral basis. You must have seen my last advice.
If violence is going on for whatever reason, civil disobedience must
be suspended unconditionally. Let those imprisoned remain in
jails. Excepting civil disobedience, the rest of the programme may
continue. You may, however, decide what you think best after
a personal visit. See Ramachandran first and then the prisoners.
Read the accompanying wire from Balkrishna of Kanpur.
I have wired back saying I knew nothing of the matter. The
Parliamentary Board, I assume, must have agreed to intervene
on the Minister's advice. Even if that is not the case, the
Provincial Committee is free to handle the affair as it likes. I
suppose all this is not out of your mind.
I hope your health is all right. I am keeping well.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Why should you resign from the Gandhi Seva Sangh?
Jamnalalji is practically an invalid at present. Even if he resigns,
1 Travancore State Congress
2 Balkrishna Sharma, a leading Congress worker of Kanpur
34
however, won't he continue to give his services? Nothing is
going to improve by your resigning.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 226-
