277. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
CAPE TOWN,
February 27, 1914
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
For the time being I am at Cape Town watching the course
of events. I do not want to inflict on you any news about the strug-
gle. I shall be as brief as I possibly can.
Mr. Andrews and Mr. Pearson are truly good men, we all
like them very much. Sir Benjamin has disappointed us. He has
hardly done any good and he may do a great deal of harm. He is
weak and by no means sincere. Even now he has hardly grasped
the details. And he undoubtedly, consciously or unconsciously, fos-
ters divisions among us. Mr. Andrews will tell you all about
him. But I thought that I should give you my impressions of Sir
Benjamin.
If there is a settlement in March, I propose to leave for
India in April. I shall have with me probably about 20 men,
women and children who will live with me. These will include
the school children who are likely to come. I do not know whether
you still want me to live at the Servants of India quarters in
Poona or how. I shall be prepared to do so immediately after I
have paid a visit to the members of my family. It is likely that the
number living with me may be augmented by some members of
my family who may wish to share my life and work. Please do not
consider yourself bound to keep me at the Society's quarters. I
am entirely in your hands. I want to learn at your feet and gain
the necessary experience. No matter whether I am staying some-
where under your guidance or not, I shall scrupulously observe
the compact of silence for one year after my arrival in India. The
vow of silence as I have understood it does not include the South
African question and may be broken at your wish for furthering
any project about which both of us hold the same view.
My present ambition you know. It is to be by your side as
your nurse and attendant. I want to have the real discipline of
obeying someone whom I love and look up to. I know I made a
bad secretary in South Africa. I hope to do better in the Mother-
land if I am accepted.
May you benefit in health by the change and the calmer atmos-
phere on the continent.
This letter will be in your hands about the middle of March.
If you deem it necessary to say anything to me about my move-
ments, you will of course cable. I assume too that you will not
want me to go to Poona before you return. If you did, I should of
course go.
If I am enabled to leave for India in April, I propose to use
the funds you have sent for our passages which shall be all deck.
I have no means of my own and Phoenix can hardly supply funds
now. It is drained totally dry.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 3774
