328. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
ON TRAIN TO RAMGARH,
March 13, 1940
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I have read yours of 23rd February many times.
There should never be any difference of opinion between us,
for there is complete heart contact and agreement as to the end
and the means. If therefore there is any difference left, it can
be due only to an incomplete appreciation of facts.
The Congress does not dictate or claim to be infallible. It
does, however, deny dictatorship to the Muslim League, for ex-
ample, and even dares to deny it to the British Government
though as a matter of fact the latter is the dictator. Hence if the
British Government will not resign the dictatorship, the Congress
has perforce to use its only non-violent sanction to dislodge it
from the position it should never have occupied.
What does the Congress ask? It asks that all the interested
parties appoint a tribunal which cannot err as to what is right,
viz., a constituent assembly of representatives elected on the basis
of adult suffrage or an equivalent. Independence or even domin-
ion status of the sincere type means nothing if it does not mean
self-determination by the people of India. The minorities repre-
sented on the Assembly will practically dictate their own safe-
guards. Neither the Congress nor the Muslim League can be
allowed to obstruct the proceedings of such an elected Assembly.
Whoever does, adopts the role of a dictator.
There remain the Princes. They are free to come if they are
elected not by the common vote but by the vote of their [own]
people on the basis of adult suffrage. Pray remember they are
a creation of the British Government. The treaties that are ad-
verse to the rights of the people have no value but the Congress
has not suggested any breach of treaty obligations. The page of
British History in India is soiled with narratives of broken trea-
ties, pledges and promises. But I personally recognize the British
Government's difficulty in the matter.
They have raised a
monster, they cannot all of a sudden abolish him. There [fore] I have
said: 'Deal with British India only.' The British Government have
without reference to the Princes given to Provinces, i.e., British
India, not real autonomy but a kind of glorified municipal self-
government as it has turned out to be in practice. Let them now
allow the people of British India the right of determining their
mode of government through representatives elected as suggested
above.
You have said "a small private but very responsible confer-
ence of a dozen representative Indian men work out to agreement
the main points of the desired constitution". The suggestion was
discussed by the Viceroy. The difficulty is who will select the
men? Anything short of elected men will lead to nothing new in
the present artificial atmosphere. Such a committee will naturally
be elected by the larger constituent assembly.
What I have said can only be done by agreement, never by
dictation. The question shorn of all camouflage resolves itself
into this. Are the British Government prepared to make a dec-
laration to convene at the earliest opportunity, not later than the
termination of the war, a constituent assembly of representatives
elected on the basis of adult suffrage or an equivalent for the
purpose of determining the mode of the Government of India
including Princes' India, if possible, and without if they won't
agree? Pending the convening of such an assembly the Govern-
ment of India will be conducted, as far as possible, as if it was
responsible to the Central Assembly without the official bloc and
the Viceroy's Council shall contain a majority of elected repre-
sentatives from the Assembly.
If in all I have said above you see dictation or want of the
spirit of accommodation or disinclination to recognize British diffi-
culty, you will please say so and tell me in what way the test
fails and I shall try to give you satisfaction. There is no desire
on the part of responsible Congressmen to pick a quarrel with
the British Government. On the contrary there is keen desire to
explore every means of conciliation.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1034
