448. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
January 24, 1948
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,
I am writing to you after a long time. But Manu does
write to you and you write to her, so both you and I have
news of each other.
One may say that something has been achieved in Delhi.
How long it is going to last remains to be seen. The weakness
following the fast persists. But God is slowly giving me back
my strength. The kidneys and the liver are not functioning as
satisfactorily as they should.
I write this about Manu, whom a year ago you offered
as a sacrifice in this great yajna. It will not be wrong to say
that occasionally I have been harsh in testing her. But the
more brutal my treatment the more it was a blessing to her.
She unflinchingly went through the ordeal and satisfactorily
came out unscathed. As I had said at Srirampore, in this yajna
we have to do or die. Here both these will be encompassed.
On the 20th when the bomb exploded Manu was sitting be-
side me along with others. So we might both have died. But
who can harm one whom Rama protects! Yesterday I had a
long talk with Manu. I told her to write to you that if you
could free yourself from there, you should come to Sevagram
or Delhi. It is possible that I may have to go to Wardha for
Jamnalal's death anniversary. But it is not certain. It does
not seem likely that I can get away from Delhi. Manu told me
that since it was I who had laid down terms for participation
in this yajna I myself should write to you. The best thing would
be for you to see my programme in the newspapers and then
come wherever I may be. You will see that I have settled the
debt I owed. She has sent you her diaries. She has made
great progress in writing the diary. She takes great interest in
writing notes and when I see them Mahadev's face appears before
my eyes.
I am dictating this immediately after the prayer. There is
a heap of letters to be attended to. If God wills we shall be
meeting In a few days and then we can talk about the
rest.
Manu is enjoying herself. If you have some magic for
making her fat you should let me know. The girls will be well
with their in-laws.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Dilhiman Gandhiji—II, pp. 380-
