90. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
BOMBAY,
January 25, 1919
MY DEAR ESTHER,
I shall try to answer your very very pertinent question as
fully as possible. A vow is nothing but a fixed resolution to do or
abstain from doing a particular thing. During the self-denial week,
the members of the Salvation Army take a vow to abstain from
taking jam or other eatable for a fixed period. During Lent, the
Roman Catholics undergo certain privations. That is also a vow.
In each case, the result expected is the same, viz., purification and
expression of the soul. By these resolutions, you bring the body
under subjection. Body is matter, soul is spirit, and there is inter-
nal conflict between matter and spirit. Triumph of matter over
the spirit means destruction of the latter. It is common know-
ledge that [ this is] in the same proportion that we indulge the body
or mortify the soul. Body or matter has undoubtedly its uses. The
spirit can express itself only through matter or body. But that result
can be obtained only when the body is used as an instrument for
the uplifting of the soul. The vast majority of the human family
do not use the body in that manner. The result is triumph of the
body or matter over the spirit or the soul. We who know the
soul to be imperishable living in a body which ever changes its
substance and is perishable must by making fixed resolutions
bring our bodies under such control that finally we may be able
to use them for the fullest service of the soul. This idea is fairly
clearly brought out in the New Testament. But I have seen it no-
where explained as fully and clearly as in the Hindu scriptures.
You will find this law of self-denial written in every page of the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata. Have you read these two books?
If not, you should one of these days read them carefully and with
the eye of faith. There is a great deal of fabulous matter about
these two books. They are designed for the masses and the au-
thors have deliberately chosen to write them in a manner that
would make them acceptable to the people. They have hit upon
the easiest method of carrying the truth to the millions, and expe-
rience of ages shows that they have been marvellously successful.
If I have not made myself sufficiently understood or written convin-
cingly, please tell me so and I shall endeavour again. I
have undergone an operation. Today is the sixth day. I do not
know whether it is a successful operation. It was performed by
an eminent surgeon. He is undoubtedly a very careful man.
It would be no fault of his if I have to continue to suffer pain
in spite of the operation.
With love,
Ever yours,
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
