84. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
June 21, 1932
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,
I forgot to send a reply to your letter with this week's post.
Do not yield to your ignorant love and ever harm the good of
Shriram. Go to Kashi or Kangri from time to time and see
him. What other freedom will Vinoba permit you? Remember to
what distant places Kamalnayan wanders one after another.
Parents have no right whatever to harm the interests of their
children. If you have heard more about Shivaji, Dattu, Shankar-
rao and others, let me know. The distinction that is made bet-
ween a diet of cereals and pulses and a fruit diet has no value.
From both physical and spiritual points of view, some of the
cereals and pulses may be more wholesome than fruit in cer-
tain circumstances. Ground-nut, though it is classed as a fruit,
is harmful in almost every disease, whereas rice, though a cereal,
can always be eaten in a limited quantity. Anybody who wishes
to control his senses may keep himself alive on rice, but ground-
nut is likely to be harmful to him. You may be sure that, for
your health, pendas will be extremely harmful. Instead of eating a
full meal in the evening consisting of rice, dal, rotlis and vegetables,
if you take a little fruit, such as munakkas oranges, pomegranates
or any other juicy fruit, that will certainly be much lighter.
Considered as foods, however, there is no difference between
cereals and fruit. The distinction between them seems to have
been invented by Vaishnavas who could not conquer the palate
and wished to deceive themselves and God. Having been born
in a Vaishnava family myself, I am writing this from experience.
Just as we make a poultice of linseed or wheat flour, in the same
manner earth should be moistened and wrapped in a piece of
cloth in the form of a bandage, which should then be bound
round the abdomen. This should always be done on an empty
stomach. Binding the pack in this manner when the stomach is
full does harm and causes stomachache. Meditating on the Gita
means meditating on the meaning of any verse or phrase from it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 182
