269. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[JOHANNESBURG,
August 12, 1908]
[THE EDITOR
THE STAR]
SIR,
You will, I hope, allow me to correct you with regard to the question
of educated Indians, touched upon in your leader of yesterday on the
Asiatic struggle. British Indians do not ask for the opening of the door
to educated Indians. They ask that the door should be left open as it
is at present under the Immigrants' Restriction Act. You assume that
a demand is being made for admitting English-speaking lads. The
truth is that Indians have declared that they would be satisfied with an
education test, no matter how severe, so long as the door is kept open
(not now to be opened) for those possessing the highest educational
attainments.
You say that General Smuts will be justified in withdrawing from
any promise he may have made, in view of the above alleged fresh demand.
From the facts stated by me, you can verify for yourself that no fresh
demand has been made. But, supposing that it was made, would it
justify General Smuts in breaking a promise which was to be fulfilled
on the condition of voluntary registration being gone through by Asiatics,
even though that condition had been fulfilled? Moreover, if Asiatics
ask for anything new, he has undoubtedly a right to refuse it, but surely
not on that account to break his promise. What Asiatics grieve over
is the fact of the General making the acceptance of educational
1 This was republished in Indian Opinion under the title "The Indian Struggle
in the Transvaal".
2 The Star, 11-8-1908, had commented editorially as follows: ". . .Mr. Gandhi
accuses the Colonial Secretary of a flagrant breach of promise in that he declines to
repeal the Asiatic Act, while on the other hand Mr. Smuts insists that the Asiatic leader
now demands new concessions . . . . But his [Mr. Gandhi's] testimony. . . is certainly not
conclusive. . . .When Mr. Gandhi goes so far as to accuse Mr. Smuts of 'murder' and
'organized robbery', even those who are not unsympathetic must feel sceptical of his
trustworthiness in questions of fact. . . . Mr. Smuts is the servant of Parliament and
any promise he may have made to Mr. Gandhi was necessarily subject to the ratification
of the legislature. . . .[Accepting Mr. Gandhi's proposal would involve] the unrestricted
admission. . . of the thousands of Indian lads who have been or are being educated in
the schools of Natal [or India] . . . .Whatever hardships the Asiatics have suffered they
owe entirely to the recalcitrancy and folly of their leaders. . . they cannot complain
when they are called upon to bear the consequences. . . ."
disqualification a condition of repeal of the Asiatic Act. Will it not be
an honourable course for him to give what he has promised, and then
throw the onus on the Asiatics of accepting or rejecting it?
You seem to imagine that, by repeal of the Act, Asiatics desire
that there should be nothing of the Asiatic Act retained in any shape
or form. So far is this from being true, that, in the draft Immigration
Bill repealing the Act and shown to me by the Colonial Secretary, such
provisions of the Asiatic Act as were necessary for properly checking
certificates already issued and such other things were taken over from
it. Asiatics do not oppose supervision, but they do oppose an Act which
is based on charges of fraud and which contains many clauses of an
objectionable character.
As to the promise of repeal, you reported General Smuts to have
stated on the 6th day of February last that "he had told the Asiatics
that he would not repeal the Act until every Asiatic was registered".
I interpret this to amount to a public confirmation of the promise made
by him to me on the 30th day of January and repeated on the 3rd day
of February last. If the declaration has any other meaning, I confess
I do not understand it.
You resent my having accused General Smuts of the murder of
Mr. Naidoo's child and my having used the expression "legalized
robbery" in connection with the Magistrate's order at Vereeniging
to seize the goods of the Indians charged, in lieu of the payment of the
fines imposed upon them. I witnessed the scene enacted in Mrs. Naidoo's
room immediately after her husband's third incarceration. I cannot
forget it. Six days after, I heard that she had a still-born son. Mr. Naidoo
had committed no offence save that, first, of helping General Smuts
out of an awkward dilemma, and then of preferring his conscience to
everything else. Although you may wonder, I must repeat that the
death of the child must be laid at the door of General Smuts. Lastly,
if a private individual were to take away my goods by violence, the
law would call it robbery. When the legal machinery itself is utilized
to confiscate my goods and thus to compel me to surrender my conscience,
I may be pardoned for calling the process "legalized robbery". And
yet that is what a forced sale of the goods of those who have done no
wrong means to most Indians.
[Yours etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 22-8-1908
1 Vide "Speech at Mass Meeting", p. 438.
