225. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
AMBOLI [via] BELGAUM,
Satyagraha Day [April 6, 1927]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I have written to you but have had no reply.
Please see that my capacity to raise funds has gone down
considerably owing to my failing health. I had made some pro-
vision but it is not available at the moment.
Had I not had the attack I could have somehow coped with
the situation.
I had asked Mahadev to write to Devchandbhai about the
speech [drafted] by Bhai Amritlal Bapa. It has to be examined
carefully. I think the [Kathiawar] Political Conference and the
charkha movement should be kept apart. Let it be like this.
There are three heads of expenditure which can be arranged as
follows:
1. Entrusting khadi activity to the Charkha Sangh as it will
survive me and carry on in whatever manner it can.
2. The schools and the Antyaja work be handed over to the
Vidyapith which too will survive me.
And an independent activity for Kathiawar.
We have not yet been able to make separate arrangements to
run these three programmes on their own. I can therefore make
only these suggestions. Khadi activities can also be entrusted to
the Gujarat Khadi Mandal. This can be finalized after we have
a discussion with Bhai Lakshmidas. Besides these three, no other
programme is, at present, likely to engage my attention. I see
however that there ought to be an independent institution for
those pursuing other interests and the Political Conference may
serve this purpose. But then these are the sick thoughts of a
sick man.
You should contact Devchandbhai and others and find out a
way after cool deliberation. If you want to see me you should
all come at your own expense; that too a fortnight hence. I
think at the moment I have not the strength to discuss the matter
at length.
God willing, I hope to keep the appointed date in the month
of June. But I can say nothing definite just now.
What you do, do unhesitatingly and dispassionately like volun-
tary trustees.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Most probably on the 19th I shall be taken from Belgaum to
Nandi Hills, near Bangalore, where we are to reach on the 20th.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2856. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah
