233. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 14, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
I got your letter. It is not right for a brahmachari to attend to
several things at a time. He takes up only one thing at a time
and concentrates all the energy of his body and mind on that
thing. If, therefore, you are occupied in manual work and there
is no necessity for you to talk about anything relating to it, the
proper thing would be to remain silent. However, if we are play-
ing or have gone out for a walk, talking is a part of the activity
and so we can talk at that time. Anybody who regulates his life
strictly according to this principle, can make it full of interest. And
an institution where people work in complete silence and speak
only when necessary impresses us as a very quiet place. Not only
do I see no harm in the girls putting on shorts and a shirt when
doing exercises and also at other times, but I actually like the
thing. For the Ashram residents their goal in life has already been
fixed, and it is that they are dedicated to the quest for truth. To
your question whether one should or should not aim to be like
200
a soldier, I shall give an answer after you tell me in your next letter
what all of you understand to be the meaning of the word 'soldier'.
After travelling in many countries, I have found India to be
the most beautiful country. But since I am free, as I believe, from
blind partiality, I have always been able to see much good in
every country and so have found them all to be good and have
appreciated the special excellence of each of them. On the whole,
however, I have felt that India is not inferior to any other country,
that one finds in it all that one may want and that what one does
not find in India is not quite essential for our life.
If the Ashram has money to spare and if the things are not
likely to cost much, even at such a time as the present I would
have no objection to having swings and slides made for you.
You should, however, bear one thing in mind, namely, that the
Ashram should always be a poor people's institution, and that
just because the Ashram has the necessary money we will not be
justified in getting anything we want. And even things which
befit poor people may be ordered only if the Ashram has the
necessary funds. The question, therefore, is only whether we
can afford a thing and whether it is in keeping with our aim.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8968. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
