88. LETTER TO RICHARD B. GREGG
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
November 27, 1926
I see you are adding to my debt. I already owe you a reply
to several questions in your previous letter. And I have now
before me another letter with quotations from Thomas Paine.
The quotations I hope to use as you suggest. I have not yet gone
through them.
The articles on khaddar you may use just as you like.
I am glad you have appreciated the articles "Is This Huma-
nity?". I felt that I should make my position clear irrespective of
whether it sounded or was in fact tenable or not. It is enough
that the views expressed therein represent my definite conclusions.
You will notice the flaw in your analogy. You compare duty
towards the ward with your duty towards moral welfare of the
assailant. Now the moral welfare of the assailant is not at stake
when you are defending the ward. It is his physical existence
that is at stake. And, if instead of the assailant being a stranger,
it was another ward, but stronger than the one then under your
protection, you would still have to defend the one under your
protection against the other ward who is about to assail the for-
mer and whom you have no other means of overcoming. God will
judge your duty in accordance with your intentions. Indeed, one
may go a step further and assume the one who is to be protec-
ted not to be a ward, but an utter stranger who has sought pro-
tection. There is a beautiful tale in the Mahabharata. A great
prince had a pigeon flying to him for protection against a hawk.
The hawk feels that the pigeon is his lawful prey duly appointed
as such by God. The prince wards him off by saying that whilst
pigeons ordinarily were a lawful prey for hawks, he cannot neglect
the obvious duty of protecting those who sought his protection and
the prince generously offered his own flesh as substitute. This, of
course, is the most spiritual method of dealing with the hawk.
But where one is too weak to adopt that method, one would be
bound to carry out the law of protection by resisting the ap-
proach of the hawk by force. And this one would do in accord-
ance with the law of ahimsa. I don't know whether I have
made my position clear.
I see you are not coming to pass your winter in Sabarmati.
I am sorry in two ways. First, because, though I shall be away,
the Ashramites will miss you. Secondly, because, it is the fear
of the Ashram climate and water that is deterring you. We, diet
reformers, should really discover ways of bending climate to our
will rather than succumb to them. I know, however, this is coun-
sel of perfection. The step you are taking is prudent and there-
fore in the circumstances superior to the counsel of perfection
which cannot be carried out without taking risk. I shall follow
with considerable interest your researches in the tutorial line.
Devdas is quite well and strong. He has gone to nurse
Mathuradas at Panchgani. I leave for Wardha on the 2nd
December. My love to you and the Stokes and Sundaram and
Savitri.
Yours,
R. B. GREGG
SIMLA
From a photostat: S.N. 12088
