483. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
VALMIKI MANDIR,
READING ROAD, NEW DELHI,
September 27, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
It occurs to me that I should reduce to writing my im-
pressions of our talk of yesterday.
You were good enough to explain to me at length the
result so far of your effort at peace-making between the Congress
and the Muslim League. In the course of our conversation you
told me that your leanings were towards the League. In your
opinion there was left only one point of difference between the
two parties, viz., the question of representation of a non-League
Muslim out of the Congress quota. You recognized fully the
reasonableness of the Congress position but you held that it would
be an act of high statesmanship if the Congress waived the right
for the sake of peace. I urged that if it was a question of waiving
a right it would be a simple thing. It was a question of non-
performance of a duty which the Congress owed to non-League
Muslims. I entirely agreed with you on the proposition that
it would be a great day if and when the Congress and the Muslim
League came to a mutual understanding without reservations,
mental or otherwise, and that it would be worse than useless if
the two came together only with a view to fight each other.
Moreover, I stressed the point that Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah should
1 Vide pp. 383- and 521-.
85-25
seek an interview with Pandit Nehru and try to come to an
honourable understanding. If, however, the worst happened and
the Muslim League boycott of the Constituent Assembly persisted
and the British Government decided to discontinue the Constituent
Assembly, I would hold it to be perfectly honourable. For,
even though the Cabinet Mission had led one to suppose that
they would continue the Constituent Assembly, I did not expect
that they would or could continue it in spite of the successful
boycott by one of the major parties. You then interpolated the
remark that there were three parties, not only two. The States
were the third party. You added that if the boycott persisted
you had grave doubts as to whether the States would come in.
Though I might be alone to hold the view, I said that I
could not envisage the framing of a workable constitution if one
of the two parties withheld co-operation and force had to be
used to keep the boycotters under restraint.
You then asked me to work out the logical conclusion of
the discontinuance of the Constituent Assembly and asked me
what I thought of the Interim Government. I told you that I
had little doubt that no matter what happened, the National
Government, having been once summoned, should continue to
function unless they themselves felt unable, owing to their own
incompetence or inability, to do so. I added that the Congress
had put up its very best men, not at all in the spirit of gaining
power for a party but in the spirit of selfless service of the whole
nation. They were so considerate towards you and the League
that they had hesitated to fill in the two Muslim seats in the
hope of the League coming into the Interim Government. You
doubted if you could contemplate the continuance of the Interim
Government and that in any case you were only a servant of the
Crown and that you would have to take your order from His
Majesty's Government. Whilst I appreciated your stand, I said
the continuance of a bona-fide National Government at the Centre
was a vital necessity and that any departure from it would lay
the British people open to the gravest suspicion on the part of
the people of India and would be a tragedy of the first magnitude.
At the conclusion of our cordial talk, encouraged by you to
say anything further if I wished to, I mentioned the Kashmir
case about which the Working Committee had passed a very
just resolution which, in the event of Kashmir State's obstinacy or
notions of false prestige, might lead to far-reaching consequences
and I asked for your friendly, as distinguished from legal, assist-
ance to smooth out rough edges.
I had a talk last night with Pandit Nehru and Sardar Patel
and as a result I have decided to stay on here for some days,
maybe even a month.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
THE VICEROY'S HOUSE
NEW DELHI
The Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, pp. 604-6; also Gandhiji's Correspondence
with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 223-
