227. LETTER TO CHHOTUBHAI
PANCHGANI,
July 7, 1944
BHAI CHHOTUBHAI,
I like your letter very much because it is so candid. But you have
raised questions one would not expect from a man of your intelligence.
There are other co-workers like you and I sometimes wonder if my
company is stifling their intelligence. All the same, I answer the
questions.
1. I have not the least doubt of Russia's bravery. But I would not
weigh it on the scales of non-violence.
2. It does not appear to me that anything that is happening today
can be likened to the Dharasana episode. I can understand the hardship
resulting from the refusal of the farmers to sell the stocks of grains
lying with them to the Government at rates lower than they can afford.
But the looting of Government grain stocks cannot be called non-violent
whether it is done after serving prior notice or not. I have always
considered and still consider salt public property like water and air.
I cannot include acts like sabotage of railways, etc., in non-violence.
3. It is of course not easy to decide on a programme for someone
who is bent upon facing bullets in a non-violent way, but it is not
impossible. One is not duty-bound to give one's name. Informing about
the action contemplated would suffice. If at the time fixed one finds
that no one has come to the spot because the notice, being anonymous,
had been thrown away, another notice can be sent. If this is done
again and again, one day the tiger is sure to come. However, do not
conclude from this that I consider the programme mentioned in the
second question non-violent even if carried out after giving prior
information. My answer is intended only to clear the difficulty about
the third question.
4. The information contained in the cutting is more or less correct.
My advice to Raojibhai was not in exercise of a right. One does not
advise as a matter of right. One commands. Is that not so ? I lost
the right to command from the moment of my incarceration.
5. Post Offices, courts, and so on, today do not belong to the
people. Even when they come to belong to the people, they will not
be personal property. Even personal property will be property belonging
to the people. Out of that, only what the nation has given unto itself
124
or kept for itself would belong to it. I hope this provides you all the
explanations you seek.
I have not revised the above.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
