369. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
April 12, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,
I got your letter just when I had been thinking of you and
wondering why there was no letter from you. I gather from
it that your health is all right. I did get in course of time the
letter which you wrote to me from England, and I have the
impression that I also replied to it. I am not aware that I
always keep my hand under the head when sleeping. It is
possible that the hand got under the head sometimes. I was
careful in the matter after I got your letter and remained vigi-
lant. I can say, therefore, that I have never kept the hand in
that position since then. However, that seems to have had no
effect on the condition of the hand. No one has yet been able
to make out the cause of this weakness. As a precaution I even
gave up writing with the right hand. But afterwards the doctors
also came to the conclusion that the pain was not caused by
writer's cramp. If your massaging the hand is likely to cure
the pain, I can certainly secure the necessary permission. How-
ever, if you explain to me the exact manner of doing the massage,
I would do it myself or ask Mahadev to do it. But the fact is
that the condition is not worth worrying about at all. Nor is
the pain continuous. It occurs only when I use the hand to do
certain things. The surgeon here was of the opinion that the pain
303
was a sign of old age and that, therefore, no cure was possible.
Certain weaknesses generally appear in old age, since we do not
exercise sufficient self-control in our earlier life. This weakness
may be one such, and there is no reason for sorrow or wonder
if it is so. Hence, apart from taking necessary precautions, I do not
worry about the matter. We have now a new doctor here, who
believes that the pain can be cured. Let me see what he can do.
I hope both of you enjoy peace of mind. We three are
happy. You must of course have met Andrews.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7548. Also C.W. 5023. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta
