507. LETTER TO SHANKARAN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 20, 1928
MY DEAR SHANKARAN,
I have your letter. The list has always remained with me and
the acknowledgment was printed in Navajivan without the list hav-
ing been got from me. I knew of the acknowledgment appear-
ing in Navajivan only from your letter. About Young India I was
myself looking over it and therefore I corrected the mistake yes-
terday and have the whole list printed, which you will see in
Young India of this week. It was all done before your letter came.
I hope however to see that all the names appear in Navajivan. I
say I hope because I am so rushed just now that I may forget it.
Mahadeo had had a somewhat serious fall at the well where
he was drawing water. He was laid up for 5 days. He is better
now and in two three days he will be quite restored.
Now about your questions: Even though the cause for which
a donation was given may have been fulfilled, the balance left
cannot be used at the will of the donee, even though the cause for
which he uses it is superior to the cause that is fulfilled. For,
what the donee may consider superior may be bad cause in the
estimate of the donor. I have just now an instance of that cha-
racter on which I had to decide yesterday. A gentleman gave
Rs. 10,000 in connection with national schools to Jamnalalji.
That amount of money is still unused. Jamnalalji wants to make
use of that money for national education, but for national education
which includes the untouchables. This is a superior cause as you,
Jamnalalji and I would consider. But I have advised that without
the donor's permission, seeing that the money is still unused,
it cannot be used. And the donor is certain not to give his per-
mission because of the disturbing introduction of the so-called un-
touchables. If Jamnalalji utilizes the money for a purpose which
the donor had never intended, he would be wrong and guilty of
the breach of the vow of asteya.
With reference to the second question: I take your own
case. You have reduced yourself to comparative poverty by
throwing overboard your job. Surely, you are the richer for it.
And if your personal wants are still further reduced, you would be
richer again. It is better that a man gives the whole of himself
than that he must retain a part for himself and a part for society.
And when a man reduces his wants to nil, he has given away his
whole self.
I hope now the thing is clear. I am keeping well.
From a microfilm: S.N. 13429
