115. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
December 1, 1936
CHI. KANTI,
I had your second letter yesterday. I have to answer both
your letters here together merely for want of time. I would
not have any difficulty in reading your long letters nor would
they tire me, because your handwriting is as neat as Mahadev's
and you never write nonsense. I was not under any apprehension
that you might adopt Islam while you were in Bombay. Amtul
Salaam had that fear. I had even rebuked her for that. However,
considering the disordered state of your mind, I did not think it
an impossibility. But you always have convincing arguments for
your changes and the motives of such changes are not immoral.
That is why I am able to put up with them. To me all religions
are equal, so I would not feel unhappy if one changed one's
religion with deliberate knowledge and in a sincere spirit in order
to cultivate more detachment and attain God sooner. However
there is one thing: one who believes that all religions are equal
will have no need to change his religion as it includes other
religions. One who has grasped this has no need to change his
religion.
I told you of my apprehensions about your going
there. I still have my fear. It seems that so far you have been
able to keep your head above water. If you succeed in doing
that till the end, it will be a triumph for you and I shall be
immensely satisfied.
Take it that for me it will have no value if you drain your
energies and come first in all the subjects. It has been truly said that
the body is verily the first means necessary for the performance
of dharma.
Eat wherever you want. Stay where you wish. But remain
healthy.
I have not given permission to Amtul Salaam to go anywhere.
However, I have not debarred her from going to Trivandrum
although I have issued several other injunctions. It was of course
good that you did not see her. There is no doubt that she is
childish and foolish. She would squander one lakh of rupees if
she had that amount. Do not encourage her but at the same time
do not neglect her. She has been asking me to withdraw the
injunction against her seeing you but I did not pay any heed to her.
Your examination result is very good. I had no doubt about
it.
You have given a good account of Harilal. God alone can
guide him. That is why I do not say anything to him. I had a
letter from him recently. There was nothing in it. I have
replied to it, an Arya Samajist is carrying on correspondence
with me. He may improve if the Arya Samajists guide him
properly, although the correspondent writes that that probability
is remote. I have forgotten his name but I have noted it down
somewhere. Harilal still wants to marry. He wants money
and a life of ease and enjoyment. You probably know about his
talk with Surendraji. However, it is impossible to set store by
his word because he is not consistent.
Lilavati is here. Manu arrived on Monday. Vijaya of Bar-
doli is also here. Those gentlemen who came to attend on
Nanavati and Mirabehn are also here. In a word, there is enough
company for us.
Durga and Bablo have also arrived, so Mahadev can be said
to have set up house. Occasionally I receive letters from Navin.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7309. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
