438. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
April 24, 1932
CHI. DEVDAS,
You have proved your opinion of yourself to be wrong. For,
your letter just received is, though not too short, not very long
either. But it will do.
I used to get news of you, though I did not hear from you
directly. It is good that you have got quiet there. It was necessary
for you to get used to it. Since you are keeping good health, I
do not worry on your account.
I certainly wish that you should master Urdu.
It is ten minutes to two now. Mahadev has come to me
after finishing most of his own work, and, since I write very
slowly with the left hand, I am now dictating this letter to him.
My aim in asking you to complete your study of Urdu is that you
should read Maulana Shibli's writings. He has written a bio-
graphy of the Prophet and also anecdotes from the lives of his asso-
ciates. There is much else too, with all of which I believe we
should become acquainted. If you have sufficient enthusiasm, you
should read all that. You can send for the books from Azamgarh,
where his office and madrasah are. Most probably, you were with
me during that tour and saw the place. The present incumbent
of Maulana Shibli's religious office is Maulana Suleman Nadvi,
since the former, as you must be aware, died some time ago.
I get quite good letters from Lakshmi. That is, she replies to
mine as a matter of religious duty. Her letters are rather short.
But she seems helpless. She admits that she cannot think of any-
thing to write and so contents herself with a few sentences.
However, whatever little she writes she writes beautifully, and her
Hindi may be said to be quite good. She writes a pleasing hand
and seems to be a quiet girl. But why need I describe her to you?
I have given here, though, the impression she has made on me.
She has been writing, it seems, to the Ashram inmates too.
We are happy here. We do not feel that we are in a jail.
How can men be styled 'State prisoners' unless they enjoy complete
freedom about food, sleep and all else? As for visitors, Dahya-
bhai comes every week and he sees both of us together; but
Mahadev does not have our status and, therefore, cannot join us
359
at the interview. Occasionally someone comes from the Ashram
too, and we two see the visitor. Durga and Jivanji came once
and saw Mahadev. Now we have decided for the present
that Durga should not come and unnecessarily spend money.
However, she is free to change her mind if she wishes, as she has
not taken a vow not to come.
This is our daily routine: All three of us get up at 3.45
a.m. After we have prayed together, Mahadev goes back to sleep
and we two take honey and water and then have a walk. After-
wards I sleep for about a quarter of an hour. At 6.30 all the
three have our breakfast consisting of bread, tea, etc., my tea
of course being crushed almonds mixed in water. I like it and
have so far not felt the want of milk. That is the only joint meal
during the day. The other two who drink milk have their next
meal at about mid-day, and I have mine at 4 p.m. In between,
I eat dates and almonds. At 4 p.m. I eat some vegetables, bread
and almonds. Mahadev has been doing a lot of spinning and
carding, giving the spare time, if any, to reading. At present
he has also to go through the proofs of the book being published
by the Oxford Press. I take about two of his hours for my work.
Owing to the pain in the hand, since the National Week I have
been spinning with the left hand and drawing the thread with
the right. I have had enough practice by now and experience
no difficulty, though the speed has of course slowed down. For-
merly I used to spin 375 rounds or more a week, but I cannot
maintain a steady speed now. I rest satisfied with whatever I
can spin in two to three hours. The highest number of rounds I
have been able to draw so far with the right hand is 182. How-
ever, I feel confident that gradually the speed will increase. As
for my reading, I could get Urdu readers here and am going
through them. I read Ruskin also and give some time to books
on astronomy too, as I have of late fallen in love with watching
the stars. With all this, I also find time for a nap of 20 or 25
minutes during the day. I have started writing the history of
the Ashram, having completed the remaining chapters of the
Ashram. Friends have been sending me enough for me to live
on. In fact they are too many already-over two hundred, as I
guess. Not that all of them are worth reading. I liked very
much Upton Sinclair's latest book which he sent me. In the
form of a novel, it gives a very good account of the working of
the American Prohibition Law. I am sending you the book,
which is named Wet Parade. Others of his books are there in the
Ashram, but I believe that this new book has probably not
arrived there. Mahadev told me a story of how you lost some
books. I was not surprised to hear it, as I think I know well
enough your capacity for losing things. Pyarelal is in Dhulia jail,
and Prabhudas is in Belgaum jail, where I hear that he is in
very good health. He has put on two more pounds of weight.
Kakasaheb is very weak. Jamnalalji, Vinoba, Gulzarilal, etc., are
in Dhulia jail. Ramdas is here, and so also are Chhaganlal Joshi,
Surendra, Mohanlal, Qureshi, etc.
I am permitted to see them
occasionally. Mathuradas is in Nasik jail. Taramati writes to me
occasionally.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2154
