118. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
As AT SABARMATI,
May 7, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,
I thank you for your letter of the 4th instant. I shall await your
further letter. May I however remind you that your receipt of a
copy of the revised notice referred to in your letter will only
enable His Excellency to deal with one matter whereas my origi-
nal letter covers several matters out of which unlicensed liquor
selling is becoming more and more urgent daily because it seems
to be increasing. His Excellency will perhaps agree that this is a
manifest breach of the Settlement.
There is one other matter which I wish to add. There is
the Young India press still undelivered. The district officer suggests
that the Manager should himself remove the press from where
it is lying, I believe, in Bombay and a portion in Ahmedabad.
The district officer in Kaira suggests a like procedure for a motor
and a bicycle lying somewhere in Kaira. C1.16(a) of the Settle-
ment clearly contemplates the return of movable property seized
in connection with the movement. It does not say that the seized
property is to be taken on application by the person but it is to
be returned, and if it is not irrelevant to mention it here, I may
inform you that the word 'returned' was chosen after discussion.
I may also add that, whilst I do not know anything about the
condition of the Young India press and other seized property, I do
know that the motor-car, and the bicycle seized in Kaira are
admittedly in a broken-up condition. It is also common ground
that, when they were seized, they were in good order and con-
dition. The district officer in Kaira in reply to my letter in con-
nection with these articles says as follows in his letter:
Reference the delivery of a motor-car and cycle. Government have
issued orders that ordinarily the owner of property attached under the
ordinance should be asked to remove the property from the place where
it is and that Government cannot undertake to undergo expenditure in
restoring it. I have no funds to which I could debit the cost of towing
the car—I understand it is not in running order—to Nadiad. I shall
be in Kaira tomorrow morning and suggest that the owner should have it
removed from my office there. If he thinks he has a right to recover
from Government the cost of removal and reconditioning, he should send
in his bill to Government and no doubt Government will call for a full
report on the whole circumstances, and the matter can be thrashed out,
but at present there is a stalemate which results in the car still suffering
depreciation.
I venture to suggest that these articles should be returned in
the same condition in which they were at the time of seizure. I
do not know that the officials of the Government had any autho-
rity or right to use these articles. But even if they had and if they
broke them, at the time of return they should be in good order
and condition. I would like the Government to give these two
matters prompt attention. Unlicensed liquor is causing daily havoc
amongst those who are gradually being weaned from the drink
habit and the detention of the seized articles which are of daily
use is causing a loss and inconvenience to the owners.
Yours sincerely,
R. M. MAXWELL, ESQ.
PRIVATE SECRETARY TO H.E. THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931 Part I, pp. 27-. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
