390. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,
April 22, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,
Only idiots can think of idiotic interpretation and because
you are such a brilliant specimen and agent of the A. I. V. I. A.,
naturally you will like the rest to belong to your species. Heaven
help poor me—their guide! ! !
Do you think anything on earth can be done without
trouble? You can't do even your unpacking without trouble.
Then what is the use of your saying that I should redeem my
promise to send you honey if it can be done without trouble?
I tell you that it cannot be done without some trouble. But
1 The addressee had interpreted A.I.V.I.A. as 'All-India Village Idiots'
Association'.
340
that trouble is going to be taken and honey is being sent. You
will cover the expense when you next send your cheque. The
parcels to follow will be sent to you direct from Calcutta or
Shillong, V. P. P. if you like. You will tell me when you will
want the next parcel. Let all eat this honey, if they prefer it
to the Australian. I am sure the
Shillong honey is any day
better than the foreign stuff, if only because it is fresher.
Your lace, mattress and the reversible sari must be in the
box that was being packed for you. You must receive it by this
time. I know there was some bungling about it. You are
not the only idiot. You may be the princess among them!!
Are you?
I go tomorrow to Nagpur, probably return on 25th, 27th for
certain. I go to Segaon, 5 miles from here, on 29th or 30th,
returning when required. I go with Sardar on 9th Mayor
about the date to Nandi Hill, Mysore. Mahadev and others
accompany me. Or else I would have insisted on Mahadev
going to you for a month. We descend to
Bangalore about
1st June and leave it about 10th June. This outing is neces-
sary because Dr. A[nsari] wants Sardar to go to a hill-station.
He would not go without me. If I had not to go to Mysore,
I would have passed a fortnight with the sisters at Panchgani.
I am sorry to disappoint them.
Of course I inflict myself on you, if I have to come to
Simla. I do not think I shall have to just yet. As for you,
I shall hold you to the three winter months with me and then
you will diet yourself under supervision. What would Shummy
say about it?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3722. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6878
