376. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
June 24, 1937
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. I read also your letter to Mahadev.
The latter I consider an excellent letter. You have been able
to describe very vividly the struggle going on in your heart.
Your decision is of course good. If you have determination,
and indeed you have it, any college will be good for you. But
compared to Bombay, Bangalore is superior because there you
will have more freedom. The fact that the Principal has sent
his son to Bombay counts little with me, for in doing so he
has merely put a higher value on Bombay degrees. For you
such value has, and I think should have, secondary importance.
It is not the university that brings credit to a brilliant
student but the latter that brings credit to a university. There
is a small village in England named Louth. Tennyson was a pupil
in that school and because of that even today the teachers of
that school take great pride in it. In the same way you should
bring glory to the college in Bangalore. What pains me particularly
when I see people going to England or the West is that those who
seek prestige for themselves by going to the West gain none,
but, of course, they certainly raise the value of Western degrees.
One can understand that those who seek prestige do not gain any,
for many who hold Western degrees remain unemployed. But anyone
who has ability, whether he holds a degree from the East or from
the West, does acquire prestige. The late Dr. Tribhovandas was
only an L. M. & S. He used to charge Rs. 1,000 a day as fee. He
was unrivalled both as physician and surgeon. And in the art of
restoring a nose that had been cut off, he has had no equal anywhere
in the world. The chief reason was that at that time dacoits had
made it a custom to cut the noses of high officials. Had Tribhovan-
das been diffident he would have called in some English doctor in
such cases. But being courageous he held the knife and the needle
in his own hands and restored the noses in all or almost all cases.
If a man is honest, he is sure to become proficient through experi-
ence. I have written all this to strengthen you in your decision, for
people will continue to put before you all sorts of arguments that
might persuade you to revise your decision. Your aim is to acquire
knowledge. It is not as if after getting a degree one need gain no
further knowledge. It is possible that real knowledge is acquired
only after getting a degree because that has been the experience
of most people. Regarding your lodging and boarding make
whatever arrangement you think will suit you from the point of
view of health and studies.
I did get Saraswati's letters and had also replied to her.
It is likely that the reply might have been delayed.
There is one sentence in your letter, "Some of the manners of
the people over here seem very uncivilized." Who are those people?
Ba, Kanu and Kusum Desai are expected here the day after
tomorrow.
It is cool now. The first rains of the season have not been
satisfactory.
Most probably Amtul Salaam will have a tonsillitis opera-
tion the day after tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7324. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
