434. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
Unrevised
ON THE FRONTIER DOWN MAIL,
August 28, 1931
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,
Will you please look after the columns of Young India? The
idea is that there should be no change of name as editor. I do
not think the law requires such change during the temporary ab-
sence of the editor in charge. But if such a change is required
C. Rajagopalachari should appear as the editor, and in any case
whenever you are in doubt or opinion among our own coterie
differs, C. Rajagopalachari's should be the final voice when a
reference is at all possible. When such is not possible Jairamdas's
should be the final voice and when even that is not possible yours
should be the final voice unless Kaka Saheb chooses to decide. I
do not want him to bear this burden. But he has a right when-
ever he considers intervention necessary. I have already written
to Rajagopalachari to send something regularly and I am asking
Jairamdas too to give you a weekly contribution or contributions.
I have asked Jawaharlal also to do likewise and he is likely to
send you a weekly budget of U.P news as also anything else he
may wish to write. This therefore should not prove too great a
strain on you. But if all these fail as they may you will fill in the
columns somehow or other. Of course I expect to be able to
send something every week. In all your writings I would like you
to make as little criticism as possible but give as many facts and
figures as possible.
If you find time you can study the economics of drink and
show by facts and figures what a tremendous waste the drink
habit means apart from the actual money value of the drink con-
sumed. You may also take up the whole subject of economic waste
that goes on in our midst through preventable disease, through
wrong feeding, through the criminal waste of human excreta as
manure. This waste has been worked out by Poord. I believe his
works we have in the Ashram. The double waste through wrong
feeding has been very partially worked out by Col. Macanister-
or some such name-the medico who has written on vitamins.
I have simply thrown together a few hints that should be sufficient
for you to make explorations and discoveries. Economics treated
373
in this manner can really become fascinating, interesting and
instructive for the masses. Nor do these explorations require very
deep or prolonged study for one like you who has studied the
science of economics. If you find that these are hints thrown out
by a man who knows nothing about economics you are at liberty
to brush aside the whole of this paragraph. Please share this letter
with Kaka Saheb. I expect to be away not longer than 3 months
at the outside and not less than six weeks in any event.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10098
