238. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
WARDHA,
December 10, 1928
SISTERS,
I have the letter written on your behalf.
You will get information about me from the letter written to
the whole Ashram.
All that is required to put a stop to the noise in the kitchen
is a firm determination. Once you make such a determination the
noise will definitely cease.
If you are not at home with your kitchen work as yet, let me
remind you that you cannot think of doing any other for an-
other year. It is best therefore that you make up your mind to
like your work.
But the painful incident that has just occurred must set all
of you thinking. The incident is not now a secret and it should
not be hidden. Therefore I want to discuss it here. Not one but
at least three of you were involved in it. It is needless to point the
finger of scorn at any of these three because all of us, whether men
or women, might be guilty of such misconduct at some time or
other or have already been guilty; I want you to learn two lessons
from this incident. In the first place we must stick to our kitchen
work for it is through it that we came to know about the mis-
conduct. If we live in the shelter of a home, we can never know
our capacity for sin. We realize the extent of it only when a
suitable opportunity presents itself. Here such an opportunity
occurred, aided by [bad] company. The result was the emer-
gence of the latent sin. The kitchen has in this way proved use-
ful. Secondly there was not enough courage to do things open-
ly, so theft and lying were resorted to. Why should we not do
a thing we want to do boldly? Why should we be afraid of
appearing as we actually are?
If we like tasty food, why hide the fact? Craving for tasty
dishes is no sin. The sin lies in hiding the craving and in secretly
indulging in it. Everyone, man or woman, is at liberty to eat
whatever he or she desires. That was one of our objects in con-
verting the Satyagraha Ashram into an Udyoga Mandir. Anyone
may satisfy his craving for good food, the only restriction is that the
good food must be prepared in the common kitchen. None should
cook delicacies whether secretly or openly in one's private rooms.
One may go out and eat a delicacy at a friend's place, there is
nothing to hide in this, or one may keep eatables such as dried
fruits and so on in one's room. It is better if such freedom is not
availed of, though there is no restriction on such freedom. My
earnest request to you is this: Always appear what you really are;
whatever you do, do it openly. Never allow yourselves to be un-
duly influenced by another; if you ever promise to do a thing, never
act contrary to it.
Everyone that does kitchen work must strictly follow her
routine. It does not look as though you had as yet been able to
remove the fears of Gangabehn senior. Every single activity in the
kitchen must go on regularly like clockwork.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3684
