322. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 3, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter.
Indu has put me some fine questions. Why should we do
in the Ashram exercises with swords, jamaiya etc.? I have dis-
cussed this question in my letter to Narandas. Hence I do not
say anything about it here. I have mentioned the question only
to ask you whether it has also occurred to you, since you have
been yourself learning these exercises.
I would not give to the Ashram the certificate which you
do. I would certainly be happy if it really deserved such a
certificate. You may have formed the impression that any person
in the Ashram who takes up some work becomes wholly absorbed
in it, but your impression is not correct. Are we able to observe
the Ashram vows faithfully? It had been decided to teach Hindi,
Urdu, Tamil, Telugu and Sanskrit in the Ashram, but we made
only a half-hearted effort. Have we acquired proficiency in tann-
ing? Do we spin fine yarn of the highest count? I can point to
many such deficiencies, but what I have said is enough to justify
my questioning [your certificate].
Everyone can pay single-minded attention to lathi exercises.
But we can say likewise that everyone runs after sweets. There
are indeed many things in the world the pursuit of which re-
quires no strenuous effort. Since we are also animals in our
nature, this quality [of pursuing a thing with single-minded at-
tention] is instinctive in us. It does not have to be cultivated.
The question is whether or not [in a particular case] it deserves
to be cultivated. Every property of animal nature need not of
course be regarded as something to be shunned.
How many persons take meals in the common kitchen these
days? Do you still make bread in the Ashram? If yes, who is
in charge of the work? If you make good bread, send a loaf
or two with any person who may come to see me.
If anyone from the Ashram meets Lakshmi, he or she should
tell her that I do not remember not having replied to any letter
from her. She should, therefore, write to me.
Dikshit's Jyotishshastra has been translated into Gujarati. I
have got a copy of the translation with me. Ball's work will be
available to me here, and so I don't want you to send a copy
from there. The books sent by Upton Sinclair belong to the
Ashram. Enter them in the catalogue and send me Boston and
Brass Tacks. Send a list of the rest.
I like the Upanishads. But I don't consider myself fit to
write a commentary on them.
You should know my love of jesting. I can tell you only in
jest that you ask me to describe your faults so that I may praise
you . There is, of course, this truth in my remark, that if a
person asks another who loves him or her to criticize him or
her, he or she will hear only praise, for love covers defects as with
a veil, or sees them as virtues. It is the nature of love that it
prompts one to point out on occasion the defects of the beloved
one because one wants to see perfection in the person whom one
loves. Did Kisan tell you that I was praising you even when I
described you as hysterical before Dhurandhar? For, in that
context you would have had to be held guilty of a more serious
offence if I did not believe that you were hysterical. You cer-
tainly are hysterical. Sometimes you almost become mad; what
does that signify? Anyone who gives way to an emotional out-
burst is hysterical. Do you understand what I mean?
I have always felt that Japan's policy is regrettable. She cer-
tainly deserved the victory over Russia but that does not make her
policy worthy of emulation by others. Just now, however, it will
be enough if we take care of our own policy. There is the Holy
Being eternally awake with a million eyes to watch Japan's policy.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10279. Also C.W. 6727. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
