112. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
POONA,
November 13, 1945
CHI. JAWAHARLAL,
I was very happy with our talks yesterday. We could not
have discussed more yesterday and it is my view that we shall
not be able to finish our work at a single sitting. We must
meet from time to time. I am so made that if I had the
strength to travel about, I would seek you out, stay with you
for a day or two, have some talk and then leave. Though I am
not in a position to do that now, you may know I have done
such things before. I want that people should know us as we
know each other. If in the end we find that our paths are dif-
ferent, then so be it. Our hearts will still remain one, for they
are one. The talks we had yesterday have given me the impression
that there is not much difference in our outlooks or the way
we understand things. I want to tell you how I have understood
you. If there is any difference you will let me know.
(1) The crucial question according to you, is how to ensure
man's mental, economic, political and moral development. That
is my position too.
(2) And in doing so every individual should have equal
right and opportunity.
(3) From this point of view there should be equality between
villages and cities. And therefore their food and drink, their
way of life, their dress and their habits should be the same. If
such a condition is to be brought about people should produce
their own cloth and food and build their own houses. So also
they should produce their own water and electricity.
(4) Man is not born to live in the jungle; he is born to live
in society. If we are to make sure that one person does not ride
on an other's back, the unit should be an ideal village or a social
group which will be self-sufficient, but the members of which will
be interdependent. This conception will bring about a change
in human relationship all over the world.
If I have understood you correctly up to here, I shall take
up the second part. I have had Rajkumari translate the letter
which I wrote to you earlier. I am getting this also translated
and will send the translation along with this. I serve two purposes
by getting the letters translated. First I can explain to you more
clearly in English what I want to say and secondly I shall be
able to know better whether I have understood you fully or not.
Blessings to Indu.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Gandhi-Nehru Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
