339. LETTER TO ANAND AND GANGI HINGORANI
NEW DELHI,
October 16, 1947
CHI. ANAND AND GANGI,
I have your letter. The condition of Sind is distressing. I
am pained by Father's condition. I just don't know what to
do. Do what both of you consider your duty.
If you have understood and assimilated my point, why should
you go to America? However, if you feel depressed all the time
because you are hard of hearing, go to any place in the world
and get yourself cured.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India
and Anand T. Hingorani
340.
SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
NEW DELHI,
October 16, 1947
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,
I have been forgetting to talk about Mysore. You must be
aware of what has happened there. Sir Ramaswamy Mudaliar is
the Dewan of Mysore. Mysore has joined the Indian Union.
The people of that State are well educated. They have resorted
to satyagraha quite often. This time too the people offered satya-
graha. They wanted adequate share for the people in the ad-
ministration. The Prince would remain and the people would be
loyal to him; but he should withdraw from administration.
This should have actually happened, but it did not. Hence the
satyagraha. The people sent me a telegram before launching
the satyagraha. They informed me that there was no cause for
me to worry. They said they had decided to resort to satyagraha
after a great deal of thought and they would strictly conform to
the rules of satyagraha. They were ready to face any hardships
in the pursuit of their goal. But the Dewan, Sir Ramaswamy
Mudaliar, is a very great man. He has travelled all over the
world. He realized that the people could no longer be ill-treated.
How long could it go on? The result was that all those who
had been taken prisoners were released and the issue was settled
between the Mysore State and the people. All the legitimate
demands of the people were accepted by the State. The ruler,
the Dewan and the people should be congratulated on this settle-
ment. The State has agreed to rule with the consent of the
people. There are many other such Princes. Let them also
follow this example and, like the King of England, rule with the
consent of the people. How wonderful it would be if they abided
by the will of the people and did not overstep the limit!
Another thing which I want to say is that the place where
I stay belongs to the Birla brothers. They allow everyone to come
in. We must appreciate their good gesture. Usually lakhs of
people attend the prayer meetings. But here the prayer meetings
have been small. Actually I did not expect even the present
number. Those attending these prayer meetings also include people
who have come from the Punjab. I was very pained to learn
that some people picked fruits from the trees around. Nobody
should touch a single fruit on the trees. Why talk of fruit, not
even a leaf should be plucked. The gardener would not at all
like people picking fruits like that. There is a time even for
picking fruits. They should not be plucked before their time. People
who come here come to worship. Let our hearts be pure at least
during the prayer meeting. During that period we should think
of nothing but God. How then can we resort to stealing? It
may be that we are all passing through troubled times. But let
us not give up our good behaviour.
I have received another complaint too. People keep coming
to see me throughout the day. Some of them say that by praising
Government officers, the police and the military I have given
them a certificate of efficiency. I have not said any such thing.
Even if I did, it was a folly on my part or I must have been
off my guard. But I have not said it at all. What I said was
that they should all rise to the occasion. Not that they have
already reached that level. It is one thing to say that a person
should have such and such qualities and another thing for him to
have those qualities. In any case, since I do not know anyone
of them, how could I give them any certificate? How do I know
that they are all working according to the law? Our duty is
to abide by the instructions of the police and the military,
because they are given a certain authority.
If we wish to have Panchayat Raj the first rule is that we
should follow its orders. We have not yet achieved the full
benefits of Panchayat Raj. Had we been truly non-violent,
this would not have been so. Even so, the British rule has ended.
The Governor-General, though he is a high-ranking officer in the
Navy and belongs to the royal family, has remained here as our
servant. He has to go by the opinion of our cabinet of Ministers.
He is not our master. Rather, we are his masters. Thus ours is
a democratic government and we must all abide by the laws made
by it. If anyone has any complaint against Government officers the
remedy lies in approaching Government or getting the complaint
published in the newspapers. If any officer has taken to bribery
or is inefficient, action should be taken against him. Those who
indulge in graft are committing a crime against themselves and
against the country. Recently some military officers were found
flogging people at the railway station. No officer has a right to
flog anyone. But in retaliation if we also start whipping we fall
victims to the same evil. Before independence, Government officers
used to behave like our masters and not servants. They were loyal
to the British Government, and if they took bribes in those days,
they were committing a crime against the British Government.
But if the officers take bribes now, they are committing a crime
against India. There is such a lot of difference in this.
Some people from Noakhali have also come to me. East
Pakistan is no small country after all. Places like Dacca and Tri-
pura are in East Pakistan. Those people tell me that the Hindus
in Dacca are fleeing. They fear some atrocities there. Those
Bengali friends have requested me to say something. I can say
only what I have been saying all along. Nobody should leave
his country or his home like that. The brave have nothing to
fear. If at all, they are afraid only of God. They should not
run away in cowardice. They must have the courage to die.
They must tell the Pakistan Government that they wish to remain
loyal to Pakistan and stay on there. They must assure it that they
will not betray and cut at the roots of Pakistan. They must say
that the Government may kill them, but cannot abduct their
daughters. If the Government forbids the name of Rama they
must insist on uttering that name. If it says they should not beat
drums on the Dussehra Day, they must insist on doing so and
explain that that is part of their religion. But it is very wrong
that influential people run away from there in order to save their
lives while the poor, helpless people stay on there. There is a
large population of Shudras there. How can they be expected to
show the requisite courage? If I am a businessman possessing
a lot of money, should I run away? That is not my dharma.
If the lawyers, doctors, tradesmen, etc., find that they have
got to leave their places, they should see that the poor have
found their safety first. It is not human to run away leaving the
poor behind. That can never bring glory to Hinduism, Islam
or Sikhism. Wherever you go, you should always keep the poor
with you. Unfortunately I am not in East Pakistan today. God
has not given me the power to be present everywhere. I am
just a human being and helpless at that. But I can certainly
make my voice reach them all, and that I am doing.
Those Bengali friends told me that I should request Dr.
Ambedkar to do something in the matter. He has done consid-
erable work among the depressed classes. On this occasion he too
should say a few things to the people there. Let him tell them
that it is sinful to keep alive at the cost of one's religion. Such
words would give them some strength.
I am also requested to send Suhrawardy Saheb over there.
It would be proper too that he went there. But Suhrawardy
Saheb is not here. He should be here in a day or two. But
Khwaja Nazimuddin is already there. He too says that no
Hindu or Sikh will be killed in Pakistan. Suhrawardy Saheb
too will go there to help him. How can he avoid going there?
Today, it is in the interest of everybody that Hindus, Muslims
and Sikhs should live in amity. If this does not happen, both
India and Pakistan will perish.
[From Hindi]
Prarthana Pravachan-I, pp. 424-
