519. LETTER TO MIRZA ISMAIL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
March 19, 1941
DEAR SIR MIRZA 3 ,
I must thank you for your most affectionate letter. I have
never doubted your personal affection for me, I was going to say
even partiality. These are things I treasure. They please me but
what I want is true co-operation, if my mission of peace and good-
will is to succeed.
Since you would know what I would like, I reduce to writing
my thoughts as they come to me.
I am quite clear in my mind that there is little real freedom
of speech in British India, there is still less in 'Indian India' and
there is no independent judiciary. Unfortunately you hold a differ-
ent view. Hence there is not much prospect of co-operation. I
am sure you will one day be convinced of this fundamental truth.
Till then we must agree to differ. Your Chief Justice is wholly unfit
for the post he holds. How can there be real justice! I know that
in British India too there have been unfit Chief and other Justices.
My point is that they become worse on going to the States. I feel
these things keenly because I am the only true friend among public
men of the Princes. This is a high but true claim. You are
about to leave. How I wish you can see truth as I feel it!
By way of palliative you can restore the sanads and redress the
wrong done to those candidates who were rejected. Such a step
will be appreciated. It won't be of much use because the lawyers
have turned the punishment to good account and they have become
workers. The rejected candidates have reconciled themselves to the
rejection. But as a gesture, if you can take the step, it will have a
value.
Don't please expect Bhashyam or others to seek an interview
with you but send for them as friends. Trust will beget trust. Surely
the first step should be yours.
I am asking Pattabhi to see you as early as he can.
I know that even in your retirement, you will be doing useful
service. May you have many years before you and may you be an
instrument for doing some truly big work.
Your sandal-wood box is always by my side and holds my odds
and ends.
This is a personal letter. I am not copying it. I have not writ-
ten it for any public use, nor do I expect a reply unless you feel
like sending one. My love to all members of the family.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Since writing this I have your letter regarding garlic for which
many thanks.
From a photostat: G.N. 2182
