492. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
September 6, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I thank you for your prompt reply to my letter of the 29th
ultimo. I had your wire too. I appreciate your hesitation to send
me an appointment straight away.
Whenever I come, if I do, as a result of this correspon-
dence, of course the announcement will be that I had sought an
appointment. As I can see things now, it is likely that after the
forthcoming meeting of the All-India Congress Committee I shall
renew my request for an appointment. For I wish to take no
step without first discussing things with you and making myself
sure that there is no room left for any misunderstanding.
I was well aware that your statement and the Secretary of
State's speech represented the decided policy of H. M. G. Had
we met, I would have sought a clearance of my doubts about
the manner in which the policy is being enforced and put before
you more fully my grounds for dissatisfaction which, I must
say, daily events are deepening.
I do not at all mind the
Congress wandering in the wilderness. Nor should I at present
engage in a fight with the Government over their policy if it
were based on grounds which could be understood by the plain
man. But I must not be a helpless witness to the extinction of a
great organization which I have held under curb on the ground
of refusal to embarrass H. M. G. at the present critical juncture.
I must not have it said of me that for a false morality I allowed
the Congress to be crushed without a struggle. It is this thought
that is gnawing at me.
As to the Maulana Saheb's disinclination to see you I had
clearly understood that you would give him the option either
to see you, if he felt like it, or to send you a written reply.
You did, as a matter of fact, give him the option. But instead
of sending a written reply he first wanted to ascertain whether
he was free to discuss the announcement itself, and when he was
told that he was not, naturally he chose not to take up your
time over discussing details of enforcing a plan of which he
thoroughly disapproved. Don't you think, taking the position
in the light I have understood it, that he was quite correct in
not visiting you?
I must deal with my complaints about the allegations as to
pressed contributions and higher salaries in another letter if
it becomes necessary to do so. Meanwhile I thank you for the
pains you are taking over my complaints.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 7848. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
