89. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
MEERUT,
November 1, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. The question of keeping a motor-car has
often been talked about. Doing so may possibly reduce our ex-
penses, but it will add to our worries. Besides, people will use a car
more often than they use one at present, so much so that ulti-
mately, I think, we would have to get rid of it. A car had also
been offered as a gift once or twice. The offers were declined
deliberately and after discussion with Maganlal and others.
More than a motor-car, we need electricity which is more useful
and less expensive. If we have it, we can also have an electric stove.
Even then, however, I have not had the courage to get the
connection. I do believe, though, that one day we shall have
a car and electricity, both. We may even have them during my
lifetime and I, too, may accept defeat and vote for them. At
79
present, however, the inner voice tells me distinctly that we
had better not have these things.
We certainly cannot have a zebra in any case. We must
use a bullock for our work and incur the expenditure of getting
him shod from time to time. And since he is our brother bul-
lock, we should be content with whatever work he gives. The
cow being our mother, the bullock surely is our brother. And so
long as we recognize the distinction between kinsmen and others,
we must tolerate a brother even if he is lame or infirm.
I will write to Jamnadas and get from him the information
which you desire. I have so much faith in him that even when
he incurs some expenditure which seems excessive I am not dis-
turbed.
I know, of course, that too much has been spent on
putting up the building for the national school. That at any rate
is my view. I had most probably expressed this view in the
public meeting itself when I declared the school open. At any
rate I did tell Jamnadas about it and he had even admitted his
mistake. This is my position. Your position is different. You
should certainly ask questions about the smallest details. The
questions which you have asked are, therefore, all right.
Exhibit in the museum the cloth received from Farrukhabad.
I have left the letter incomplete here.
Delhi, 1-11-1929
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5469
