328. LETTER TO TARACHAND
SEVAGRAM,
March 3, 1945
DEAR DR. TARACHAND,
I understand and appreciate the principle involved in No. 7
of your scheme. If full local autonomy is granted to Western
Bengal and East Punjab as proposed in Nos. 1 and 2 of your
scheme, it may overcome the objections of the Muslim League
and obviate the necessity of dividing Bengal or Punjab.
This part of your scheme should be treated as an essential
condition and not be considered as mere detail.
I do not follow the argument in No. 5. If, however, the people
of the areas concerned are agreeable to dispense with a plebi-
scite, I would not insist on it. It is a matter for consideration
what, apart from a plebiscite, would be a satisfactory proof of
the people being agreeable to the proposal.
I presume that the step embodied in No. 4 will be simul-
taneous with and an integral part of the whole scheme.
198
Apart from and independent of these proposals I may add
that if you can induce the League to accept the award of a
board, say consisting of yourself and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, I
would accept it.
You will mark the changes I have made in your draft, which
I enclose herewith.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[ENCLOSURE]
Suggested changes shown in margin.
My interpretation of Mahatmaji's letter of 24th
September, 1944, to Mr. Jinnah is as follows:
(a) that Mahatma-
ji's terms are
an acceptance
of the claim
for separation
according to a
reasonable in-
terpretation of
the
Muslim
League resolu-
tion of 1940.
(a) that Mahatmaji accepts the Muslim claim for
separation as contained in the Muslim League
resolution of 1940.
(b) Mahatmaji is agreeable to the appointment of a
commission consisting of representatives of the
Congress and the League immediately for the
delimitation of the boundaries of the separate
sovereign States.
(c) Mahatmaji wants that the sovereign States will
immediately enter into a treaty for the purpose of
(i) safeguarding interests of minorities,
(ii) establishing a machinery for the adminis-
tration of subjects of common concern.
But Mahatmaji desires that the wishes of the
inhabitants of the areas to be demarcated into
sovereign States should be ascertained by a
plebiscite.
Mahatmaji does not agree with the theory that
the Hindus of the whole of India or the Muslims of
the whole of India constitute two separate nations.
In my (Tarachand's) opinion Mahatmaji has substan-
tially accepted the Muslim demand and agreed to the
establishment of two sovereign and independent States
in India. The differences between Mahatmaji and
Mr. Jinnah are :
(1) Mahatmaji wants before separation a plebiscite.
(2) He does not believe in the theory of religious or
communal nationality.
(3) He desires that the machinery for administration
of matters of common interest should be embodied
in the treaty of separation.
I suggest that the differences between Mahatmaji
and Mr. Jinnah can be eliminated provided an
agreement is arrived at as follows :
(1) The sovereign and independent States in the
North-West and East and in the rest of India
should be federations. The units of these federa-
tions will be, in the North-West:
(i) Baluchistan,
(ii) North-West Frontier Province,
(iii) Western and Central Punjab,
(iv) South-Eastern Punjab (one or two units)
(v) Sind.
(2) These units will have certain subjects including
culture, education, personal law, etc., under the
control of the governments of the units. The
federal government will have the usual federal and
common subjects under its control.
(3) Similarly there may be units in Bengal, if the
inhabitants of Bengal so desire and the remaining
India will form one federation.
(4) These two federations will by treaty establish a
confederation of independent and sovereign fede-
rations for the administration of matters of com-
mon interest, e. g., defence, customs, foreign affairs,
communications.
(5) The establishment of the confederation eliminates
the necessity of a plebiscite, which therefore need
not be held.
(6) The subjects of
each federation
will be full
nationals and
no discrimina-
tion will be
made among
them in the
matter of vot-
ing or other-
wise on the
ground of race
or creed.
(6) The subjects of each federation will be the full
nationals and no discrimination will be made
among them on the ground of race or creed.
(7) The establishment of federations in different regions
obviates the need for any large adjustment of
the present boundaries of the provinces.
(8) The provisions about the establishment of feder-
ations and confederations will be embodied in
the treaty of separation.
From a photostat: G.N. 5120
