262. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 22, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I understand about Kanchan. My judgment approves of
her opposition. For you have observed no limit in harassing
her and now you yourself tell her that from the social point
of view your reason does not approve of the thing. Kanchan is
bound to interpret that to mean that you are opposed. You
also desire children, and that is why you cannot regard
either yourself or Kanchan fit for brahmacharya. You have tested
yourself much. I should advise you now to set up house sepa-
rately so that both of you can be happy. If you give up the
thought of brahmacharya and live as a householder no harm will
follow. If you wish later to observe abstinence, you will be able to
do so. It seems to me that a separate establishment for you
two and brahmacharya go ill together. However, do what your
heart bids. Chi. Kanaiyo tells me that you like his suggestion.
I have made a few suggestions. For two days he is going to
Wardha. When Sushila comes from Nagpur, he will return here.
Meanwhile, all of you may think things over. In my absence you
are bound to be under less pressure.
I understand about servants. In this matter also you should
regard my view only as a suggestion. You should do whatever
all of you like and think. About newspapers, Ramprasad tells
me that these days he himself gets them at half past one. It
would be better if you discussed the matter further with him. If
you can take charge of the newspapers, you may do so. I would
not at all advise you, though, to take it up. However, have a
talk with Pyarelal.
My desire to run away from here also has at the back of
it the consideration of the convenience of you all. But we need
not think about this matter. If it is to happen it will happen
in the natural course. And then neither I nor you nor anybody
else will be able to stop it.
Are you satisfied now?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5831. Courtesy : Munnalal
G. Shah
