110. LETTER TO T. K. MADHAVAN
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 11, 1926
MY DEAR MADHAVAN,
I have your letter. I am glad of the settlement at Suchin-
dram. Dr. Naidoo did telegraph to me about it and I wrote
him in reply that I would not notice it in the pages of Young
India till I had a full text of the settlement. I now see that it is
all confidential. I suppose therefore I must say nothing about it.
I do not at all like the idea of your resigning the membership
as a protest against the Dewan's ruling. If every member who
considers some ruling to be unjust were to resign there would be
no member left. We must not become judges in our own suits in
the manner you have been. How do you know your interpreta-
tion is right and the Dewan's wrong? Of course I know no-
thing of the merits but I know the principle on which resig-
nation by way of protest can be tendered. The injustice of the
ruling may be a cause for moving the adjournment of the house
or making a simple statement and doing many other things, but
surely not for resignation. I would like every act of yours to be
well-considered and dignified. Your responsibility is much greater
than an ordinary member's because you are a representative of
suppressed classes and unfortunately even an error of judgment on
your part will be magnified whereas many stupidities on the
part of ordinary members will be condoned.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. T. K. MADHAVAN
TRIVANDRUM LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY MEMBER
TRIVANDRUM
From a microfilm: S.N. 19355
1 1 1 . LETTER TO SURESH BABU
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 11, 1926
DEAR SURESH BABU,
Your letter was received after I telegraphed to you. Lest
you may not find time to come here, I want to say in reply to
your letter that it was wrong on your part to have delayed com-
pletion of the contract form pending satisfaction.
Regarding the difficulties mentioned by you, I will still
advise you to finish the contract before you ask the Secretary to
consider the many points raised by you. I ask this because it
was upon my own personal desire that money was sent to you
without the conclusion of formalities. In the first instance it was a
departure from the methods that a big corporation like the All-
India Spinners' Association should really follow.
If you can possibly come here the majority of the things men-
tioned by you can be dealt with satisfactorily. I had expected
from you a full description of the Poet's visit to the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19356
