490. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 27/ December 3, 1930
Thursday morning
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time your packet was handed over to me as soon as
it came yesterday evening. I have received the copies of Vrata-
vichar.
If Chi. Kusum is firm in her decision, I like it. Since in any
case she will not marry before swaraj is won, why should she
bind herself just now? The right thing would be to act upon
her inclination at that time. Convey this view of mine to both
Devchandbhai and Jamnalalji. Ascertain Kusum's real wishes.
She should not advance this as an excuse if in the depth of her
heart the real reason is different. She is completely free to do
what she wishes. I would tell this same thing to the two young
men too; if they are ready to wait till we get swaraj, why should
they wish to bind themselves or bind any girl now? A brave
man or bhakta would not do that, and if Kusum is a brave girl
and if she has decided to marry, she should marry a brave youth.
I will write to Ghanshyamdas.
Why does Manilal refuse to take milk? If he keeps up his
strength, however, I don't insist that he should take it. Only,
he should not be obstinate in refusing to take it. If he is losing
weight, he should take it. Why doesn't Devdas write?
Friday morning
Ever since I had heard about Amidas, I was filled with admi-
ration for him. He has achieved perfect victory. He was like
one of the ancient sages in keeping his pledge. I believe the
Ashram to have been sanctified by his having stayed there. Let
all of us learn from Amidas how to die cheerfully for the sake
of our pledge. If he had been inspired by my example in taking
the vow of refraining from milk, etc., he had acted hastily. I think
that no one should copy my example in this respect till I myself
succeed in keeping such a vow. It is, however, clear to me as
daylight that, having taken the vow, Amidas could not break it.
A vow taken with open eyes, even if it means a risk to the body,
ought not to be broken. A vow which would do harm to the soul
353
44-23
ought not to be taken and, if such a vow has been taken, it is one's
moral duty to break it. For instance, no one can take a vow that
he will always speak untruth, for such a vow harms the soul. A vow
always to speak the truth may mean a risk to the body and may
cost us our life, it may even seem to harm the interests of the
country, but it must be kept. I will write a letter to his father.
Read it and send it on to him.
Saturday morning
As regards Sorabji's insurance, inform him that it is beyond
our means to pay the premiums. He should manage somehow
to pay them and should send the receipt. Write to Jalbhai
too about this. Make a note of Budhabhai's decision concerning
Nanibehn and inform her about it, and go on recovering the
money till the amount is paid up. I was not satisfied by . . . 's
letter. Read the reply which I have written to him. So long
as we entertain a suspicion about him, he cannot join the struggle.
Only those inmates of the Ashram who are pure in our eyes may
join it.
Take the utmost care about the [spinning] yajna. Endeavour
to remove the deficiencies in such work. Everyone should learn to
test the strength and count of yarn, and should actually do so
every day. A rough and ready method of testing the strength can
be easily invented. It should be invented and everyone should
test the strength of his or her yarn with its help. If the yarn
spun by each is woven separately, we would know its strength better.
It was very good indeed that Sitala Sahay came. But how did
he escape the attention of the U.P. Government? Show Shiva-
bhai's letter to Kakasaheb before you send it to me. If the
facts he mentions are such as can be given publicity, there is no
objection to his writing to me about them. On the contrary,
there may be some advantage in informing me about them. But
leave the responsibility in this regard to Kakasaheb.
. . . 's case is a moving one. I cannot understand how . . .3
came to form such a connection. I will write to him. Read
the letter and pass it on to him.
Sunday night
I have written the letter I mentioned above. It has turned
out to be a very important one. I should like it to reach him.
1,2& 3 The names have been omitted.
I got the taklis sent by Vinoba. Read the letter to Mirabehn
for information about my health. They sent Pyarelal here
immediately after Kaka had left. Read the back of page I for
the discourse.
December 2, 1930
Inform Mahadev that he should write even from the jail, if
he can get time and is permitted to write. More next week.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
The third, the fourth and the following fifth chapter should
be read together, as they explain to us what the yoga of selfless
action (anasakti) is and what are the means of practising it. If
these three chapters are properly understood, the reader will have
less difficulty in tackling what follows. The remaining chapters
deal in detail with the ways and means of achieving anasakti. We
should study the Gita from this point of view, and if we pursue
this study we shall find without much trouble a solution of the
problems which confront us from day to day. This calls for daily
practice. Let everybody try it. If for instance he is angry, let
him remember the verse dealing with anger and subdue that
enemy. Supposing we heartily dislike somebody, or are im-
patient or gluttonous or in doubt as to whether we should do or
should not do something or other, all these difficulties can be solved
with the help of mother Gita if we have faith in it and give it
constant study. Our daily recitation of the Gita as well as this
series of letters is a means to this end.
The bugle for 5.30 a.m. has sounded.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 52 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
