137. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
NAME OF PRISONER: M. K. GANDHI
NUMBER (with initial letter): 777
PRETORIA PRISON,
TRANSVAAL,
March 25, 1909
MY DEAR SON,
I have a right to write one letter per month and receive also one
letter per month. It became a question with me as to whom I should
write to. I thought of Mr. Ritch, Mr. Polak and you. I chose you,
as you have been nearest my thoughts in all my reading.
As for myself I must not, I am not allowed to, say much. I am
quite at peace and none need worry about me.
I hope mother is now quite well. I know several letters from you
have been received but they have not been given to me. The Deputy
Governor however was good enough to tell me that she was getting
on well. Does she now walk about freely? I hope she and all of you
would continue to take sago and milk in the morning.
And how is Chanchi ? Tell her I think of her everyday. I hope
she has got rid of all the sores she had and that she and Rami are quite
well. I was much struck by one passage in Nathuramji's introduction
to the Upanishads. He says that the Brahmacharya stage—i.e., the first
stage—is like the last, i.e., the Sanyasin stage. This is true. Amusement
only continues during the age of innocence, i.e., up to twelve years only.
As soon as a boy reaches the age of discretion, he is taught to realise his
responsibility. Every boy from such age onward should practise continence
in thought and deed, truth likewise and the not taking of any life. This
to him must not be an irksome learning and practice but it should be
natural to him. It should be his enjoyment. I can recall to my mind
several such boys in Rajkot. Let me tell you that when I was younger
than you are, my keenest enjoyment was to nurse my father. Of
amusement after I was twelve, I had little or none. If you practise the
three virtues4, if they become part of your life, so far as I am concerned,
you will have completed your education—your training. Armed with
them, believe me, you will earn your bread in any part of the world
and you will have paved the way to acquire a true knowledge of the
soul, yourself and God. This does not mean that you should not receive
instruction in letters. That you should and you are doing. But it is
a thing over which you need not fret yourself. You have plenty of time
for it and after all you are to receive such instruction in order that your
training may be of use to the others.
Remember please that henceforth our lot is poverty. The more
I think of it, the more I feel that it is more blessed to be poor than to
be rich. The uses of poverty are far sweeter than those of riches.
You have taken the sacred thread. I want you to live up to it.
It appears that leaving one's bed before sunrise is almost indispensable
for proper worship. Do therefore try to keep regular hours. I have
thought much over it and read something also. I respectfully disagree
with the Swamiji in his propaganda. I think that the adoption of
the sacred thread by those who have for ages given it up is a mistake.
As it is, we have too much of the false division between shudras and
others. The sacred thread is therefore today rather a hindrance than
a help. I should like to elaborate this view but I cannot for the present.
I am aware that I am expressing these views before one who has made
a lifelong study of the subject. Yet I thought that I would pass on to
the Swamiji what I have been thinking over. I have studied the Gayatri.
I like the words. I have also studied the book the Swamiji gave me.
I have derived much benefit from its perusal. It makes me more
inquisitive about the life of Swami Dayanand . I see that the meaning
given by Swami Dayanand to the Gayatri and several mantras of the
Vajasaneya Upanishad is totally different from that given by the orthodox
school—now which meaning is correct? I do not know. I hesitate
straightway to accept the revolutionary method of interpretation suggested
by S. Dayanand. I would much like to learn all this through the
Swamiji's lips. I hope he will not leave before I am out, but ifhe does
leave, will he kindly leave all the literature he can or send it from India?
I should also like to know what the orthodox school has said about
S. Dayanand's teaching. Please thank the Swamiji for the handmade
socks and gloves he has sent me. And get his address in India. Show
the whole of this letter to the Swamiji and let me know what he says.
I have not yet thanked Bhatt Keshavram for presenting me with
the Upanishads. The book has been simply invaluable. It has given
1 Swami Shankeranand, Hindu missionary who toured South Africa in 1908-
2 A Vedic mantra, the metre of which is known by the same name
3 Swami Dayanand Saraswati (1824-1883); founder of Arya Samaj
4 Isha Upanishad
me much solace. Write to him thanking him on my behalf and tell
him what I have said above.
How is the school progressing? Have any other boys come? How
are Ebrahim 1 and Manikam 2 ? If the building is being constructed,
Chhaganbhai should see to it that four tanks are put at the four corners.
Mr. Ismail Gora should be approached regarding it.
How is Mr. Cordes? Tell him I have not forgotten the scene
enacted at Mr. Kallenbach's the day I left for Volksrust. I often think
of him, sit and say to myself, "After all, how egotistical we all are!"
Mrs. West by this time must be out of the woods. Let me know
how she, Mrs. Pywell 4 and Devibehn are keeping. I trust Mrs. Pywell
continues to act the mother of the settlement.
Has Thakar arrived? If he has, where is he housed? How is
he? How is his wife?
I hope Kababhai's son is quite all right now and that
Dhoribhai and Nagar 10 are now fixed up.
Let Mr. Polak please keep his eye on the finances of the office.
Dada Abdulla & Co. should be approached and asked to pay a portion
of the debt they owe. Mr. McIntyre11, I hope, is looking after the
business part of the office. What about Miss Schlesin's articles? I
am entitled to receive one visitor during a month. Let Mr. Polak come.
He has not yet sent the books I have asked for.
I received Purshotamdas'12 letter. But I was not able to reply
to it. He should have the verandah fenced. The other additions should,
I think, for the present, stay over unless they are absolutely required.
I hope, tell him, he has well digested the conversation I had with him.
He has raised in me great expectations to which he has to live up. How
is poor Ani13? She must be loaded with work!
Please let me know how Messrs Sam, Behary, Muthu, Rajcoomar,
Ram and Mannering are getting on?14 Remember me to them. I hope
Mr. Mannering has not again got tired of the jungle life.
Remember me to Mr. West and ask him to recall the communion
I had with him on the day of departure from Phoenix.
And now again, yourself. Do give ample work to gardening, actual
digging, hoeing, etc. We have to live upon it in future. And you should
be the expert gardener of the family. Keep your tools in their respective
places and absolutely clean. I hope Ramdas and Devdas are keeping
well, learning their lessons and not causing any worry. Has Ramdas
got rid of his cough?
I trust you all treated Willie well while he was with us. Any
balance of the foodstuff left by Mr. Cordes, I doubt not you have
returned to him.
And now about yourself. How are you. Although I think that
you are well able to bear all the burden I have placed on your shoulders
and that you are doing it quite cheerfully, I have often felt that you
required greater personal guidance than I have been able to give you.
I know too that you have sometimes felt that your education was being
neglected. Now I have read a great deal in the prison. I have been
reading Emerson, Ruskin and Mazzini. I have also been reading the
Upanishads. All confirm the view that education does not mean a
knowledge of letters but it means character building, it means a knowledge
of duty. Our own word literally means 'training'. If this be the true
view and it is to my mind the only true view, you are receiving the best
education—training—possible. What can be better than that you should
have the opportunity of nursing mother and cheerfully bearing her
ill temper, or than looking after Chanchi and anticipating her wants
and behaving to her so as not to make her feel the want of Harilal
or, again, than being guardian to Ramdas and Devdas? If you succeed
in doing this well, you have received more than half your education.
In your lessons you should give a great deal of attention to mathe-
matics and Sanskrit. The latter is absolutely necessary for you. Both
these studies are difficult in after life. You will not neglect your music.
You should make a selection of all the good passages, hymns and verses,
whether in English, Gujarati or Hindi and write them out in your best
hand in a book. The collection at the end of a year will be most valuable.
All these things you can do easily if you are methodical, never get
agitated and think you have too much to do and then worry over what
to do first. This you will find out in practice if you are patient and
take care of your minutes. I hope you are keeping an accurate account,
as it should be kept, of every penny spent for the household.
Remind Anandlalbhai of his promise this time not to dis-continue
his studies. I am more anxious that he should give a proper training
to Vijia. Has he secured the garden?
1 Anandlal's daughter
Please tell Maganlalbhai that I would advise him to read Emerson's
essays. They can be had for nine pence in Durban. There is a cheap
reprint out. Those essays are worth studying. He should read them,
mark the important passages and then finally copy them out in a notebook.
The essays to my mind contain the teaching of Indian wisdom in a
Western garb. It is refreshing to see our own sometimes thus differently
fashioned. He should also try to read Tolstoy's Kingdom of God Is
within You. It is a most logical book. The English of the translation
is very simple. What is more, Tolstoy practises what he preaches.
I hope the evening service continues and that you and all attend
the Sunday service at Mr. West's.
You should copy this letter. Get the others to assist you and send
a copy of it to Mr. Polak and a copy to Mr. Kallenbach, another to
Swamiji. You should read my letter carefully and give me a detailed
reply. You should wait for a reply from Mr. Polak so that you may
tell me what he has to say. As soon as you have read and understood
my letter, you may commence writing your reply. It should be [in]
ink and neat. Let it be as long as you want to make it. It should not
contain any information about the struggle. Then there would be
no difficulty about my getting it. You may take your time about the
reply. This will be in your hands perhaps on Tuesday. I shall wait
a week from that date. You may even take longer if you like. You
should await Swamiji's and Mr. Kallenbach's letters also before closing
your letter. You may tell me what they have to say. You may write
a little from day to day. What you cannot express in English, you
should get Purshotamdas to translate for you. If you do not understand
any portion of this letter, you should get it translated to you.
Please send me a copy of Algebra. Any edition will do.
And now I close with love to all and kisses to Ramdas, Devdas
and Rami.
From
FATHER
MASTER MANILAL GANDHI
C/O INDIAN OPINION
PHOENIX
NATAL
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4676
Courtesy: Louis Fischer
9-14
