368. LETTER TO RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
February 11, 1933
DEAR RAMANANDA BABOO,
I thank you for taking so much trouble over my letter of the
20th ultimo about the Yeravda Pact. I had read all that appear-
ed in the Modern Review on the Pact and I wish that I had
spared you the trouble of sending me copies by telling you that
I had read them and asking you if you had any further comments
to offer on the matter in view of the agitation set up in Bengal.
I am not so bad as I used to be out of prison. Then, I had not
a moment to read even the Modern Review let alone other maga-
zines and papers. Inside the prison hitherto I have had time
to read the Modern Review which you have been so kindly and
punctually sending me from month to month.
The argument in your letter is quite clear to me though it
does not convince me. I was surprised even when I read your
1 Of October, 1932
2 Wherein the addressee had written: "My individual opinion is against
the Poona Pact, so far as it relates to Bengal . . . Reservation of seats for
the depressed will not help the really "depressed" or "untouchable" people.
. . . The present "depressed" class M. L. C.s generally oppose nationalist par-
ties and side with the pro-bureaucracy Mussalmans. Giving 30 seats out of 80
to the depressed castes would mean the practical wiping out of a nationalist
opposition party in the future Bengal Council. . ." (S. N. 20155).
272
note on the Yeravda Pact. For I had heard that you had been
party to the statement made by Dr. Moonje that so far as Hindu
Sabha was concerned he was quite willing that cent per cent seats
were given to the depressed classes, and I was glad when I read
the statement and still more so when I heard that you had hear-
tily approved of it.
My own position is fundamentally different from yours. If
there was to be any reservation at all, and I saw that there had to
be, we could not afford to give it in a niggardly spirit. We were
bound to give as many seats as Harijan representatives desired and
certainly up to their numerical strength. My action was based
on absolute trust. If we have to suffer for it no one will be to
blame but ourselves. We can never suffer if we will be only strict-
ly just to them. We can never be generous, for there is no dan-
ger for years to come of our giving them too much. I wish that
I can persuade every caste Hindu as to the measure of the enor-
mity of the wrong done by them to Harijans. Nor do I mind
many who have hitherto described themselves as caste Hindus rush-
ing to the registering officers to be classified as Harijans.
I do not mind because daily we must be advancing towards efface-
ment of the vicious distinction between caste Hindus and out-
castes, so much so that it would be a privilege for a caste Hindu
to be classified as Harijan.
Indeed, in my opinion Bengal is in a better position than the
other Provinces, if it is true that there are very few untouchables
in the real sense of the term-and I think that it is true-but that
many are classed as such because they are economically depressed
and are suffering from other social disabilities than untouchability.
So far as I am concerned, let all, everywhere, who are at all eco-
nomically depressed and are suffering from any social disability
get themselves registered as Harijans, if to be registered as Hari-
jans is an optional act. That very fact will be a factor in the
removal of untouchability instead of, as you fear, in hardening it.
Lastly, I do not share your fear that in many elections only
those who may be called advanced Harijans will be elected. That
and many other things will undoubtedly happen if the reformer
either goes to sleep or is insincere. If he is sincere and active,
untouchability will be a dying cult and those who are lowest in
the social scale and intelligence will get their due. And if at the
bottom of all your arguments and fears there is the suspicion that
the reformer is not all that one would desire it to be, for a
moment, but only for a moment, I would be tempted to share that
suspicion, but I am a born optimist. I have faith in my sincerity
53-18
and activity. Therefore I refuse to suspect my comrades. Hence
the counter arguments that I have advanced. I would invite you
to share my faith in the reform and the reformers and believe with
me that if we are true the Harijans will be true and all will be
well. If you find nothing in my letter that appeals to you I would
like you to strive with me and tear my argument to pieces. You
know the regard I have for you. If it admits of enhancement it
would only be enhanced by your frank and fearless criticism. I
am anxious that we approach the Yeravda Pact and all it means
with perfect confidence in its correctness.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
C/O "THE MODERN REVIEW"
CALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20217
