121. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
May 22, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,
A letter addressed to me at Calcutta in which you wrote
about a young graduate, went from place to place and was
received only yesterday. Your letter written on the train was duly
received and was easily readable. And now has come yours of
19th.
I feel better and rested after reaching Segaon. I want men-
tal rest. The mind has been overworked. I can take that rest
only here, so I find from experience.
The heat is no doubt trying. But I feel the joy of being
a co-sharer with the other inmates. I propose presently to take
daily silence for a few hours.
My weight was found to be 106 yesterday-not much of a
loss for retaining the health I was able to keep.
Yes, the Mysore communique was distinctly good. You
must have liked the W. C. resolution. It was good you went
to Mysore.
I shall gladly revise what you may send.
What do you say to my exploit about Prithvi Singh?
I must send you a copy of what happened between Jinnah
and me. He is a very tough customer. If the other members
of the League are of the same type a settlement is an impossibi-
lity. But there is a way out for a unilateral undertaking. Settle-
ments cannot be unilateral. I do not know that a unilateral
undertaking will not be in the prevailing atmosphere a better
mode of handling the situation. But every attempt must be
made to arrive at a mutual understanding.
I have not yet written to the Mirza. I shall do so in a day
or two. As for myself you are right. You and others can help
me only through prayer. I feel that the cloud is lifting. What
is happening to make me feel easy, I do not know. And why
should I worry? God's ways are mysterious.
1 &2 Vide "Resolution on Mysore Settlement", pp. 87-.
92
I had an hour's good chat with Jawaharlal on 19th. Your
diagnosis is correct. The European visit will do him good. Of
course he is at heart religious, though he denounces religion. He
reads the Gita. He sports a Buddha head in his bedroom.
Whatever he does and wherever he is, it is well with him.
Did I ever tell you that I did not deliver your letter to
Jinnah? I did not like it. It should have made no mention
of me but should have confined itself to the question itself. But
it does not matter.
How are you doing? What about the eczema? And the
throat?
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3629. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6438
