213. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[LONDON,]
August 10, 1909
CHI. MANILAL,
I have received your letter. There is little hope of any settlement;
I am therefore writing this on Tuesday, for there is likely to be a greater
pressure of work on me than before.
The words in your letters are sometimes incomplete. You will do
better if you form the habit of reading the letters after writing them.
As regards having another tank, my advice is that you should carry
on for the present without buying a new one. The rains will now set in
and it will be possible to carry on with one tank. Meanwhile, I hope to
be able to go there. We shall see to it then.
I am glad that you have given up worrying [about your studies].
The more I observe things here, the more I feel that there is no reason
to believe that this place is particularly suited for any type of better
education. I also see that some of the education imparted here is faulty.
However, there is a constant desire in my mind that each of you should
be able to come and stay here for a while at least. If we go on doing our
duty properly, we need not worry about the future. Your studying there
earnestly would be your preparation for coming here. Mr. West's
mother is just 150 miles away from London and yet she has never visi-
ted this city. The distance between London and Louth is only three and
a half hours.
That there are more fruit trees on the land than we can look after
shows our lack of competence. You should grow only so much as you can
look after yourself.
Please let me know what made Anibehn ill, the nature of her ill-
ness and for how many days she has gone to Tongaat, and other news.
It is a matter of joy that Kababhai got a son. However, as you know
my ideas in the matter, I feel sorry too. Thinking of the state of affairs
in the country, I believe very few Indians need marry at the present time.
The significance of marriage is also very deep. A person who marries
in order to satisfy his carnal desire is lower than even the beast. For the
1 Harilal Gandhi and Parsee Rustomjee were released on August 9 and 10
respectively. Rustomjee was re-arrested the same day and sentenced on August 11.
2 Vide "Letter to H. S. L. Polak", pp. 356-.
married, it is considered proper to have sexual intercourse only for having
progeny. The scriptures also say so. Thus considered, all the progeny
that is born now is the issue of passion. Hence it is that the children born
are mean and faithless and continue to be so. I do not want to discuss
these things further with you; for that one has to go deeper into them.
But I want you to understand the purport of what I have said above;
and, understanding it, conquer your senses. Do not be scared by this
and think that I want to bind you not to marry even after the age of25.
I do not want to put undue pressure on you or on anyone whatever. I
just want to give you advice. If you do not think of marriage even at the
age of 25, I think it will be to your good. But in case you feel like marry-
ing then, I would like to explain to you the meaning of marriage from
Kababhai's example. I am putting this serious subject before you,
though you are but a child, simply because I have a high opinion of your
character. I would not place these thoughts before any other child of
your age, for he would not understand them.
More you will know from my letters to Ba and others, which I shall
write hereafter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the original Gujarati in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 85
Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
