480. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
April 15, 1933
CHI. MANILAL,
I have to answer two letters of yours. I had intended to re-
ply to your previous letter, but somehow failed to do so.
I have heard that Pragji has landed in Bombay. But there
is no news from him yet.
You have written to Narandas asking him to pay the bills
for the press equipment, but how can it be done? It is altoge-
ther improper to use Trust funds in such a manner. It would be
another thing if Narandas could make some private arrangement.
You should have such dealings with the traders directly, or order
the goods through traders there or remit the money in advance.
I understand your difficulty, but you ought not to adopt an im-
proper course to solve it. Otherwise you will come to grief some
day. One should stretch one's legs according to the covering. It
is better to draw in our knees, rather than borrow a covering from
somebody else.
I hope all of you have emerged safe from the epidemic of
fever there.
Do Pathar and others who come there for change of air
meet their own expenses or does the burden fall on you? If it
falls on you and if you can shoulder it, of course nothing like it.
But if you cannot shoulder it, you should humbly tell them that
everybody will have to meet his own expenses. Please know that
it is against dharma to do anything beyond one's means out of a
false sense of prestige. We should let ourselves be seen as we are.
I don't like at all your request to be allowed to shift the
press to a city. That will mean that all my ideals are wrong,
or that you do not believe in them or cannot live up to them.
If any of these alternatives is correct, you should not remain a
trustee and should leave Phoenix. You seem even to have for-
gotten how quickly and with what difficulties I turned my back
on city life and established Phoenix. You grew up in Phoenix.
It was there you atoned for your errors, lived an independent life.
Sita was born there too. That you should forget all this in a
moment and think of leaving Phoenix for ever-imagine the weak-
ness and the pitiable condition of mind it reveals.
I supported you in one wrong step that you took and invited
West's criticism. That criticism was deserved to some extent.
This error was about the insertion of advertisements. I did not
like your action, but I did not have the courage to tell you that
you could close down Indian Opinion if you wished. I don't want
you to fall further and drag me down with you. I will not let myself
be dragged down. If you cannot settle in Phoenix with single-
minded devotion and cannot live up to its ideals you should
wind up the work. Or you and Sushila should dedicate your-
selves exclusively to Phoenix. Instead of being forced to close
down the settlement, I should like you to give your resignation to
the Trustees and hand over the place to them and then do what
you like. I will welcome your leaving Phoenix with your reputa-
tion unsullied. I shall not be pained if you do so. But I shall
feel deeply pained if you are forced to leave the place in dis-
grace. Please remember that only recently you borrowed Rs. 10,000
from a public body here and took the money with you. For-
get the past completely. Wake up from your slumber. Don't
think that I say all this merely in reply to one suggestion by you
and feel hurt. That suggestion reveals your attitude of mind. It
is a dangerous one and that is why I caution you against it.
There is Miss Schlesin entertaining beautiful dreams about
you, and you are thinking of filthy Durban. You must have
sufficient pride in you to be determined that, if you cannot bring
glory to your father's legacy, you will at any rate not disgrace it.
Do you know the objects of Phoenix, or have you forgotten them
as well? Read them again.
Miss Schlesin's suggestion is certainly admirable.
But I
don't think you will be able to act upon it. Kallenbach will
not agree to meet the expenses of a visit to America, and you will
not be able to get the money from any other source. And I also
think it difficult, if not impossible, that I. O. can be kept up mean-
while. Even if you go to America and return after getting train-
ed, I don't think patients from all communities will come to Phœ-
nix for nature-cure treatment. All the same, if you have self-
confidence and if everything can be arranged, I would certainly
like you to act upon the suggestion, for the aim behind it is
noble.
I hope Sita has completely recovered now. Take the ut-
most care of your health.
Read this letter three or four times and then decide your
future course. Think over the following questions:
(1) What is the aim in life of you both?
(2) Do you wish to live up to the ideals of Phoenix? Do
you have the necessary strength for it?
(3) Can I. O. be made self-supporting?
You may take one thing as certain: We don't wish to run
Phoenix while abandoning its ideals, and I. O. must not be shift-
ed to any other place.
Please don't take this letter as a rebuke to you. I have
written to wake up both of you. Indecision is a very bad
thing.
We are quite well. The letter has become too long and I
have no time either. So I cannot give any news about things
here.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4806
