183. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Wednesday, March 24, 1926
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,
I have your letter. You may do what is needed regarding
Bhai Purushottam Joshi. In my opinion, [as] you say, the person
who has been paid off and has left cannot be held responsible for
the missing papers. Where can he search for the letters? It is
another thing if you want to prepare a report regarding the
missing papers.
Herewith Chi. Narandas's note about the Amreli office. As
Narandas says, you have drawn more than the sanctioned amount,
and you still continue to draw. If this is true, we cannot go on
like this. Do not [ask] me to go beyond the fixed limit. You
must send the figures regularly. You must not write out a
hundi to Bombay without securing our permission. Jamnalalji
enquired about the hundi which you issued this time, and I
wired to him to honour it so that your credit may not be damaged.
But you must not repeat this. Nowadays it is risky to accept
hundis on telegraphic intimation. There have been cases of em-
bezzlement under cover of big names. Therefore businessmen
do few cash transactions by telegrams these days. As per the
agreement, you have to produce the khadi. You must bear in
mind two things. You should not work beyond your capacity and
oblige us to tell you [to stop]. You must not incur expenditure
of a single pie more than what has been agreed upon before me.
Remember, without any doubt, that I have no inexhaustible source
of funds. Not a pice has yet arrived from Rangoon. Whatever
amount is handed over is at our risk and we have ventured on
this enterprise solely relying on your efficiency and foresight.
I might, perhaps, leave for Mussoorie on the first of April.
You should note that during my absence only such amount as I
have permitted shall be drawn. So if there are any arrears of pay-
ment according to the previously laid down conditions, you may
please point out my error and on my part I shall deal with them
accordingly. Previous intimation must be furnished here re-
garding any hundi to be issued. It will be accepted on receipt of a
letter to Jamnalalji from here. Consult Bhai Jagjivandas and
let me know what is to be done about Gariadhar. Regarding
Gariadhar I shall bank upon you primarily. You should discuss
with Bhai Jagjivandas also about the sales at the Amreli Centre.
I shall also write to him.
Ramdas mayor may not stay there; you cannot leave Amreli
at present. Why cannot Urmila and Bachu live here without you?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19376
