43. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
7, BUITENCINGLE [STREET,]
CAPE TOWN,
April 22, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 21 st instant.
I regret that General Smuts finds it impossible to settle the
Transvaal Asiatic trouble during this session. I am, however,
grateful for the statement contained in your letter that the matter
will engage General Smuts' attention during the recess with a
view to bringing about a settlement during the next session.
I share General Smuts' anxiety that passive resistance may
now be brought to a close.
May I then suggest the following for his consideration so that
the suspicion that is sure to be roused among my countrymen
owing to a postponement of the solution may be allayed?
An assurance should be given that:
(a) legislation will be passed next session repealing Act 2 of 1907
subject to the reservation of the rights of minor children in
terms of the Chotabhai judgment and restoring legal equality
1 Vide Appendix II.
2 A. E. Chotabhai, domiciled in the Transvaal since 1899 and regis-
tered lawfully under Act 36 of 1908, brought his minor son aged 15, whose
name appeared in his father's registration certificate, in January, 1910. On
the boy's attaining majority, his application for separate registration under Act
36 of 1908 was rejected by the Registrar of Asiatics. Chotabhai appealed to
Magistrate Jordan who dismissed the appeal and ordered deportation. Chota-
bhai then moved the Provincial Court where Justice Wessels in Chambers dis-
missed the application but restrained the order of deportation pending appeal
to the higher Court. The Full Bench of the Transvaal Division of the Supreme
Court dismissed the appeal with a dissenting judgment by Justice Mason.
Finally on January 25, the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of South
Africa ruled that, although Act 36 of 1908 provided only for registration of
minors resident in the Transvaal at the commencement of the Act or born
within its boundaries, it did not follow that minors entering lawfully after that
date were to be excluded from the registration provided for under the earlier
Act 2 of 1907, and that it appeared improbable that the Legislature would
allow Asiatic minors free entry into the Transvaal but allow the Registrar no
discretion to permit them to remain in the country on their attaining majority.
The appeal was upheld. The case, in its various stages, was reported in several
as to the immigration of Asiatics into the Transvaal and
maintaining existing rights. If the racial bar in the present
Immigration Act of the Transvaal is removed by a general
bill, such bill should naturally be free from a racial bar
throughout the Union;
(b) passive resisters who but for their resistance would have been
entitled to registration should now be so entitled notwith-
standing anything to the contrary in Act 36 of 1908;
(c) educated passive resisters who are now in the Transvaal but
who are not registrable under the Asiatic Act should be allowed
to remain in the Transvaal as educated immigrants in anti-
cipation of the forthcoming legislation, their number not to
exceed six. They may have special certificates in order to
enable them to move to and fro without hindrance.
If the above assurance be given, I do not anticipate any
difficulty in persuading my countrymen to suspend passive resi-
stance.
I trust General Smuts will recognize that, in asking for the
above assurance, I am simply requesting ratification of what he
has so often publicly stated.
I am sure that the Indian community will be deeply grate-
ful to General Smuts for consenting not to imprison Mrs. Sodha
in the event of her appeal failing.
I am thankful, too, for the verbal assurance given by General
Smuts that he will be pleased to grant relief in cases of individual
hardship.
I need hardly reiterate the statement that, whatever befalls
the present passive resistance movement, the Indian community
will continue to worry him about the many matters in the
different Provinces which have from time to time formed the
subject-matter of memorials, etc.
Lastly, I venture to repeat what I have said so often that those
who have the privilege of guiding the Indian community in South
Africa have always been anxious, and will continue, to help the
authorities and to study and appreciate the European standpoint
issues of Indian Opinion between August 1910 and April, 1911; vide also Vol. X,
pp. 310, 325, 359-60 & 402.
consistently with that community's self-respect and interests.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From Indian Opinion, 29-4-1911; also Cd. 6283 and photostat of type-
written office copy: S.N. 5496
