124. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL AND MAGANLAL GANDHI
Shravan Vad 14 [August 23, 1911]
11 p.m.
CHI. CHHAGANLAL AND CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have the letters from both of you. You may take £9 every
month.
I shall not hesitate to write to you what I ought to say. I
do not intend to return the money spent on the land, whether on
the building or other things. If anyone has paid for the land, I
think we should return the amount. That is, if we set up a new
convention.
If I have again to break my head over law4, it will not be
only because of you. There may also be other factors of a similar
nature to make things difficult for me. That course will be the last
remedy, and the fact that I am obliged to mention it bespeaks my
want of faith, my moha and immaturity. These ideas of mine
suggest a false satyagrahi relying ultimately on brute strength.
Personally I know, however, that there is a difference between
the two things. It will be best, all the same, if I do not have
to practise law again—I do fervently wish I do not have to. I
also wish, we in Phoenix adopt a life of total poverty while I am
yet alive. I pray to God for such a time, but the portents, I
find, are all to the contrary. It is unlikely that the time will
ever come when we shall be living in real poverty. Dr. Mehta's
help stands in the way. As long as this fount flows on, I feel we
shall not enjoy the rare privilege of knowing that we have not
a pie left for the next day and wondering what will happen.
I consider this privilege a rare one, for such is the state of the
majority in the world, and such was, and will be, the state of the
Buddha and others [like him]. I feel positively that it is impossible
to realize the great atman in any other way.
Jaikrishna Vyas and others gave us philosophy indeed but I
feel it was all dry philosophy. True knowledge, I am convinced,
was taught by Narasinh Mehta and Sudamaji. To indulge in the
pleasures of the senses and then assert that one does nothing, that
the senses just go their way, that one is a mere observer; all this
is vain chatter. He alone may argue thus who has achieved com-
plete mastery over his senses and whose senses function only to keep
the body going. By the same token, there is not one among us
who is fit enough to speak these words and there will be none till
we have achieved true poverty. There is no reason to believe that
kings are kings in virtue of their punya All that can be said is
that they are kings because of their deeds. But to say that these
were necessarily good deeds seems entirely wrong, considering the
nature of the atman.
If all of you agree that these ideas are right and desire that
we should all enjoy the exalted state which I have pictured, God
may well grant us such a time.
Narandas has not even replied to my letter.
Saltless diet is in the air at the Farm these days. It remains
to be seen how long the fashion will last. Parsee Jivanjee's two
sons have arrived today to join the school here. I have taken
them on condition that they also do without salt. More later.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5568. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
