138. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Aso Vad 2 [October 10, 1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
I have not replied to your two letters because I was not to write
to you in Europe.
Harilal wants to appear for the matriculation examination.
I tried hard to convince him that there was nothing to be gained
by doing so, but the advice sticks in his throat. He refuses to come
out of the state in which I once was, when I was infatuated with
degrees. How can one blame him for it? I do only hope that
he will see the light one day. His motives appear to be good.
Manilal reached Durban on Monday last [week]. He left
Durban yesterday (Monday). He will arrive here (at the Farm)
tomorrow. There was a letter from him from Phoenix, in which
he said that he liked the place.
Chhaganlal also writes to the
same effect. Let us see how things turn out here.
I have been invited to become the President of the [Indian
National] Congress. It is not clear from whom the invitation has
come. The cable was addressed to the Natal [Indian] Congress,
which has already cabled back that it should be possible for me to
go. I have sent a private cable saying that I should be asked
only if my freedom would not be compromised and my presence
was thought especially necessary, else I might be left alone. About
twelve days have passed since the cable was sent, but there has
been no reply so far. From this I infer either that the cable from
Calcutta was not an invitation but a mere enquiry or that my
condition was found unacceptable.
I know you are very keen that I should leave for India at an
early date, and stay there for good. The idea appeals to me and
I shall go the moment I can become free here. I think it necessary,
however, to settle matters here. I cannot possibly be there in
time for famine [relief] work. I can see that it is a terrible one.
I also know that the belated rains are almost useless for many
people.
Please do not think that I shall incur the sin of falling into
the delusion that I should serve the entire world. I well realize
that my work can only be in India and that in Gujarat, rather
in Kathiawad.
Excellent articles continue to appear occasionally in Indian
Opinion, and sometimes I even feel that the fullest advantage is not
being taken of all that comes out. True, Miss Smith's despatches
are insipid. But I do not wish to discontinue them. Her sympathy
is sincere. I pay her nothing. I stopped paying her while I was
still in England. But Miss Smith herself asked to be allowed to
go on writing without an honorarium. I agreed. In fact, I do
not send some of her despatches for publication. Only last month,
I withheld one. She is not likely to feel hurt either. Having
regard to her feelings, I do not think it will be right to discontinue
her despatches altogether.
I have not got the letter you wrote after meeting Kallenbach.
There was no letter from you last week; only a pamphlet was
received. You must have seen the garbi on Jasama in Indian
Opinion. It has also been republished separately, as people liked
it. I have instructed Phoenix to send you a copy. It fell into
Chhaganlal's hands by chance. I personally feel that in this garbi
the poet has conveyed profound knowledge in sweet and simple
language. We have not been able to ascertain the name of the
poet. Please let me know what impression it makes on you.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5630. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
