291. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
WARDHA,
February 12/13, 1935
CHI. SHARMA,
I have your letter. I liked it immensely. Mistrust had arisen
because Amtussalaam had written very strongly. It is no ordi-
nary matter to be my associate. To renounce everything, to
renounce attachment and to rejoice in the renunciation is not
within everyone's power. You have given up numerous things but
so long as you do not have inner realization how can you have
inner joy? And one who lacks inner joy is prone to anger, to
sickness and may be up to anything.
I shall now consider all that you write as coming from the
heart. You must understand that there is a little difficulty
here and the reason for the difficulty is your hastiness, your anger,
and if, in your haste and anger you should write something and
I accept it as truly meant, it will not be right. But I see no alterna-
tive if I am to deal with you. I like your keeping a cow but
bear in mind that you are not to incur any debt. Your contact
with the Harijans is also to the good.
The thought of your medical studies occurs to me daily. I
have written to Dr. Ansari but there is no saying when he will
answer. And how can we complain? He takes up more work
than he is equal to.
I do not know which is the better thing. I have no infor-
mation regarding the curriculum in Madras but I can find out.
It will not be possible for you to live with a surgeon. Would
you be willing to go alone? I could not bear to have Draupadi
living in Khurja all by herself. What appeals to me most is
for her to be with me, work for me and put up with Ba's tem-
per . Your task and mine will become easier when she is prepared
for this. I have built many hopes on you. I feel I can take
much service from you once you have rid yourself of all your
blemishes. After all even if you go to the West I could never
agree to Draupadi and the children accompanying you, because
I consider it unnecessary. If I am prepared to send you, it is
only to disillusion you about the West. True nature cure is to
be found in the villages. All the knowledge the West has to offer
can be got from the books. The rest is to come only from the
villages. And in the end the service we wish to render will be
to the villagers. Think over all this and tell me what you con-
sider it is best to do. Can Draupadi stay with me?
Your time-table is good. What books do you read and what
do you teach the children?
Is the flour ground at home? Is the rice unpolished? I have
only now learnt that unpolished rice does not come to the
market at all. I hear that it is very easy to husk rice without
polishing it. I have grown some paddy and intend to try and
get it husked here.
Who is the pandit teaching your children? I wonder if you
will be able to decipher this letter. I write with the right hand
only on Mondays. It needs a little rest.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3154
