417. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SITANAGARAM,
December 25, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
You waited for a letter from me and I waited for one
from you. I was under the impression that I had not received
a reply to my letter. We are touring with such speed that I can't
remember dates or days. I don't remember, even, to whom I
have to write and what. That I am past sixty may also be one
reason for this.
Chandrashankar has unnecessarily alarmed you about [my
rising] at three. If I did not get up at that hour, I would feel
very uneasy. You should insist, rather, on my going to bed
early. That rule is certainly not being observed just now. Still,
all the doctors tell me that my health has remained very good
so far. Nor do I write as many letters as you think I do. I
write only such letters as I must. If you were with me, you also
would press me to write some of them. I must admit that your
complaint that I left you alone [in jail] is just. But the pro-
blem will be solved by and by, I am sure. Stop worrying about
me completely. I don't overstep the limits of my health.
If
you saw how I work, you would admit that I was taking very
good care of it. Or truly speaking I should say that God has
been preserving it. What would He do, however, if I opposed
Him? That He has been saving me from serious dangers is a
sign that I have lost myself in Him.
In Madras I was in danger
every day of getting crushed, but I was saved. That was not
man's doing. It was God's will. The rule about five hours has
been observed mostly on paper only.
I will certainly write to Ba every week. So far I have not let
a single week pass. God will keep her firm. Who else can do that?
There is no cause at all for worrying about Mani.
I had sent a wire immediately to Kanjibhai and I had re-
ceived a reply both by wire and letter. I have again replied by
letter and said that he should not come thus far for my sake. If,
however, he himself thought it necessary to come, he might cer-
tainly do so. I have even given him [convenient] dates. I
forgot to mention all this in my letter to you. His letter was a
fine one.
I think it will be difficult to meet Raja, though Lakshmi saw
me in Madras. She is running the sixth month and cannot,
therefore, move about freely. She keeps good health. Raja wants
the delivery to take place under his care. Devdas also will go
to Madras. Lakshmi was in good spirits. Raja will be released
on 6th February.
. . . 's 1 condition is the same that it has been. He is dis-
contented with himself. He is miserable because . . .2 is again
pregnant. He cannot exercise self-control and afterwards he
feels unhappy. I have tried my best to comfort him. But on the
whole he is better where he is.
Princess Aristarchi writes to me every week without fail. She
sends money too. There is no limit to her kindness. She is now
helping Trivedi's Manu. . . .3 I have written to the Princess and
requested her to explain to him his duty. It is true that Mani-
lal and Sorabji are quarrelling with each other. Their quarrel
is about the policy to be followed there. I couldn't advise either
of them in this quarrel. But I have written to Manilal and told
him that he should follow what seems right to him, without de-
parting from civility. I have advised him not to make the quar-
rel a personal affair. I believe their differences will be resolved.
Gordhanbhai continues to write about Vithalbhai's dona-
tion. I have not read all that he has written. I will take a
suitable opportunity to reply to him and then keep quiet. I had a
very sweet letter from Subhas. I did send it to the Press. I
am sure it must have been printed.
The tour is going on very well. There is no heart-burning
anywhere. So far I have not met people in the South bent on
creating trouble. About the future, God alone knows. The
crowds are as large as ever. We are in Sitanagaram today.
There is perfect peace here. This is a small village. Today is my
silence day. Tomorrow also I shall be here. If I had not got
these two days at one place, it would have been difficult for me
to go on with the tour.
I met Sastri in Madras for an hour or so. It was just a
friendly meeting. Munshi and Lilavati came and saw me there.
Munshi seemed to be in good health.
There was a wire from
Bhulabhai. He has not recovered completely.
Kaka and Surendra Mashruwala are in Gujarat.
Kishorelal has still not recovered. Swami is in a place bet-
ween Sanoli and Bombay. I suppose you hear about him.
Have I told you that Kisan is in the party with me? She is
a very good young woman. Being a friend of Prema, she
couldn't but be so.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 53-
