54. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN,
Tuesday [February 8, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL,
Now I can let you have the news. I have almost settled the
betrothal. But although you have given me the authority to fina-
lize the matter I do not propose to exercise it.
Herewith a letter from Sushila; she is Tarabehn's elder sister.
At 19 she is in good health though slightly hard of hearing. She
knows Gujarati and Marathi. She also understands Hindi and a
little English. She had her schooling up to the fourth form. I
send with this Sushila's photograph. She is Kishorelalbhai's niece.
Her parents are alive. Sushila is good at painting and also tries a
little music. She plays on the harmonium. She is good at house
work. She has herself written the letter without any help. She
has also been told that you were almost engaged in South Africa.
I would not have been able to find out a better match. Initially
the suggestion came from Jamnalalji. Sushila's brother is to be
operated upon. The marriage can be fixed for the 11th of
March if he recovers [by then], and you can set sail immediately.
If the operation is not successful marriage would be postponed on
account of the mourning.
Now about you. I believe . . .2 you have no disease such as
syphilis or diabetes. I also told Sushila that . . .3 if you ever go
astray she should try to stop you and if you persist she should
leave you.
Now along with your approval I want a solemn assurance
from you that . . .4 you shall honour Sushila's freedom; that you
shall treat her as your companion, never as a slave; that you shall
take as much care of her person as of your own; that you shall
not force her to surrender to your passion, but that you shall
take your pleasure only with her consent. I would advise you to
set certain limits to your enjoyment.
While describing your good points I have let it be known that
you are generous, guileless, and affectionate; that you have great
love for the motherland and want to serve her.
I carry a grave responsibility. Here is a devout family. I
would be glad if we become related. They have left everything
to me. You must never deceive me. I would be mortally hurt if
Sushila suffered the least unhappiness. She has impressed me as an
innocent girl true to her name.
You know my attitude towards women. Men have not been
treating them well. I have proposed this alliance assuming you to
be capable of coming up to my ideals.
Now if you are agreeable to this engagement, wire to me and
write a detailed letter. If you do not approve of this match or
if you cannot accept the conditions I have laid down, wire to
me: "Unable accept"2, and if you would say 'Yes', then wire, "Ap-
prove match, can satisfy your test".
Write to me at length. Here is my address: 10th Jalgaon;
11th Jalgaon; 12th Chopda; 13th, 14th and 15th Dhulia.
With the fear of God in your heart, write to me only the truth.
May God bless you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9124. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
