464. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 10, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,
I have been obliged to neglect you these few days. My only
comfort is that the correspondence has been practically suspended
-all my time being given to the sick ones. I can't say they are
yet on the mend. The temperature is slowly rising daily. There
is no danger as yet. But both are very weak. They will be
all right if they have enough vitality. Anyway neither they nor I
have any anxiety. The C. S. was here today to examine them.
They are having only water-cure.
I have just finished your broadcast. Your experience of the
village is excellently reproduced. The other part is not well
balanced.
You say "old systems . . . have perished." If they have, where
is the cause for revival? But you yourself show later that they
have at most decayed, not perished.
And then you begin at the wrong end-build roads and
houses! ! Who can do the thing? Surely sanitation comes first.
We were agreed upon it too!! And you began with it. But how
should [you] be Idiot, if you remembered such a very simple
fact? And then you have not made a sharp division between
what people can and should do themselves and what the State
can and should. You do not want more than this, do you?
And you are in no need of praise. Of that you must have
had a surfeit.
If you are only permitted to pass two months with me, I
should hope to reconstruct your body. This eczema is certainly
a source of anxiety from the medical standpoint. But I do not
despair. Of course you won't go to Ahmedabad, if you are not
quite fit.
The apples of late have been quite hardy and all in a good
condi[tion]. You should tell me what the fruit costs each time
and what the railage costs. The honey too came in quite safely.
I finished the whole yesterday. It was quite nice.
I have not yet heard from Lionel.
Khan Saheb has all the fruit he can eat. I get apples from
you and Ambujam-more than I need-mosambis from Bombay
and oranges locally.
Love.
TYRANT
[PS.]
Khan Saheb leaves for Delhi on 14th.
From the original: C.W. 3749. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6905
