8. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
BOX 299,
JOHANNESBURG,
March 25, 1903
TO
THE HONOURABLE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to draw your attention to the enclosed
copy of the notice served on British Indian store-keepers by the
Magistrate in Pietersburg.
The notice has naturally produced consternation among the
Indians in Pietersburg.
The threat conveyed by the notice was first given in De-
cember last. As you are aware, the matter was brought before
Mr. Chamberlain1, but the Supervisor of Asiatics assured the
Right Honourable gentleman that he had fixed up the thing
with the Magistrate and that the licences would be renewed from
quarter to quarter.
Again when the Magistrate in spite of the above assurance
insisted on giving the notice that the licences issued last year to
Indians in the town who were not trading before the War
would not be renewed after the 31st March, the Supervisor
was approached, and he gave the assurance that his under-
standing with the Magistrate was that the licences should be is-
sued from quarter to quarter and stopped after 31st March.
But the Magistrate still insisting on giving the notice above
referred to, the complaint was placed before you personally,
first by Mr. Lunnon and then by Mr. Gandhi both of whom,
my Committee understands, were told not to bother about the
notice and to advise the store-keepers concerned to take out quar-
terly licences and that they would be renewed from time to
time at the end of every quarter.
The men on the strength of the assurance took out the
licences. And yet, my Committee is grieved to find, the notice
herein referred to has been served by the Magistrate who evidently
intends to enforce the threat first held out.
My Committee will be greatly obliged if you will be good
enough to let me know by wire whether the Government will be
pleased to instruct the Magistrate to withdraw the notice in
question or to give my Committee the assurance that the threat
covered by the notice will not be enforced.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: LG. 97/12 Asiatics. 1902-1906
