514. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
URULI KANCHAN,
DISTT. POONA,
August 1, 1946
CHI. SARALABEHN,
Your letter of the 29th addressed to Rajkumari reached today. I
have come to Uruli for four days leaving Rajkumari and others at Poona.
If anyone of them has any business with me, they will come and return
in the afternoon in good time. I did not want to have a crowd here.
Your blood-pressure is very high. I cannot say I am wholly out
of danger, but I think my blood-pressure is under control. Everyone
does not have [high] blood-pressure for the same reason. [High] blood-
pressure is not a disease in itself; it is a symptom of some other disease.
1 This was in reply to the addressee's telegram seeking Gandhiji's advice
regarding participation of the States' people in the proposed union of Eight
Deccan States which was resolved by the rulers in their meeting held at Poona
on July 29, 1946.
It may, for instance, be caused by kidney trouble. A diseased kidney
means the whole body becoming poisoned. Kidney trouble is caused
by worrying too much or working under tension. In my view whatever
the cause, fruit diet is an effective remedy. This should not include
starchy fruits such as bananas. Oranges, pomegranates, pineapples and
grapes are best. One must sleep well. To sleep is to rest. The fruits
mentioned above may be taken as they are or their juice. They can
be taken in either form. You may take gentle walks. There are also
some exercises that one can do lying in bed. You should do such
exercises. Along with this, if you enshrine Rama in your heart, I am
sure your blood-pressure will be cured. Ramanama means having God
in the heart in the form in which we worship Him. This is not
superstition. This is scientific deduction. I shall not take you into the
rationale thereof. I am writing this because I have known you as a
saintly woman for many years which you are. I give no thought to
the fact that you are the daughter of a rich father married to a rich
man.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 11150. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
