33. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 8/13, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I had got your postcard before I received the other post
from you today, but I did not reply to it in a separate letter since
I had written in detail about Narayanappa in the letter which
was dispatched yesterday along with the other letters. I have now
received a negative reply in regard to Mirabehn. It was good,
therefore, that I had already decided provisionally not to see visi-
tors. That being so, though Durga and Anandi had come today to
see us, Vallabhbhai and I could not see them. Mahadev went and
saw them. We certainly felt unhappy but it is only by swallowing
such bitter draughts that one can preserve dharma.
I, therefore,
welcomed the pain that I felt.
I am very happy that you have decided to follow the method
of calculating the value of work at the rate of one anna per hour.
I think we shall make some important discoveries by following
it. In order that the account may be properly kept, everybody
should know exactly how long one has worked. That means that
you will have to strike the bell for each hour or will have to
devise some other method so that everybody can know how
much time has passed. Secondly, the information about the
hours of work supplied by every inmate must be correct. If it is
clearly realized that time is money, it will be seen that giving
wrong information will be like passing off counterfeit coins. Our
records will be wrong and, in consequence, our conclusions will
be wrong too. I think for at least one month the slips received
from everybody should be preserved. To facilitate this, I suppose
all the inmates are supplied slips of the same size. The slips should
be filled in in clear handwriting. Now that I think about the
matter as I dictate these lines, I feel that you yourself need not
keep a daily record. Your record will be the slips. If we decide
to preserve them permanently, they can be pasted [in an account
book] but I do not think that is necessary at all. As the slips are
received, the hours mentioned in them may be entered in the
ledger. If you object that, in that case, we would not know for
how many hours each type of work was done, you may enter the
hours under separate heads of work. However, to be able to use
that information you will have to maintain a double-entry ac-
count, that is, keep the record under each name and each type of
work separately. Only then will you be able to draw up quickly
a summary every month showing the hours given by each person
and the total number of hours spent on each type of work. I do
think that for our purpose information under both heads will
be necessary. At the moment I cannot think of any other sugges-
tions besides these. Your account of your own daily work seems
all right. If necessary, you may reduce yajna work from two hours
to something less. If anybody gives money equal to the value of
the yarn spun by him, instead of the yarn itself, his yajna is cer-
tainly imperfect, since it is marred by his desire to wear cloth
woven from his own yarn. That is, he spins yarn of fine count
through his selfish desire to be able to wear cloth woven from
such yarn. Ideally, one should not wish at all to derive any
personal benefit from work done for yajna or from any gift made
as yajna. Anybody who works for yajna may take from what
he produces only as much as would be the share of each if the
total quantity were divided equally among all the persons for
whom he works. We claim that we work for the 300 millions
of our countrymen. If so, we may certainly have 1/300 millionth
share of the yarn which we spin, imagining that that share is mixed
with the yarn from which the cloth of our garments is woven.
I know that many arguments have been advanced, from the point
of view of increasing the production of fine khadi, against my
stand, and I admit the force of those arguments. That is why I
have tolerated yajna which is only half pure. But I have always
felt within myself that such yajna is imperfect. If you clearly see
the imperfection to which I am drawing attention, you should
hand over all the yarn which you spin and overcome your desire
to get cloth woven from it for your or Jamna's use. When all the
yarn received is mixed together and woven into cloth, you may
take from it what you require. If you see any error in my rea-
soning, please point it out to me. And you need not follow my
suggestion though you may agree with me, if you feel that it is
beyond your capacity at present to do so-irrespective of whether
the reason is Jamna or yourself. If we voluntarily start doing
something which we had not been doing up to now, we expe-
rience nothing but intense joy from that and feel that a heavy
load has been taken off our head. Do not act upon my suggestion
till you feel thus. As I stated in a previous letter, I want every-
body's yajna to be perfect, but I should like to wait till all
people are convinced of the correctness of my view. I see from
your letter, however, that they have now come so far that it
should not be difficult to take the last step, if it is not implied in
what they have agreed to. I have interpreted your letter to mean
that everybody would spin for yajna in the porch between 12.30
and 1.30 and hand over there and then the yarn spun by him or
her. Literally understood, this means that one cannot even buy
back that yarn. If this is to apply to all, you also will have to
hand over the yarn spun by you. Your statement, however, that
the yarn spun during that time will be handed over may also
mean that a person may buy back his or her yarn for personal
use. If so, the arrangement will have the imperfection which I
have remarked above. I should be happy if all agree to remove
this imperfection. If they agree, however, everybody should under-
stand that he will have to spin in future even more carefully than
he had been doing up to now when he knew that he was spinning
the yarn for his own use.
I have been spinning for the last ten days or so with such
bad slivers as I have never used before. I am doing this purpose-
ly. I wrote to Premlilabehn requesting her to send me some cotton,
and in reply she immediately sent slivers. The slivers with which
I have been spinning are from this lot. It certainly cannot be
thrown away as useless. That would mean being light-hearted
about work. Nor can I send these slivers to the women prisoners.
If the slivers are good enough for them, I would say that they
were twice so for me. I, therefore, decided to use them up. I
realize from my experience the great difference between good sli-
vers and bad slivers. Theoretically I always understood it, but
I realized it from experience only now, for ordinarily I would
always get good slivers. Whenever I myself have carded cotton
I have done so very carefully. Hence I do not remember to have
spun with such bad slivers any time in the past. And I see from
Mahadev's spinning what difference good cotton can make.
My purpose in writing about all this is to point out that, if
we wish to spin for yajna the finest yarn that we can, the slivers
with which we spin should be of the best quality and the cotton
must be perfectly clean. The spinning-wheel also should be in good
condition. If these conditions are fulfilled, no one will find the
one hour of spinning boring. On the contrary, the smoothly
rotating spinning-wheels would make such sweet music when so
many persons spin in complete silence that the hour would pass
as but one minute and give perfect joy. Even the most interesting
activities will only bore a person who does not understand their
value or who feels aversion towards them. Here ends my ser-
mon on account-books and on yajna.
I have already said above that I will not see visitors now.
Do not worry about my hand till I tell you that the condition
is serious enough to cause worry, for I am keeping back nothing
about it. I see no necessity to keep back anything. We aspire to
learn to bear everything that may happen to us. If so, it would
be altogether wrong to keep back anything relating to illness or
pain. The left elbow is in plaster just now. I, therefore, present
a pitiful sight, though there is no reason at all to pity me. If the
cause of the pain in the elbow is no other than the excessive work
I have done with that arm, it is obvious that it should be given
complete rest. Since the only way of doing that is to put it in
plaster, that has been done. We shall know the effect in a week or
two. If the elbow requires only rest, the officials themselves will
obtain whatever external aid may be required. In other respects
my health is very good. The weight is 106½ pounds, that is, it has
been increasing. Though I can work only with one arm, and des-
pite the trouble which bad slivers give, I can spin more than
200 rounds daily. I can also read for a while. I practise, like a
child, writing large Urdu letters in a copy-book. I would not be
able to do all this if my health was not good. The mind would
simply not work.
I think your decision regarding Jayantiprasad's daughter is
perfectly all right. You should not assume new responsibilities
just now. If the girl were capable of looking after herself and
were healthy, I would have certainly felt tempted to take her in.
Chimanlal should improve his health anyhow.
Leave Parnerkar to solve his problem by himself. If he can
stay, we certainly want him to do so. If he cannot, we need
not press him. The verse in the Gita which asks what avails a man
to force himself beyond a certain point applies in this case too.
The fact that you do not find Savitribehn's address there
means, I suppose, that you have not been getting any letters from
her recently. But her connection with the Ashram is not recent.
You may find some of her old letters lying somewhere. Moreover,
if correspondents' addresses are being preserved in the Ashram,
her address must have been written down somewhere. If anybody
goes to the press, we are bound to have her address on its re-
cord. She has also written a book about me, in which she has re-
produced some of my letters. You may possibly find her address
in these. However, I do not want you to spend too much of your
time in finding it.
Father Elwin has not explained why he suggested Friday
for a Christian prayer. On Sunday evenings pious Christians will
have gone to churches and will be attending special services, so
that Sunday may not suit them for the purpose of the public
communion which he has in view. Moreover, Friday is the
day of Jesus's crucifixion, and Father Elwin may have selected it
for that reason. But this is only my guess. I very much like the
idea that we should fix one day in the week for a Muslim prayer.
If Friday is not available now for that purpose, we may fix Thurs-
day. Thursday means Jummerat, and I think that day also is holy
for Muslims. To us, however, all days and hours are equally
holy. It is enough if we pray with sincere devotion.
We also had read here in the papers about the suitcase.
Hence Mahadev believes that we must have lost one. Aluvihari
was with us all the time and was one of the party. It seems that,
having read about the suitcase in the papers, he went and
claimed it. Mahadev cannot guess-and if he cannot, how can
I ?-whose clothes and books it contains. Well, it is safe now.
Aluvihari will probably send it to you, or may use his judgment
and do with it what seems best to him. I expect to hear from
him.
I have always considered that the rule that newcomers should
not be permitted to start immediately on English is a correct
one. My stand is that they may learn English, must learn it, but
only after they have acquired a working knowledge of Sanskrit,
Hindi and the Urdu script, learnt music well enough to join in sing-
ing bhajans and mastered all the processes relating to spinning.
I think a person of average ability would take one year to com-
plete this programme, though it is likely that some may take
more than that and some less. Those who have joined the
Ashram for life or have joined it temporarily with the aim of
training themselves for service should have no special attraction
for English. If anybody feels it, he should know that he cannot
satisfy his desire in the Ashram. Nobody should understand from
this that we proscribe English from the Ashram or do not love
it as much as others do. Our only aim is to see that it does not
occupy a place which does not belong to it. For many persons
knowledge of English is essential even for the purpose of service,
but we can give instruction in it in the Ashram only in a man-
ner convenient to the Ashram and consistent with its aims. We
are entitled to expect this patience in all inmates of the Ashram.
June 11, 1932
Regarding Imam Saheb's tomb, Pyare Ali asked Khatib
Saheb for his opinion. The latter said that Islam does not ap-
prove of the erection of tombs. You should, therefore, put a few
blocks of stones on the spot to mark it off and to prevent the
ground being used for any purpose. Take or send some Muslim
to the place and ask him to arrange a few stones. If there is no
objection to our laying them, somebody from among ourselves
may arrange them.
Silence Day, June 13, 1932
I got your letter today. Since tomorrow (Tuesday) is a
holiday, I will dispatch the post today. Read the letter which I
have written to Sitala Sahay. However, in the end do what you
think proper. I think it is best that in this matter I should not
decide from here what should be done. I will approve of what-
ever you do. I may not even have the necessary data for taking
a correct decision.
Where is Madhavlal at present? I thought he was in jail. But
I hear from Vithal that he is not in jail.
I am not sending any article this week. I have no time to
write one, and, moreover, this letter to you has become some-
thing like an article.
The plaster on the left arm has been removed. There has been
no improvement. The cause of the pain, therefore, must be
something else. But there is no cause whatever for worry. Mira-
behn is on saltless diet at present, and, therefore, had been press-
ing me to adopt it. I started it yesterday. For me it is child's
play to live on such diet, for I have done that for eight years.
I shall have fresh experience of it now. If there is anything to
write about, I will do so before the next letter is due.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C. W. 8232. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
