228. LETTER TO H. G. PATHAK
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 29, 1927
MY DEAR HARIBHAU,
I have your letter. No apology is needed for not writing in
Hindi. But I shall certainly be glad at the end of six months
from now to find you writing in Hindi.
I did not take part in any of the proceedings of the A.I.S.A.
Council meeting here. Nor had I seen the resolution of which
you have sent me a copy. I have promised Jamnalalji and other
members of the Council faithfully not to intervene in anything
that they may do except when they ask me.
Whatever you think is not proper in the resolution I would
like you to write to Jamnalalji or to Mr. Banker. But I quite
agree with you that the workers ought not to be hampered by un-
necessary restrictions. I do not think there is any desire on the
part of the Council to put any obstruction in the way of the
young men.
With reference to the Rs. 2,500 loan I did not understand that
it was to be used for buying the Gandhi Shikshanamala but that it
XXXIV-17
was to be used for paying off Mr. Kanitkar's debts and that the
books were to [be] held as security for the amount of the loan.
Nor did I contemplate that if there were any profits made
from the sale of the books they were to go to A.I.S.A. So far as
I recollect our conversation I did not contemplate making any pro-
fits. But if there were any, they should go towards the upkeep of
the Swarajya which after all is as much Mr. Kanitkar's concern
as any other. You may make use of this letter in your communi-
cation with Jamnalalji, and if necessary, the resolution will be alter-
ed accordingly at the next meeting of the Council. But, even as
the resolution stands, I do not think that for your purposes it needs
any alteration.
Instead of calling the copies "a security", they have called
the transaction "a sale" which in effect is one and the same thing,
and the question of profits is a very distant hope.
The pronote required should of course be sent without delay
by you even if you wish for any alterations in the resolution.
I do not think that the charge against the Council of luke-
warmness towards Maharashtra is correct. That you have to suffer
is true and that perhaps makes workers sensitive and makes them
expect from the Council what it really cannot do. But the suffer-
ing will only make you all the fitter for service if the suffering
does not weaken the principles of the sufferers.
Regarding Lokamanya's reminiscences you are asking me to
put an extra tax upon the very limited energy that I have got and
which I require for my present work. Nothing that I may write
can possibly remove the impression that might have been created
with reference to my attitude towards Lokamanya or his life-work.
That can only be removed by my uniformly correct conduct, and
the question of conduct can only be determined after my death.
If, therefore, I write anything at all I should certainly not do
so in the hope of the reward that you hold out before me.
About the unemployment, I don't know what I can do from
here beyond saying that you should send all the likely names to
the Technical Department. Personally I think that every willing
worker can be accommodated in the Khadi Service. But I cannot
give that faith to all the co-workers. And for such practical work,
therefore, it is best for the present to treat me as dead. If I
come to life again and plunge into practical work, you will cer-
tainly come to me. But, for the present, you have to go to Mr.
Banker. Frame a policy and then see whether many can be accom-
modated. Do not give up the hope or the work on behalf of the
unemployed fit men because you can no longer rely upon me.
About the co-operation with mill-owners, it is really for them
to co-operate with us. Our co-operation therefore just now consists
in cheapening khadi, making it stronger and in helping the mill-
owners to get all the Government aid they can.
Have I made myself clear? I shall make note of Annapurna-
bai's vrat. Please write to Mr. Banker for a formal receipt of your
policy.
I shall look forward to Mr. Joglekar's pocket looms.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. H. G. PATHAK
283, SADASHIV PETH
POONA CITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19793
