294. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
BARDOLI,
May 29, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,
I thank you for your several letters which I hope to deal
with as fast as time permits me. But I must make time to reply
to your latest, i.e., of the 25th instant and the previous one, i.e.,
of the 24th instant.
I do not know what there can be in the prabhat pheris to object
to. Though they took form during the Civil Disobedience campaign
they were in themselves quite innocent. I do not know how far they
disturb the peace of citizens. During my recent travels, I found
them more or less in vogue in the other cities too. I can under-
stand prohibition of inflammatory songs. But I do not know that
the Government will be right in interfering with this innocent and
beautiful institution which reminds citizens of their duty towards
their Creator in early morning.
With reference to the Seva Dals the practices they go through
are not new. They have for years been going through them
without any interference. If there is anything specific that is
objected to, I would like it to be specified. I am unable without
further information to endorse the suggestion that 'these camps
do not wholly reflect the spirit of the Settlement and that they
are calculated in some degree to delay the restoration of normal
conditions and feelings'.
As to the other letter, i.e., about liquor sales it comes upon
me with painful surprise.
If whilst liquor picketing is recognized as legitimate, the
Government counteract it through several practices even consi-
dered illegal, and contend that such practices are not in contra-
vention of the Settlement, I venture to suggest that nothing that
the Government may do or may not do need be deemed to be
in contravention of it.
But your letter tells me that the present practice of sale out
of ordinary hours and outside ordinary places of sale is perfectly
legal. This I must confess is a revelation for which I was wholly
unprepared. It means that the Collectors are guided by no legal
restrictions or regulations that the public need know. Indeed if
such is the condition of liquor law or rather if the sale of liquor
is governed by no law save the will of Collectors, the sooner the
public is informed of the fact the better for it. And it will be
a serious matter for the Congress Working Committee to consider.
His Excellency will permit me to say that he is evidently un-
aware of the fact that picketing in Ahmedabad has been accepted
by the previous District Officer and the Superintendent of Police
as the most peaceful and inoffensive. His Excellency is also evi-
dently unaware of the fact that the picketing was started by the
Labour Union in the interest of labour long before the Civil Dis-
obedience campaign was inaugurated. It has been admired by
strangers from the West who have visited Ahmedabad.
His Excellency will pardon me for saying that the opening of
the last paragraph of your letter betrays amazing ignorance of the
working of picketing in Ahmedabad. I state here for his information
that the Labour Union including the drinkers are thankful for
this watch and it is the Union that has borne the expenses. It was
surely His Excellency's duty to be sure of his facts on which un-
deserved reflections upon the conduct of an honourable body of
men and women are based.
The suggestion contained in the last sentence that such picket-
ing cannot be peaceful implies a reflection on Lord Irwin who
negotiated the Settlement which reflection I am sure His Excellency
could never have intended.
In conclusion I repeat my humble opinion that if the practice of
liquor sales now going on in Ahmedabad continues, the continuation
will be in breach of the spirit if not the letter of the Settlement.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931, Part II. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
