79. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
May 31, 1911
DEAR MR. NATESAN 2 ,
In my cable advising of the provisional settlement, I asked
Prof. Gokhale to inform you of the contents of the cable. I hope he
repeated the cable to you. The settlement has gone beyond our
expectations. We did not expect to be able to save individual
for self-realization" "cast a spell" over him, and "in moments of spiritual crisis,
therefore, he was my refuge" and "the predominant factor" that led to Gandhiji's
vow of brahmacharya. Gandhiji kept up a correspondence with him till the poet's
death; vide An Autobiography, Part II, Ch. I, XV, XXII & Part III, Ch. VII.
rights. These have now been fully protected. But we are by no
means yet out of the wood. General Smuts has to translate his
promises into legislation. This, however, there is little doubt, will
be done unless General Smuts has no regard whatsoever for his
reputation. The danger therefore lies not in the likelihood of his
breaking his promise but in his passing other legislation affecting
adversely the position of domiciled Indians. His actions, therefore,
will have to be closely scrutinized. I need hardly say how much
we owe to your wonderful work there. I hope that you will persist
in your agitation for securing an amelioration of the condition of
those who are residing in S.A. I have no doubt that you are keep-
ing yourself in touch with the columns of Indian Opinion in which
are reproduced all the petitions recently sent to the Imperial
Government.
You have earned the gratitude of every Indian in S.A. by your
work on the indenture question also. Having observed the system
for nearly 18 years, I have come to hold very strong views on the
question of indentured emigration from India. Even if it were
possible to secure fair treatment from the masters (which it is
not) the system is inherently bad. Indentured men lose terribly
in moral fibre. In many cases they improve as animals, they lose
in almost every case as men. As a solution of the problem of poverty
such emigration has in no way proved helpful. As a nation we
lose in prestige by sending our poorest brethren as practically
slaves. No nation of free men will tolerate such a system for a
moment. I hope therefore that you will with all your might agitate
for putting an end to the system, first outside India and then within
our own borders. If I could help it, I would certainly not send a
single Indian under indenture, say, to Assam.
As the struggle has only been suspended, Tolstoy Farm will be
continued though under considerably modified conditions.
Mr. and Mrs. Polak will be in India about the month of
November and they will remain there pending the introduction
of General Smuts' Bill next year.
With renewed thanks for all you have done in our behalf,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G. N. 2224
