369. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 21, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter. I understand the need for you to remain
there. You alone can judge which need is more important. Whe-
ther here or there, we have to do the same sort of work. We
should stay where the need is greater. You may, therefore, do what
you think proper. About the Congress work in Bombay, my view
is that those who have undertaken the responsibility should do the
job in their own way or give up control of the organization. How
long will they be able to hide the truth?
The problem of purifying the Congress is a big one. We
can discuss it in detail only when we meet. I agree with what
you write about . . .1. The Congress must decide its policy. Let us
send for . . .2 and discuss the matter with him and have done
with the problem. I had a letter from . . .3, to which I have replied
saying that he may come in the first week of September and may
fix the date through you. If it is impossible for you to come then,
I will argue out the matter with them. I will not give anything
in writing without showing it to you.
I fully understand your impatience regarding Gujarat. Do
what you think best. We must have our eyes on the future.
When Andrews comes there, have a frank and full discus-
sion with him about everything. I will write to you or ask some-
body to write to you about what happens here.
Mahadev is going to Prayag today. He will return before
Saturday.
Please don't overwork and fall ill again.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I forgot to write about Kaka. He had taken the decision
with my consent. I liked it. It was not taken in resentment but
was inspired by his sense of duty. I myself suggested to him that he
should write to you. I didn't even ask myself whether you had a right
1,2& The names are omitted in the source.
4 Of resigning from all trusts
339
to be consulted. Kaka felt very unhappy, and rightly, for having
written that he had consulted trustees when he had not done so.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 118-
