323. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 5
Not Revised
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 4, 1928
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I feel that you love me too well to resent what I am about to
write. In any case I love you too well to restrain my pen when
I feel I must write.
You are going too fast. You should have taken time to think
and become acclimatized. Most of the resolutions you framed
1 From the reference to Gandhiji's proposed stay at the Ashram "for the
next three months", the letter appears to have been written in the first week of
January 1928; vide "Letter to G. D. Birla", 5-1-1928.
2 II. 56
3 Rajendra Prasad's son
4 Mrityunjaya's wife, Prabhavati's sister
5 This was published along with the following note from Jawaharlal Nehru:
"I returned from Europe in December 1927 and went straight to the Madras
Session of the Indian National Congress. A number of resolutions were passed
there at my instance. This letter was written by Gandhiji because he did
not approve of some of my activities at this session."
and got carried could have been delayed for one year. Your
plunging into the 'republican army' was a hasty step. But I do
not mind these acts of yours so much as I mind your encourag-
ing mischief-makers and hooligans. I do not know whether you
still believe in unadulterated non-violence. But even if you have
altered your views, you could not think that unlicensed and un-
bridled violence is going to deliver the country. If careful obser-
vation of the country in the light of your European experiences
convinces you of the error of the current ways and means, by
all means enforce your own views, but do please form a dis-
ciplined party. You know the Cawnpore experiences.
In every
struggle bands of men who would submit to discipline are need-
ed. You seem to be overlooking this factor in being careless
about your instruments.
If I can advise you, now that you are the working secretary
of the Indian National Congress, it is your duty to devote your
whole energy to the central resolution, i.e., Unity, and the im-
portant but secondary resolution, i.e., boycott of the Simon Com-
mission. The Unity resolution requires the use of all your great
gifts of organization and persuasion.
I have not time to elaborate my points, but verb. sap.
I hope Kamala is keeping as well as in Europe.
Yours,
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 55-
