504. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYAR
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 19, 1928
MY DEAR PYARELAL,
I dictate this because I am spinning and I want to save the
few minutes that will be required for writing to you in Gujarati.
I am eager to write to you at once to tell you that your arti-
cle is A 1. I have read it through, though hurriedly. But I find
nothing in it jarred and it is just the kind of thing that was
wanted for "outsiders", not in the Government sense, but in our
sense. No one else, I am confident, could have written the article,
because no one else would have the penetration that you have.
You have shown why the struggle has been possible and how the
splendid organization has come into being. I only hope that the
article will be copied widely by the Indian Press. This article
shows, and I never had any doubt ever since my reading of your
essay which was published in Young India, what capacity you
have, if you will only have confidence in yourself. Between you and
Mahadev I can safely forget all about [Young] India and perhaps
never write a single line. However, let me hope and wait.
Mahadev is all right now. He will be up and doing in one
or two days. He is doing even now. You know what the cause
was. He had a fall at the well where he was fetching water. We
have very few labourers in the Ashram. You know that we had one
robbery and one burglary. There were nearly 50 robbers.
Surendra and Shankerbhai came in for a fair beating alongside
the workers at the Tannery. And I was so happy to find these two
amongst those who were beaten. The burglary was committed in
the store-room two days after the robbery, though I do not think
that they are interrelated.
There are many other startling changes. The common kitchen
has expanded to nearly 100 and the place where I was staying is
turned into women's quarters. My office is in Maganlal's room.
The kitchen has been transferred to the kitchen attached to the
Chhatralaya. I take my meals with the rest there. The other
things you must learn from Imam Saheb if you open out to any-
body at all.
I hope that you are keeping your body in perfect form. Dev-
das has returned to Almora.
From a photostat: S.N. 13427
