10. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[GEORGETOWN, MADRAS]
Vaishakh Sud 7 [April 21, 1915]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I learnt from Maganbhai that you had reached Gurukula.
Agricultural work is part of satyagraha. We have deduced the necessity
of agricultural work from satyagraha. Hence the question : what should one
do if it becomes necessary to give up agricultural work for the sake of
satyagraha? My purpose was to show to Jamnadas that [in such a situation]
agricultural work is not our chief object. His question was : What should one
do if the ruler of the place where we are living seizes our land? Also, that if
1 Pragji Khandubhai Desai, Gandhiji's co-worker in South Africa; among the earliest
to arrive at the Tolstoy Farm; taught the youngsters at the Farm and wrote regularly
for the Gujarati section of Indian Opinion
2 From the printed letterhead
3 From Gandhiji's itinerary mentioned in para 5; he arrived at Bombay on May
10, having left Madras on May 7; reached Ahmedabad on May 11 and Rajkot on May
15. Vaishakh Sud 7 in the year 1915 corresponded to April 21.
LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
11
a situation arises in which one may have to attend immediately to some urgent
work, the agricultural work may get neglected. I can say much to explain this
matter. Our object always remains the same. But as circumstances change from
time to time, we can deduce from the nature of our object what should be done
in each case.
If Jamnadas does not take the vows, he can remain in the capacity of a
student.
Harilal1's letter made me realize that I should act more independently of
others than I do at present and teach you all to do likewise. You have to
show to a still greater degree that you always do what you think proper and
not out of regard for me. As for Harilal's letter, it merely echoed his weakness.
All of us shrink from admitting our weakness, and so abuse what our weakness
does not permit us to do. Even Harilal seems to have realized this now. His
two letters accompanying this, are worth reading and pondering over by you
all. Therefore, read them and understand their meaning. Preserve the letters.
It seems to me that Manilal2, Ramdas 3 , and you too, will recover your peace
of mind to some extent.
Here I am tasting the utmost sweetness. I will leave Madras on the 7th
and go to Bombay. From there to Ahmedabad, and from there to Rajkot. I
have now received Sheth Mangaldas's letter. He says in it that the place is
ready in Ahmedabad. I will go to Ahmedabad and see everything for myself.
I will await a detailed letter from you today.
Assuming that Maganbhai and the others will also read this letter, I am
not writing another one to them.
Ba is fine. You must have come to know of my two vows. 4 Raojibhai also
has taken a vow. You must have come to know of it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33907
1, &3 This first, second and third son, respectively, of Gandhiji.
4 On April 10, 1915, at Hardwar, Gandhiji took two vows —not to eat more than five articles
of food during 24 hours and not to eat after sunset.
