158. LETTER TO A SOCIAL WORKER
NAVAJIVAN, SARANGPUR,
AHMEDABAD,
January 24, 1926
BHAISHRI . . . ,
I am injured and cannot write my own letters. I wanted to
write to you three days ago, but could not owing to rush of work.
This pressure is the main cause of my fever. At the moment I have
no temperature; nor is it likely to rise. You must have learnt from
her letter that . . . has gone to Sehore. In view of the telegram
I thought she must leave for Sehore. It was obvious that we
could not treat the telegram as a fake. I have had no letter from
her yet. I met her quite often while she was here and also talked
with her on several occasions. From all this I have reached the
conclusion that a marriage would prove undesirable for both of
you, besides it might become a hindrance to your work. She
can think of nothing but marriage, and all because of her in-
fatuation. She is a good woman, as simple as she is guileless.
She has no urge to serve the country or the people. Her marrying
cannot be regarded an ideal widow-marriage. A man like you
can get along with a woman only if there is something extra-
ordinary about her desire to marry at thirty. I find no such
thing. I would therefore advise you to be firm and cure her of
her infatuation. I had mistaken your disease for burns. It is
not much if your friends expect you to set an example and forgo
parenthood. After marriage I do not think you can escape it.
I presume you will not debase yourself by resorting to contraceptives,
once you start conjugal life. I am afraid a man with such ideas
cannot work among women. Without marrying her you can render
perfect service to her. You can regard her as your own sister, you
may even support her and take as much work from her as she is
capable of. We can have thousands of women as our mothers
or sisters but if a number of them were to go crazy over us how
many of them can we marry? And if it is . . . today, tomorrow
some other woman may be drawn to you; what can we do then?
Yes; one way there is. We may follow the doctrine of our age,
or rather that of the West, viz., free love, i.e., licentiousness. I
want you not to act without thinking.
Having considered all this you will do only what you deem
correct. Many people seem to know about your proposed mar-
riage; I do not like this. Even the women in the Ashram have come
to know of it. And as Bhai Chhaganlal Joshi says, everyone in
the college believes that your marriage has been solemnized in
the Ashram itself.
I am going to read this letter to Bhai Kishorelal and ask him to
write whatever he wants to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12180
