155. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
January 22, 1926
Now with the arrival of Taramati and Dilip you have more
company. Dilip's presence should prove a tonic for you.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 85
156. SPINNING-WHEEL MILL
A Hindi professor has written a long letter which, being of
interest for Gujarati readers too, I summarize below:
Do you intend to continue the spinning-wheel move-
ment even after we have swaraj? Will not the number of
Indian mills go up automatically then and, their products
being cheap, will not the cause of the spinning-wheel suffer?
And finally, since these mills themselves will have accom-
plished the boycott of foreign cloth, will not your idea of
ending hunger in the villages through the spinning-wheel
remain a mere fancy? Or may it not happen that under
swaraj we shall discover some other remedy for poverty? If
so, why should you not devote your strenuous efforts to multi-
plying the number of mills in order to ensure the success of
the boycott movement instead of to the spinning-wheel?
If you agree that after we have swaraj the spinning-wheel
movement is bound to stop, but think that it must continue
meanwhile for ten or fifteen years, could you not have new
mills set up during that period and ensure immediate boy-
cott [of foreign cloth]?
The arguments advanced here have been answered some time
or other in Navajivan. If, nevertheless, even a learned gentleman
like this correspondent, a regular reader too of Young India and
Navajivan, has still doubts in the matter, it may be worthwhile to
try to answer his questions.
I am convinced that the spinning-wheel will stay even after
we have won swaraj. The movement has its origin in the condition
of villages. Even after swaraj, cultivators will need a subsidiary
occupation and, in our country, spinning is the only possible
occupation of the sort. It is not as if the moment we get swaraj
new mills will spring up overnight like mushrooms after the rains.
Setting up a mill requires capital, and those who put it up expect
interest. For a mill we must have land, facilities of water, etc.,
and workers and machinery. These resources cannot be created
as easily as spinning-wheels. If a sufficiently large number of people
decide, they can produce one crore spinning-wheels in the country
in one day; on the contrary, even if thirty crores wish it, they
cannot set up a mill with thirty crore spindles in one day. Exper-
ience has proved positively that a spinning-wheel can produce
nearly the same amount of yarn in eight hours which one spindle
produces in a mill. If, therefore, the Indian people choose, they
can, in a few months, produce enough cloth for themselves with
the help of spinning-wheels and handlooms. Given a little will
and corresponding action, it is possible to bring about immediate
boycott [of foreign cloth] with the help of the spinning-wheel,
whereas it is not possible to do so with the help of mills, however
much we may wish or try. Moreover, if we seek to effect the
boycott with the help of mills, we shall have for a long time to
depend on foreign countries for two things-for years to come we
shall have to get the machinery and engineers from outside.
Again, the multiplication of mills can never end the hunger
of the poor. If we cannot find today some other means of ending
their poverty, we have no reason to believe that we shall discover
it after we win swaraj. No one, so far, has even tried and de-
monstrated how to employ the other means which have been
suggested in place of the spinning-wheel for ending mass hunger.
I am, therefore, of the view that nothing besides the spinning-
wheel can satisfy the hunger of the crores in the country.
This being my unalterable view, there can be no question, as
far as I am concerned, whether the spinning-wheel movement
will succeed or fail. I have even stated my view that without
boycott of foreign cloth there can be no swaraj for the millions.
I am firm in this view of mine too. Hence, whether it takes one
year or a hundred years for the spinning-wheel to become uni-
versal, it is the sovereign means of winning swaraj. I am, more-
over, serving the untouchable communities through it. I am also
making a great contribution towards Hindu-Muslim unity, since
I appeal to Muslims, too, that they should take up ginning, card-
ing, spinning and weaving. Setting up more mills will produce
none of these benefits. The effort will have been worth-while
only if it succeeds. It can yield no great benefit. In my view,
boycott brought about by any sort of means can do no good.
Only the boycott which has been brought about by the concerted
efforts of millions and which has, in the process, satisfied their
hunger, can be of immense benefit. Moreover, whether the spin-
ning-wheel movement succeeds or not, it is without any flaw and
that is why it can never fail.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 24-1-1926
