368. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
BOMBAY,
June 28, 1919
DEAR MR. JINNAH1,
I was delighted to receive your letter. I shall certainly keep
you informed of the doings here. I cannot say anything about the
Reforms Bill. I have hardly studied it. My preoccupation is
Rowlatt legislation; add to that the Punjab, Kalinath Roy, Trans-
vaal and swadeshi and I have more hay on my work than I can
carry. Our Reforms will be practically worthless, if we cannot
repeal Rowlatt legislation, if a strong committee of enquiry is
not appointed to investigate the Punjab affairs and to revise what
appear to be excessive sentences, if the glaring wrong done to Kali-
nath Roy is not redressed and the Transvaal Indians not protected
from further encroachments on their liberty, and if India does not
take up and appreciate the work of swadeshi. The first four are
needed as much to test our strength as to test the measure of the
goodwill of Englishmen, and the last, viz., swadeshi, is an earnest
of our love for our country, and I am, therefore, concentrating all
my energy upon these things. And as I can imagine no form of
resistance to the Government than civil disobedience, I propose,
God willing, to resume it next week. I have taken all precautions,
that are humanly possible to take, against recrudescence of violence.
I have duly informed the authorities of my intentions and I have
even sent a cable to Mr. Montagu.
I enclose proof copy of the instructions I shall be leaving be-
hind. They will give you the further information I should like
you to possess.
Pray tell Mrs. Jinnah that I shall expect her on her return
to join the hand-spinning class that Mrs. Banker Senior and Mrs.
Ramabai, a Punjabi lady, are conducting. And, of course, I have
your promise that you would take up Gujarati and Hindi as
quickly as possible. May I then suggest that like Macaulay you
learn at least one of these languages on your return voyage? You
will not have Macaulay's time during the voyage, i.e., six months,
but then you have not the same difficulty that Macaulay had. I
hope you will both keep well during your stay.
If you get the time, please turn over the pages of Young India
sent under separate cover. It is wretchedly printed because I have
no trained help yet, and I am training helpers at the expense of
indulgent subscribers.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 6698
