231. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
DELHI,
October 30, 1924
DEAR MOTILALJI,
Ever since the firing of the Viceregal bomb I have been
taxing myself as to what we can do and our helplessness has preyed
upon me. This is our conclusion! We must not do anything
in haste or anger. We must therefore bow before the storm. For
the time being we must revert to the old method of simply expres-
sing our opinion and we should concentrate all-India opinion
upon the lawless methods of the Government and therefore attack
the principle of the Government adopting extraordinary measures
and should therefore call upon the Government to repeal even
Regulation III of 1818. If extraordinary powers are required by
an extraordinary situation, they can be taken only upon a vote
of elected representatives. I know that even this is tall talk and it
jars on me. But I see no other way out at the present moment.
So much to the all-India work. If I could carry you, that is
you personally and Swarajists, with me, I would ask the Working
Committee or the A.I.C.C. to concentrate its efforts upon the
three items mentioned. Give me a compact disciplined Congress,
and I can see my way again to answering Government action with
popular action. But till then, and till Hindus and Mussalmans
speak with one mind and till we show substantial work about
khaddar and untouchability, I for one see no prospect of any
effective direct action. Since the Bengal arrests, the idea of retir-
ing from the Congress has possessed me, unless I receive the enthu-
siastic support of Swarajists in my proposals. I simply want to
bring into being a compact organization which will respond to
every call. I do not care how small that organization is. All other
non-violent activities may go on. I can understand their utility
up to a point. But I am convinced that they will all be a wasted
effort, if nobody concerns himself with bringing into being a
disciplined and effective organization. I feel deeply hurt and
humiliated that we cannot take up with any degree of effect the
Government challenge. I think I have told you all you can want
to know from me. I am sending you the following telegram:
I sent a little note to Das as he passed through Delhi. Please
tell him it is not want of will which keeps me tied down to
Delhi. I hardly looked at the newspapers before. But since the
arrests I have been eagerly scanning everything about them in
all the papers that come under my notice.
I was glad you were able to go to Nagpur and more so
that you are able to get the parties to agree to your and Mau-
lana's arbitration.
I hope you are well.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
