475. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
WARDHA,
August 13, 1935
CHI. PREMA,
I am observing two and a half hours' silence today to over-
take the arrears of correspondence. Disposing of the letters one by
one, I saw just now your letter of July 9, 1935.
You did very well in meeting Kelkar. It would be good if
you could take him to see your work.
What you say about work regarded as unclean is correct. I
am giving in Harijanbandhu the portion about the Mahars. Your
name will not be published.
Inform me when the Poona resolution is implemented. Which
is the other book about Hitler?
And now I come to your question. There is great risk in
taking Russia as a model to be emulated. For one thing, we have
no direct knowledge; secondly, the experiment has not yet lasted
long enough; and thirdly, they rely on violence for what they are
doing. We should, therefore, leave out Russia when thinking
about our problems. This must be assumed to be common
ground between us, that we do not wish to use violence to force
people to do anything. Hence the easiest way of securing justice
from the rich is to see that they make the best use of the wealth
they earn. This may possibly result in their being no longer eager
to acquire much wealth. We need not mind that. Nor need we
mind, even if such a result does not follow. We shall in this way
get the use of so much wealth without having to bother about its
safety. If a large number of rich people become trustees, we shall
want nothing more. Your argument springs from the suspicion
that the rich will never agree to be trustees of their own property.
We needn't worry if your suspicion is well founded, for truth
is bound to triumph ultimately. He who keeps more than he
needs is a thief and stolen wealth is like unprocessed mercury.
It cannot be digested. We should have faith that the thief will
not be able to retain the property he has stolen and should go
on employing non-violent means.
If you are still not satisfied, ask me again. The question you
have put is an important one, and if you have fully grasped the
meaning of ahimsa my answer should satisfy you as a perfect one.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Lakshmi has gone to Bardoli. Prabhavati is here, and so is
Amtussalaam. Ba is in Delhi. Lakshmi has given birth to a son.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10376. Also C.W. 6815. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
