7. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 4, 1929
CHI. MIRA,
I have been awake quite by accident since 3 a.m. It is now
nearing 5 a.m. and I have nearly finished the U. M. post.
I travelled 3rd class again without any mishap and without
any discomfort worth the name. And it added to my mental
peace. I am never at peace with myself travelling 2nd class.
There is no more news to give you about Rasik . There was
no wire awaiting me at Karachi and today I shall get nothing
before this is posted. The post closes at 9 a.m.
Did I tell you that last week it was so cold at the U .M. that
the water in the buckets and the little reservoir had frozen. The
thermometer registered 28 degrees—an unheard of temperature
for Sabarmati. We had a most magnificent crop of vegetables,
cotton, etc. Poor Somabhai had given his whole soul to the thing.
Well, practically all was destroyed by the terrible frost, even the
beautiful papaiya orchard gone. The whole fields looked like weeping.
It was an unbearable sight. And yet behind this tragedy Nature
has a kindly purpose which we cannot perceive, but believe in full
faith—yes, faith is evidence of things unseen and unseeable.
I hope you have now completely regained your normal health.
You will—won't you—recognize the limitations of your body and
insist on having the things it may need for its upkeep even as a
trustee would be bound to secure the well-being of his ward. Be
sure that you do not pamper the body, that you are treating [it]
as a trust from God to be used for your unfoldment and you will
be justified, nay bound, to supply its primary wants.
It is not enough merely to postdate the programme by two
days. It has been rearranged but it would be wise to treat
Hyderabad Sind as headquarters. I have not spent money on wir-
ing as, whenever you post your letters, I am bound to get them.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Of course you have read my articles about the European
visit. Do you not agree? You will write to Rolland.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5340. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9395
