41. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
October 26, 1943
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
SIR,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 14th
instant received on 18th instant.
2. Your letter makes it clear that my reply to the charges
brought against me in the Government publication Congress Res-
ponsibility for the Disturbances, 1942-43, has failed in its purpose,
namely, to convince the Government of my innocence of those
charges. Even my good faith is impugned.
3. I observe, too, that the Government did not desire
"comments" upon the charges. Previous pronouncements of the
Government on such matters had led me to think otherwise.
Be that as it may, your current letter seems to invite an answer.
4. In my opinion, I have, in my letter of 15th July last,
unequivocally answered all charges referred to in your letter
under reply. I have no regret for what I have done or said in
the course of the struggle for India's freedom.
5. As to the Congress resolution of 8th August, 1942, apart
from my belief that it is not only harmless but good all
round, I have no legal power to alter it in any way. That
can only be done by the body that passed that resolution, i.e.,
the All-India Congress Committee which is no doubt guided by
its Working Committee. As the Government are aware, I offered
to meet the members of the Working Committee in order to
discuss the situation and to know their mind. But my offer
was rejected. I have thought and still think that my talk with
them might have some value from the Government standpoint.
Hence I repeat my offer. But it may have no such value so
long as the Government doubt my bona fides. As a satyagrahi,
however, in spite of the handicap, I must reiterate what I hold
to be good and of immediate importance in terms of war effort.
But if my offer has no chance of being accepted so long as I
retain my present views, and if the Government think that it
is only my evil influence that corrupts people, I submit that
the members of the Working Committee and other detenus
should be discharged. It is unthinkable that when India's
millions are suffering from preventable starvation and thousands
are dying of it, thousands of men and women should be kept
in detention on mere suspicion, when their energy and the
expense incurred in keeping them under duress could, at this
critical time, be usefully employed in relieving distress. As I
have said in my letter of 15th July last, Congressmen abundantly
proved their administrative, creative and humanitarian worth
at the time of the last terrible flood in Gujarat, and equally
terrible earthquake in Bihar. The huge place in which I am
being detained with a large guard around me, I hold to be waste
of public funds. I should be quite content to pass my days in
any prison.
6. As to "satisfactory assurances" about my "good con-
duct", I can only say that I am unaware of any unworthy
conduct at any time. I presume that the impression Govern-
ment have of my conduct is referable to the charges mentioned
in the indictment, as I have succinctly called, Congress Responsi-
bility for the Disturbances, 1942-43. And since I have not only
denied the charges in toto but, on the contrary, have ventured
to bring counter-charges against the Government, I think that
they should agree to refer both to an impartial tribunal. See-
ing that a big political organization and not a mere individual
is involved in the charges, I hold that it should be a vital part
of the war effort to have the issue decided by a tribunal, if
mutual discussion and effort are considered by the Government
to be undesirable and/or futile.
7. Whilst your letter rejects my request that my letter of
15th July last should, in fairness to me, be published1, you
inform me that their decision in this matter, however, "is with-
out prejudice to the freedom of Government to use at any time
and in any manner which they think fit the various admissions
contained in the communication which you have voluntarily ad-
dressed to them". I can only hope that this does not mean
that as in the case of the Congress Responsibility for the Disturban-
ces, 1942-43, garbled extracts will be published. My request is
that my letter should be published in full, if and when the
Government think fit to make public use of it.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 114-.
Also from a photostat; C.W.
10380. Courtesy; India Office Library
1 It was published by the Government of India on June 21, 1944.
