189. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
KARACHI,
July 11, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
These days I cannot write to you when I propose to do so.
I commenced this letter at 5.30 a.m. after breakfast. Just then a
Parsi lady came in with her 15-year-old daughter. The latter has
won the first place in tennis in the whole of India, but she has now
lost interest in worldly things.
Her interest now is all in religion.
She, therefore, urged her mother to bring her to see me.
She gave
ten rupees for the Harijan Fund and has now left after obtaining
my autograph.
Please do not be unhappy at the news of my fast.
It is
absolutely necessary. Large crowds come to the meetings and
sanatanists are on the war-path. People do not tolerate their
conduct and, therefore, trouble is bound to follow.
People will
not listen to mere exhortations.
One can convey one's message
to vast masses of people only by fasting. Crowds at the meetings
are larger than ever before and it is very difficult to control them.
Seven days will pass without any difficulty.
Please don't worry in
the least. My health is perfectly all right. In spite of heavy pressure
of work, the blood-pressure remains round about 150. That should
be considered very good. The weight is 104. I shall be happy
if the rest of the tour is completed without further trouble. August
will be taken up by the fast and the gradual return to normal
diet. After that as God wills.
I must get a detailed report about your health. I am writing
to Dahyabhai to send me one.
I learnt yesterday about Mani having been released.
Maha-
dev and Pyarelal will join me at Lahore. That will increase the
size of the party. Kakasaheb has joined it at Hyderabad. It is
quite desirable that all three of them should be with me at
present. Narahari will not be coming. If I can stay at a fixed
place, I can meet everybody. Let God's will prevail.
1 Vide the following item.
168
Ba keeps good health. She manages to secure the food that
she needs. At any rate, in such matters nothing is likely to escape
Thakkar Bapa's attention.
Ramdas's trouble is mental, and mental illness cannot but
have an effect on the body.
At present he is following . . .'s
advice. He has been considerably reduced. The fact that he has
three children also worries him.
What is ordained will happen.
Devdas's Lakshmi keeps fairly good health.
I had long discussion with . . .2 and others. Just now they
are not likely to listen to any advice. The new wind is intoxica-
ting beyond measure. They will come to their senses only when
that intoxication has subsided. Swami parted from us at Viramgam.
He will now take up constructive work in the suburbs.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 110-
