431. LETTER TO K. B. BHADRAPUR
As AT SABARMATI,
June 7, 1931
DEAR MR. BHADRAPUR,
I write this letter in connection with the present Mukhi of Ras.
I discussed the question of his removal and the appointment of the
old Mukhi with Mr. Perry more than once and I had hoped that
by this time at least the Ras Mukhi would have been removed.
The matter is now becoming urgent as a deputation on behalf
of the non-Dharala inhabitants of Ras waited on me yesterday
and complained that life was becoming unbearable for them
there. I enclose herewith particulars of destruction that is alleged
to have gone on in Ras during the past fortnight. They men-
tioned also that personal assaults were added to the injury to
property. It is not suggested that the Mukhi himself has per-
sonally done these things but it is suggested that they have been
done with his connivance, if not instigation. It will be readily
admitted that if the statements made in the memorandum hereto
attached are at all true, it won't be possible for the non-Dharala
population to proceed with the cultivation of their fields as
soon as rains commence. Suggestion has already been made that
the Mukhiship should be divided into three parts, each part being
held by a different person. I need hardly say this will not do.
Either the present Mukhi is an undesirable person or he is not.
If he is an undesirable person, in accordance with the terms of the
Settlement and the admission made by the Commissioner, un-
desirable Mukhis should be removed. And in view of the fact
that there is a conviction for theft against the present Mukhi of
Ras, his removal is surely overdue. This I ask irrespective of and
without prejudice to my contention that appointments of Mukhis
for definite terms are not permanent according to the meaning
of the Settlement. I shall therefore be obliged if you will kindly
let me know as early as possible whether it is the intention of the
Government to remove this Mukhi and protect the life and prop-
erty of the inhabitants of Ras.
Yours sincerely,
K. B. BHADRAPUR, ESQ.
COLLECTOR OF KAIRA DT.
KAIRA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
