524. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 13, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
In the hope that you would get this on or before Monday,
I write in reply to your unexpected letter received today.
It is well if you do without the fountain pen. But what we
must aim at is the correct attitude. This brings about lasting
and drastic changes. A detailed local treatment must go hand in
hand with a penetrating search after the root cause, the desire
to possess. It is possible to conceive a person not being poor in
spirit though he may have nothing, because he is jealous of those
who possess. He has nothing, but feels the deprivation. Another
may have by him a golden footstool which he is seen using in
order to save his feet from treading on hot ashes, but which he
converts into cash for the poor the very next moment and feels
the delight of dispossession. This is not to criticize what you have
done but to enforce it, if it is at all necessary or possible.
You will come as soon as you can, bringing with you anyone
who may wish to come and who is permitted to come. Pyare
Ali and Noorbanu can come. Not yet Damodardas whose name
is still under consideration. You should go to Pyare Ali's place
and there see Amina's children and Tilak.
Of course, Tilak
can come if he wants to. There is immediately the question of
poverty. But I would not bring it up in his case if he has a
desire he cannot restrain.
Your left-hand writing is certainly steadier than mine. You
will, in a short time, write as well with the left as you do with
the right hand.
I am delighted Sofia is with you. I have met her. It is
just like her to join you in prayer so heartily. Give her my
love. I would almost wish for her sake that she had you longer
than you would be. Let her write to me if ever she has a month
when she has nobody else in particular to write to. That could
not be I am sure. But who can say?
Magan wheel has caused me trouble, but I am gaining mas-
tery over it. Ground-nuts are gone. Vallabhbhai and Mahadev
frightened me and I have allowed myself to be frightened. My
weight has gone up to 105½ again.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6221. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9687
