302. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[February 3, 1933]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter.
You must have got my letter regarding Mahavir and the
family must have left now. If they have not left, you may use the
accompanying letter. It is best now that the chapter should be
closed as early as possible. After it is closed, I will write in greater
detail about the duties of people who live in the Ashram.
Titus's overstaying his leave seems improper. We would be
in a better position to judge if we know the reason for his doing so.
But it can be stated as a general rule that nobody should overstay
his leave except for reasons absolutely beyond his control. How-
ever, do not start enforcing this rule with Titus. Know the rea-
son from him after he has returned and write to me. But we can
lay down the following rule for the future:
Anybody who violates a vow or pledge taken by him should,
if he is outside the Ashram at the time of doing so, keep out of
the Ashram and, if he is in the Ashram, leave it. In an ashram
which is dedicated to truth, this rule should be observed without
any exception. It will not apply in a case in which the reason
for violating the vow or the pledge is beyond the control of the
person doing so. A person who goes on leave also promises to re-
turn before a certain date. This rule is observed even in ordinary
institutions. An institution in which it is not observed will not
run for long or will lose its reputation.
You and other senior inmates there should discuss this rule
among yourselves and, if all of you agree, read it out to the other
inmates. If all the people accept it, enforce it rigorously there-
after. The enforcement of such rules is essential for the work which
the Ashram has to do. I feel that it will soon be necessary for us
to lay down our lives for banishing untouchability. But only those
who are perfectly pure in their lives are fit to make such a sacrifice.
If we did not strictly observe the necessary rules in looking after all
the girls in the Ashram, we would be lost. We should not mind if
the Ashram breaks up, but should not tolerate the violation of
rules which we accept for ourselves. We are judged by the manner
in which we observe formal rules in their true spirit. Only God
can know whether we observe a rule in its spirit, but everybody
can know whether or not it is formally observed. However, the
Ashram does not belong to me alone; it belongs to you all.
I have only stated my views. It is for you all to consider whether
you should act upon them.
Mahadev had got Vasram's letter to him. I have referred
to this in my letter to him. I hope he got that letter.
What you write about Chhotubhai is correct.
My headaches did not last long. They were cured by mud-
packs. I have continued the packs as a preventive measure.
BAPU
[PS.]
Give the accompanying letters after reading them. Letters
for Durga, Krishnamaiyadevi, Nimu, Liladhar, Bhagwanji, Ba and
Mary Barr.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I.
