34. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
July 13/15, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time all the letters were delivered to me as soon as they
were received, and probably that is what they will do in future
too.
Last time I wrote 47 letters and then added two at the last
moment, but could not change the figure which I had mention-
ed in your letter. For the Jail Superintendent arrived then and I
handed over the packet to him after inserting into it those two
slips of paper.
My speed has not increased to 400 rounds, or even yards, and
it is not likely to do so. I believe that my body simply does not
have the capacity for that. Formerly I used to spin 160 rounds
during the day; instead, I now spin 375 rounds. But to spin that
takes on an average four hours. Even on days on which every-
thing goes well, I take not less than three hours. The average pro-
bably comes to 400 rounds a day. The speed used to be 160, which
has now risen to 200 rounds, but that only on the day on which I
have sufficient energy and the materials are well arranged. Make
this correction. I have become slack about the takli these days. I
get pretty tired working on the spinning-wheel. Ever since my
illness I have lost the strength to sit up for four hours at a stretch.
I, therefore, find it difficult to accustom the body to that. But this
is my only spiritual discipline at present and hence I cling to it.
Of course I take care of the body. The weight is steady, so I don't
believe any harm is being done. I have good sleep. I of course
give some time to the takli. I cannot yet make a very good takli
with my own hands and, for want of time, I do not try to learn to
do so by constant practice. I give primary importance to spinning,
as I should like to spin as much yarn as I can. Sewing is going
on all right. The hand has set well on the machine. I still do not
know its intricacies, for there is no one here to teach them to me.
You will read more about these matters in my letters to Mirabehn.
Kakasaheb is in excellent health. After his coming here his
weight has increased by two pounds. He walks for about two and
a half hours daily, in addition to the walking he has to do in
connection with work. He takes all the milk in the form of curds,
so that the milk he consumes is easily digested. He toasts bread.
Ordinarily he gets the vegetables by turns. He gets radishes and
brinjals, and sometimes turiya or guvar. He does not cook the
radishes. He digests ten tolas of butter. He still spins on the
takli only. A Gandiva spinning-wheel arrived from Surat only
recently and Kakasaheb has started to learn spinning on it from
today. He continues to teach me Marathi. It is he, again, who
puts the fruit into water for me or washes it and also washes the
utensils in the evening. Besides these, I accept many other small
services from him.
You need not worry about either of us.
I am happy that the problem of the Bharwads has been solved.
I have not received any cotton from there till today. I am
writing this on Saturday night. If no cotton has been sent up to
the time that you get this letter, post some immediately. I think
there will be no difficulty if I get it by return of post in reply to
this letter. I do hope, indeed, that since I have given the time-
limit up to the 15th, I shall get the cotton on or before Tuesday.
As days pass, I have certainly become a little impatient.
I did not see Sharja's letter. Kanu's I got this time.
Give me news about Punjabhai. How is he? Where does he
live? How does he spend his time?
July 14, 1930
One of the boys asks me in his letter why I use slips of paper.
The reply is that a prisoner should consume the minimum of
everything. Secondly, he who observes the vow of non-possession
is a trustee of all property and, therefore, I must use the property
of this prison, too, like a miser. Thirdly, isn't this property really
ours? With whose money have these things been bought?
Fourthly, in this poor country the less the consumption of such
things the better. Fifthly, it hurts me to use anything extravagant-
ly at a time like this.
I hear today that there is a railway receipt in the office, which
means that the cotton is likely to have arrived. If I cannot men-
tion the total number of letters, I am sure you will see the serial
number on the last letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
It is now 5.30 a.m. on Tuesday. I stop writing the letters. In
all there are 52. If there are people to whom I have omitted to
write and if they expect letters from me, send me their names. How
is a man with a large family to decide whom he would write to
and whom he may omit? Where is Subbiah?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
