275. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
SRIRAMPUR, NOAKHALI DISTRICT,
December 11, 1946
CHI. SUNDARAM,
Your letter today with Press cuttings which you have done
well in sending. I have read them all. I have already written
to Sheth J. K. Birla and sent the note by hand through Baba
Raghavdas. You will probably see that letter and you will see
too that I have spoken about you to him. In my opinion, your
course is clear. If you can breathe the soul of Hinduism into
the Viswa Vidyalaya you should stay, not otherwise. I have
advised that the stipulated sum should be collected as was de-
sired by Panditji.
Therefore, an appeal should go from the
University to the Princes. They can easily find the sum ex-
pected of them and if it is properly managed they will do so.
Businessmen will find their portion and the rest will come easily.
But all this can and should be done only if a living, befitting
temple is built.
The whole of the sum will not be spent in stone and mor-
tar. Some marble is necessary. It should be a unique thing.
It ought not to contain any idol. An idol is not a necessity
of Hindu belief or a Hindu temple. Such a model structure
but very artistic has been built in the Harijan Colony, Kings-
way, Delhi. You have seen it. The one in the Viswa Vidya-
laya grounds will be twenty times larger, with a great dome
with proper acoustic properties, to accommodate an unlimited
number of people. It will be a striking thing and there should
be a daily service conducted there by priests who will show
piety in everyone of their activities, private and public. If
the idea is grasped, the proper persons will come. More I need
not say. You can dot the is and cross the ts.
I have not really the time to spare from the work here
before me, but Panditji's memory is a sacred trust for me. He
was much greater than he himself knew. But his limitations
were amazing. The wonder is that he surmounted them all.
I am in the hands of God. He will shape me as He will.
Don't worry or fret about me.
You can, if you wish, share this letter with those who
were near and dear to him. It is not for publication at all.
BAPU
SHRI V. SUNDARAM
From a photostat: G. N. 3200
