214. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 16, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got today, Saturday, your mail which ordinarily I should
have got on Tuesday. We should regard it as God's grace that
I got it at all. But we should understand that things have be-
come uncertain now. You will probably have received my
letters by now. All of you are having experience of the practice of
non-attachment, and so are we here. What could a prisoner do
if he was not permitted to write or receive any letters or see visi-
tors? If, then, he is granted some little freedom, why should he
expect too much because of that? If, therefore, you stop getting
my letters, you should conclude that something must have hap-
pened. I will of course go on writing regularly about something
or other.
It was a very good thing that the inmate of the Raniparaj
Ashram was cremated. If you have come to know his age, let
me know, and also if you know of what he died.
Narmada's story reads like an incident in a novel. From here
I cannot guide either you or her. If necessary, you may consult
Bhai Mavalankar about the matter or, if he cannot get any time
or if he is not there, consult Bhai Tulsidas or Fulshankar, the
lawyer. In the last analysis this is a question of what is right from
the point of view of dharma. You may, therefore, do what you
think dharma requires. You have done perfectly right in writing
to her husband.
If Chhotubhai stays for the present in the Ashram to look
after his aged father, we may perhaps welcome the latter. How-
ever, we cannot let it become a practice for inmates of the
Ashram who have invalid relations to bring them to the Ashram.
If we do that, the Ashram would be disrupted. This is a difficult
time and Chhotubhai's father has already arrived, and so I have
suggested a via media. If Chhotubhai does not stay in the
Ashram, the Ashram should certainly not accept the responsibility
of looking after his father.
If, through some unavoidable reason, Hariyomal's son cannot
come to the Ashram, I do not think it would be too big a sum
to send fifteen rupees every month for him. We have given such
help on several occasions. The rule, of course, is what you say it
is. But we should think whether it should be applied in Hariyo-
mal's case. Since you know more facts about this matter than I,
you may attach what weight you think my opinion deserves and do
only what seems right to you.
For Anandi and Mani, follow Dr. Kanuga's advice. I cannot
say that taking milk has benefited my elbow in any way.
Think very carefully over the article about prayer which I
am sending with this. You will find it very easy to understand.
If you understand it, you will also be able to explain its meaning
to others. I see from my experience that, instead of our time
being wasted in that way, our mind seems to become lighter and
we feel less the burden of work or responsibility. These days I
think frequently about prayer, and especially about individual
prayer. Rambha had taught me to pray when I was a mere
child, and so prayer has become a most natural thing for me.
But I still see short-comings in me. If perfect wakefulness is
achieved, the grandeur of that state would make everything else
seem meaningless.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8239. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
