54. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[March 7, 1920]
The Khilafat question has now become a question of ques-
tions. It has become an Imperial question of the first magnitude.
The great prelates of England and the Mohammedan leaders
combined have brought the question to the fore. The prelates threw
down the challenge. The Muslim leaders have taken it up.
I trust that the Hindus will realize that the Khilafat question
overshadows the Reforms and everything else.
If the Muslim claim was unjust apart from the Muslim
scriptures, one might hesitate to support it merely on scriptural
authority. But when a just claim is supported by scriptures, it
becomes irresistible.
Briefly put, the claim is that the Turks should retain Euro-
pean Turkey subject to full guarantees for the protection of non-
Muslim races under the Turkish Empire and that the Sultan
should control the holy places of Islam and should have suzerainty
over Jazirat-ul-Arab, i.e., Arabia as defined by the Muslim savants
subject to self-governing rights being given to the Arabs if they
so desire. This was what was promised by Mr. Lloyd George
and this was what Lord Hardinge had contemplated. The Moham-
medan soldiers would not have fought to deprive Turkey of her
possessions. To deprive the Khalif of the suzerainty of Arabia is
to reduce the Khilafat to a nullity.
To restore to Turkey, subject to necessary guarantees, what
was hers before the War is a Christian solution. To wrest any of her
possessions from her for the sake of punishing her is a gun-pow-
der solution. The Allies or England in the hour of triumph must
be scrupulously just. To reduce the Turks to impotence would
be not only unjust. It would be a breach of solemn declarations
and promises. It is to be wished that the Viceroy will take his
courage in both his hands and place himself at the head of the
Khilafat agitation as Lord Hardinge did at the time of the South
African "passive resistance" struggle and thus like his prede-
cessor give a clear and emphatic direction to an agitation which
under impulsive or faulty leadership may lead to disastrous conse-
quences.
But the situation rests more with us Hindus and Moham-
medans than with the Viceroy and still more with the Muslim
leaders than with the Hindus or the Viceroy.
There are signs already of impatience on the part of Mus-
lim friends and impatience may any day be reduced to madness
and the latter must inevitably lead to violence. And I wish I
could persuade everyone to see that violence is suicide.
Supposing the Muslim demands are not granted by the Allies
or, say, England! I see nothing but hope in Mr. Montagu's brave
defence of the Muslim position and Mr. Lloyd George's inter-
pretation of his own declaration. True, the latter is halting but
he can secure full justice under it. But we must suppose the worst
and expect and strive for the best. How to strive is the question.
What we may not do is clear enough:
1. There should be no violence in thought, speech or deed.
2. Therefore there should be no boycott of British goods,
by way of revenge or punishment. Boycott, in my opinion, is a
form of violence. Moreover, even if it were desirable, it is total-
ly impracticable.
3. There should be no rest till the minimum is achieved.
4. There should be no mixing up of other questions with the
Khilafat, e.g., the Egyptian question.
Let us see what must be done:
1. The cessation of business on the 19th instant and expres-
sion of the minimum demands by means of one single resolution
is a necessary first step provided that the hartal is absolutely volun-
tary and the employees are not asked to leave their work unless
they receive permission from their employers. I would strongly
urge that the mill-hands should be left untouched. The further
proviso is that there should be no violence accompanying the
hartal. I have been often told that the C.I.D. sometimes pro-
mote violence. I do not believe in it as a general charge. But
even if it be true, our discipline should make it impossible.
Our success depends solely on our ability to control, guide and
discipline the masses.
Now a word as to what may be done if the demands are not
granted. The barbarous method is warfare, open or secret. This
must be ruled out if only because it is impracticable. If I could
but persuade everyone that it is always bad, we should gain all
lawful ends much quicker. The power that an individual or a
nation forswearing violence generates is a power that is irresis-
tible. But my argument today against violence is based upon pure
expedience, i.e., its utter futility.
Non-co-operation is therefore the only remedy left open to us.
It is the cleanest remedy as it is the most effective, when it is
absolutely free from all violence. It becomes a duty when co-
operation means degradation or humiliation or an injury to one's
cherished religious sentiment. England cannot accept a meek
submission by us to an unjust usurpation of rights which to
Mussulmans mean a matter of life and death. We may therefore
begin at the top as also the bottom. Those who are holding
offices of honour or emolument ought to give them up. Those
who belong to the menial services under Government should do
likewise. Non-co-operation does not apply to services under
private individuals. I cannot approve of the threat of ostracism
against those who do not adopt the remedy of non-co-operation.
It is only a voluntary withdrawal which is effective. For volun-
tary withdrawal alone is a test of popular feeling and dissatisfac-
tion. Advice to the soldiers to refuse to serve is premature. It
is the last not the first step. We should be entitled to take that
step when the Viceroy, the Secretary of State and the Premier
leave us. Moreover every step in withdrawing co-operation has
to be taken with the greatest deliberation. We must proceed slow-
ly so as to ensure retention of self-control under the fiercest heat.
Many look upon the Calcutta resolutions with the deepest
alarm. They scent in them a preparation for violence. I do not
look upon them in that light, though I do not approve of the
tone of some of them. I have already mentioned those whose
subject-matter I wholly dislike.
"Can Hindus accept all the resolutions?" is the question
addressed by some. I can only speak for myself. I will co-ope-
rate whole-heartedly with the Muslim friends in the prosecution
of their just demands so long as they act with sufficient restraint
and so long as I feel sure that they do not wish to resort to or
countenance violence. I should cease to co-operate and advise
every Hindu and for that matter everyone else to cease to co-
operate the moment there was violence actually done, advised
or countenanced. I would therefore urge upon all speakers the
exercise of the greatest restraint under the gravest provocation.
There is certainty of victory if firmness is combined with gentle-
ness.
The cause is doomed if anger, hatred, ill will, reckless-
ness and finally violence are to reign supreme. I shall resist them
with my life even if I should stand alone. My goal is friendship
with the world and I can combine the greatest love with the
greatest opposition to wrong.
Young India, 10-3-1920
