225. LETTER TO N.
June 9, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
You must not expect from me just now any reply to your
letters. Strength is not coming to me as rapidly as I had ex-
pected. But my expectation had no justification. The regaining
of strength is really as rapid as is possible for an old man of 64.
When I built my castle of expectation I had forgotten that I
was 64 and not 46.
What you say about the monthly business is quite true.
But it is not likely to be true of you. To reach the state you
have described, you need to attain perfect purity not merely in
act but in thought also. Then undoubtedly the sex symptom
goes, mere form remains. I do fervently hope that you will
soon reach that state, but you have not yet done so. That you
can do so, I have not a shadow of doubt. You have in you the
making of such a woman. I know your aspirations and I know
that you want to be true through and through. You are, so far
as I can read your letters, making a Herculean effort. May you
succeed soon. Meanwhile, I am not just now building any high
hope upon the scarcity of the monthly symptom. I have not,
therefore, lost all fear of conception. [If] it is there, I want you not
191
to mind it but to regard it as a blessing of God. Whereas if there
is no conception we would regard that too as equally a blessing
and a narrow escape. Either way let it serve as a warning, final
and unforgettable.
I am glad you like Abbas and Govindji as tutors. I know
that they are all very fine workers. They have their hearts
in their work. Of course, Lakshmidas you will look up to both
as your first teacher and in the place of a parent. He is one of
the staunchest of men in the Ashram. I want you to pick out
all that you may find to be good in the Ashram and cling to it.
As to the name, you will see that I have adopted your sug-
gestion. You may ask everybody in the Ashram to cut out
Devi in any case. And let them address you as N. or N. behn
just as they wish. But having done this forget all about the name,
and its meaning and significance. After all nothing hangs by it.
Everything is based upon what we think and what we do.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19095
