7. LETTER TO MAHADEVSHASTRI DIVEKAR
November 1, 1945
PANDITJI,
I have had your book read out to me from beginning to
end. These days while I spin I have a friend read out to me
some book which I think is worth reading. I am disappointed
with your book. From what you had said I had expected that
I would learn something new from it and at the same time
some light would be thrown on the Hindu-Muslim question.
Right from my childhood I have lived with Muslims and when
I went to London Providence placed me in close association
with Christians, Muslims and Parsis. Hindus of course were
there. I came into contact with the intellectuals among them
and that is how I read the holy books of all the four religions.
I came to the conclusion that we could know the true facts about
any religion only after reading its sacred books. I also read
quite a few criticisms of them. I can say that I have also read
the Muslim critics you mention in your letter. I had a talk with
Muslims in South Africa about those books and also with an
Englishman who had become Muslim. After coming here I read
the works of Maulana Shibli. As a result I have realized that
every religion contains both truth and untruth. The root of all
religions is one and it is pure and all of them have sprung from
the same source, hence all are equal. This equality of all religions
has been included by Vinoba among the eleven vows in a Marathi
sloka, which is daily recited in the prayers.
Non-violence, truth, non-stealing, brahmacharya, non-possession,
body-labour, control of the palate, fearlessness on all occasions,
equal respect for all religions, swadeshi and sparshabhavana these
eleven vows should be observed in a spirit of humility.
I am trying to live in accordance with this and so are my
associates.
As it is, the letter has become quite long but since you have
taken so much trouble and have also sent to me extra copies of
your book, I felt I should at least let you know my stand.
I do not wish to argue with you. I have an answer to what
you have suggested but I see no need to give it here. I therefore
think that what I have said is enough.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
