537. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
January 8, 1933
BHAI BHAGWANJI,
I got your letter. Though you usually write frankly, your
postcard this time is not frank enough. You seem to believe
that Manibhai is a bad man. If that is so, you should state it
plainly. I wrote to you and told you that I did not know even
that Manilal had complained. Do you have personal knowledge
of his having complained? If you have it, your first duty as a
gentleman and as a relation was to write to him. I am willing
to write to him if you give me some evidence of his misdeeds.
Apart from that, I don't know what to say about your suggestion
as to whom I should put up with. I do not think that I am so
good a man that I should never put up with a person whom the
people believe to be a bad man. I myself am a bad man, and
still I live in my house. Would it be proper for me, then, if I
try to sit in judgment over others? Moreover, how can a man,
who daily wanders from place to place and eats and sleeps at other
people's places, afford to be too particular about the place where
he puts up. I, therefore, follow one rule, namely, to regard all
strangers as my kith and kin. My own relations remain so in
any case. I do not agree with the principle, if you have laid
down any such for yourself, that one must not lodge a criminal
complaint against one's relations, no matter what wicked things
they do, but one may do so against strangers. However that
may be, I ought to tell you, as I told Khimchand some months
ago, that I have not the least trust in him. You may also know
that Manilal is not the cause of my distrust. It is Khimchand's
own letters one after another which have increased my distrust of
him. You may see now how much worry and trouble you have
created for me. And still you ask for forgiveness, but I don't
think, you expect to receive it. But you are free to do whatever
you like and so are safe.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5816. Also C.W. 3039. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
