67. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 30, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You are working wonders. If you are, in the midst of your people,
carrying the same spirit, they will learn much from you and your visit
will be a blessing to you and to them.
I have received the no-salt and other pamphlets as also Wagner's
Simple Life and The Party System for all of which I do not need
to thank you.
The engine has left the Farm. Flooring is not yet quite finished.
I see what a task it was. There are some signs of rain now. There
were a few drops last night.
The first death on the Farm after it changed hands has taken place.
John's grandchild that was born here died yesterday. I supplied him
with planks for making a coffin. The child was buried somewhere near
the Kraal. I thought that was the best place.
Our semi-fast finishes tomorrow. It will have to be a complete fast
tomorrow. I have not felt it in the slightest degree. It is a question
whether I should now at all go back to two meals. But I shall not
be hasty.
Fencing should begin next week in earnest.
I wrote to Call and wired. Have not heard again.
I have not been able to go to Pretoria. It has been practically
impossible, so tied down have I become to the school and its
appointments.
I have restarted sandal-making. Ramdas and a new pupil are the
apprentices. Between them I finish a pair by 11 a.m. if the back bands
are ready. Repairs and new sandals were badly wanted.
Hilt has not yet paid the arrears. Lapin tells me in a letter that
Hilt has promised to send the money in a few days. I am watching
him.
By the time this is in your hands, you will have heard about the
offer made to me to preside at the forthcoming National Congress in
India. The invitation was sent to the Congress in Natal by six prominent
Indians including the All-India Muslim League. Indians are all overjoyed.
They insisted that I should accept the invitation. I have therefore said
yes, but asked for a free hand. 1 I am now awaiting reply. Meanwhile,
Reuter has published the news to the world. And yet it is likely that
they may not have me if I want a free hand. I do not propose to
discuss this matter just now. If! receive a cable accepting my conditions,
I shall cable to you, asking you to return. I shall ask Polak too to
do likewise. If you do not return, I could arrange to fix up matters
during your absence. But it will be better to return. You may want
to come to India. If so, we could start together from here after making
all arrangements, or you may join me in India. My visit there will be
so hurried that I would much rather you did not come. I may not be
in India more than a fortnight. For I must return in time for next year's
Union Parliament. This invitation I do not like at all. I do not want
it. And yet I could not say 'no'. The matter is most delicate.
With love,
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
