332. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
SABARMATI,
August 15, 1924
MY DEAR MISS SCHLESIN,
Though late in the day, your letter was most welcome. If
you wanted to make it a model of neatness, you have failed badly.
The same slovenliness, the same smudging. I can almost see your
inky fingers in your letter. Here is the certificate you want. You
will be entitled to accuse me of untruthfulness in that I have not
certified to your slovenliness. Let me hope the new 'master' will
fare better. I must refuse to plead guilty to all the charges you
have noted against me. Why should I care about giving you a
'business certificate'? But how are the mighty fallen! Regarding
the £24, I thought the draft of £150 included the amount. How-
ever, I am writing to Parsee Rustomji to write off the whole of the
balance, whatever it might be, of the £150.
My health is fair. Now that you have commenced to write,
will you continue?
The rest I must leave to Ramdas to deal with.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
ENCLOSURE
SATYAGRAHASHRAM ,
SABARMATI,
August 15, 1924
Miss Sonja Schlesin served me as confidential secretary in
South Africa for nearly seven years and during a most important
part of my public life. She was entrusted with heavy responsi-
bilities including account-keeping, involving transactions extend-
ing to four figures at a time. She came in touch with hundreds of
people belonging to different races and nationalities. During my last
incarceration in South Africa, she was in sole charge of my affairs.
I never once had reason to doubt her integrity or ability. Indeed,
she did not work for the sake of pay but for the sake of the work
itself which she loved. Her services were available to me at all times
of the day. Her knowledge of shorthand and literary talents were
of great assistance to me. I could not wish for a better secretary.
I should like to hear that she was entrusted with a post requiring
close attention, strictest honesty and ability.
The letter is from the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary and the
enclosure from a photostat: S.N. 10118
