214. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 16, 1945
CHI. NARANDAS,
I sent you today a wire as follows: "All agree cotton
condition beneficial end. Writing-Bapu." If I could have
written to you on the very day that I received your letter,
this letter would have reached you at the same time as the
wire. But I did not wish to reply to your letter without
showing it to others. For, though I had written a long letter
to you, you remained convinced in your mind regarding your
demand. I did not, therefore, think it proper to write to you
on my own. Your letter has now been read by Jajuji, Chhaganlal1,
Krishnadas and Kanaiyo. They all agree with me. Jajuji has
even written down his view.
I send it with this. He has
described his own experience. I am confident that a person like
you is bound to have the same experience. "Swaraj will be gained
through yarn," I said, relying on intuition. But I realize now
that intuition is one thing and its confirmation by experience
another. And what I have been putting forward now is some-
thing different still. Others are having more convincing expe-
rience of the same. It is not going to impress me at all even if
in Kathiawar khadi worth Rs. 4 lakhs instead of Rs. 2 lakhs is
produced and sold. For it could be proved that such production
and sale of khadi would only promote the welfare of the poor,
and an all-India institution like the Charkha Sangh need not
be established merely for that purpose. A co-operative of the
poor for producing khadi could be established and more khadi
at still lower cost could be produced. But even then that khadi
would be of value only as khadi for the poor. It would, one
may say, make no contribution to the cause of swaraj. I, there-
fore, desire that you should have perfect self-confidence and adopt
this new method-policy-for khadi and discover from experience
that it is khadi for swaraj. It is quite possible that Kathiawar
may not accept such khadi. If so, don't mind if no khadi work
is done there, for you must be aware that no such work is done
in many Indian States. In the same way if no work is done
in Kathiawar, either, the cause of khadi for swaraj would not
suffer. I go even further and say that in carrying on khadi acti-
vity for swaraj, if it ceases to be khadi for the poor, the latter
are not going to lose anything for they will be able to earn
their bread in some other way. But if khadi supports the poor
even while remaining khadi for the swaraj, it would be a credit
both to the poor and the cause of swaraj. The poor thereby
would have contributed to the winning of swaraj.
If I have left
any point unexplained, Kanaiyo will explain it when he arrives there.
I hope your health is perfect. If you can leave that place,
it might be better for you to come and see me once.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8628.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
