288. LETTER TO SATYAGRAHIS OF SURAT
BOMBAY,
May 20, 1919
Your letter wandered from place to place and came to my
hand only today. I think it is wrong of you to covet my signa-
ture. My physical condition being what it is, I cannot sign, nor
dictate, all letters.
So long as India has not understood the true nature of satya-
graha, the doubts you have raised are bound to occur and you
will have to have patience.
Satyagraha, once started, ends only when it has achieved its
aim. At times it does seem to have ended, but in fact it has not.
When satyagraha is likely to be confused with duragraha, suspend-
ing it will be a way of launching true satyagraha. It is such a
subtle thing that only through experience and constant reflection
do we come to understand a little of it. As I see things today,
satyagraha in the form of disobedience to laws is likely to start in
July. Circumstances may, however, arise even earlier in which
it may be resumed.
Some of the forms of satyagraha may conceivably have to be
suspended repeatedly. I think it is impossible, beyond a certain
point, to explain to you what power there is in fasts and other
religious practices; since you have been keeping fasts all these
years—I am sure you have been—and you would not have thought
of saying some of the things you have said if there had been any
satyagraha in your fasts. If you could see no difference between
the fasts you kept in the past and the one on Sunday for Horniman,
I must say you have deceived yourselves. I am emphatically of
the view that our struggle grows protracted in the measure that our
satyagraha is deficient. Renunciation is no renunciation if the de-
sire for the things renounced has not disappeared. Those of you
who have sacrificed their jobs and all will have done so to no
purpose if they think they have gained nothing as a result. He
alone has truly given up his job who could not do otherwise. Those
who gave up their jobs should have felt happy doing so, not un-
happy, but I see that that is not how they felt. This is why you
feel yourselves in the position of Trishanku.
Who am I that I should provide an opportunity for satya-
graha? A satyagrahi is ever his own master. You can discuss things
with me. It is quite true that, when an organization offers satya-
graha, individuals should submit themselves to its discipline. But,
once a person has become a satyagrahi, he will always find opportu-
nities for offering satyagraha. How can those who are full of
doubts and fears be reckoned as satyagrahis? To be a satyagrahi
is like walking on the blade of a sword.
If I have not succeeded, despite what I have said, in solving
your doubts, I can only counsel patience. If you think that satya-
graha only means courting imprisonment somehow, you can go
to jail by breaking any law. If one can offer satyagraha in
this way, every prisoner is a satyagrahi.
There can be satyagraha only in civilly disobeying a law, for
sufficient reason, without violating a moral law. If I could show any
such way to you, I would myself offer satyagraha.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
