532. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 28, 1936
CHI. AMTUSSALAAM,
I have a letter from you after a long time. Nowadays I
am afraid of writing to you. You see in my words what was
not intended because you have grown very suspicious. I am even
considering whether I should stop writing in Urdu. You were
hurt by an innocent letter containing nothing offensive because
you put a contrary interpretation on it. I was only jesting when
I wrote to you not to quarrel with Thakkar Bapa. I know that
you are not one to quarrel with anybody, and hence it can
be only a jest if I talk of a quarrel with reference to you. I made
the joke only after I had Thakkar Bapa's loving letter and
understood that it was all over. Why should you then feel un-
happy and not be glad about it?
Shall I henceforth give up all joking with you?
1 Published in Harijan, 23-5-1936, under the title "A City Woman on the
Lucknow Exhibition"
2 Vide p. 419.
What if there are all kinds of stories about you? Are you
sure it is not your suspicious nature that is at work here again?
You are concerned with your work alone. Tell me what other
work can be better than cooking for the Harijan children, feed-
ing them and keeping all things clean. Moreover, you have Tyagi
and Rajkishori with you and you should therefore experience no
difficulty.
It will pain me greatly if you ruin your health. You ought
to forget the grief over Dr. Ansari's death and take up the work
he has left behind.
The talk you had with your brothers at Patiala was not
right. It was nothing but your foolishness and it evoked the
response it deserved. What else would an unhappy member of
the family say? All have to bend before your obstinacy.
I had already sent for Saraswati and her mother even before
you made the suggestion. I believe they will come to Bangalore.
Have no anxiety on Kanti's account.
The reply should now be addressed: Bangalore City.
I am writing to Sukirti and Raj. Write about your health.
Tell me whether you can correctly read this letter.
Have I not answered all your questions now?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 595
