461. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
GAZIPUR,
October 3, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. It is natural that you should feel worried
about Prabhudas. But instead of letting the worry grow, try to
overcome it. Prabhudas writes and tells me that he is more
worried about my worrying on account of you both than about his
fever. If it becomes clear that the plains will not suit him, we
will let him remain in Almora. There is work there too, and he
has already formed contacts there so that he will have no diffi-
culty in staying on. It is likely, however, that by the time you
get this letter, Prabhudas himself will be with you. I hope that
he has no fever now.
I have written to Raghunath asking him to return there. I
have written to Umiya, Kusum and Vasumatibehn too. The
difficulty about slivers, therefore, will disappear. What have you
been doing during their absence? I think that when you are
short of slivers there, you should even get them from the Ashram
and supply them. The reputation of a person or thing becomes
established when all people have the same experience of that
person or thing. I wish, therefore, that the work there may be
reduced in scope as much as you like but should be systemati-
zed. At present you are getting work done with the help of who-
ever is available to you. Instead of doing that, you should now
think what the minimum number is that you require, and arrange-
ments should be made accordingly.
This must be fixed as a rule, that we should get slivers made
exclusively through the new volunteers who are being trained.
We shall then know who are capable of being trained. What will
it cost to send one maund of slivers from the Ashram? Calculate
this. It is necessary to estimate the likely expenditure if the work
in Vijapur is organized into an institution. We shall consider
afterwards how much to add to the cost of the khadi produced
there.
I have two things in view: one, to provide work to the really
poor women there and, two, to run an ashram on an extremely
small scale but well organized. You are, however, the centre in
all this as Vinoba is in Wardha. Wardha has developed along
its own lines as planned, and Vijapur along a different line. We
went to Wardha of our own choice. To Vijapur we went by
chance. The latter is a memorial to Gangabehn and Rustomji
Sheth. As one of the oldest inmates of the Ashram, you seem to
have settled down there in peace. I would, therefore, be happy
if an independent weaving school could be run there as a branch
of the Ashram and following the rules of the Ashram. Think
about all this and write to me.
I have taken some time over this letter, and, therefore, I send
a copy of it to Chhaganlal Joshi so that he too may know my
views and make his suggestions. In any case remember that we
wish to buy up the plot there whenever we can get it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 148-50
