47. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Saturday Morning, December 27/30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I got your packet only yesterday (Friday) after
2 o'clock. Because of Christmas there seems to have been some
confusion in the post office. Here the officials seem quite care-
ful about my post. That is why you got my packet on Thursday.
I got the piece of leather for sandals. I see Mahadev's name
in your list, but I did not find his letter. Perhaps there was a
letter by Durga, but I do not find even that. I did feel that
Ratilal would return. Where had he gone on his pleasure trip?
Send with a visitor some time a sample of the bread which you
make there. We do not know when Giriraj will see reason. Go
on doing your best. His heart is pure and he is filled with the
spirit of self-sacrifice. One day, therefore, he is bound to see
reason. "No one seeking to do good ever comes to harm."
I understand everyone being nervous about my experiment
in diet, for I have not fully succeeded in it. But perhaps you
may tell people that you know that I wake up in time and make
necessary changes, and that my body responds to them. How can
I give up a dharma which has come to me unsought? I was
weighed yesterday and again seemed to have gained a pound
and a half. I advisedly say "seemed" because on the previous
occasion I was weighed after I had passed stool and this time
before I had done so. The weight of the stool is not real gain
in weight, but an unnecessary load. We may therefore count
half a pound less; even then there has been a gain of one pound.
But more important than the weight is the energy which I feel
in my body. I feel no sign of weakness yet. I eat without diffi-
culty one bhakhari of the size which they make here, half a piece
at one meal. The quantity of almonds which I eat comes to
nearly two ounces. At present at any rate I feel that, if I can
continue to digest this amount of food, I shall be able to keep
up my strength. There is, therefore, no reason at all for worry.
I am taking the utmost care, and, after all, even in this matter
one needs to practise non-attachment. Who can say when that
1 Bhagavad Gita, VI. 40
37
thing, more fragile than glass, will slip from one's hand and
break?
I suppose you remember that you sent to Kantu a diary
made of handmade paper. He has now sent it for my autograph.
The binding is very bad. Not only that there is no neatness
about it, but he has so bound it that one cannot turn the pages
at all. The art of binding books is easy to learn. It can be learnt
in a very short time. Someone from among us should learn it.
Or we should get our binding done outside. I intend to get the
diary re-bound in the press here. This is just by the way. I
have mentioned the matter for future guidance. "Yoga is skill
in work." This should be illustrated even in our least important
activities. "Skill in work" lies also in not attempting what we
cannot do. That is a case of action in inaction. Even refraining
from something is a form of action. There is a saying in English
borrowed from Persian. "He who knows that he knows not is
wise." I am prompted to say all this from my own unhappy
experience. I observe that my spinning displays too much evidence
of lack of skill and slackness despite all the care that I take.
There may be a knot in the thread which I observe, but I let it go.
At times the yarn is much too loose, but I let it remain. I have
acquired no proficiency at all in joining broken thread. But I
go on, all the same. What kind of yajna is this? Whether you
call it carelessness, laxity or indifference, I observe every day
this weakness in me in regard to this great yajna of spinning.
I try every day to improve myself, and fail. But I keep hoping
that one day I shall do well in my yajna. Even if I do not, I
derive consolation from the verse: "After many lives, the enlight-
ened one attains Me". It is a dangerous verse. One may use it
to remain content with one's lethargy. If a person pays attention
to the meaning of every word in it, he will not fall, otherwise
the verse can be the cause of much harm to one. I hear the bugle
sounded every day at 5.30. It is now time for me to pace up
and down.
7.30, Tuesday
If you send your packet by unregistered parcel, it may per-
haps be delayed. Make inquiries, however, and do what you
think best. This time I have been hard pressed for time to cope
with the work. Ordinarily, I should be spinning at this hour. I
get letters from Prabhavati from time to time. She should arrive
in the Ashram any day now. Drop me a postcard as soon as
she arrives. Most probably I shall get it. Read my letters to
Kaka and Mirabehn. Today I stop here.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Did you read the account about Amidas? If you have not
read it, get a copy from Harivallabhdas. He seems to have pre-
served one.
[PPS.]
There are 82 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
