275. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
June 30, 1933
CHI. AMALA,
In spite of your grandmotherly advice I must persist in
the course I have adopted about my diet. Most grandmothers,
when they give advice, at least make themselves sure of their
facts before they begin their unsolicited work but you are a
curious grandmother. You begin your sermons not caring whe-
ther you base them on facts or affection, and I like your
authoritative "we in Europe", Unfortunately for you what is
good for Europe may not always be good for India, and do you
not see that "we of Europe" means only a few cranks like your-
self? The real "we of Europe" believe in live oysters, lobsters,
high game, crawling cheese, fiery champagne, and stout beer. You
have begun with carrot juice. I hope you will not end with Port
Wine. Both are no doubt juices, but there is a little difference bet-
ween the two. God forbid that you should ever become a
nature cure Miss. It is quite enough and it will be excellent when
you can become a proper full-fledged Harijan servant and if you
will be that, nature cure will take care of itself.
Do you know that you do not yet know your Hindi letters
properly? I hope you did not teach your pupils in the manner
you seem to be teaching yourself. You must not satisfy yourself
with faulty letters. Do you know that your 'k's are like 'f's, your
'r' is like the numeral number '2', and your 't' is like 'dh'? There
is hardly a letter which I should say is perfectly drawn. In
the beginning stages I was not inclined to be critical but really
there is no change for the better from the time when you first
began to write a few words in Hindi. You should condescend to
have your letters corrected before you trace the few words you
do in every letter. You will admit that this task is not as heavy
as that of washing your needlessly heavy garments. The heaviness
of your garments is your own creation, but somewhat pardon-
able. The faulty lettering, you should regard as utterly unpar-
donable.
I observe that your passport, according to the copy you say,
expires on the 15th March 1935. If that is so, need anything be
228
done now and if it requires to be extended now I take it that it
is the German Consul who has to do it. If you do not know this
I must enquire.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also
based upon enlightenment. You are wholly unjust to the doctors
who are attending upon me. They have been most careful,
conscientious and helpful. They have not stopped oranges as you
imagine. What they have said is according to the latest natural
healing methods. They know that I am not likely to accept
any of their nostrums and therefore they are making an honest
effort to suit my peculiarities. I can describe to you what they
have prescribed, what exactly I am doing and perhaps you will
feel that they have said or done nothing that should offend
against the laws of natural healing.
The use that I want to
make of doctor's presence at the Ashram for S., is to know exactly
what is wrong with S. and why he has lost weight. The doctor
there would not easily prescribe any medicine but he will give
general guidance for which you and I and the Ashram as a whole
must be thankful. Then we mayor may not accept his advice.
But nonetheless it is necessary to have a proper diagnosis of the
boy's illness.
As for your boils, you are quite right in giving up even
milk for the time being. Take plenty of juicy fruit, hot water and
lemon and salt or hot water, lemon and goor or honey. If it is
goor, the water should be strained. The best thing is to dissolve
it in cold water and then put the strained goor-water on the stove.
It is as well that you have recalled some of the instances
of your violent nature. I had detected it and therefore your
letter has caused me no surprise, but you are not to get rid of
that violence by making a brave effort. Nor must you wreak
it on S. and don't insist upon S. eating this thing or that thing.
After all he has got to like the things he eats, and remember that
we are all largely a mixture of our parents. You may not, there-
fore, resent S. being a second edition of yourself in many respects.
Tell me whether S. has made friends with anybody else in
the Ashram, whether amongst grown-up people or children.
Now for the dogs. You are quite right we ought to be able
to find a solution. The European countries have found it by kill-
ing the dogs beyond their wants. India would not tolerate
that solution and yet has not found an ideal solution in terms of
ahimsa. The society for the care of animals takes charge of stray
dogs, etc. Unfortunately, these societies are not well-organized.
However, the Ashram is in touch with one such society and very
often there is a clearance. Ask Narandas how it is that dogs
have not been cleared by the society.
N.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19110
