226. LETTER TO PATRICK GEDDES
[NADIAD,]
April 12, 1918
DEAR PROF. GEDDES 2 ,
I am truly thankful to you for your very kind letter.
You would not be more pained than I am over our base imi-
tation of the West. I want a great deal from you but nothing indis-
criminately. I take part in the spectacles such as the one at Indore
in order that I may reach and touch the hearts of the people
and wean them from materialism as much as possible. There is a
materialistic view of the vernacular question and the religious.
I am endeavouring to place the latter before them. The success of
the Conference is to be measured by the extent to which I have
been able to touch the religious in [ the] audience before me.
I tried last year to do away with the pandal for the Congress
and suggested a meeting on the Maidan early in the morning.
That is the Indian style and it is the best. I wonder if the am-
phitheatre is an improvement. My ideal is speaking to the crowd
from under a tree. Never mind if the voice does not reach the
thousands, nay millions. They come not to hear but to see.
And they see far more than we can imagine. Amphitheatres suggest
a limitation to the space capacity. The merit lies in an unlimited
number being able to come and yet doing their work in an
orderly manner. Such were the annual fairs of old. We have
but to introduce religion into the new social and political life and
you have a perfect organization in working order to fall back upon.
But what is the use of my writing? Both of us are pre-
occupied. The wretched fever of the West has taken possession
of us. We have no leisure for things eternal. The utmost that
can be said of us is that we do hanker after the eternal though
our activity may belie our profession.
I shall treasure your letter. May I make public use of it?
And do please tell me how I may build cheap and durable
houses—from the foundation to the roof.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
