721. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
As AT WARDHA,
November 26, 1933
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABU,
I have your letter. I wish that I could have a heart-to-heart
chat with you. I shall try to write to you at length in spite of
the pressure under which I am working. But I know that the
letter will never yield the result that a brief conversation can.
From your letter, I had gathered that you were not fit to
seek imprisonment, and knowing your domestic difficulties as I
now do, I feel that until those difficulties are satisfactorily
solved you ought not to think of imprisonment.
By labour I mean any kind of physical labour that you may
be able to perform. Such labour for you is tailoring, shoe-
making and any other healthy labour that you can think of.
Whilst you will not immediately earn much, it will mean a
mighty revolution in your life. Your children will then be brought
up as labourers. As such they will not have to struggle so
much to live, as you do just now. And when your attitude is
changed, you will set for yourself and the whole family the
labourer's standard of life. Your wife, if she accepts the revolu-
tionary change, will also be doing her share of labour.
You will be interested to know that my sister because she
will not live in the Ashram, owing to non-observance of untou-
chability, earns about Rs. 15 per month by grinding. Giri, who
with her three daughters and two sons was in the Ashram for
seven years and whom I declined to support on the breaking
up of the Ashram, but whom I advised to take to some labour
is now earning from the labour of her two daughters nearly
Rs. 30 per month by preparing sweetmeats and fritters for a
hotel-keeper. And her son is earning about the same as a
carpenter. Dal Bahadur Giri was not a labourer. He was living
an almost aristocratic life. I believe that the widow and her
daughters are happy. They have not cut off all connections with
me. Two daughters are grown-up girls, marriageable, but have
no present intention of marrying. They can read and write but
they have learned the dignity of labour, and therefore are not a
burden on society. Now I hope you understand what I mean
by physical labour.
Now for the education of your children. If you accept the
revolution that I have suggested, naturally the children will be
brought up by you. You will give them not merely a literary
training but you will give them also a training for labour with
their hands. Immediately you begin this life you will find it to
be a pleasure and all your difficulties will automatically be
solved, and you will be rendering a distinct service to society
by setting a wise example. I do want you to get out of the
mood of despondency and helplessness. Do write again if this
does not explain all I mean.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
[From Hindi]
Kuchh Apni Kuchh Deshki, p. 190
