32. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I send with this my reply to the question asked by Mary and
Duncan. Read and think over it and then pass it on to them.
I wrote to you yesterday regarding Lakshmi and also sent a
message for the occasion. Most probably Devdas will arrive there
on Sunday.
I am becoming convinced that the source of asthma also is in
the stomach. If, therefore, Chimanlal and Jamna cling to the
experiment of milk diet with determination, their asthma is bound
to be cured. And they need not also think that they must drink a
certain quantity of milk. I think that they will be able to digest
only a very small quantity. Milk is drunk for the sake of the pro-
teins, the ghee and the vitamins which it contains. If proteins give
strength, they also diminish it if there is the slightest excess of
them. Weak people, therefore, can build up strength by drinking
milk in a very small quantity. The chief food of such people should
be vegetables and juicy fruits. Without trying other remedies,
therefore, if they eat bhaji and juicy fruits in plenty and drink a very
small quantity of milk for strength, they are bound to get all right.
And if this regimen does not help them, I will not mind their
concluding that nothing else will and doing nothing. They should
drink the milk unboiled and mixed with some fruit or green vege-
table. In doing so, they would be eating milk instead of drinking
it, and it will then be much easier to digest. They should also regu-
larly do pranayamas, slowly and moderately, on an empty stomach.
Besides, they should take sun-bath. In this season, hip-bath also
is bound to be beneficial.
I have looked into Radha's accounts. I am returning them.
I think in the present circumstances we are helpless in this mat-
ter. Expenses on food alone come to Rs. 30. Rs. 55 account for
rent, railway fare and other expenses during the journey, and Rs.
25 for the doctor's fees, maid servant, postage, repair of watch, etc.,
and playing cards for bezique. There may be room for criticism
in regard to this item of Rs. 25, but there can be no criticism in
regard to the Rs. 30 for food, if the amount is for one month. The
whole question of Ashram expenses, that is, of our way of living, is
a complicated one. If we carefully watch ourselves daily and intro-
duce greater and greater simplicity in the Ashram, we shall learn
to rely more and more on God in our misfortunes in the shape of
illness and accidents. Our work then will shine better. We shall
feel happy with ourselves and will be safe in all circumstances. It will
then be easy for us to control, without criticizing them, those others
who spend too much. "We" here means most of the inmates of the
Ashram who are seekers after truth and have dedicated themselves
to its pursuit. Personally I feel that a time is coming when we
shall have to live like sannyasis confined to the Ashram. That is,
we shall have to be content with whatever treatment we can get
in the Ashram itself for any illness. Almora was intended, is still
intended, to supplement the Ashram. But I think it would be desi-
rable to renounce even that. But we can do all these things only
by cultivating such a climate of opinion in the Ashram. In doing
so, nobody should look to what the other inmates do. Anybody
who feels that he ought to practise such sannyasa should start doing
so. In other words, he will not go anywhere outside the Ashram
for treatment of illness or for his personal work. Just now, this is
only an aspiration. I have merely taken this opportunity to put
the suggestion before you so that you may think over it at leisure
and discuss it with other senior inmates.
Sitla Sahai has attacked me too. But I have thrown the res-
ponsibility for the whole thing on you. He also has complained
that I have shifted the responsibility. I will put up with that
charge. Ask Purushottam to write a detailed letter to me. The
doctor's remarks in regard to Kanu seem justified to me. If he
has carefully learnt how to do the massage, if he gives complete
rest to the affected part and if it is gently massaged every day,
it will certainly be cured. The improvement will of course take
time.
Parashuram seems to have joined the Ashram to test your
capacity for endurance. But you are strong enough and so we
need not worry. You may give him divorce when you can bear
it no longer. Personally, I am now ready to accept this reform in
Hindu marriage. Millions of poor Hindus do have the custom of
divorce. Their lives would become unbearable without it. I see
no dharma in people regarding themselves as belonging to the
twice-born class and forcing women to accept their ideal. Spiritual
bonds must be indissoluble. But when the ideal is forced upon
54-
people through law, it ceases to be dharma. I was discussing the
question of marriage with the Ashram, but I digressed and discus-
sed the problem of ordinary marriage. Those who join the Ashram
marry it, and say so. The Ashram is the wife and the person who
joins it is the husband. When, however, the bond becomes unbear-
able to the poor wife, she has every right to ask for divorce. You
may use this right whenever you wish to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8330.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
