29. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
Sunday, December 26, 1909
MY DEAR MILLIE,
I am writing this in Mr. Kallenbach's tent. It has been raining for
the last two days. The tent is soaking wet, water dropping here and
there. The wind is howling about me. Manilal is with us. He is a good
boy. I notice that he is over-particular about his dress. He devoted
nearly a[n] hour to ironing his suit. He is pining to go to gaol.
I see you address me Brother in inverted commas and underlined
thrice. We may well call ourselves brother and sister. Our conduct
certainly justifies it. But will you give me a sister's confidence? If you
say 'yes', I shall try to be 'brother' to you. No real increase in my
family can be a cause of sorrow to me.
Henry wants me to send you £ 17 now. His previous letter said
£ 16. I think I wrote to you from 'on board' that I should like to
be able to send you more. Now it is done by Henry which is the same
thing. Henry wonders how you will take his prolonged stay in India.
And yet he is there in his element. After a certain stage, my presence
is a hindrance to friends' growth. Henry is doing much better
independently of me. He has succeeded in captivating Dr. Mehta who
wants me to print his address on industrialism and its evils for free
distribution.
Your letter is full of epigrams in your best style. You could hardly
be so sweet as you are if you never needed a friend's help and
consolation. Though a brother could never replace a husband, I tried
during my stay in London to replace Henry so far as I could. It was
no more a wrench to you to separate from me than it was to me
to separate from you. We certainly came nearer each other in London
than ever before. It was natural.
You may well envy Maud and yet you cannot. Maud is a different
type. Friends can make or mar her. You can be helped by friends
and never marred. A trusting nature like Maud's is beautiful. It can
under good auspices develop into a very strong nature. Her progress
can be rapid but so can her retrogression. With you retrogression is
impossible. And progress, shall I say, slow if not even difficult. You
would be justified, I know, in saying the same of me. We are both
strong natures. We may be nearest each other but never identical. I
was tempted to analyse Henry. But I must not speculate any further.
39
Your wonderful letter before me has given rise to these thoughts. That
is the beauty of epigrams. You could say so much on each.
You are right in assuming that Lord Morley's reforms may be a
piece of bone thrown to a hungry dog. And yet it is open to those
who will be the leaders in the new Assembly to make much out of
them. Lord Morley can do little for India unless Indians themselves
are prepared to do something for themselves. Just now assassination
is the order of the day. Lord Morley can stop it but he is too blind
to see the way. I should like to be able to throw myself into the work
but I cannot, and have no desire to force the pace.
I am glad Waldo and Baby are getting on. I hope Celia and Amy
are keeping well.
Of myself, you will learn from elsewhere.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
YOUR 'BROTHER'
From the original
Gandhi -Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
