22. LETTER TO BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
March 9, 1933
THE JOINT HON. SECRETARIES
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
18 BRITISH INDIAN STREET, CALCUTTA
DEAR FRIENDS,
I thank you for your letter of 23rd ultimo enclosing a memo-
randum on the Poona Pact on behalf of the British Indian Asso-
ciation. I have been carrying on private correspondence with
friends in this matter to ascertain Bengal opinion. My own position
is quite clear. I was wholly uninterested in the number of seats
reserved for untouchables or depressed classes. Once the principle
of reservation was conceded, my own position was that the more
they got the better it was for them and for Hinduism and, therefore,
for the whole of India from every point of view. If untouchables
are a part of ourselves, what can be grander than that we reserve
seats for them without any reservation. That to my mind would
be the very best method of killing the spirit of difference. I wholly
dissent from the view that the principle of separation is left in-
tact in the Yeravda Pact. On the contrary, the principle of joint
election has been the main feature of the Yeravda Pact so far as
the political side is concerned. That the candidates for joint elec-
tion have to be selected by Harijan electors in the first instance
is surely no drawback, if we have faith in ourselves and in our
regard for them, and if all the four candidates selected happen
to be anti-Hindu reactionaries it would be to me proof positive
that during the period of grace we had failed to command their
affection or esteem and we would have to thank our stars if we
have to elect from among reactionary candidates. I do not
in any way share your fear that depressed class members will not
do justice to the Hindu or the national cause. Nor have I any
fear that they will not be able to discharge their proper function
as representatives of the people. Should it prove otherwise it will
mean that we are not fit for swaraj.
All things considered, therefore, I fear that I can be no party
to the revision of the Pact, and in any case I am only one of the
parties concerned, and my opinion will be valueless if all the other
parties consent to or desire revision of the Pact in the direction
suggested by the British Indian Association.
As I do not wish to compromise your position in any way, I
have not entered into a public discussion of your position nor will
I do so now unless you wish me to. The very first person I wrote
to was, I think, Dr. Bidhan Roy, and he told me that he was seeing
all the interested parties and that he would write to me. I have
not heard from him since. I am now in your hands.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20511. Also C.W. 7931. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
