91. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
March 13, 1933
SUJNA BHAISHRI,
I got your letter. I would be content to accept from you as
much as you can give. I must, therefore, make my request and
leave the matter to your discretion. In relation to you, I am in
the same position as Ramabehn. If she does not get something
from you, will she complain about that to me ?
You seem to believe that you are immortal and that, there-
fore, the people are safe. But the truth is that in matters in which
action by the Ruler is essential, he must act. "Ruler" here may
mean, if you wish, his Executive Council or the Assembly. Res-
ponsibility must vest with some individual or body so that a tradi-
tion may be maintained. When I analyse even your method, I
discover the same thing, namely, that power is being exercised,
though secretly. You may deceive yourself and the people that
things go on by themselves, but the truth is that nothing goes
on by itself. Hence in regard to such problems as removal of
carrion, admission to schools, etc., about which something ought
to be done and about which public opinion also is favourable,
legislation is essential. Where there are no laws, there can be no
government but only anarchy or misrule. Even Mussolini pre-
tends to run a government. Nobody should object to a declaration
that the Durbar, that is, Bhavnagar State, does not recognize un-
touchability. Sanatanists may, if they wish, continue to follow
the practice and enforce it by social sanctions. You follow
many principles in your own family, but try and see if you can
enforce them in your immediate circle in which you have in-
fluence. You will not succeed. You can declare, without hurting
anybody, that for the Ruler all subjects are equal. Having done
that, don't mind if no child from the so-called untouchable com-
munities can attend your schools. I have written a note in the
Gujarati Harijan about the problem of carcasses. Find some
time and read it. Some of what I have said there is addressed to
you, though no particulars of name or place are mentioned.
Though both of us are old, we are greedy. We have even the
courage to do service. We give away all the money we may have. But
you have to run a State, and your hair has become grey under the
burden. You should also cultivate the company of persons like
me. You have accepted a difficult job. Superficially it might seem
that your path and mine are different. Both of us have the same
aim and pursue the same goal. Must you, then, insist every time
that you will follow your own method? Well, have it your own
way. I am concerned with the result, and leave niceties of methods
to politicians. I will be happy if you can satisfy the Harijans some-
how.
I am afraid I have not expressed myself very well, but I
hope you will generously overlook the insufficiency of the letter.
Take care of your health. I have received much from you,
and wish to have much more still.
With good wishes for the welfare of Harijans from,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5980. Also C.W. 3242. Courtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani
