16. LETTER TO "THE ENGLISHMAN"
CALCUTTA,
November 13, 1896
THE EDITOR, The Englishman
CALCUTTA
SIR,
"Send Mohandas (my Christian name) road enforcing Indians
to locations." These are the words of a telegram received yester-
day from Natal by the agents, at Bombay, of Messrs Dada
Abdulla and Co., a leading Indian firm in South Africa. The
Agents very kindly telegraphed the message to me. This renders
it absolutely necessary for me to leave Calcutta abruptly.
"Road" is an error. I believe it means "Rhodes", 1 meaning
the Cape Government. The message means, therefore, that the
Cape Government are enforcing Indians to locations. And it is
not unlikely, as the Cape Parliament has empowered the East
London Municipality to remove the Indians to locations. Yet,
seeing that the whole Indian question is now pending before Mr.
Chamberlain, such active operations might have been suspended
for a time.
The message shows the tremendous importance of the ques-
tion as well as the feeling of the Indian community in South
Africa about the matter. Had they not felt the indignity keenly
they would not have sent an expensive message. The removal
may even mean ruin to the Indian traders affected. But who
cares for the welfare of the Indian in South Africa?
The London Times says as follows:
In India the British, the Hindu and the Mussalman communities
find themselves face to face with the question as to whether, at the
outset of the new industrial movements which have been so long
and anxiously awaited, Indian traders and workers are or are not to
have the same status before the law as all other British subjects enjoy.
May they or may they not go freely from one British possession to an-
other and claim the rights of British subjects in allied States? Or are
they to be treated as outcaste races, subjected to a system of permits
and passes when travelling on their ordinary business avocations, and
relegated, as the Transvaal Government would relegate them, to a ghetto
at the permanent centres of their trade? These are questions which apply
to all Indians who seek to better their fortunes outside the limits of the
Indian Empire. Mr. Chamberlain's words and the determined attitude
taken up by every section of the Indian Press show that to such
questions there can be but one answer.
It is clear, therefore, that the question affects not only the
Indians at present residing in South Africa but all who may wish
to seek fortunes outside India, and that there can be but one
answer to the question. I hope there will be only one answer.
If all the Associations, Anglo-Indian and Indian, were to
protest against the disabilities that are being heaped upon the
Indians in that country, and if every important town in India
were to hold meetings to express disapproval of the ill-treatment,
I venture to think that it will not be doing too much.
It is necessary that the public here should know what
activity the various Governments in South Africa are showing
and what pressure is being placed upon the Colonial Office at
home to bring the matter to a successful issue from their stand-
point. Public meetings are being held all over the country asking
the Governments to put a stop to the 'coolie' immigration.
Mayors of the different towns have been meeting in congress
and passing resolutions desiring the restriction of the Asiatic in-
flux. Sir Gordon Sprigg, the Cape Premier, is in active com-
munication with the Colonial Office about the matter and is
hopeful of a satisfactory result.
Mr. Maydon, a prominent
politician in Natal, has been telling his audiences that the friends
of the Colony in England are doing everything to vigorously put
forward the Colonial view before Mr. Chamberlain. Sir John
Robinson, the Natal Premier, has gone to England to recoup
his health and to discuss important State matters with Mr.
Chamberlain. Almost all the newspapers in South Africa have
been discussing the matter from the Colonial point of view. These
are only some of the forces that are at work against us. As an
ex-member of Parliament says in a letter of sympathy: "The
whole struggle is unequal," but, "justice is on our side." Were
not the cause absolutely just and righteous it would have received
its death-blow long ago.
One thing more. The matter demands immediate attention.
The question is now pending. It cannot long remain undecid-
ed. And if it is decided unfavourably to the Indians it will
be difficult to have it reopened. Now, therefore, is the time for
the Anglo-Indian and the Indian public to work in our behalf.
Or it will be never. "The wrong," says a distinguished Conser-
vative1, "is so serious that it has only to be known, I hope, to
be remedied."
Yes, Sir, I implore the Anglo-Indian public also to help
us actively. We have not restricted our advances to one body
or only one section of the community. We have ventured to
approach all and so far we have received sympathy from all.
The London Times and The Times of India have been advocating
our cause for a long time. All the newspapers in Madras have
fully supported us. You have given us your ungrudging support
and laid us under deep obligation. The British Committee
of the Congress has rendered us invaluable help. Ever since he
entered Parliament, Mr. Bhownaggree has been on the alert on
our behalf. He has been ventilating our grievances in season
and out of season. Many other Conservative members of the
House of Commons have extended their support to us. It is
not therefore simply a matter of form that we appeal to the
Anglo-Indian public. I venture to ask all your contemporaries
to copy this letter. Had I been able, I would have sent copies
to all the papers.
M. K. GANDHI
The Englishman, 14-11-1896
