144. LETTER TO SOUTH AFRICAN RAILWAYS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 27, 1913
TO
THE GENERAL MANAGER
SOUTH AFRICAN RAILWAYS
[SIR,]
With two other Indians I was travelling by the Kaffir Mail
that left Durban on Thursday to the Transvaal. We were all
travelling third-class. We occupied one of the corridor third-
class compartments which are usually attached to the Natal trains.
My companions and I were put in the compartment we occupied
by one of the conductors. At Ladysmith, however, the new con-
ductor came and told me that we would have to shift from the
compartment we were occupying to another. On enquiring for
the reason I was told that the compartment we were occupying
was meant for Europeans only. I drew the conductor's attention
to a compartment which was so labelled, also to the fact that our
compartment was not labelled at all, and that I had travelled in
such compartments several times on the Natal line. I informed
him also that the conductor at Durban had placed me in that
compartment, but the new conductor said that I was to obey instruc-
tions or to get permission from the Station Master to remain where
I was. Thereupon, I saw the Station Master, but I must say that,
in rather a rude manner, he told me that I was to do as the
conductor asked me, and that I ought to know that the conductors
could ask passengers to shift as many times as they chose without
giving any reason whatsoever. I did not argue the matter with the
Station Master but simply went and occupied the compartment
I was in and awaited developments there. Meantime, unknown
to me, a friend who happened to be on the platform, and who knew
me, disclosed my identity to the conductor who subsequently spoke
to me and told me that, in asking me as he had done to remove,
he was only carrying out instructions. I told the conductor then
that, after having known who I was, it was his duty to have me
arrested for disobeying instructions, but that he would not do. I
was told by the Indians who were on the platform at the time, and
who were watching the proceedings, that such difficulties happened
to Indian passengers very often. I do not know what truth there
is in what the conductor told me. I can only hope that he has
misread the instructions of the administration, because, in my
humble opinion, it would be preposterous if even third-class Indian
passengers may not travel without being disturbed, and without
being told that the nicest compartments were always reserved for
Europeans.
I hope that you will be good enough to investigate this matter
and do whatever you consider is necessary. I feel that high
officials, such as Station Masters, ought to be told to realize their
responsibility and behave courteously towards passengers even
though they may not belong to the European race. I hardly think
that it was necessary for me to disclose my identity before I could
claim courteous treatment from the Station Master.
[I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 8-10-1913
