269. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
July 20, 1941
What you say in your letter is true. Don't be eager to go
to Wardha for marketing. You may do that when you are all
right, for you have a special aptitude for it. For the present,
follow my advice and confine yourself to work in the farm—
within the limits of your strength. That will restore your health.
Give up all worries.
Live chiefly on milk and curds.
Eat
whatever fruit you can get.
Eat very little of bread, but eat
greens in plenty.
Your second letter is fine. The best way of winning people's
trust is through selfless work and service. The secret of this
lies in "seeing oneself in all creatures". If this truth abides in
your heart, nothing will make you unhappy. My plan regarding
your expenses is this.
I wish to draw from the money lying
in your name for all extraordinary expenses till the amount is
exhausted. You two will begin to progress rapidly only when
it is fully exhausted. As long as the money is there, interest in
possession will remain and you will continue to harbour the
sense of proprietorship. Though it is true that both of you have
practically gifted away the money, the knowledge that you own
it does you harm.
If you do not understand this distinction,
ask me.
Let not the arrival of Kanchan disturb your peace of mind
in the least.
It is indeed a good thing that she has come.
Stop regarding her as your property. You may start living as
husband and wife after some time, but if you accept her right
to enjoy the same freedom that you do, you will not get angry
with her for anything she does. You may let her serve you, but
you must not feel in the least offended if she does not do that
to the extent you would like her to do. You wish to win her
trust, too, don't you? Please remember that unbroken cheerfulness
is the most important condition for your keeping good health.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8519. Also C.W. 7117. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
