334. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 7, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I have two postcards and one letter to acknowledge. Valla-
bhbhai makes the choice of the best envelopes from his ever in-
creasing stock. No wonder you appreciate his art. It is an art
which turns waste into wealth.
I am delighted that Rajendra Babu is with you. If I fail to
write to him, give my love to him in which Vallabhbhai and
Mahadev join. I doubt not that wherever possible, you are speak-
ing in Hindi.
You asked me the other day about a further selection of books
when and if you get the leisure. Babu Sivaprasad has a very
fine collection of books. He and Rajendra Babu can help you to
make the selection. As you like the Ramayana, you are likely, too,
to appreciate the Mahabharata. It is a big task but it is worth
undertaking. And then there are the Vedas and the Upanishads.
You can have selected readings from the former and read all the
principal Upanishads. This course will certainly give you an
insight into the Hindu thought that would be valuable. Your
intuitive love of Hinduism will then have the backing of an in-
formed mind. And it may be that you might have to correct
some of the notions you have formed. I would balance this read-
ing by a reading of the Koran and Amir Ali's Spirit of Islam.
Pickthall's translation of the Koran is perhaps the best. I can-
not tell. But if not that, then Dr. Mohamed Ali's translation.
I have now given you fully a year's course of good, solid reading.
I say nothing about Devdas as I am writing to him separately.
Tea and coffee, if they are strong, are poison for a convalescing
patient. Tea made after the Chinese fashion is likely to be harm-
less. You know how it is made, do you not?
The note you refer to from S. Sahai and Rajen Babu I do not
find at all. It must have been left there. For the time being
at any rate my post both outgoing and ingoing is again in order.
For the past week I have replaced chapatis with bananas of
which I take 4 daily. This I did to avoid constipation which
seemed to be coming. I feel better. The result of course is that
there is little salt in the food now. I take none with oranges
which I am taking. I retain a vegetable on which I pour the
evening milk.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6235. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9701
