254. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
[July] 12, 1944
MY DEAR HORACE,
I have your long letter—long for the time and the way in
which it had to be sent, not for the subject matter. Some of
what you tell me I had known already after coming out, and
some of it is startling. All of it is good as coming from you, even
the part that I know to be wrong. But that which is wrong does
not diminish the importance of what you have said. The defects
of your narrative arise from your good nature. I would rather
have the latter than have the defects removed at the sacrifice of
it. I need not thus have qualified my appreciation of your letter
but for the fear of misleading you into the belief that I accept
the whole of your version without any deduction. To discuss
the deduction is not germane to what I want to say. You know
the other side of the picture. The popular fury was pardonable;
the vindictive and inhuman retribution wholly indefensible. But
I will not take your time over this.
Your anxiety that I should offer co-operation at least for the
alleviation of hunger, I fully understand. My difficulty is that I
cannot, for the very valid reason that the alleviation is only ap-
parent. The Viceroy's good intentions in the matter are not to
be doubted. His promptness in rushing to Bengal on arrival was
worthy of the soldier that he is. The agency through which he
had and has to work is not designed to carry out the work of
alleviation. You are entitled to put your noble work and ex-
perience against what I am saying. That only shows that evil
by itself and in itself has no life. It requires the prop of good
for its sustenance. Hospitals, roads, railways are probably good
in themselves but when they are instruments of evil they are to
be shunned. They become snares. You will now realize some-
what my meaning. Sufficient to say that at no time has India
been so bound down as now. The remedy is liberty consistent
with the movements of Allied troops. But there is deep mutual
distrust. Authority distrusts the Congress and every public body
including the Muslim League. Public opinion is flouted at al-
most every turn. In this state of things voluntary co-operation
becomes impossible. I have tried in vain to see the Viceroy or be
permitted to see the Working Committee members. Now tell
me what to do. I know what not to do. I am praying to God
to tell me what to do. You can assist.
I had a pleasant union with James Vail. Love to all who
think of me.
Love.
From a photostat: G.N. 1440
