130. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[DURBAN,]
Bhadarva Vad 3 [September 18, 1913]
CHI. HARILAL,
You have not kept your promise about writing to me. You
gave such a promise more than once and you have broken it
every time.
I am very unhappy that your health has gone down. I always
thought it would. I even warned you. You know that, though
you went with my consent, I did not want you to go. Even now,
your way of life and your ideas do not appeal to me. Personally,
I feel that the education you are having is of the wrong kind. You
have harmed Chanchi's interests and now you are harming those
of the children. Still, I regard you as friend, with due affection,
so that I do not wish to order you. I want to bring you
round only by appealing to you. I do not wish to exploit your
filial piety to make you do anything. There is no anger in this.
I do this as a matter of duty. Still I must advise you to shake off
this craze for examinations.
If you pass, it won't impress me
much. If you fail, you will feel very unhappy. However, take the
course you think is best. If you give up the thought of examina-
tions and if, when you get this letter, the struggle here is continuing,
come over here along with Chanchi, both of you prepared for
imprisonment. Chanchi has otherwise no right to come now. If
the struggle ends soon, I shall go there immediately and we shall
have a good hug and a talk.
There is only one remedy for your dyspepsia— a daily walk of
15 miles. By way of diet, you should have solid food, according
to appetite, which you can chew. If you have read the chapters
on health, the experiments described there will help you to get
rid of [the complaint] altogether. It is not surprising that you
have lost your mental powers. The education there is useless be-
cause it is ill-conceived. Since you have never reflected over
the mental vacuity of thousands of educated people, what can I
say and to whom am I to say it? What have your studies been
that you should acquire strength of mind through them? Where
the aim is merely to pass an examination, the result is bound to
be unhappy. As far back as thirty years ago, Mr. Ranade used
to discuss this problem. Just think of the condition of the ordinary
B.A. What can you do if, after passing a big examination, you
find yourself a physical or mental wreck? Have you had a careful
look at things round you?
Ba, Ramdas, Kashi4, Santok Chhaganlal, Kuppu, Govindoo6,
Revashankar 7 , Shivpujan, Raojibhai 8 , Maganbhai 9 , Sam, Rustomjee
Sheth, Solomon and others have set out to get imprisoned.
They were arrested at Volksrust on Tuesday. I am writing this
letter on the morning of Thursday. There has been no telegram
yet about what happened yesterday. Devdas is in Phoenix. He
has acquired great efficiency. I get up at 3.30 a.m. and Devdas at
4.30 a.m. At 5, studies and other activities begin. He has filled
out a little. Of course, changes do occur in this schedule. For
the present, the boys who have remained behind go without salt
on all days except Sunday. They propose to continue the practice
as long as the satyagraha lasts. Maganlal and Miss West will
look after the children. I shall leave for Johannesburg on Satur-
day. People at Johannesburg will then try to get arrested. I
shall get arrested last. I have thought out a way of getting arrested,
one which will require a little especial courage. I am constantly
praying to God to grant me that. Manilal is in Johannesburg.
He has now subjected himself to strict vows and is going through
a course of penitence. He will court arrest in Johannesburg. Jeki
has accompanied Ba to get arrested. She, too, has changed her
way of life altogether. Medh and Desai are also in Johannesburg.
Jamnadas is impatient to be in gaol. I shall most probably wire
to him to come over. I have not made up my mind, though.
Please remember that you have not sent me your examination papers,
which I had asked for. I am trying to make arrangements for the
maintenance of Gangabhabhi. For the present, my desire to go
over there has come to nothing.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My wish is that whatever steps you take should be without
reference to me or my views.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 9540
