289. LETTER TO LEO TOLSTOY
LONDON,
October 1, 1909
SIR,
I take the liberty of inviting your attention to what has been going
on in the Transvaal (South Africa) for nearly three years.
There is in that Colony a British Indian population of nearly 13,000.
These Indians have, for several years, laboured under various legal
disabilities. The prejudice against colour and in some respects against
Asiatics is intense in that Colony. It is largely due, so far as Asiatics
are concerned, to trade jealousy. The climax was reached three years
ago, with a law which I and many others considered to be degrading and
calculated to unman those to whom it was applicable. I felt that sub-
mission to a law of this nature was inconsistent with the spirit of true
religion. I and some of my friends were and still are firm believers in
the doctrine of non-resistance to evil. I had the privilege of studying
your writings also, which left a deep impression on my mind. British
Indians, before whom the position was fully explained, accepted the
1 & 2 Some words are missing here.
3 The Transvaal Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance; vide Volumes V and VI.
advice that we should not submit to the legislation, but that we should
suffer imprisonment, or whatever other penalties the law may impose
for its breach. The result has been that nearly one-half of the Indian
population, that was unable to stand the heat of the struggle, to suffer the
hardships of imprisonment, have withdrawn from the Transvaal rather
than submit to [the] law which they have considered degrading. Of the
other half, nearly 2,500 have for conscience's sake allowed themselves
to be imprisoned, some as many as five times. The imprisonments have
varied from four days to six months, in the majority of cases with hard
labour. Many have been financially ruined. At present there are over a
hundred passive resisters in the Transvaal gaols. Some of these have been
very poor men, earning their livelihood from day to day. The result
has been that their wives and children have had to be supported out of
public contributions, also largely raised from passive resisters. This has
put a severe strain upon British Indians, but, in my opinion, they have
risen to the occasion. The struggle still continues and one does not know
when the end will come. This, however, some of us at least have seen
most clearly, that passive resistance will and can succeed where brute
force must fail. We also notice that, in so far as the struggle has been
prolonged, it has been due largely to our weakness and, hence, to a belief
having been engendered in the mind of the Government that we would
not be able to stand continued suffering.
Together with a friend, I have come here to see the Imperial autho-
rities and to place before them the position, with a view to seeking redress.
Passive resisters have recognised that they should have nothing to do
with pleading with the Government, but the deputation has come at the
instance of the weaker members of the community, and it therefore
represents their weakness rather than their strength.
But, in the course of my observation here, I have felt that if a general
competition for an essay on the Ethics and Efficacy of Passive Resistance
were invited, it would popularise the movement and make people think.
A friend has raised the question of morality in connexion with the pro-
posed competition. He thinks that such an invitation would be inconsist-
ent with the true spirit of passive resistance and that it would amount
to buying opinion. May I ask you to favour me with your opinion on
the subject of morality? And if you consider that there is nothing wrong
in inviting contributions, I would ask you also to give me the names of
those whom I should specially approach to write upon the subject.
There is one thing more with reference to which I would trespass
upon your time. A copy of your letter addressed to a Hindu on the
present unrest in India has been placed in my hands by a friend. On
the face of it, it appears to represent your views. It is the intention of
my friend, at his own expense, to have 20,000 copies printed and distri-
buted and to have it translated also. We have, however, not been able
to secure the original, and we do not feel justified in printing it, unless
we are sure of the accuracy of the copy and of the fact that it is your
letter. I venture to enclose herewith a copy of the copy, and should
esteem it a favour if you kindly let me know whether it is your letter,
whether it is an accurate copy and whether you approve of its publication
in the above manner. If you will add anything further to the letter,
please do so. I would also venture to make a suggestion. In the con-
cluding paragraph you seem to dissuade the reader from a belief in re-
incarnation. I do not know whether (if it is not impertinent on my part
to mention this) you have specially studied the question. Re-incarnation
or transmigration is a cherished belief with millions in India, indeed, in
China also. With many, one might almost say, it is a matter of experience,
no longer a matter of academic acceptance. It explains reasonably the
many mysteries of life. With some of the passive resisters who have gone
through the gaols of the Transvaal, it has been their solace. My object
in writing this is not to convince you of the truth of the doctrine, but
to ask you if you will please remove the word "re-incarnation" from the
other things you have dissuaded your reader from. In the letter in
question, you have quoted largely from Krishna and given reference to
passages. I should thank you to give me the title of the book from
which the quotations have been made.
I have wearied you with this letter. I am aware that those who
honour you and endeavour to follow you have no right to trespass upon
your time, but it is rather their duty to refrain from giving you trouble,
so far as possible. I have, however, who am an utter stranger to you,
taken the liberty of addressing this communication in the interests of
truth, and in order to have your advice on problems the solution of which
you have made your life-work.
With respects,
I remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
[COUNT LEO TOLSTOY
YASNAYA POLYANA
RUSSIA]
Tolstoy and Gandhi
1-1-1910, with a preface by Gandhiji. A Gujarati translation by him was also publi-
shed, first, in Indian Opinion and, later, in the form of a book.
1 Tolstoy agreed to this.
2 A booklet written in 1904 by a Bengali saint, Baba Premananda Bharati,
then resident in California
3 Tolstoy replied to this letter on October 7; vide Appendix XXVII.
