374. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
December 19, 1933
BA,
I got your letter today. The letter addressed to Sabarmati
must have been received. I will continue to write to you regu-
larly. I will write every Monday or Tuesday, for on those two
days I get some free time. Take care of your health. I will
send the slivers. If I don't have any extra stock with me, I will
get them from some source and send you. I have been having
some blood pressure. I was examined by Dr. Ansari in Delhi.
Do not at all worry about me. I will surely write to Manilal
and Sushila every fortnight.
I wrote to them long letters. I
will send your blessings to everyone. Do not worry about any-
body. I have written to Manu also regarding Kusum. The
latter is really ill and mayor may not survive. Kishorelal has
been having fever intermittently. He is in bed. Brijkrishna also
has been bed-ridden for a long time. Devdas is well, and so
also Rajaji. Give my blessings to all the women there. I hope
all of them are doing physical work and maintaining good health.
Ramanama is an unfailing remedy. I had prepared an abridged
Gita for Ramdas. It is being printed. When it is ready, I will
send a few copies there. If you want anything else, write to me.
Address your letters always to Wardha. I hope you are supplied
newspapers. You have asked for a discourse from me. I will
not send one this time. I will see if I can do so next week. It is
certainly very good that you read the Gita regularly. Who teaches
you to read it? What food do you get there? You remember,
don't you, that you can write to Premlilabehn or Trivedi for any-
thing that you may want. You will have fewer visitors there and
so the best course will be that you should write one letter to me
and receive one from me every week. However, you may do as
you like. Om is all right. Premabehn's friend, Kisan, has joined
me recently. You remember her, don't you? She is very
hard-working and has been well educated.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 2-
