422. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
JORHAT, ASSAM,
April 18, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
It will soon be time for the prayers. I am in Jorhat just now.
The birds are singing. Here the dawn breaks earlier. It is
daylight by five.
A copy of Ba's letter is enclosed.
I hope you have fully understood my decision. I see that
it is having a good effect. After observing it, I feel that the
decision was absolutely correct. It has been taken neither too
late nor too early. I think it has been made at the right time.
But why should we think about results? How can one claim to
be a student of the Gita and at the same time be concerned with
results? Let the results be what they will. A seemingly good
result may be a snare and a seemingly bad result may be for one's
good. How can we know? Daily we sing, too, "Miseries are not
what we regard as miseries."
All will meet in Ranchi. I shall guide them according to my
lights. I think it is our duty to give full freedom to Congress-
men who favour entering the legislatures. It is but right that those
who daily attend legislatures in their thoughts should do so
physically as well. Then alone will they be able to judge the
relative advantages and disadvantages of that policy. Is it not
better that one who daily eats Jalebi in his imagination should eat
the real thing and know the wisdom or folly of doing so ? Most proba-
bly Mathuradas also will attend, and so will Perin and others.
The company will be in Ranchi for four days. I hope Raja also
will come. I see that Raja fully approves of the move. And so
does Mathuradas. Rajendrababu has been in favour of it from
the beginning. Pyarelal is with him just now.
Pierre Ceresole, a man devoted to social service, is coming
here from Geneva. One may say that it is his occupation to go
and help wherever there is a natural calamity like an earthquake.
He is an expert engineer. He is coming to give help in Bihar
and will land in Bombay on the 25th. Mathuradas will bring him
or send him to Ranchi. Higginbottom also came and saw me.
He also has promised to help. Harrison and Lester will meet
me in Patna. I will know from them what they have been able
to achieve. Both of them had gone to Calcutta. They have
been working very hard indeed. They are sincere and brave. But
theirs is a cry in the wilderness.
Bal is still with me. Kaka is fairly well in Hyderabad [jail].
He has been collecting a lot of books there. Mahadev is already
buried in books and now Kaka too will get so buried.
I have worked very hard for Obedullah behind the scenes.
I think my efforts are bearing fruit now. Probably he will be saved.
The epidemic of children's disease in Ahmedabad has become
fairly widespread. Some say that the cause of the epidemic is the
cinema. I wouldn't be surprised if it was so. Those who see
pictures tell me that there is considerable strain on the brain and
the eyes.
Chandrashankar had gone [home] and fallen ill. He returned
too soon and fell ill again. And so he has gone back. I saw
that he could not stand travelling.
Kamala Nehru and Sarup Rani have gone to Calcutta for
treatment. It has been decided that I should tour Bengal, too.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 94-
