464. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May 14, 1936
BHAI BAPA,
I send with this a cheque for Rs. 200 received from Sophia
Wadia . The receipt need not be sent to her. Send it to me.
I understand what you say regarding Sastri. I enclose [a
report of] the work done in Madras in four hours. Jagannath-
das had arranged a prayer meeting in Kodambakkam, but I
refused to go till an assurance was given that the institution
would be continued. Jagannathdas gave the required assurance,
which I send with this. Please preserve it. I met Pratapmalji
also. He, too, has undertaken to solve the financial worries,
but he asked for somebody who would be able to create there
the atmosphere that we have in the Ashram. How can I find
such a person? I met Venkatasubbiah here and discussed the
problem with him. He and the others expressed their dislike of
Sastri. Venkatasubbiah says, however, that they will do without
Sastri and Ganesan.
One of the four will visit the place daily
by turns.
This is what I have been able to do.
Kindly
write from there now and ask them clearly to relieve Ganesan.
Sastri's resignation has already been accepted. You can men-
tion Jagannathdas's letter and say that you hope that the four
of them will carry on the work.
Since Dr. Ansari had detained Amtussalaam please accom-
modate her. Malkani, poor man, writes and tells me that he
could not tolerate the thought that she had to leave because of
Rukmini. The latter does not tolerate anybody. But does
that mean that they should all leave? I have written a strong
letter to her. Amtussalaam is not likely to pay attention to
Rukmini's words. She will remain happy if you go on giving
her some work.
I hope that your letters are opened before they are sent
to you. If there is any cheque or such things in an envelope,
they should not follow you from place to place.
You, too, have been travelling a good deal. It seems you
are becoming young again. If you share your experiences with
the people, they will be of priceless value to them. Garhwal
is a 'sealed book' for most people. I have heard that it is a
very beautiful but a very poor region.
We are in Nandi Durg, enjoying its pleasant air.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1122
