21. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 17, 1908
THE DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter No. 667
of the 16th instant. My Association deeply regrets the fact that the point
raised by it is still being missed.
My Association is aware, and admits, that, medically, mealie pap
is a perfectly healthy diet, but the point raised by my Association is that
it is not a diet suited to the habits of even poor-class Indians. Mealie
pap is not the national diet of Indians. I have no doubt you are aware
that, although it is medically suitable, bread is always added to mealie
pap issued to European prisoners. Bread is certainly, from a medical
standpoint, not more necessary for Europeans than for Indians. You
are also aware that mealies are given to the Native prisoners for the
midday meal. They are also, medically, a proper diet, and yet, with
the knowledge that the Committee must have had at its disposal, mealies
were replaced by rice for Indian prisoners in respect of the midday meal.
The reason that actuated the Committee that framed the diet scale in
prescribing rice instead of mealies for the midday meal for Indian
prisoners is also the reason why my Association asks for a substitute
for mealie pap for the morning meal.
If, hitherto, there has been no complaint made against the diet
scale for Indian prisoners, the reason is that there have been very few
Indian prisoners; but, on the present occasion, a complaint is justified,
not only because the Transvaal prisons are crowded with Indians, but
also because these Indians are not, strictly speaking, criminals, and
belong, in the opinion of my Association, to the highest class among
the Indian community in South Africa.
If the repeated representations of my Association have remained
unheeded, the only conclusion the Indian community can come to
is that the reasonable request of my Association is refused out of political
considerations, and with a view to starve the Indian community into
submission to an Act which is resented by it.
I venture to hope, therefore, that you will be pleased to remove
any such suspicion by granting the relief requested.
I have, etc.,
A. M. CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 3-10-1908
