407. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 26/27, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Mahadev must have replied to your letter. Raja arrived
suddenly today and was in a great hurry to return. Since I spent
a good deal of time with him I am late with the post. Aney also
came and saw me. All that I can say about him is that he
brought a message of love from Malaviyaji and asked me if I had
any reply to give. I told him that if they cared for propriety they
should put up their candidates after consulting us and should not
put up anybody simply to fight the Congress. He left soon, as
he had to catch the train for Nagpur, and said that he would
come again. The new Party has confused the situation, but apart
from that I don't think it will be able to do much harm.
Bhulabhai came. I had a wire from the Maulana. He will
have no objection to the meeting being held in Wardha. He can
easily be accommodated here. He says he will not mind if he
cannot stay in a hotel. I don't think he will stop for more than
two days. To me, Wardha would certainly be more convenient.
There will of course be some burden on Radhakisan, but he
has kept everything ready. Recently Jamnalalji has added to
the buildings. Hence there is sufficient accommodation. I have
been assured that all the arrangements are perfect. Jamnalalji's
invisible presence has been working behind all this, of course.
Bhulabhai will take care of all the necessary arrangements in
consultation with you. You may now do what is most convenient
to you. If you fix the meeting here, one advantage at any rate
will be that we shall be able to meet.
I have been discussing with Rajaji my intention of leaving
the Congress. He has come specially to discuss that. If possible,
he wants to run away on Tuesday.
Ramdas is returning from Khurja on Monday. It is because
of the cholera there. I shall know more when he comes.
I hope you are recovering your strength.
Mahadev has written to you everything about Jawaharlal.
It was very good indeed that he went. Jawaharlal felt much com-
forted. Moreover, the old lady and Kamala were very happy.
371
I have dashed this off in great haste immediately on entering
my silence after the evening prayer. If anything is left out, I will
supply it tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Morning, August 27, 1934
I have recollected one thing. It is not necessary for me now
to write to Ballubhai or anybody else about the matter concerning
the Municipality. I should write to you only. Even if you decide
to take back the books belonging to the Vidyapith, there must
be books worth thirty to fifty thousand belonging to the Ashram,
maybe a little less or a little more. These books are lying unused.
If they employ a librarian, the books can be catalogued on scien-
tific lines, rules for lending them can be framed and they may
then be loaned according to those rules. I very much desire that
something should be done.
Andrews and Jones have arrived. I got your letter. Bhula-
bhai will be seeing you tomorrow. You may certainly have the
meeting at Wardha. As regards Mahadev, see him when you
come over. Andrews and Raja are here.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 128-30
