403. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
January 16, 1948
CHI. PREMA,
I got both your letters yesterday. I had received the tilgur
on the Sankranti day itself. I saw that little bag on my desk.
The card pinned to it was on the other side. I looked at it and
read your name. I remembered that it was the Sankranti day
and understood. I then got the parcel opened by Abha and
asked her to distribute one piece as from you and the other one
as from me among all those present, since, because of the fast, I
myself could not partake of it. Immediately the tilgur grains
were distributed among all present. I read your poem describing
the significance of the tilgur, and was pleased. I would never
slight a religious celebration which was used to strengthen pure
sentiments. But celebrations which involve conspicuous enjoy-
ments displease me.
Shankarrao Deo told me yesterday that you had written
to him earnestly requesting him to inquire about my health
daily and write to you. If he has to do this, please consider
that he will not be able to attend to his duty. He has to go
and visit different localities; should he neglect that duty in
order to inquire after an old man? Why need you also come
running here to see how I am? Please remember that there are
a great many people here engaged in service of one kind or an-
other. If I let all of them come and see me, my fast would
have to be indefinitely prolonged. For they would then labour
under the delusion that they were doing their all in looking
after me and so neglect their real duty. If you still feel that you
must come, you are free to do so.
Both your letters are like beautiful poems. I did not know
that you had such great command over the language.
About the Socialists, I believe that they are self-sacrificing,
studious and courageous men. I do not know what they have
been doing. If it is enough to know what appears in the news-
papers about them, then that much I know, though not in
great detail. If they remain in the Congress and also serve on
the Working Committee, I think they will strengthen the or-
ganization. The reason is that such men would never seek to
strengthen their party at the expense of the Congress and, if
they did, they would only weaken it. If the converse also is
true, those who follow my line of thinking should bear love to-
wards the Socialists or other opponents and disarm their distrust
through love. Even the bitterest enemy could be won over
through love. If we fail, we should know that the fault must
be ours. Our love in that case is imperfect.
The words attributed to me when I proposed Jayaprakash's
name as President must have been uttered by me, for they
were true then. There is some change in the position now.
How it came about, we need not consider. It may be that in
my affection I may consider a person deserving to be President.
But his fitness to be President has nothing to do with my love.
Let me tell you that even I would not be able to describe the
context and the manner in which I had made the remark.
It is true that the Working Committee is selected from
among men belonging to the majority in the Congress, but it
does not always happen that the majority elects the President
from its own ranks. A wise Committee would certainly select a
capable and upright man from among the minority if they found
one. In this way alone would democracy succeed in the end.
A narrow-minded majority is bound to invite disaster.
As far as I know, Jayaprakash's views and policies are not
harmful to the country's interests, but his method is. If, how-
ever, he becomes President, he must follow the Congress policy.
Anyway, he was wise enough to decline to be President in the
prevailing atmosphere of opposition to him. When a person
who has opposed the official policies from outside becomes the
leader of the whole country, he would if he has any touch of
patriotism in him give up his opposition. This is not a rule
laid down by me, but the common rule in a democracy. I
am surprised how you failed to see this. I have explained above
how my mind was working. But this does not mean that any-
body should give up his views and act contrary to his own
convictions out of deference to me or to anybody even more
important than I.
2. In order to explain this fully, I would have to write
a treatise. I am sure you don't expect me to do that on the
fourth day of my fast. I don't remember what I wrote on the
subject earlier. But in any case I would attach no importance
to it. What matters to me, and should matter to you, is what
I believe today. It would be a suicidal policy to take every
decision by a majority vote. In matters involving no moral
principle, there is always room for give and take. My own view
is this, that if the provinces must be formally reorganized on a
linguistic basis from right now, why not confirm what the Con-
gress did in 1920? If that is done and if the boundaries of each
province are also determined through joint discussions among the
parties concerned, I think the problem of Maharashtra, Bombay
and Gujarat can be solved. But I think I must conclude the
letter now, for Deo is waiting to carry it away. I had sent
for him.
3. The Congress is still a political body and will remain
so in the future. When, however, it holds political power, it
becomes one of the parties, no matter how big. Those, there-
fore, who have perfect faith in ahimsa should not hold any
office in the Government.
You could not have expected such a detailed reply in the
present circumstances. But the fact that I am able to dictate
it shows that this fast is causing me the least pain.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10459. Also C. W. 6897. Cour-
tesy: Prema Kantak
