382. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, MALABAR HILL,
BOMBAY,
June 22, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I thank you for your letter of 16th instant.
Though it is a pity that prisoner Prithvi Singh cannot be
discharged, I have no difficulty in understanding your decision.
I must await another opportunity.
The case of Jaipur is hanging fire. I wonder if a solution
may be expected. As far as I know the Maharaja himself was
quite willing to set free Sheth Jamnalalji and the other pri-
soners, to recognize the People's Association and to respect full
civil liberty so long as it did not cross the bounds of non-violence.
There is one other matter which I had better mention in this
letter. I understand there are Princes who are desirous of seeing
me but they have hesitation in doing so for fear of the disappro-
val of the Political Department. As I had said during our talks
in New Delhi, I am of opinion that they should be free to meet
any person so long as they do so openly. It would be a good
thing if a declaration of your policy on this subject were made
either openly or privately as may be thought advisable. I feel
that it would not be enough if the permission is given in individual
cases like mine. Seeing that the people of the States have inti-
mate connection—political and social—with Congressmen and
others all over India, is it not wise and proper to encourage
the practice of Princes establishing friendly relation with those
who have influence over their people? To treat Congressmen
and others as outsiders seems to be so unnatural that the barrier
cannot last long. It would be a pity if it is broken after a clash
and creation of bad blood. I wonder if you have noticed that
some States have invited or welcomed visits of anti-Congress per-
sonalities. I do not complain of this but it is in striking contrast
to the opposition fostered often by the Political Department to the
visits of Congressmen.
Yours sincerely,
H. E. THE VICEROY
SIMLA
From a copy: C.W. 7827. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
