187. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
September 19, 1937
CHI. NIMU,
Your letter about Usha alarms me. We call illness corpo-
ral punishment. How appropriate is this expression! Because
such a body deserves the punishment. Don't be impatient now.
Do not worry. Busy yourself with your work. Really speaking
you have never lived the life of a student. You had your lessons
in your childhood but that was not real student life. When one
willingly devotes oneself to something, one is said to be living
for it.
As for instance life for the sake of service, life for the
sake of learning, life for the sake of enjoyment, life for the sake
of [amassing] wealth. In these cases service, learning, enjoyment
and wealth become the only purpose of life.
And other things
are sacrificed for their sake. From this point of view, since you
have taken up student life you ought to forget about Usha for
the time being, as also Sarita3, Ramdas and me. Only studies
should not be forgotten. This is called the yoga of non-attach-
ment. You have accepted student's life for one year. So forget
all other things.
I shall find out about Usha and also write to Sarita. I am
not sending a wire today because it is a Sunday. I shall send
a wire tomorrow. I shall also write to Navanit. Like Ramdas
who cannot rush to Usha's side from South Africa, you also cannot
run from where you are. Life and death are in the hands of
God. If Usha is destined to live long she will recover soon. If
you wish and if Sarita agrees, I am prepared to take charge of
Usha. Ba of course is here.
Amtul Salaam is also here. If
she gets such an opportunity to serve, she will consider it a god-
send. I am writing this after getting her consent. About the
treatments also I am writing to Sarita as much as I know.
Even if you yourself were there, what more could you have done
in addition to the treatment she is receiving today? If I ask her
to come to me it does not mean that she will be served better
here. But certainly there is the thought that better medical con-
sultation can be available here than at Lakhtar. Any other
advice can also be more readily available here and I also know
fairly well about a number of such diseases. . . .1
From a copy of the Gujarati: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
