262. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
May 26, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
There is no letter from you today.
I was perturbed by Sushila's letter of yesterday. How can
she be consoled? She seems to be hurt all the more by my letters.
It seems that my letters, instead of healing her wounds, are
keeping them raw. Why can you not console her? I am sure
you understand my state of mind. As for the night of the 9th
I have explained that I fully agree with what Sushila says. I
have indeed said that her impression might not have been correct.
By the same token, I also believe that my impression might not
have been correct either. I am even going a step further.
Sushila is witness to her purity of mind. I cannot even claim
purity of mind. I am willing to admit that I might have had a
dirty mind. Can it not be that my diseased mind might have
aroused me and I might have seen the reflection of my own
morbidity in that innocent girl and in her action? Why should
Sushila feel unhappy when all this is possible ? Why should she
feel miserable on account of my morbidity, my delusion and my
imperfection? Why should Sushila go on feeling unhappy
in spite of my acceptance of all these possibilities? I am
not accusing her of anything. If you are convinced by my
argument, try to pacify Sushila in your own words and in
your own way. I do not wish that she should be calm for
my sake. I can be calm only if her mind accepts that there is
no reason at all to feel perturbed. I have somehow started feel-
ing that in all these incidents I alone have played the role of
Satan and by imputing guilt to an innocent act have caused
untold misery to Sushila, to Mahadev and even to you. Thus,
while on the one hand I am beginning to feel calm under the
intoxication of work, on the other hand, whenever there is free
time, I keep analysing the incidents of the day of the 14th of
April and the night of the 9th. I have found no clue so far.
161
SV:III. 11
I do not know if I shall find it at all. As Rajkumari says my
faith in God is being tested. If Sushila cannot be pacified at
all, I can see that it will be a terrible thing for me. But if she
cannot be pacified what will you do? What will poor Sushila
do? As for me, I shall reap what I have sown.
Blessings from
BAPU
[Ps.]
You may use this if you really think it is proper. If I
cannot reduce Sushila's misery, let me at least not add to it?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
