79. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 28, 1908
MY DEAR MAGANLAL,
Please tell Mr. Budrea I have gone through his papers most
carefully. I have read the agreement that was signed by Mr. Anderson
from Newcastle. I have read the reply to Vawda's summons. There are
two things which certainly should give Mr. Budrea complete success.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the reply state that the land wanted by Vawda
is not the land described in the contract, and that the land surveyed by
the surveyor includes land which is not covered by the contract, accord-
ing to which the summons is issued. If these two things can be proved,
Mr. Budrea must win, but I am very much afraid that there may be
some mistake in the reply given. He must, therefore, be very careful,
because, if he loses, the action in the Supreme Court will cost him pro-
bably £100 or more. The Solicitor at Dundee, Mr. Labistour, has sent
me the papers. He is very hopeful, but I should myself like to be abso-
lutely certain that the land required by Vawda is not the land described
in the contract. You must therefore have every emphatic and conclu-
sive evidence regarding it. You should explain this letter to Mr. Budrea
thoroughly. If he wants to put more questions, I am in a position now
to answer them, because I have all the papers, I think, before me and,
what is more, I have studied them. Please also tell Mr. Budrea that after
the last account that was rendered to him and about which he said
something, I have not charged any fees at all, and I am not charging
any fees without his concurrence with reference to the work I am now
doing. Please ask him what his own opinion is in the matter, and
whether I should charge a fee. Tell him, that although it is not the
usual thing, I wish to be guided entirely by him in the matter of
fees, as he has reposed so complete [a] trust in me.
You may leave this letter at Mr. Jitanmia's, if you do not find
Mr. Budrea.
Yours sincerely,
From the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4806
