331. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 9, 1938
CHI. MANILAL,
I got your letter. The practicability of Mr. Kallenbach's
suggestion will depend on my ability to send teachers from here.
But that is nil.
It is difficult to get teachers who would satisfy
me. Even if I come across such a teacher, he would have to be
paid a salary which we cannot afford. Thus whatever arrange-
ment you think of making will have to be made locally. My
opinion, therefore, is that the plan of a school will not work.
So I have to think only about I.O. If the people there give
a clear guarantee to make good the loss, not oral but such as
will satisfy the bankers, then it is your duty to keep it going.
If Rustomjee Trust offers some help, there is no harm in
accepting it. But I would like only direct help from the people.
If the I.O. can be kept going, Sushila must return there. I
think that essential for helping you as also for her and your
peace of mind. Sushila's presence by your side will by itself be a
source of comfort, such as you cannot have from anything else.
I feel that if Sushila goes there, Arun should accompany her
and Sita should stay here. Both of you should learn to bear such
separation. I am considering here only the welfare of the children.
In case Sushila goes there, you should treat Phoenix as your
home and stay there. You should overcome your desire of coming
over here too often. It is, of course, a different thing if you get an
unsought opportunity of coming.
You should overcome the desire to see your elders. If sepa-
ration from one's people is one's dharma, one must cheerfully
abide by that dharma.
Today this is enough. The other news Sushila may give if
she wishes and knows how to.
If Ramdas can be tempted to stay there, then there is no-
thing better than that. In that case the children of both of you
should also be trained to look after the work there.
About Hanna also, whatever Sushila may write.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4878
