372. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 2, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
You have arrived on the scene none too soon, and, in the words of
the Times writer, you are immediately "to co-operate with those advocat-
ing on the spot the claims of the British Indians". You will see the new
Bill there. I enclose herewith my analysis of it in the letter to
Mr. Gregorowski. I enclose also my letter to Smuts, and the interview
with the Leader. I, at first, wanted to send a letter to Smuts in accord-
ance with [the] interview, which is really taken from the letter that was
to be sent to Smuts. Cartwright thought that I ought to publish the
letter and make the position clear, but I told him it would be wise
not to do that. He, therefore, published the main contents in the form
of an interview. Subsequently, I changed my mind, and I thought
that to Smuts I should simply write on the struggle, so that, in the event
of future disputes, the issues might not be clouded. While, from the
theoretical standpoint, the Bill is admirable, seeing that it recognises the
equality of Indian languages also with the languages of Europe, the prac-
tical effect of the Bill, so far as the Cape and Natal Asiatics are con-
cerned, is, in my opinion, disastrous, as you will see from my analysis.
You may just compare the Cape Immigration Act with the Bill, and you
will see the glaring difference. Smuts stated definitely, as you will see
from the Leader report of his speech on Neser's amendment, enclosed
herewith, that the way he wishes to meet Asiatic trading is by stopping
Asiatic immigration entirely, except for a certain number to be agreed
upon between the Imperial Government and the Union Government.
This doctrine may be all very well for the Transvaal, but how can the
Cape and Natal Asiatics agree to a material curtailment of their rights?
It will hinder them from getting clerical and other assistance, because
semi-educated young Indians, I think, will hardly be admitted under the
education test. I suggest, therefore, first a deputation to the Minister
of the Interior, from the Cape, with a written submission; his answer
being unsatisfactory, a petition to Parliament, and an interview with
the Cape Members who have hitherto been sympathetic, and who have
also been receiving the Indian vote. I think that the Cape Members
will be largely sympathetic. It is highly unlikely that, with reference
to the education test, you will succeed in getting a substantial amend-
ment of the Bill, but you may get a declaration that the test will be so
applied as to enable Indians to get the necessary number of educated
assistants. But the most important section, on which I think you are
almost bound to succeed, is Section 25. The latter ought to define, as
the present Immigration Laws both of the Cape and Natal do, the resi-
dential rights. The Cape Statute states that domiciled Asiatics and their
wives and minor children are exempt from the prohibitive clauses, and
the Natal Statute, besides containing the general clause as to domicile,
states that, for the purposes of the Act, three years' residence in Natal
will be accepted as a title to domicile; and it ought not to be at the
discretion of the Minister, but obligatory on him, to issue a certificate
of domicile to any Asiatic applicant. I think that in this respect you
will find the Cape Members very sympathetic. When I was on board,
I discussed the Cape Asiatic Act with Sauer, and he told me that the
issue of temporary permits only to Asiatics absenting themselves from
the Cape, instead of permanent certificates of domicile, was a crying
injustice, and he assured me that he knew nothing about it. If these
amendments can be secured, I think that the Immigrants' Act will be
admirable. I think, too, that, in order to put the community right in
so far as it can do so in the eyes of the European inhabitants, it would
be a tactful move to make the admission that, in view of the unfortu-
nate prejudice that exists, we cannot claim the right of inter-communi-
cation between the Provinces; but this submission should be modified
by the declaration that the education test to be imposed upon people
wanting to pass to and fro within the Union ought not to be severe.
I have asked West to send you copies of Indian Opinion from and after
the 18th ultimo. I hope that you have them. From your letter, I presume
that you have not brought Mr. Cohen with you. The publication of
the Bill will now keep you there, I take it, for some time. More later on.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5219
1 Vide Appendix IX.
2 Vide Vol. IX, p.285.
3 This letter to West is not available.
4 Addressee's father-in-law
