504. LETTER TO LALTA PERSHAD SHAD
October 2, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter and the books. The English book I shall
return as soon as I have finished it. But it may take some time
before I can go through it. My difficulty, however, is more funda-
mental than you imagine. But fundamental though it is, it is not
so serious as perhaps you imagine. I am in search of a guru
because I am humble and because that search is a scientific necessity
for every godfearing man. The search is its own reward and its
own satisfaction. Some do get the guru they want. But it is not
a matter of such moment if they cannot get the guru during the
current incarnation. It is enough if the search is absolutely sincere
and equally persistent. It is also an article of faith with me that,
if my search is sincere and persistent, my guru will come to me
instead of my having to go to him if and when I deserve him.
I am therefore quite content to remain as I am and there is
enough warrant in the Shastras for such contentment. You will,
therefore, not consider it a matter of indifference on my part if
I cannot take up your suggestion enthusiastically and proceed to
Agra. At the same time, if ever I do go to Agra in the course
of my travels, I would certainly like to see the institution described
by you. I would like too to have more information about it. I
know the prototype in Pabna of the Agra institution. I had a long
chat about it with Deshbandhu. He was undoubtedly enthusiastic
about it. He had great faith in the Thakur and it was out of
regard for him that I made it a point when I visited Pabna to see
the Sat Sangh Mutt and to make the acquaintance of the Thakur
and his mother and the inmates of the Mutt. But I must tell you
that I was not much impressed either with the Thakur or with all I
saw in the institution. And what I have since heard about the
institution is not very creditable to it. The information given to
me may be totally incorrect. But I am telling you somewhat of
what I know and what I have heard about it.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. LALTA PERSHAD SHAD
KAYASTH MOHALLA
AJMER
From a photostat: S.N. 19711
