40. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 22, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,
There are two things in which I want your help outside the
khadi work. Keshu, as you are aware, is a born mechanic.
He wants to make further progress. That he thinks he can only
do by being in some mechanical engineering institution or shop.
I would like to satisfy his ambition.
But I do not know where
he could be put. I have sent for the syllabus from the Andhra
National Institute at Masulipatam, which I have got. But I
know that you can give me the best advice in this matter.
That
is one thing.
The second is the soap question. As the colony here is
growing in extent, the expense of soap increases. A cake of soap
for the body costs 4 to 6 annas. Washing soap a cake two annas.
Is there not a cheaper way of cleaning our bodies and our clothes
if one wants to use something more than water? If you give
me a simple recipe, I shall certainly make the soap at the Ashram
if that proves cheaper. Having manufactured so much soap, you
can perhaps tell me what to do. I want a prescription some-
thing after Dr. Ray's style. You may remember what he said
about tooth powders. He said: "the Bengal Chemical Works tooth
powder was for fools, but chalk or powdered coal was the best
powder for wise men like himself." Is there any such simple
soap prescription for wise men?
I observe Hemaprabhadevi has ordered 12 copies of Ashram
Bhajanavali. The last edition is almost all exhausted and I have
discovered many typographical errors in it. It is the most popu-
lar publication of the Navajivan Printing Press. The edition is
now being carefully revised by a committee and I hope that in a
short time a faultless edition will be published when she can have
as many copies as she likes.
I do not mind your not coming if you are wanted for your
work there. I shan't strive with you about your personal finance.
I am satisfied so long as both of you keep perfect health and
perfect temper.
Yours,
SJT. SATIS CH. DAS GUPTA
KHADI PRATISHTHAN
170, BOW BAZAAR ST.
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 19630
