114. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 19, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
This is just after the morning prayer Thursday. Vallabhbhai
and I are waiting for the hot water for honey.
I have your letter before me. Of course I wrote last week
as usual on Thursday after the morning prayer. If the letter
was for any reason detained by the Superintendent there, he
would have at least informed you of the fact so as to spare you
the anxiety of imagining all sorts of evil. I brought the matter to
the notice of Major Bhandari and he promised to inquire. The
letter was duly posted at this end. It may be, however, that the
letter was withheld because, for the first time so far as I can recall,
I sent you with my letter, letters of welfare from Madeleine
Rolland, Andrews and copy of my letter to Madame Rolland. I
sent also a very beautiful picture-card containing the Virgin and
the divine babe. I should be surprised if the letter was withheld
for that reason and even then why the letter itself. I therefore
imagine that it has been waylaid during transit. Anyway I am
inquiring at this end and you may at yours. For me that card
was the greatest treasure with Aristarchie's inscription at the back.
And from this incident learn the lesson that even if such a
mishap occurs again feel assured that I have written as usual
even though I may not have got your weekly message and that
the mishap must be due to causes beyond my control. If I got ill
and could not write or if I was prevented for any other cause,
you should be duly informed that no letter was sent during that
week. In other words do not imagine causes but wait patiently
for the knowledge if it is to come and in any case never imagine
the worst. Since God is a God of mercy, if we must imagine, it is
best to imagine the best. Of course, a votary of the Gita never
imagines anything. Good and bad are after all relative terms. He
takes note of things as they happen and reacts naturally to them,
fulfilling his part as if propelled by the Great Mechanic, even as
a piece of machine in good order responds automatically to the
call of the machinist. It is the most difficult thing for an intelli-
gent being to be like a machine. And yet, if one is to become a
zero, that is precisely what one desiring perfection has to become.
The vital difference between the machine and the man is that the
machine is inert, the man is all life and consciously becomes
like a machine in the hands of the Master Mechanic. Krishna
says in so many words that God moves all beings as if they were
parts of a machine.
You see I have written this with the right hand. I notice
that the left too requires rest from even the little writing it does.
It is probable that the pain in the elbows has something to do
with outward fatigue caused by writing or spinning or both. It has
certainly not yielded to the saltless, and how should it if the
cause is not organic? It produces immediate effect in you, because
with you the cause is organic. I have no rheumatism. If there
was any, I should not fail to know it. Anyway the saltless diet
still continues. And I showed yesterday an increase of one lb. It
is therefore now 104 lb.
You should, if you can, discover the cause of your giddiness.
Have you discussed it with the medical officer there? You ought
not [to] feel giddy at the end of your walk. You should feel re-
freshed. It is often a good thing to dash cold water on the face
and even the head before starting the walk and sip cold water
during the walk on the slightest warning of approaching giddi-
ness. Even stopping for a moment to take deep breath avoids
it. These are all bits out of my own experience.
I note what you say about your reading. The Mahabharat is
a good programme. You ought to be a good Hindi scholar when
you have finished reading the unabridged Hindi translation with-
out missing the meaning of a single word. That means a great feat.
But I know there is nothing that can defeat love.
If you are allowed to drop a postcard to acknowledge this
and if it is delivered on receipt, drop me a postcard.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6259. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9725
