215. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
May 18, 1937
CHI. CHIMANLAL,
I have been meaning to write to you all these days but
in the mean time I got your letter today. Sharda is fine.
For the present she seems to be happy. If she can stay with
me cheerfully, I am ready to relieve you of your responsibil-
ity regarding her.
I will fix her up where and when I think
proper. She will stay with me, of course, till she recoups
her health. I will give her whatever treatment I deem fit.
Just now she says she is quite ready to stay with me. She
also says that both you and Shakaribehn are ready to entrust
her to me. She had not told me that she was suffering from
leucorrhoea.
She felt shy. It seems to have become chronic.
But I think it can be cured. It will take time though. I also
understand about her marriage. I have been thinking about
the matter ever since she told me about it. But marriage is out
of the question till her health improves. I would favour marrying
her outside the caste and, if possible, even outside the Province.
But that remains to be seen. Sharda herself is ready for this
and she says that both of you also will be ready. So much
about Babu .
Now regarding you two. Babu is 20; but in some matters
she is wiser than her age. She seems to be much concern-
ed for you both. You have—Shakariben has—Rs. 3,000, and
it is on that that you live at present. I do not mind that. You
need not worry even after that amount is spent. You ought not
to care so much for possessions. But since you have the money,
let it remain. I would not mind if, despite your having that
money, you earn more somewhere by honest means. But so long
as you have it, it would be more becoming of you both to do
public work without accepting anything. But this is my personal
view. If it does not appeal to you, you may certainly follow
another path.
Babu also told me that Vijapur did not suit you and that
you wished to go somewhere else. When I mentioned Rajkot,
she said that that was the last place you would like to go to.
The reason, that the estrangement between Narandas and you
still persists, pains me. Being inmates of the Ashram, you two
should be more than blood-brothers to each other. You ought
to overcome your mutual antipathy. I am sure that there is no
deeper cause behind it. You both have no personal interest to
serve. Why this enmity, then? Hence, whatever disagreement
you have must be one of principles only. Why be afraid of
such disagreement? If you wish, I may go deeper into the
cause of this disagreement. Whether you go to Rajkot or not,
your antipathy to each other must end.
Babu says further that you prefer your own place. I think
nothing would be better than that, if you could settle down
there. If you stay there, the expenditure also would be less
and you could serve the village more easily. If, therefore, you
can decide to stay in your village, you should do so.
If you wish, you may come and see me after the 25th. I
shall leave this place for Wardha on the 30th.
Don't worry at
all about Babu.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 21
