292. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 3, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I assume that Jnana has not left for Wardha. I have sent a
wire to Purushottam, but have received no reply from him so
far. I have not written any letter to him, but assume that he
must have received the wire. If you have not heard from him
anything, please write to him immediately after you get this letter.
That will save time. Ask him to come here as soon as possible. I
can't say how long I shall remain free.
Keshu is still here. He has been talking things over with
me. He seems to be calm. I asked him what remains to be
decided regarding carding, but he didn't seem to know. I also
don't understand.
I have sent a wire asking you to send Mahalakshmi here.
If you have not done so, please send her immediately. About
Bhagwanji, too, I have suggested that he may come. If he
does, I shall be able to pacify him.
Brijkrishna is receiving treatment in Dr. Mehta's nursing
home. He is improving. He consumes ten to twelve pounds of milk
1 Vide p. 234.
242
daily. Krishnan Nair also is here at present. I will suggest to
him that he should pay a visit to the Ashram.
We should not mind some of the women having started sepa-
rate kitchens. I think that is for the good of us all. Rice is
not the only reason for their decision, though it is certainly one
of them. They cannot do without rice, and will want other
things also from time to time.
Let not the other inmates
grudge them their freedom. We should not criticize what others
do. We can cling to our chosen path only if we feel that we
follow it for our own good. Nobody should do anything simply
because others do it. Acting in that manner does one no good
at all. I think that, except for milk and ghee, the food served
in the Ashram should resemble as far as possible the food served
in jails. Our test is still to come. I don't know when it will
come, but I have no doubt at all that it is coming and must
come. Those who have trained their bodies and minds for it will
come out of it victorious, and those who have not done so will
fall on the way. This is what has always happened. Nobody
should criticize, or has a right to criticize, the women who have
started separate kitchens. There is no ground at all for such
criticism. Who can do more than what he or she is capable
of? Moreover, nothing is more reprehensible than criticizing
other people's food-habits. Nobody can exercise enough self-con-
trol in one's own habits, but no person has the right to pass judg-
ment on the measure of such self-control exercised by others.
He has no means for passing such judgment, either. I don't set
great store by my ability to refrain from chillies and spices. If,
however, Harilal could give up drink, I would admire his self-
control. For some, giving up spices might be as difficult as giving
up liquor would be for Harilal. Revashankerbhai found it a hard
task to give up smoking. It is mostly such matters that call for
the exercise of non-violence. Explain all this to everybody when
you find it convenient.
My dissatisfaction regarding Kusum persists. Will a vaidya
never get a chance of treating her? However, as long as she her-
self is satisfied I need not worry about her.
I suppose Dhiru and Balbhadra have had their lungs exa-
mined. Personally, I have no faith in such methods at all.
Even after an x-ray is taken, only an expert can read it correct-
ly. You or I can judge nothing. I look upon these things as
the luxuries of the rich. They are certainly not within the means
of the poor. However, as long as people give us money and we
have faith in these methods, we may avail ourselves of them.
I think I have now replied to all your questions.
You will be able to judge about the state of my health from
this letter itself.
Purushottam has arrived. I have had a letter from Jamnalal
and it seems from it that Jnana had reached there before he
wrote it. I am enclosing that letter for you to read.
[PS.]
NARANDAS,
After I had finished the letter above, I received a letter from
Kanhaiyalal and one from Maganlal, both of which are enclosed.
I don't know anything about the matter in question. Do you?
Have you received any letters from Jivaram ?
How is his
health? I have replied to Kanhaiyalal and Maganlal that I
can advise only after I hear from Jivaram. It is probable that
both have left Bhadrak by now. I got the letters only today.
They are dated June 20, and the gentlemen had hoped to get
my reply before the end of the month.
I have written to Wai regarding Parachure Shastri's son. I
will let you know when I get a reply.
I had a letter from Harakhaji. Perhaps you have read it.
He wants to fix up somewhere else. Can you suggest anything?
Letters for: Amala, her mother, Gajra's mother, Valji, Ramji,
Kusum, Harakhaji, Lilavati, and the letters of Kanhaiyalal and
Maganlal.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8389. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1 Jivaram Kothari from Kutch who, after giving away one lakh of rupees
-all his wealth-to Gandhiji, went to Orissa to work for the poor
