235. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
July 24, 1908
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
I wish to draw public attention to the case of R. Lalloo V. Rex,
reported in the Press. The case, which, fortunately, has been now
considered by the Supreme Court, shows most clearly that the Immig-
rants' Restriction Act does not prohibit the entry of those Asiatics who
can comply with the education test. The summons issued against Lalloo
charged him with contravening Section 25 of the Immigrants' Restriction
Act, in that he, being unable to write in European characters, having
insufficient means to support himself, and being the minor child of a
prohibited immigrant, was himself a prohibited immigrant. Had he,
then, been able to satisfy the education test, assuming that he had sufficient
means to support himself, he would not have been prevented from entering
the country. Sir William Solomon, in giving judgment, said:
His (Sergeant Mansfield's) evidence was that the prisoner could not write
any document in a European language, and there was no denial of it. Sergeant
Mansfield could only have obtained the information either by asking the ac-
cused to write or the accused telling him that he could not write, in which
case, it would have been a farce to call upon him to write a document in
English characters.
It will, therefore, be seen that, according to the learned Judge,
the Immigrants' Restriction Act does not debar Asiatics possessing edu-
cational qualifications from entering the country. In the light of this
judgment, the British Indian contention is absolutely upheld and
strengthened by the incarceration of Mr. Sorabji, who lawfully entered
under the Immigrants' Restriction Act, but became a criminal because
he would not submit to the Asiatic Act.
1 Following this, Gandhiji made another speech in Gujarati, the text of which
is not available.
2 This was published under the title "The Immigration Question".
3 Vide "Johannesburg Letter", p. 411.
There is, therefore, nothing new in the claim brought forward
by the British Indian community in insisting on the retention of the
right of entry on the part of educated Asiatics under the Immigrants'
Restriction Act. It is General Smuts who demands from British Indians
their consent to an abrogation of that right, which Indians are in honour
bound to resist.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 1-8-1908
