411. LETTER TO ANNIE MASCARENE
Not for publication
NATURE CURE CLINIC,
6 TODIWALA ROAD,
POONA,
October 28, 1945
DEAR MASCARENE,
In continuation of the receipt of your resolution, you will not expect
me to express any opinion because just now I have, so far as it is
possible, steeled my heart against any expression of opinion. I have
not studied the question of primary education in Travancore so as to
satisfy myself, and I observe that many persons of note have expressed
emphatic views one way or the other. I do not feel called upon to
say anything.
Why did you drag my sister and her daughter? My sister is wholly
illiterate. Her daughter can with difficulty read or write something. But
neither takes any interest in public matters. It is fraud upon the public
to put such ignorant persons on the platform and make them repeat
things parrot-like, leading the public to believe that some good work
has been done.
I felt sorry when I first heard that my sister had been dragged
out of her merited obscurity in which she was happy and contented.
She has now come to me being on her way back to Rajkot. She tells
me that she had not the slightest intention of going to a meeting or
sending her daughter. She allowed herself to be tempted to go to
Rameshwaram as a point of pilgrimage. She had intended also to remain
obscure and not let the people know that she was my sister. If she
had asked me I would have dissuaded her even from going to
Rameshwaram, for I have no faith in these pilgrimages except under
certain conditions. But what is done cannot be undone. I would however
like you to give me your version of the story, so that I can have full
facts enabling me to come to a right judgment, for I do not want to
do you any injustice by making up my mind on insufficient data. Please
therefore enlighten me. And who was the party who wrote out the
speech that my sister's daughter read without understanding it ?
Yours,
BAPU
MISS A. MASCARENE
STATE CONGRESS OFFICE
TRIVANDRUM
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
226
