620. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 4, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
This is Saturday before prayer time 3.30 a.m. No letter from
you till Friday evening. I put off even yesterday in the hope of get-
ting your letter in the afternoon and still posting you something
yesterday but that was not to be. So each week your letter is getting
later in coming. But though I look forward to it I do not worry.
The letter-writing is not a right of prisoners.
Therefore
there is no deprivation. What in ordinary life religion calls duty
becomes or seems to be compulsion in the prison life. But that
is not the case with us. We are in a way voluntary prisoners.
Therefore we may not feel the compulsion as such when a certain
permission is withdrawn or is regulated in the manner suited to
the authorities. I can do without your letters if need be and
you must train yourself to do likewise and feel happy. In a
manner everybody trains himself to do without things when he
cannot get them. A follower of the Gita dharma trains himself
to do without things with happiness called equanimity in Gita lan-
guage, for happiness of the Gita is not the opposite of unhappi-
ness. It is superior to that state. The devotee of the Gita is
neither happy nor unhappy. And when that state is reached,
there is no pain, no pleasure, no victory, no defeat, no depriva-
tion, no possession. Prison life is a life of privilege if we learn
to practise the Gita teaching. It is easier in the prison than out-
side. For outside we have the opportunity of picking and choos-
ing. Hence we are not always able to test ourselves. In the
1& 2 These words are underlined in the source.
prison, there are various jarring occasions. Are we able to bear
them with equanimity? If we are, it is well with us.
I have kept your letter of 19th February which I got after I
had written my weekly letter. You had Mridula in your party.
I hope she is quite well. She was not quite strong and healthy.
Ba should look after her jaws. Does she wear her teeth? Does
she take enough exercise? Does she do any reading herself ?
Does she get weekly letters or fortnightly?
I know last time she
did not get several of my letters. I do not know what happen-
ed to them. This time I am anxious that she should get my
letters. So far as I am aware prison authorities had not with-
held her letters.
I do propose to write to Dr. Saunders about your history.
But whatever the history, there is only one treatment which I
have mentioned to you. There need be therefore no waiting for his
report. It would be interesting to know what he has to say. Sun-
light, simple food in which vitamins have not been destroyed and
exercise in the open air will dissolve all glands and other affections.
Verrier has cried off the proposed marriage with Mary Gil-
lett. But his communications are not happy. He is showing a
very vulnerable spot in his character. But it is well to know
our friends as they are and still to love them.
Here they come for the prayer. 4.10 a.m. I stop.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6265. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9731
