356. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 19, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your messages. Please see if you can come here after
you have got all right. Andrews is coming on the 25th. I
think it will be good if you are here then. I do get here as
much rest as I need. Nobody bothers me. The chowkidars also
follow Jamnalalji's instructions to the letter. I am sure that
you, too, will get more peace here than you do there. But you
can think of that only after you have completely recovered from
fever and regained peace of mind. If you come, Mani will defi-
nitely benefit at any rate.
I understand that nothing can be done about your nose
trouble just now. If anything can be done by staying on there
for some time, I think it will be worth while to do so. Let us
see if it helps. There will be no risk at all in getting it done
just now. The only thing is that you will have to keep to the
bed for some time. That need not matter.
I had a long letter from Jayaprakash yesterday. He is very
unhappy. He has read much but does not seem to have digested
all that he has read. And he certainly has no experience. But he
can pour out in speeches what he has read. That impresses edu-
cated people, which fact increases his enthusiasm and he leaves
home and family, neglects his health and goes about rousing
people. He has, however, said in his letter that he will come
and see me. Let us see what happens.
There is no possibility of my leaving the Congress imme-
diately. But I share my agony with you.
How can I leave the Congress till you and others permit me
to do so. Personally, however, I do feel that there is no other way
for me. I seem to be obstructing the growth of the Congress.
To cling to the means without faith in it or to fail to act ac-
cording to one's faith-what a pitiable and frightful condition
to be in! Is it not your duty to save the Congress from it?
There may be no harm [in my remaining in the Congress] so
long as I can think of some means of fighting the rot, but what
can I do if I cannot think of any way except leaving the Con-
gress? My doing so will rid it of hypocrisy. If the attitude of
329
the ordinary Congressman is that no distinction need be made
between truth and falsehood, violence and non-violence, khadi,
calico, Jagannathi and muslin, then it is best that he should act
accordingly. But that won't be possible till I leave. These res-
trictions cannot be removed with my consent, for I would never
consent to their removal. If the Congress removes them despite
my opposition, would not that amount to expelling me? Would
it be desirable to let things go that far? I want to make you,
Raja and others think about all these points. If you can come
over, we shall discuss them at leisure.
We shall also have to think what I should do in Septem-
ber or after I have regained strength. It is an issue to which
we must give thought. The time is drawing near for taking a
decision.
Jawaharlal's explosion is not as frightening as it
seems from the flames. He had a right to let off steam, which
he has exercised. I think he has calmed down now.
About the unfortunate cultivators of Gujarat, I will do what
you want, but I have definite views of my own in the matter.
What you desired regarding the Parliamentary Board has
happened, though the reason for postponement was quite differ-
ent.
I have written enough, I think, for today.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 115-
