78. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
January 30, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
I could give to you some more reminiscences of Miss Doris's
school, about which I wrote to you last week. But I will leave
that subject today and write about [Madame] Montessori's school-
children. Montessori is an aged lady. She has dedicated her
life to children's education. She is an Italian lady. Learn from
your teachers where Italy is and how its government is run. Keep
the map of Europe before you. In the map it looks like a fat
leg which has separated from the rest of the body.
But let us leave that and return to the school of the learned
Madame Montessori. The lady happened to be in England,
where they were holding a conference of all teachers who followed
her method. She invited me to it and explained to me how and
what they taught the children. The most important thing was
that the children felt no burden of learning as they learnt every-
thing as they played. Secondly, the aim is to develop all the senses
and organs of the child, that is, its hands, feet, nose, ears, tongue,
skin and the mind, and they have very carefully planned a teach-
ing programme with that aim in view. In the programme very
little place is given to memorizing. Music has an important place,
and it accompanies physical exercises also. They teach dancing
too, and it gives plenty of exercise to the body. The children
do most of the things by themselves and learn without effort to
concentrate attention. The thing I liked most in their method
was that they trained children to observe silence and concentrate.
This is how they do it. The children sit with closed eyes, the
teacher speaks in a voice no louder than a whisper into one's ear
and children strain their ears to hear what she says. As soon
as any child hears it, it goes over on its toes and sits by the side
of the teacher. Till all the children have done this one after
another, everyone is to remain sitting and keep silent. You, too,
should try this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
