272. LETTER TO SIR STAFFORD CRIPPS
NEW DELHI,
May 27, 1946
DEAR SIR STAFFORD,
I got your touching letter yesterday when I was busy writing
for Harijan. Though I read it as soon as the visitors who had
dropped in, had gone, I could not before now spare the time
to write.
I am returning your letter, as it is marked "very confidential".
However I see nothing in it which the world may not see, if it is
curious.
I entirely agree with you [on] what the State Paper demands
and commends to us and yet it like everything coming from the
British evokes nothing but distrust. And I am sorry to confess
that what has happened since the publication of the document has
somewhat shaken my trust which the document by itself command-
ed and still commands. The interpretations put upon it and the
declarations since on independence, paramountcy, troops and the
proposed disposal of the Baluchistan election, the uncertainty
about the European vote and above all, the waiting policy and
the interminable delay about the Interim Government make me
wonder whether a satisfactory Interim Government will ever be
formed and whether the Constituent Assembly will ever meet.
Has even the cry of independence in action vanished into thin air?
But I shall hope against hope and work for the success of the
Mission even in spite of itself, though not hiding from them or
the public honest doubt. Trust put on is worse than useless.
Trust felt is the thing that counts. Anyway, why worry about
trust. Trustworthy action will dispel all mistrust or distrust as
the sun dispels the morning mist.
This is not to disturb your rest. I would have refrained from
writing to you, if your letter had not required a fairly full answer.
I am sending an advance copy of my article for the next
issue of Harijan.
Do be well quickly. 'Be careful for nothing.'
If you want me to do anything, do not hesitate to send a
messenger to me. I leave for Mussoorie tomorrow morning. I had
to finish writing for Harijan, before leaving. As I do not want
to inflict my writing on you, I am asking Rajkumari to copy
this for me. Of course you are at liberty to share this with your
colleagues or whomsoever you like.
I am sending a copy of my article to Lord Pethick-Law-
rence.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 199-200
