494. LETTER TO FULCHAND
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Friday, May 7, 1926
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I got your postcard. I don't think it was a virtue in Bhai
Shivlal that he should be suffering from piles and yet not give so
much as a hint to anyone. I would rather blame him for not doing
so. He cannot now carry on his work of service. No one can say
how long he will be in bed; besides, the illness will mean expen-
diture which could have been avoided. But who can make Shiv-
lal see reason? You should now immediately take whatever mea-
sures are necessary to get him cured.
I follow what you say regarding the Wadhwan Udyogalaya.
Your letter seems to suggest that I have been unfair in forming
my opinion about Wadhwan and that I am partial to the
Amreli Centre in supporting it, and that too is a form of injustice.
How can I convince you that I am neither partial towards the one
nor hostile to the other? I am partial only to khadi. After inspect-
ing the Amreli Centre personally and also through others' eyes I
came to the conclusion that it did not deserve to be closed. I
had not examined the Wadhwan centre, nor did I think it neces-
sary to look into its working, as I had confidence in your ability
and used to get regular reports about it from Devchandbhai. I
thought about the Centre only when the problem of selling khadi
arose. And when you showed me the accounts in the course of my
inquiry, I was startled. If it is a fact that in Wadhwan you
offer higher rates for spinning, weaving and carding, is it [worth-
while] to continue to run the Centre?
I apply one criterion to khadi activity at all places. Are the
women who will be spinning starving for want of employment?
If so, and if, to our good fortune, they agree to spin, we may start
khadi work in that place.
Provided workers were available in
sufficient number, I would try to maintain all those centres in
Kathiawar which satisfied this principle. Write to me if you
have anything to say after this explanation, and try to convince
me. I yearn for testimonials from my co-workers certifying to my
impartiality. I regard you as one such co-worker. I, too, will not
give up the effort to convince you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19534
