97. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
September 17, 1932
DEAR MOTHER, SINGER AND GUARDIAN OF MY SOUL,
Your lovely letter was preceded by one lovelier—if possible—
from Padmaja. The decision was taken after much prayer, in the
name of God and at His call. I have no power therefore to post-
pone the hour of execution.
You have every right to call upon me to revise my decisions
and actions and it is my duty to respond, if I discover the error.
And I claim unquestioned 'obedience' if I cannot with all the
prayerful effort discover any error. You have 'manfully' asserted
the right and woman-like offered obedience.
The motherly affection has blinded the poetic vision and
prompted you to appeal to my pride to retrace my steps so as to
make me cling to life.
But I know you have not missed the woman in me. I have
therefore chosen the way of life through suffering unto death.
I must therefore find my courage in my weakness.
This is how your vision has failed you. The communal deci-
sion was the last straw. The conception of giving my life for
the untouchables is not of yesterday. It is very old. There was
no call from within for years. But the Cabinet's decision came
like a violent alarm waking me from my slumber and telling me
this is the time. It therefore provided the psychological moment
and I instinctively seized it. The necessarily restricted wording
of my official letter covers in their implications the very things
you would have me to die for and to live for-one and the same
thing in essence. She who sees life in death and death in life is
the real Poetess and Seeress. But the proof of the pudding is in
the eating. You will soon test it and prove it for yourself.
Meanwhile pray that God may give me strength enough to walk
steadily through the vale. If Hinduism is to live, untouchability
must die.
It may be that this is my last letter to you. I have always
known and treasured your love. I think that I understood you
when I first saw you and heard you at the Criterion in 1914.
If I die I shall die in the faith that comrades like you, with
whom God has blessed me, will continue the work of the country
which is also fully the work of humanity in the same spirit in
which it was begun. If the interests of the country are to be
one with those of humanity, if the good of one faith is to be the
good of all faiths, it will come only by the strictest adherence to
truth and non-violence in thought, word and deed.
And now for a little lesson in recognizing one's limitations.
You may be a good confectioner, but you need not therefore pre-
sume to be a good baker or a judge of good bread. Well, my
brown bread is really superior to your 'good white bread'. And
there is an interesting, instructive history behind it, which you
should get Major Bhandari to relate to you, if he will. Anyway
there was to be a choice between my delicious and digestible
brown bread and leathery chapati. Those who were doomed to
these chapatis have chosen the brown loaf. I accept your apo-
logy in anticipation.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 38-40
