401. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
August 25, 1934
CHI. NARAHARI,
Since Kakasaheb has resigned from the Board of Trustees of
the Vidyapith, the question arises as to what should be done
regarding the village improvement scheme of Shri Nagindas Amu-
lakhrai. As desired by Shri Nagindas, I had appointed a commit-
tee to implement the scheme.
On thinking about it, I now feel
that the committee should be made completely independent of
the Vidyapith, and that Sardar Vallabhbhai should be appointed
its President and Raojibhai its Secretary. The latter should be
appointed for one year.
Kakasaheb has rightly deposited the money of the Nagindas
Trust with Jamnalalji. After the latter is all right, we may, if
necessary, make some other arrangement. I have another fund
also under my control. Kakasaheb has deposited that amount, too,
with Jamnalalji. For the convenience of keeping accounts and from
other points of view I think it would be desirable to amalgamate
this amount with the Nagindas Trust money.
The late Punjabhai had donated an ear-marked sum and, on
my advice, entrusted the Vidyapith with the responsibility of
editing and publishing Jain literature through a committee. I
have a moral responsibility in this matter too. In view of the
present circumstances, I would suggest that that work also should
be carried on independently of the control of the Vidyapith. I
suggest the following names as Trustees of such an independent
body:
1. Narahari Parikh
2. Valji Desai
3. Ramniklal Modi
4. Maganbhai Desai
5. Nilkanth Mashruwala
6. Gopaldas Patel
If, besides these, we can get a learned and pious Jain, I
think it would be desirable to invite him also to become one of
the Trustees. We shall have to look out for such a person. If you
can think of any name, please let me know.
In this programme, so far we have paid attention to publica-
tion of material from the original sources of the Agamas together
with a translation.
If, instead, we make selections from this vast
field of literature which might be useful to the people, or get such
selections made, and publish them, I think the late Punjabhai's
object would be better fulfilled.
It was always Punjabhai's wish that Shri Rajchandra's birth
anniversary should be fittingly celebrated. We should assume
the responsibility for this. But whereas in Punjabhai's time people
were content with holding meetings on the anniversary day, I think
it would do greater credit to the committee and give greater peace
to the soul of Shrimad if some constructive work could be done
on that day.
The committee should consider whether this should
be done by publishing some literature or arranging a lecture on the
anniversary day or in some other manner. The anniversary falls
on the next Kartik Purnima.
We should, therefore, think and decide
in time how it should be celebrated on this occasion.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9063
