318. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 7, 1934
CHI. MIRA,
At 6 a.m. I entered upon the fast. It is now 7 a.m. I do
hope that you would not be disturbed during the week. There is no
cause for uneasiness. But what is the use of my saying all this?
Ere this reaches, the fast would have been twice over.
You are quite right in repeating your warning. (At this
stage I felt too sleepy to write, so I slept. It is now 7.30 a.m.)
So long as you feel like giving the warning, you should go on
doing it, in ever so emphatic terms. Some day it may have its
full effect. Partial effect there is even now. It keeps me on my
guard. If. . .1 copied me, he had surely a corrupt mind. For
there is no warrant for thinking that any other person was simi-
larly affected unless of course I have been kept in the dark or
unless you suggest that every fall in the Ashram was due to my
practice. So far as . . .2 is concerned, Jamnalalji and Swami
Anand with whom . . .3 had long talks have almost come to
the conclusion that . . . has concocted the whole story for the
purpose of blackmail. They are both finishing the chain. But
this is all by the way. You should not disturb yourself over this.
I don't. I take the necessary steps and forget all about it. You
have given a whole paragraph to the matter. Hence this reply.
Many changes are taking place in my mind just now. The
corruption in the Congress is preying on me as it has never be-
fore done. I am conferring with friends as to the advisability of
leaving the Congress and pursuing its ideals outside it. It is good
1,2,3& The name has been omitted.
5 Which he ultimately did on September 17, 1934; vide Vol. L X I .
that the corruption agitates me. I shall take no hasty step but
there it is. And I feel that the girls' institution here should be
closed unless I am prepared to sit down in Wardha or Vinoba
takes the sole responsibility of its management. He will think over
it during the fast. These are the two things that are uppermost
in my mind.
The rest you will have from Mahadev or Pyarelal both of
whom and Bal, Bapa, Devraj and Prithuraj are here. I insisted
upon Jamnalalji going to Bombay for his ear trouble. Ba, Prabha-
vati and Om are of course here. And Vasumati and Amtul Salaam
have insisted on coming here. The latter is somewhat better but
by no means overwell.
Your work there is certainly voluminous. You are putting
forth extraordinary energy. What more can you do? Take your
time. Do not get ill.
Kamlani's mental derangement is sad news. I hope you had
time to be able to go to him. Your very presence may do him
good.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not been able to write to Maxwell. Sorry.
From the original: C.W. 6294. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9760
