377. LETTER TO KANU GANDHI
June 24, 1937
CHI. KANAIYO,
I got your letter. I will wait for you after the time limit
you have fixed.
A sister from Madras had come here the day before yesterday
and left the same day. Pyarelal says that you know her. Her
name is Soundaram. She had also brought her vina, which was
worth Rs. 150. The chief reason of its high value was its decora-
tion. Without the decoration it would be worth only Rs. 80.
But what I like most was her mastery in playing on the vina.
She sang, too, to the accompaniment of the vina. Her voice is
sweet. During all that time I remembered you. She said she
would come again some other time.
You have not followed my questions about book-keeping.
That only means that you have not understood the technical terms
of book-keeping. So to that extent you probably do not know
book-keeping. Show that letter to Narandas. If he does not
understand my terms, then I will have to admit that I do not
know the technical language of book-keeping and, therefore, could
not use it correctly. Narandas knows book-keeping thoroughly
well. I learnt just enough of it for my legal practice, with my own
effort, and it is possible, therefore, that I do not know the
technical terms as well as an expert in book-keeping. In short,
what I had asked from you was a summary, or 'abstract' as it
is called in English, of the different accounts in the ledger.
If neither the register nor the abstracts are available here,
we cannot know what the credit or debit balances are in the
different accounts. And such occasions are bound to arise when it
becomes necessary to know the figures. Do complete the accounts.
While you are there, try to perfect your knowledge of book-keeping.
Similarly you may increase your knowledge of music as much
as you wish to. You are doing well in planning to go to Chorwad
a little earlier.
Amtul Salaam's amount has been received. I see that you
go to bed at 11. I consider it too late. Everybody should
form the habit of going to bed by 10. But you should of course
follow the convenience of others there.
335
I was very glad to learn that Purushottam was keeping good
health.
Ba will most probably come the day after tomorrow. At
present the house here is full. Jamnalal's bungalow having been
completed, everybody is accommodated comfortably.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
