579. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM,
Wednesday, May 26, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,
I got your letter, and also Lalji's. Yesterday I dictated my
letter in a hurry, and so one thing was left out. The faintness
that you felt when you tried to stand up was not weakness, it was
the result of your not having had the practice of standing and
walking for some time. Perhaps you may not remember that,
when Colonel Maddock permitted me to walk to the lavatory
during daytime, he warned me that my legs might tremble and
I might feel giddy, but told me not to be alarmed on that account.
After you have walked once or twice with some support, you will
get back the ability to walk. Hence I am not in the least worried
because of your having felt giddy when you tried to stand up. But
I also see that your wound has not completely healed; this is a
common enough experience in such operations. No doctor can
understand all the facts about the condition of the patient's body,
and, therefore, some complication always develops after an ope-
ration, but it can be easily cured. The only thing is that the
period of your convalescence is becoming a little too long. I have
now concluded that Lalji and you will be discharged at about
the same time. This, I think, should please you, though what you
wanted was that you should get well but should have the privilege
of staying on for Lalji's sake. It seems that you will not have
that privilege. If, however, all our wishes were granted, would not
the world perish? As against one good wish, based on regard for
truth, entertained by one person, how many wicked wishes, based
on disregard for truth, would there be entertained by others?
Yesterday I got a telegram from Paul, and there was a second
one today. He informs that he has collected Rs. 6,000 and hopes
that I will not think it necessary to cancel the trip. I will wait for
a reply to my letter, but it seems to me that we shall have to go.
By not going, we may perhaps put Mr. Paul in an embarrassing
position.
I was glad to read all that you write about Dr. Dalal's kindness.
I was glad that Abbas Saheb went and saw you; the man's cou-
rage is boundless. Keshu has stayed back, and is bound to be of
some help to you.
It will do if he arrives here on the 29th.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19552
