66. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 5, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
It was a good idea of yours to pay all those visits. I
understand what you say regarding Rukhi. City life cannot
have any other result than this. Rukhi could have made her
way easier, but she did not have enough courage. But that was
not her fault. Everybody obeys his or her own nature. One
may make whatever changes are possible within its limits.
Anybody who attempts more is bound to fall lower than he or
she was before.
Prabhudas has got what he wanted. He will make his way in
life if his health remains good.
Let Velanbehn follow her own inclination and rise or fall
in consequence. She will come to no harm whatever. If Prema
is released after I have left, I hope she will follow me. When is
Lilavati expected to be released? I feel sometimes that we should
now relieve Anasuyabehn of the burden of Anandi and others.
Kanu has proved his mettle well indeed.
I have written to
Amala. You do not seem to have met Amina. Amtussalaam
has been operated upon for piles in Bombay. She is in the King
Edward [Memorial] Hospital. Write to her. It is a painful
state of affairs that weavers do not get yarn.
Think over the problem of the dairy. The work ought not to
be neglected.
Write to Titus and tell him that he should attend
things in right time. He should not spend his time away from
the dairy as he likes. A letter for Chhaganlal is enclosed.
Where is Chimanlal at present? I hope you will be in
Ahmedabad when I go there. If Jamnadas's health still does
not improve I will not mind his resigning. But who will run the
school afterwards? Jamnadas rarely writes to me. See that he
does not decide anything in haste.
I like Purushottam's idea of going to Wardha. The rains
have started here and it is not possible now to continue the
tour on foot. I am, therefore, thinking what to do on the re-
maining days.
It has been decided just now that we should walk more to-
day and reach Bhadrak, and leave it for Wardha on Friday, and
proceed from there to Bombay on Wednesday.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8401. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
