437. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
April 20, 1907
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
With reference to the £10 withdrawn by Harilal from your father
at Rajkot, I am crediting the Press with £10 and debiting my private
account, and, I take it, you will withdraw the £10 from the Press, unless
you have done so already.
With reference to the entry of £4 re. Kaliandas, the book here seems
to be in order. When the month was finished, £3 was debited to the
Press and credited to Kaliandas, £4 debited to the Office and credited
to Kaliandas. Evidently, it should have been £4 against the Press and
£3 against the Office, which will now be done. Further, what has to
be done here is to pass a debit against the Press of £ 1. These entries
will be correct, if, at the time, you did not make any entries there, that
is to say, if you did not credit Kaliandas independently of entries sent
from here. If you did, you will now have to make cross-entries. I
assume also that no moneys passed from you to Kaliandas, because, in
my ledger £7 has been credited to him.
I have now received the household account. They seem to have
spent money lavishly, and, yet, there is very little in detail I can take
exception to. I notice also that the piano has not yet been debited to
me, unless I have overlooked it in going through it hurriedly, so that
the amount will be increased by another £10. Is that so?
I am intensely dissatisfied with Gokaldas' betrothal, for I understand
that he has actually paid Rs. 2,000 in order to bring about the betrothal.
I do not know whether I have understood the thing correctly. If it
is in respect of jewellery, the matter is not so open to criticism. I have
meagre details about it. If you know anything definite, I should like
to know what has actually happened.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I am sending you 3 numbers of The Times of India. After you have
seen and admired pictures I want you to cut out Gaekwar, the Jam, and
the Cricket Team. We might one of these days want to reproduce these
pictures as supplements, and it would be better for you also to file any
other pictures you may come across and consider good enough for use.
From a photostat of the typewritten original: S.N. 4734
