483. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
SEGAON, WARDHA,
September 13, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,
I am thankful for your letter of the 8th instant regarding the
political convicts. Much as I should like, if only for the trou-
ble you have taken in the matter, to fall in with your proposal, it
would be a breach of faith on my part to do so. For, as you
know, I am bound by a solemn promise made to these friends
when, at my instance, they suspended their hunger-strike. Con-
sistently with that promise I have to make every reasonable at-
tempt to secure their early release. This I cannot do if I identify
myself with your proposal.
I cannot agree with you that if you fixed a time-limit it
would be inconsistent with the reference of the very thing to a
tribunal. Surely there is nothing inconsistent with such reference
to say that you expect the tribunal to regulate the dates of dis-
charge within a particular period. Under the terms of your
reference the judges need never discharge a single prisoner if, in
their opinion, the enormity of their crime did not merit any con-
sideration. However theoretical my objection may appear, it is
impossible for me to run risks.
Perhaps the Bengal Government and their advisers have
missed one big factor in the consideration of the question of release.
These prisoners have no sense of guilt. The crimes, however
bad in themselves, were not committed for personal gain. The
prisoners, having changed their views on violence, feel their deten-
tion an intolerable hardship. They are fretting for public service.
The public estimate also in this matter is of a different character
from that of the Government. But since yours is admittedly a
Government responsible to the people, you are bound to give
considerable weight to public opinion which, so far as one can
judge, emphatically demands their release.
Though you have, and I admit properly, ruled out the idea of
exploiting my influence with the prisoners and the public for the
preservation of public peace, I urge that there is nothing inher-
ently wrong in using it if there is a reasonable chance of its tell-
ing on the side of public peace. But I may not labour this
point.
For the considerations mentioned by me in this letter and in
my previous letters and during the talks between ourselves and
between your good self now and Subhas Babu who, in this
matter, was acting as my representative, I must regretfully with-
hold co-operation from the Government in the projected scheme.
But that does not in any way mean that I should obstruct you in
your endeavour to accelerate the process of discharge. My action
will largely depend upon the pace with which the discharges
take place. My measuring rod will always be my letter of the
13th April, 1938.
I trust that in the interest of the common cause the facilities
for correspondence and interviews with prisoners which you have
hitherto afforded me will be continued.
I can have no objection to the correspondence that has taken
place between us being published. I entertain the hope that
this very important question will be kept by all concerned above
party politics. I venture also to hope that the Press and the
public will write or do nothing that may give a violent turn
to the agitation that may become necessary to procure the
prompt discharge of the prisoners.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
KHWAJA SAHEB SIR NAZIMUDDIN
BENGAL SECRETARIAT
CALCUTTA
From a copy: C.W. 9933
