237. LETTER TO COW-PROTECTION COMMITTEE,
MYSORE
AS AT THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 11, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I must apologize to you for the very long delay in acknow-
ledging your letter of 27th November, 1926. I duly received your
first intimation which I thought was purely formal and as I had
nothing effective to say, I did not send you a reply. From your
second letter, however, I observe that you were anxious to have
my opinion. But when I received it I was so overwhelmed with
work that I had no time to collect my thoughts and give you a
considered reply. Even as it is, I am sending you this reply
in the midst of my Bihar tour. I hope you will accept these facts
as sufficient excuse for the delay that has been caused in send-
ing you my reply. Probably now it is of no use, even so I gave
myself the satisfaction of telling you that there was no discourtesy
intended by me in the first instance in not replying and now
in replying at a time when my reply may prove too late.
In matters of religion I am against any State interference,
and the cow question is in India a mixed matter of religion and
economy. So far as economy is concerned, I have no doubt that
it is the concern of every State, whether Hindu or Mussalman,
to conserve the cattle supply. But, if I have understood your
questionnaire rightly, the underlying note is whether the State
would be justified in interposing itself between Hindus and Mus-
salmans and regulating cow slaughter even for purposes which
Mussalmans consider to be religious. In India which I consider
to be as much the land of Hindus born in it as of Mussalmans,
Christians and others born in it, even a Hindu State may not
prohibit cow slaughter for purposes considered to be religious
by any of its subjects without the consent of the intelligent
majority of such subjects so long as such slaughter is conducted
in private and without any intention of provoking or giving
offence to Hindus. That the very knowledge of any such slau-
ghter would give offence to Hindus is inevitable. But unfortu-
nately we know that in India cow slaughter is often resorted to to
defy and wound Hindu sentiment. This should be put down by every
State that has the slightest regard for its subjects. But in my
opinion the economic side of the cow question, if it is properly
handled, automatically provides for the delicate religious side.
Cow slaughter should be and can be made economically im-
possible, whereas unfortunately, of all the places in the world,
it is the sacred animal of the Hindus which has become the
cheapest for slaughter. To this end I suggest the following:
(1) The State should in the open market buy out every
[head of] cattle offered for sale by outbidding every other
buyer.
(2) The State should run dairies in all principal towns ensur-
ing a cheap supply of milk.
(3) The State should run tanneries where the hides,
bones, etc., of all dead cattle in its possession should be utilized
and should offer to buy again in the open market all privately-
owned dead cattle.
(4) The State should keep model cattle farms and instruct
the people in the art of breeding and keeping cattle.
(5) The State should make liberal provision . . .1
From a microfilm: S.N. 12667
