355. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
AS AT PATNA,
3.45 a.m. April 1, 1934
MY DEAR CHILD,
I had your long letter after keeping me waiting for a long
time.
There is not in your letter enough search for truth-that
is, the hidden purpose of God. When we know that God Himself
is the mystery of mysteries, why should anything that He does per-
plex us? If He acted as we would have Him do or if He acted
exactly like us, we would not be His creatures and He our Creator.
The impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is not a curse but a
blessing.
He has given us power to see the steps in front of us
and it would be enough if Heavenly Light reveals that step to us.
We can then sing with Newman, 'One step enough for me.' And
we may be sure from our past experience that the next step will
always be in view. In other words, the impenetrable darkness is
nothing so impenetrable as we may imagine. But it seems impene-
trable when in our impatience we want to look beyond that one step.
And since God is love, we can say definitely that even the physical
catastrophes that He sends now and then must be a blessing in
disguise and they can be so only to those who regard them as a
warning for introspection and self-purification.
I understand what you say about the children.
I am glad
that you are in Kodaikanal with the children.
You will let me
know when Menon gets something. Agatha Harrison is with me.
It is rather a trying time for her, not being used to the Indian
1 This and the preceding two paragraphs are from Harijan, 20-4-1934.
life.
But she is standing it bravely because she wants to learn
everything that she can in the shortest time possible. Muriel Lester,
I left at Patna. She was not doing well. I return to Patna on the
4th April to leave it on the 7th for Assam. I return again to Bihar
about the 25th, pass about a week and then go to Orissa once
more returning to Bihar.
You will continue to use the Wardha
address.
Love to you and kisses to the children to whom I may not
write today.
BAPU
MRS. ESTHER MENON
BOURNE END
KODAIKANAL
From a photostat: No. 128. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also
My Dear Child, pp. 104-
