490. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
January 13, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got the letters from both of you. I hope you get my letters
regularly. Of late I have not missed a single mail. With my
last letter I had enclosed a copy of Ba's letter.
Sushila has given sufficiently detailed news about Shanti.
If he does not waste money in fanciful ventures, I am satisfied.
Sushila wishes to know who are in my party. I think I have
already written about that.
Chandrashankar, Mirabehn, Om,
Kisanbehn (Premabehn's friend), Professor Malkani (Thakkar
Bapa's representative), two accountants-Vishwanath and Damodar
-one store-keeper Sharma and one typist-these form the party.
Personally I like Sita being talkative and mischievous. It is
for the parents to put these qualities to good use. They can in
this way impart a good deal of education.
Naughtiness and
talkativeness are a kind of energy, like steam. The energy of
steam is conserved and used to drive big trains and steamboats.
A child's energy can be used in a similar manner. If we un-
derstand it and use it wisely, it can produce excellent results.
Instead of making Sita write the letters of the alphabet, you
should teach her just now to draw geometrical figures. After
that you may teach her to draw pictures of objects and last of all
to write the letters. But before doing that you should teach her
to recognize the letters, and to understand the meaning of words.
You can give her some knowledge daily through stories. You
can easily teach her something about history, geography, science
and tell her stories from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. She
can learn all these things in play. This will not tire you; on
the contrary you will enjoy teaching her in this manner. Through
this you yourself will learn something daily and Sita will get the
best possible education. She can learn English, Gujarati and also
Hindi at the same time. What help do you give to Manilal?
Did either of you see West? Please meet him and give me
some news of him. I shall be satisfied if he is not unhappy.
You should show yourself always ready to help.
Ba seems to be all right. This time she does not appear to
enjoy as much freedom as before.
I did not understand Pragji's letter to you. I do not remem-
ber in what context we had the talk and what I had said.
In
any case, what I may have said does not apply to you two. The
facts are not the same in all cases. We may have discussed what
his duty was in India. It is of course true in a sense that, if the
struggle here succeeds, the solution of the problem in that country
will soon follow. But that certainly does not mean that anybody
should leave that country and come away to India. The rule that
'better is death in the discharge of one's duty' is perfectly true
in this case. You two, therefore, should go on doing the work
which is your dharma at present. It will be enough if you do
not depart from the path of dharma in doing that work.
Devdas has been released. He will spend his time in Delhi
and other places for the present. He will come and see me. He
has kept good health. He paid a visit to Kanti. The latter has
displayed boundless courage. He doesn't leave jail at all. Let
us see how long he keeps it up.
Kishorelal can be said to be a little better. The fever has
not yet wholly left him.
Write to Devdas and Lakshmi. And continue to write to
Ramdas and Nimu regularly. I hope you are getting Harijan.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I wrote this letter a little after 3 a.m. before prayer time in a
town called Tellicherry.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4814
