19. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
September 3, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM,
I have your letter and the questions. You may leave me if
you like-that may happen though I do not wish it to happen.
I, however, will never leave you, for I still want many services
from you. There is a prescription which I always recommend, and
you should never forget it. As soon as we feel the slightest anger
or aversion against a co-worker or think that he has done us in-
justice, we should sink into deep meditation and tell ourselves: 'I
certainly deserve such treatment. The fault is not my co-worker's
but mine. Knowingly or unknowingly, I must have given him some
cause to be angry with me or feel aversion against me.' When
the mind is so persuaded and has calmed down, you should im-
mediately go to the co-worker and ask him what fault he had seen
in you. We should then examine ourselves to see that fault and
overcome it. If we follow this method, we shall always enjoy
peace, feel generous towards the whole world and never feel offen-
ded with anyone.
I am satisfied if the massage has really cured the pain. In such
a matter, one should never deceive oneself. Do not be afraid of a
surgical operation if it becomes necessary.
Of course there was the hand of Fate in the sinking of that
boat, but we can see from it the fear which rules our people. It
also shows how great is the fear of death in us. If the people
had kept their reason to see that the serpent could not have bitten
all of them, anyone of them could have picked it up and thrown
it into the river or even killed it, if he so wished. But where no-
body thinks of others and everybody is seized with fear, the result
is bound to be what happened. The only lesson we have to draw
from this is that we should never have fear of any kind and we
should pray to God to grant us good sense when we unexpectedly
find ourselves in such situations.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7507. Also C.W. 4984. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
11
