31. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
February 9, 1929
CHI. DEVDAS,
I have just now got your two telegrams here at Larkana.
I also got Dr. Ansari's telegram. The telegram arrived while
food was being brought in for me. I took my meal as usual and
kept on working as I ate. Now I sit down to write this. My
programme here will remain as already fixed. This is what I
feel now. Rasik's death certainly pains me, but that is only be-
cause of selfishness. I loved the boy. I had placed high hopes
on him. God will in some mysterious way fulfil through him the
hopes we had of him. But how are we, human beings, to re-
main steadfast in such faith? Our pain at his departure is the
result of our selfishness. As for Rasik he has been freed from
the pains to which the body is subject. I have no doubt that
he is in a better state in the other world, for he was a devotee of
Rama.
You will feel the greatest pain of all, though you may not
show it. What you did is beyond praise. You will have the re-
ward of your services to him. Your fortitude will lead to your
progress. Rasik died through no fault of yours. He went to Delhi
to collect the debt owing to him, and departed when it had been
paid. You did your duty well. God will certainly bless you.
Let me tell you what I feel inwardly. It is of course God's
will that prevails, and human intelligence follows the law of
karma. Man is however entitled to use his reason. Accordingly, it
appears to me that the best remedies are the remedies I or we
employ and are based on nature-cure methods. It seems to me
that both Maganlal and Rasik could perhaps have been saved if
simple remedies had been applied. One may put the same idea
in another way. If Rasik had been destined to live, he would
have been put in such circumstances that only nature-cure methods
would have been used in his treatment. This thought, however,
is no consolation, nor do we seek any. By saying all this, I do
not express regret at having sent him to Delhi or at his being put
under a doctor's treatment. You did what was proper for you
to do, as Brijkishore Babu had done what was proper for him in
respect of Maganlal. We should never grieve over anyone's
death. Dharma lies in doing one's duty, not in making no
mistake at all. But after all, mine is only a conjecture. What
was best Rama alone knows.
Incidentally, I have to go to Delhi on February 17, and
that is exactly as I would have it. I shall be able to see you.
Detain Ba. But let her go if she wishes to. I know you must
be comforting Kanti. I shall expect a full account from you
then. I still have enough attachment to be eager to know from
you about the last days of Rasik's life. Do not disappoint me
in that.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2122
