484. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
GORAKHPORE,
October 8, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I send with this Ayodhyaprasad's letter to me and a copy of
my reply to him. Go through both. I do not follow what he
wants to say. I do not understand what he says about Mathura-
das either. Nor do I understand what his complaint is. Write to
me and explain if you know what it is.
I have gone through Ranchhodbhai's speech. I found in it
nothing worth reproducing. I went through Parnerkar's speech
too. It does not give an account of the progress made by the
goshala, but explains what needs to be done. It is not necessary
to print the speech. A report of this kind should give figures of the
increase in the yield of the cow's milk, the fodder consumed, the
cow's weight, the percentage of fat in milk, the average price of the
cows, the expenditure on maintaining crippled and infirm cattle
and that on maintaining milch cows only, the profit earned from
castrated bulls and the expenditure involved in not castrating the
bulls, a comparison of the prison [sic] cows and the kankareji and
other cows in Gujarat, a comparison of the cows in Gujarat with
cows in Hissar, a comparison of cows with buffaloes, etc. A report
containing such information would be of great value. We ought
to have such a report with us, for we have now started a school and
train students, and also intend to institute certificates in this field
as we have in khadi work. We wish ultimately even to award
degrees. We ought, therefore, to have a report of the kind I have
set out. We see some reports of this kind which have been
published as books and become famous. Ours is an unexplored field
so that all our reports can be of that kind. I expect such reports
from our workers. Show this letter to Parnerkar and Valji.
Surendra, too, may read it.
Were necessary reforms carried out at the time of the Exhibi-
tion? Are the dung and urine of the cattle fully utilized? Has the
uncleanliness to which I had drawn attention been removed now?
I heard a startling thing in Agra. Whereas the hide of one
of our cows weighs about 20 lb., that of a cow in Europe weighs
about 80 lb. I believed till now that we supplied to the whole
world hide for the soles and heels of shoes. I discovered in Agra
that in Europe they always make the soles and heels from the hide
of cows and bulls, and that their hide is stronger than even the
hide of our buffaloes. There may be some exaggeration in this,
but all this is interesting information.
I have not yet read Surendra's report fully. I shall also let
you know the thoughts which occur to me after I have read it.
I return with this Parnerkar's report.
I dictated the paragraphs above at half past five in the morn-
ing in Gorakhpur. I am dictating what follows in Basti. I got
the post sent to this address.
We cannot give to Prabhashankar the bungalow reserved for
the doctor, for the latter may now arrive any day. Moreover,
Ratilal and Prabhashankar are at present on extremely un-
happy terms with each other. The latter has harassed even Dr.
Mehta a good deal. He cannot, therefore, be lodged in the doc-
tor's bungalow. If there were a vacant room in the Ashram, we
would have certainly offered it to him. Write to him, therefore,
and tell him that apart from Dr. Mehta's bungalow there is nothing
else in the Ashram and that a part of the bungalow is occupied
by Manilal Kothari, and the ground floor, which is vacant, was
especially got vacated for Dr. Mehta; add further that all the rooms
in the Ashram are occupied.
My certificate to Budhabhai is not to be treated as gospel
truth. I can state only the impression which I have formed from a
distance; if I imagined anything contrary to that impression or
refused to state, when the occasion demanded, what my impression
was, that would be a blot on my vow of truth. Hence, the certi-
ficate I gave was the only one I could give though in point of fact
it might be understood. I think you should attach more weight to
what Harihar and others, who have come into contact with him,
may have to say. If, therefore, you meet Budhabhai, tell him only
what you think right and feel no hesitation in doing so. You will
thereby have done your duty as a friend and served Budhabhai's
true interests. If he has beaten his wife, he has of course committed
a sin. He has no right at all to beat her. If he does not speak
with her, that also is difficult to understand, though of course
sometimes this can be a form of satyagraha.
I understand what you say about Madhavlal. I have no letter
from him. Ordinarily, we can say that we cannot give him money
for his wife. Madhavlal is slow of understanding, and so we should
take no offence at what he says. If we can tolerate his dullness, he
may even become intelligent. Take him into confidence and
have a talk with him when he is alone. Tell him all that you
think. Having taken him in and let him stay for so long, we
cannot abandon him. He seems to be sincere, and so he cannot
but be of some use. We should find out in what way he can be
used.
It is necessary to take the advice of an experienced engineer
about how to change the course of the river. Such an engineer
can suggest some practical means.
Fever seems to have claimed many victims and harassed them
a good deal.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5452
