201. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 6/10, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter and the other mail. These days I get them
very regularly. I had handed over my packet on Monday for being
posted and I do not understand why you did not get it till
Saturday. In future, you should inspect the postmark on every
packet. It is difficult to understand how a letter posted by you
there reaches me the next day but what I send from here reaches
you after six days.
You need not send me just now the register of hours of work.
It will be quite enough if you send it whenever you observe any-
thing special in the figures, or at the most once a month. Among
other things, I am sure of this, that when the whole thing has
become systematic everybody will do his or her work sincerely and
then nobody will feel any burden. If anybody feels a little wor-
ried in his mind, that also will and must disappear. For a sin-
cere person one thing should be enough. Nobody should under-
take more than what he can cope with and should wish to do less
than what he can. He who attempts to do more than what he is
capable of suffers from pride, he is attached to work and its fruit.
He who does less than what he can is a thief. By maintaining a
register of the hours of work, we can save ourselves from either
mistake, maybe without knowing it. I don't say that we shall
positively save ourselves, for, if we do not help to keep the regis-
ter willingly and with full appreciation of its need, we cannot de-
rive the fullest benefit from it.
Did you carefully read Sitala Sahay's letter? I saw nothing
objectionable in it. I see no anger in it. If what he writes about
Prabhudas is correct, his demand is not unreasonable. But we
can decide this justly only in the manner I have explained, that
is, by examining his expenses. In such matters, examples of
others give us no help. They may serve as a guide, but, when a
person gives us an account of his expenses and we can find no
fault with it, we must pay him what the account justifies. It is
quite possible that such precedents may cause difficulties in future.
But we may hope that, since our motives are sincere, we shall
escape such difficulties.
He who has protected us up to now will protect us even in
future. We shall go on paying as long as we have money. If
we have brought His name into disrepute, He will deprive us even
of what we have. Whom will we pay then? Sitala Sahay says in
his letter that Padma has sent some accounts to you. I suppose
they are all right, are they? I also assume that what Sitala Sahay
writes about Prabhudas's expenses is correct. If, however, the facts
are not as stated by him, it would certainly be necessary to think
more about the matter. My opinion, thus, is based on the assump-
tion that the information given by Sitala Sahay in his letter is
correct. You do perfectly right in putting all the facts of a case
before me. I should go on giving my opinions as long as I can,
so that your burden may be lighter.
Nimu has written a letter to Ramdas which he has sent to me.
She writes in it about having engaged a boy. She believes that
she needs his help, but suspects that you may not have approved
of her action. She also says that you have raised no objection.
Ramdas has left it to me to do what I think proper. I cannot de-
cide in this matter independently. I am writing a letter to Nimu.
Read it and do what you think best. Don't wait for Nimu to speak
to you, but go and meet her yourself and put her mind at rest.
If you can, do save Shashi. If necessary, you may speak
firmly to Ratilal about him.
July 10, 1932
My writing letters has become a serious issue and I do not
know when, if at all, you got the last packet of my letters. Nor
do I know when you will get this. I have sought clarification
about this matter. I cannot say what the outcome will be.
"Neither be glad to get what is pleasant, nor be sad to get what
is unpleasant".
Today's article is about education. Read it carefully and
think over it. If you understand it properly, you will have to
shoulder one more burden, a mental one this time.
Examine
carefully every person in your mind, and consider whether all of
them fully understand the work which they do. Understand and
explain to others the meaning and method of every activity in the
Ashram. If there is any point which you do not understand ask
me. If you question me about anything which I understand, I
will answer your question. Find out whether everybody gets time
to read. You will require some peace of mind to be able to
take up this responsibility. As it is, you have been all the time do-
ing a teacher's work, and so this work will not be new for you.
I have only widened your sphere. However, my method of
teaching is simple. It requires little memorizing to be done. Our
activities concern rural life, and their science, therefore, is not
beyond our capacity. As for literature and similar studies, every-
body may get from the books in the library as much as he can
and impart it to the others. The important thing is development
of intellect and understanding the meaning of our quest of truth.
If that is understood, the rest will follow. Our contentment then
will be boundless. We shall have to make no effort to learn pa-
tience. We shall have secured the key to all knowledge. We shall
wish to know only as much as is necessary for our spiritual pro-
gress and for self-realization.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8238. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
