329. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,
Vaishakha Sud 12, May [13]1, 1927
CHI. MANI,
I have your letter. You both did well to volunteer your services
for patrolling the Ashram at night. I wish you did it to the full
extent of your physical capacity (even if as assistants to some
other person). Fear is a mere figment of our imagination; there
is nothing real about it. It vanishes as a result of facing it often
enough and by the grace of God. When the thieves realize that
even our paid watchman will not beat them up but would suffer
beating at their hands and that the volunteers belong to a diffe-
rent class altogether and are ordinary householders, they will
cease to trouble the Ashram folk. I am sure that someone of you
will employ soul-force some day and win them over by love. But
there is no doubt that this is like placing one's hand in a pit occu-
pied by a snake. Someone will be beaten up or even killed. What
man is there who is not afflicted by disease? Men, women and
children, all fall a victim to it. How often was Radha knocked
down? What happened to Rukhi? How many girls were taken
to the Hospital at Juhu? If we can stand it, why should we not
also take a beating from thieves and others, with courage? This
idea may be strange for those who expect to be protected by the
police but not for us at the Ashram.
I received the slivers prepared by you just as I was spinning
and tried them at once. The thread did not break even once, and
today I have found out a way to determine the strength just by
myself and no sliver has yet given me a thread comparable to that
from you. I have come across no sliver better than yours. Equally
good slivers might have come my way only once or twice before.
But I do not think anybody can make better slivers than yours.
Indeed after once having tried my hand at yours, it may be diffi-
cult to spin with any other. I wish and hope that you will be
first in the first class in writing a good hand and in spinning as well
as carding.
I had a letter from Karachi yesterday. Your appointment
appears to have been delayed on account of Narandas's absence.
So they have asked for a month's time. I wrote that if they really
wanted you, I would wait for a month longer, but they should
do nothing just by way of courtesy or just to get you there, i.e.,
merely to oblige us. I also asked for a reply by wire. I would
like you to go only to a place where you are really wanted; only
this would be seemly. We are in no hurry. Meanwhile you have
to become perfect in every department of your studies.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 60-
