401. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
BIRLA HOUSE, NEW DELHI,
January 16, 1948
CHI. MIRA,
I got your letter yesterday. Evidently when you wrote it,
you had no knowledge of this, my greatest fast. Whether it will
ultimately prove so or not is neither your concern nor mine.
Our concern is the act itself, not the result of the action. The
fast was commenced as usual with a service, part of which was
singing of "When I survey". It was well sung by Sushila.
There were some good friends at the service. The company was
impromptu. No one was invited. I am dictating this imme-
diately after the 3.30 a. m. prayer and while I am taking my
meal such as a fasting man with prescribed food can take. Don't
be shocked. The food consists of 8 ozs. of hot water sipped with
difficulty. You sip it as poison, well knowing that in result it is
nectar. It revives me whenever I take it. Strange to say, this
time I am able to take about 8 meals of this poison-tasting but
nectar-like meal. Yet I claim to be fasting and credulous people
accept it. What a strange world !
I shall watch and see how you can keep two typists con-
stantly at their typewriters. If it is only self-deception and the
typists a fraud on you, you will succumb and fall ill in the
midst of attractive surroundings of your own choice. One man
claims that oil-cakes are easier to make, cheaper in the end,
and yet as effective as compost which requires a fair amount of
technical skill for a kisan.
Your description of Goswami's Goshala is tragic, if true. It
is enough to make one despair of the cow, the mother of pros-
perity, receiving her due in a country accused of cow worship.
There is no swaraj in such a land.
Your describing the Ashram as "Pashulok" is a magnificent
idea. It is poetic. Don't ever write Pashulok Ashram. Ashram-
Pashulok with a dash in between is good. Though now that I am
thinking over it a little more deeply, Pashulok Ashram perhaps
better represents your idea. Since, however, it is your excellent
idea that is to be carried out, your choice is to be final.
1 A hymn by Isaac Watts
430
I see that you are destined for serving the cow and no-
thing else. But I seem to see a vital defect in you. You are
unable to cling to anything finally. You are a gipsy, never
happy unless you are wandering. You will not become an ex-
pert in anything and your mother is also likely to perish in your
lap. The only person and that a woman who really loves the
cow will fail her. Shall I pity you, the cow or me, for I, the
originator of the real idea of serving and saving the cow for
humanity, have never cared or perhaps never had the time to
become even a moderate expert. Satis Babu is better than you
and me. He adopted the idea and has become a fair expert,
in fact the real source of milk among Muslims, not Hindus in
Bengal. It is he who has produced with amazing labour and
concentration the only classic we have on [the] cow. He is a
genius. I bow my head before him. Correspondence with him
will give you something.
Don't rush here because I am fasting. The yajna, as I have
called it, demands that everyone, wherever he or she is, should
perform his or her duty. If an appreciable number do this, I
must survive the ordeal. Trust God and be where you are.
Pursue Goswami.
From the original: C. W. 6532a. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9927
