259. LETTER TO COWASJI JEHANGIR
AS AT SABARMATI,
May 26, 1931
DEAR SIR COWASJI,
You will please forgive me for not having sent you an earlier
reply. I returned to Bardoli only yesterday from Nainital where
and at Simla I was so overwhelmed with local work that I had
no time to frame my reply to you or to Sardar Garda. I am now
sending you a copy of my reply to Sardar Garda which will speak
for itself. I am sending you also a copy of his letter to me. At
best his allegations are vague and even these are really denied
by the people. But the complaint he could legitimately make
could only be about matters happening after his promise to restore
the land. That should be after the receipt of Rao Bahadur Bhim-
bhai's letter or so after the 25th April when we had the first
conversation. If we were to take the 25th April as the date you
will see that there is only one paragraph devoted to the happen-
ings thereafter. It says: "On 28th April Babla people again
scared away our labourers and cartmen that came from my bet.
So also a Rajput family on the 3rd instant. With other threats they
were told that their abodes would be burnt down together with
the inmates."
These allegations I have carefully enquired into and I have
statements on oath made by the people concerned repudiating
them. If, however, this investigation does not satisfy you, I am
quite willing that you should nominate someone on your behalf
who would investigate these two complaints.
As to Bhikhabhai who is said to have refused to take up his
bungalow, I understand that he denies having made the state-
ment ascribed to him. But even if he did not, how could we
interfere in such matters?
With reference to the other complaint in your letter I was
painfully surprised to find this sentence: "I desire to draw your
attention to other cases of harassment of Parsis which have been
brought to my notice." This presupposes that you have taken the
harassment of Sardar Garda for granted and you have generalized
from two incidents yet unproved an indictment, I do not know
against whom, for harassment of Parsis as a class. As a matter of
fact throughout the last 12 years of intense political work the
relations between the Congress and the Parsis have been of the
happiest character. How can there be then any question of
harassment of Parsis?
And even if it can be proved, should
the harassment of the lady whose case you have mentioned affect
Sardar Garda's promise of restoration of land which on his own
showing he bought for a song. I am however anxious to give
you all the satisfaction I can that there is no desire whatsoever on
the part of Congress organizations to harass Parsis. In the lady's
case there is an impeachment of Syt. Bharucha who has investi-
gated the matter. In view of the fact that there are two contrary
allegations by two Parsis of position, I can only ask you to name
some person who would make the investigation and report to you.
Pending receipt of your letter on this point, I am staying any
further investigation into the lady's complaint.
Yours sincerely,
Encls. 2
SIR COWASJI JEHANGIR
READYMONEY MANSION
CHURCHGATE STREET
FORT, BOMBAY
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-C, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
