255. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
June 21, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter of 18th came into my hands this morning.
I
have given up the milk treatment as it is called. But I am taking,
after my own fashion, four lb. of milk at intervals of three hours
commencing from six o'clock and juicy fruits (oranges, grapes, and
pomegranate juice). This is likely to suit me better for the time
being. My weight has gone up to 93¾ lb. It is a good increase,
and I am allowed to walk a few steps daily, three or four times.
I had, for the first time after six weeks, a tub-bath. It was very
refreshing. So you see that there is nothing to worry about so
far as my health is concerned. In the milk treatment, so called,
and in accordance with my height I should be able to take 12
lb. of milk per day without discomfort. It is a special method
and in many cases it is very efficacious. In my case too, ultimately
it was expected to succeed, but I did not want to engage myself
in arguing over it, and therefore, for the moment I have dropped
it. You will be surprised to know that Kakasaheb is undergoing
that treatment and is now taking 10 lb. per day and has to come
up to 12 lb. His weight has gone up to 120 lb. Brijkrishna,
who has been suffering, as you know, for years from habitual cons-
tipation, is also undergoing that treatment. He is taking 12
lb. per day without any difficulty in quantities of 1 lb. per hour.
It is a well-tried method. The central point of this method is
that whilst you are taking the milk treatment you have got to lie
in bed and take perfect rest. You can take plenty of exercise in
the morning before commencing the milk feed.
Nothing is certain as to where Devdas is to stay in future or
what he is to do. It is enough that both he and Lakshmi are very
happy and so is Rajaji, who is both father and mother to his
children. He loves them, and he would be satisfied to lose him-
self in them if he had no other call upon his time. Prabhudas's
turn comes next. It is likely that he will be married to a girl who is
just now living in the Ashram. She belongs to United Provinces.
But nothing is yet certain. Ramdas has gone to Sabarmati and
with his wife he will be presently going to Wardha. Verrier con-
tinues to suffer from one thing or another. He is now ready
for an operation for hernia from which he has been suffering for a
long time. As a matter of fact the operation seems to me to be
overdue. Radha is still lingering at Deolali where Rukhi has
given birth to another son. She is having her treatment at Deolali.
Keshu is staying there still uncertain as to what he is to do.
Chhotalal is now free from his eczema. Balkrishna is just as weak as
before. He too is in Wardha. Santibehn is here with Om for
reasons of health. She is not keeping well. Jamnalalji has just left
for Wardha in connection with an old business case. His ear trouble
is just now under control, but only under control. It has made
him very weak. He becomes easily fatigued both in body and
mind. N. seems to be shaping well. Duncan, of course, is
quite happy and evidently retaining his health. It is not so with
N. She has rash and boils. I think I have given you a fairly
full budget of family news. I dare say I have forgotten many
names, and the little ailments from which the large family is
suffering, but the sample I have given you tells its own tale.
The news about your own health is cheerful. I wish and hope
that you will now continue to improve steadily without interrup-
tion. You will not over-tax yourself by insisting upon going
through the daily programme. Take it easily and go through
whatever you can without difficulty or strain. Then you will be
quite all right.
What you say about boys and girls learning astronomy and
the like is of course very true.
Did I tell you that Prabhavati is with me and is standing by
my bedside whilst I am writing this?
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6281. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9747
