33. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
[About September 28, 1919]
CHI. RAMDAS,
I have your fine letter concerning Moti Marad. I see that you examine
everything very closely and also that you have started taking interest in them
all. Did you know that I had gone to Moti Marad? Devchandbhai is an old
man now. One cannot convince old people with arguments. They will learn
only from experience, and that is as it should be. He will learn. . .2 If you
succeed in your work, that will be an object lesson to others. It would not be
very easy to find a man of transparent sincerity like Devchandbhai. You may
certainly tell him courteously what you think if it is necessary to tell him.
Harilal had called on me. His affairs are getting worse. He goes about begging
everywhere. He has even wired to Manilal for money. It was he who told me
to write to the elderly aunt 3 . But now he is not at all willing to keep her
with him. He says he has no money to do that. He does not like even Ba to
be with him. He has called on me only once. 4
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1 As suggested in the source. It is also substantiated by reference to Gandhiji's
visit to Moti Marad which he visited on September 27, 1919.
2 The rest of the sentence is illegible.
3 Probably Gandhiji's elder sister, Raliyatbehn
4 The letter is incomplete.
33-A. LETTER TO MAZHARUL HAQUE
LABURNAM ROAD,
GRAMDEVI, BOMBAY,
March 18, 1920
DEAR SHRI HAQUE,
Because of my active participation in Congress work last year, I am be-
ing asked that I should take more interest and join this organization. This
demand is from those people with whom I got the opportunity to work, though
I had nothing to do with their organization. They say that I should join India
Home Rule League. I have told them that at this stage of my life, when I have
developed a firm viewpoint, I can join an organization only if I can influence
their viewpoint rather than get influenced myself. It does not mean that I do
not have an open mind to accept new ideas. I only want to emphasise the fact
that a fresh idea, with some extraordinary relevance alone can impress me
now. I want to place before my friends, my certain and firm views on the
following subjects.
(1) If we want to build a better nation, the virtue of great honesty should
constitute the polity of the country. Right now, we have to admit, we are not
sure and certain in choosing the right path to adopt the principle of truth.
(2) Swadeshi should be our goal. It should be demanded from the mem-
bers of the council that they take a pledge to save the cottage-industry,
particularly the cloth-industry.
(3) Hindustani, i.e., a blend of Hindi and Urdu, should be accepted as the
national language for future use. So, the future members of the councils will
take a pledge that till the use of English is stopped in correspondence, etc., at
the national level, Hindustani should be used in the Imperial Council and
regional languages should be used in the Provincial Councils. They should
resolve that Hindustani would be implemented as the compulsory co-language
in middle schools with freedom to choose either the Devanagari or the Urdu
script. English language will be accepted in the field of administrative matters,
diplomacy, and international trade.
(4) Whenever a chance presents itself, the principle of re-division of
provinces on the basis of language should be accepted.
(5) From the political and religious viewpoint, the quintessence of the
Hindu-Muslim unity should be made an article of unfailing faith. In fact, this
will be a viewpoint of mutual help, mutual tolerance and the feeling of mutual
sharing of suffering by all. This will include the programme of co-operation
on the question of Khilafat, leaving behind the propaganda of unity through
the programmes of inter-caste marriage and inter-dining. During discussion
with my friends, I also told them that I neither want the approval of my
principle of civil-disobedience nor am I concerned with any party. But I would
1 The letter has been translated from Hindi. The original letter was in English
which is not available.
32
LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE AND PRABHUDAS GANDHI
33
like to make the League a non-party organization which would help all honest
persons. According to me, the League cannot be an anti-Congress organization
but should work in the interest of the Congress as it is doing at present.
Keeping in view my capabilities and my helplessness, do you suggest that
I should join Home Rule League?
Yours,
M.K. GANDHI
[From Hindi]
Ashiyana Ki Awaz, pp. 40-41
