282. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
LAHORE,
November 12, 1919
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letters. Owing to my wanderings in the Punjab, I have
not been able to write to you.
In my opinion, your attitude regarding the S.A. affairs and the
committee is quite correct. I shall speak to Dr. Mehta about it when
he returns. You may have my name if it is of any use to your committee.
I am asking Chhotalal to send you copies of my letters to Sir George
Barnes. I had a long interview with him yesterday. I met also Sir
Benjamin Robertson.
Regarding Mrs. Sorabji, she has been hasty and I have been
continuously writing to her. Both Palanji and Rustomji have asked me
not to raise any subscriptions. If Palanji does not assist, she can easily
be assisted. However, I shall ask Jehangir to pay what you have sent.
Why did you not send the money directly to me in July ? Having sent
it to Jehangir, why did you not even advise me ?
The High Court has issued a rule nisi to show cause why I should
not be committed for contempt for the publication of the Ahmedabad
judge's letter to the Registrar regarding the satyagrahi lawyers. They
asked me to apologize. I cannot see my way to do [ing] so. You need
not therefore be surprised if you find me imprisoned.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National Archives
of India
1 Vide also Vol. XVI, p. 510.
272
283.
LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
M. K. GANDHI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 27, 1920
MY DEAR HENRY,
You will not I hope consider that I have been less attentive to
you than I should be because of the very great irregularity in my
correspondence. The fact is I have no time. I simply write when and
where I must.
Your latest letter fills me with sorrow. I do not know how far
you did right in writing as you have done to Babu Surendranath. You
know him better perhaps than I do. I shall therefore say nothing more
about it. I do not know that I should agree with you in your categorical
description of Mr. Samarth. He is a man with strong views. I would
even call him dense. But holding strong views myself I too run the
risk of having that adjective applied to me. So I remain satisfied by
simply saying that Mr. Samarth's ways are not my ways. And that
attitude of detachment always leaves me free to try to win him over
to my side. Lately, that is, during my five years' stay in India, I have
found the truth of the position abundantly illustrated. If we get enraged
against a person, we render ourselves more or less unfit to serve him.
Now for the Khilafat. I do not mind your differing from me so
violently as you do. You accuse me of narrowness because of my
being cooped up in India and not knowing anything of the new life
in Europe. I can only say that the new life in Europe appears to me
to be abhorrent for its total disregard of sanctity of promises and of
its idolatrous worship of brute force and money. Being in the thick
of it, you are unable to feel the foul stench that modern Europe is
filling the world with. I who stand outside it know what it means. But
here again I will not argue with you. I certainly feel sorry that I cannot
have your co-operation on this very important question and if I could
but see you face to face I would certainly endeavour to convert you
to my view.
On the British Guiana Scheme, we are at one. There is no danger
of my falling into the trap. On South Africa, Fiji and all colonial affairs
we agree. We have, therefore sufficient in common to work upon.
1 N. M. Samarth, a member of the 1914 Congress Deputation to England
273
Andrews returns here on the 2nd April. East Africa for me seems
to be the storm centre because the issues have not yet become
crystallized. I hope therefore you will concentrate upon East Africa.
Did I acknowledge the two books from Millie ? I am ashamed
to say that I have not read them. I have no time. Please tell me
something about Maud, Sally, Ceilia. And let me know how my bed-
fellow Waldo and Leon are doing.
I am dictating this at Sinhgarh where I have come for four day's
solitude. Dr. Mehta, Mahadev, his wife and others whom you do not
know are with me. Mrs. Saraladevi Chaudhuri, your one-time hostess
in Lahore, is also with me.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
