466. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
February 19, 1933
THE SECRETARY
TO
HOME DEPARTMENT
DELHI
DEAR SIR,
I thank you for the reply to my letter addressed to the
Private Secretary to the Viceroy dated the 1st instant. There
are two things about which I would like to make brief observations.
The Government have assumed without just cause that
"education and the provision of the normal facilities of life" are
not considered by me as the vital part of the Resolution referred
to therein. It was wholly irrelevant to the purpose of my letter
to the Private Secretary to the Viceroy to state what was being done
by me or through me in connection with these things. Indeed
I have shown in my writings being published in the course of the
controversy that education and the like were being prosecuted
with all the vigour possible and that the pace would be quadrupled
by the temples being opened to the Harijans.
As to the two measures now before the legislature, I may be
permitted to point out that they are not intended to affect
"religious customs and usages of the Hindu community". They
are specially designed to leave that question to the community
itself. The law as it stands makes impossible the operation of the
Hindu mind on certain religious customs and usages, and the
measures are designed to release the Hindu mind from those fetters.
I would submit that it is the duty of the Government, which is
pledged to neutrality in religious matters, to free the reformers
from the shackles of, not of religious custom, but of the law.
For, had it not been for the law, it would have been open to the
trustees, with the consent of the temple-goers, to change the
custom. Nor may it be forgotten that the Bills have come before
the legislature as a result of the formation of a very strong body
of public opinion in favour of the change of custom.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 50/II/33, p. 40.
Courtesy:
National Archives of India. Also G.N. 7587
