28. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
MOTIHARI,
New Year's Day, 1974 [November 15, 1917]
What shall I give you on this auspicious day? I am trying
to give you what you, I and many others lack. If one has that,
one has everything. Only he who has it can give it. If that is
the truth, what can I give? However, we may strive for it together.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove moun-
tains, and have not charity, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give
my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.
Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth
not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity,
but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth
all things, endureth all things.
Charity never faileth; but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away.
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I
was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now
we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part;
but then shall I know even as also I am known.
And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of
these is charity.
Read this, meditate on it and read it again. Read it in English
and translate it into Hindi. Strain every nerve to have at least
a brief glimpse of love. Mira 1 had felt the stab of this dagger of
love, deep in her heart. If we could but get hold of this dagger
and get also the strength to stab ourselves with it, we could shake
the world. The thing is there in me, and yet I feel its lack every
moment. There is much that is wanting. Sometimes, I behave
like a half-filled pot. Only yesterday, I had no time to spare for
people who wanted, in their love, to detain me. I felt sore over
this all the time. This is no sign of love. That is just the way a
half-filled pot spills over. May the New Year bring you prosperity.
It is my wish, and my only blessing, that you may grow in your
physical, mental and spiritual powers and dedicate them all, with
love, to India.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
