330. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
September 7, 1936
CHI. KANTI,
I have been thinking of you every day, only my indifferent
health would not let me write to you. But I cannot postpone
writing today. I have no fever. I have written for Harijan, so
why should I not write to you? I have your letter. I was cert-
ainly pained beyond measure.
The edifice of my trust collapsed
in a moment. You suddenly drifted away from me. Ba's grief
is greater than mine; and poor A.'s the greatest. You have justified
the epithets I gave you. You are a tyrant, you are trea-
cherous. You stole A.'s heart and then you spurned her. Can
you think of an act of greater cruelty? In your curriculum you
will have occasions to drive needles into living beings and dissect
them. Remember this letter then. You have started your lessons
by torturing a living human being. But I am not at all angry at
your strange sacrifice. What could you do? How far can you get
over your nature? You have been carried away by the current of
the prevailing atmosphere as well as by your own mental make-
up. This happens more or less to everyone. May you be blessed.
One thing hurt me very much. In the evening you came to me
with a certain resolve. Next day you changed it altogether.
You did not even think it necessary to discuss it with me. What
kind of conduct is this? Do you regard your own word as ab-
solutely worthless? It was a severe blow. You made me cry so
much. You could have desisted from this act without difficulty.
Well, one cannot collect spilt water. It will be enough if you learn
to value your own word after this regrettable episode. Remember
knowledge without a moral basis has no worth whatsoever. It is
like a two-pice bit of copper coated with mercury to look like a
rupee.
Take good care of your health. Don't reduce yourself to a
skeleton by overwork. Don't exhaust your brain. I have no
doubt that you will pass all the tests.
Write to me regularly.
I am still in the hospital. The fever may be said to have
gone. Mirabehn's bed is by my side. She is still running a
temperature. The third patient is Ba who is suffering from cough.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 10707. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
