585. LETTER TO RELATIVES OF DARBARI SADHU
May 25, 1932
Please tell Darbari that there was no need for him to give
up the kasti and sadra 2 , and that it would be proper for him to
resume them as soon as he returned home. There is no sin in
wearing them, nor is it superstitious to do so. By wearing them
he does no harm to anybody, but by not wearing them he gives
pain to other Parsis. It does not befit a servant of the people to
give pain to anybody needlessly, and moreover such behaviour
is a violation of ahimsa. It should be enough if one does not at-
tach undue importance to these things. One should not idolize
them, and he does not do that. The two things are only outward
signs of one's being a Parsi, and I do not think it desirable from
any point of view to discard them. I have asked Dahyabhai to
bring for him books containing the teachings of Zoroaster.
I
have read Zoroaster's sayings. I read a translation of the Vendidad
many years ago. The work is rich in ethical teaching. Since
Zoroastrianism is a very old faith, it is possible that all its scrip-
tures have not survived and that those which are extant do not
contain spiritual knowledge of the same order as the Upanishads
and other works do. Darbari should read the extant works
and reflect over them. But even today it is accepted that Zoroa-
ster's teaching is based on that of the Vedas. As far as I remem-
ber, the translator of the Vendidad has pointed out a close similarity
between Zend and Sanskrit. It is, therefore, in no way derogatory
to Zoroastrianism or to the self-respect of the Parsi community to
fill in the deficiencies which may be observed in the Parsi scrip-
tures with the help of the Vedas and the Upanishads. In fact, it is
our right, even our duty, while adhering to our own religion, to
accept from other religions anything which specially appeals to us.
It is fanaticism to think that we cannot adopt anything from
other religions, and Darbari and all of us have grown out of it.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 173
