551. LETTER TO MAHARAJA OF NABHA
AS AT THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
January 1, 1927
DEAR FRIEND 2 ,
I was distressed to find that a resolution was brought up be-
fore the Congress in connection with yourself. I understood also
1 The addressee received this on December 22. The silence day, i.e.,
the Monday, prior to this date, fell on December 20.
2 Ripudamansing Malavendra Bahadur, deposed ruler of Nabha
3 At the Gauhati session of the Congress on December 27, 1926, a
resolution was moved regarding the addressee's restoration; vide Vol. XXXII,
p.468; background information, vide also Vol. XXIII, pp. 218-20 and 230-.
404
that the resolution was brought at your desire and instance.
When it was first brought to my notice, I told Sardar Sardul
Singh that it would be injurious to press the resolution. I told
him that even whilst I was ailing in Poona I had studied your
Highness's papers and I was satisfied that yours was not a case
for public agitation and that if any relief was to be expected,
it was to be had only through proper diplomatic channels which
really do not admit of public agitation. I told Sardar Sardul Singh
further that it would be wrong for the Congress to be identified
with the agitation and it would be harmful to your own cause.
Nevertheless, in the absence of Pundit Motilalji and myself, the
resolution was brought up before the Subjects Committee which,
in my opinion unthinkingly and hastily, adopted it. The following
morning I was informed of the event. Pundit Motilalji was
equally distressed with me to find that the resolution was passed.
And it was only then that I heard that Pundit Motilalji was your
legal adviser. As a lawyer of some experience I think that a
client does grave injury to his cause who behind the back of his
legal adviser adopts means of redressing the wrong which he en-
trusted to a chosen adviser. I further learn that you were so
impatient to be reinstalled that you were paying heavy sums to
all sorts of men who at all held out hope of securing relief for
you. As a friend and servant of India and therefore of your
Highness, I have no hesitation in saying that if you have been
paying people in the manner described to me, you are but
injuring your cause and your reputation. I think that you could
restrain all your friends, however well-meaning they may be
from carrying on public agitation such as ventilating your case be-
fore the Congress, that you should be true to your legal adviser
and should do nothing behind his back, and that if you have a
good case, you will get relief only through proper and clean diplo-
matic channels. Lastly, I repeat what I have said to the Sikh
friends who, I expect, saw me on your behalf and who were
hurt because I had intervened and persuaded the Subjects Com-
mittee to reconsider and reverse its decision. If they thought I
had not properly studied the case or there were any documents
which had not been shown to me by the Sikh deputation that had
seen me at the Sassoon Hospital2, I would be prepared patiently to
go through the case and give my opinion. You must have seen
that the Subjects Committee has referred the case to the Working
Committee for examination, if the matter is brought before it on
your behalf, and for confidential report.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
HIS HIGHNESS THE MAHARAJA OF NABHA
DEHRADUN
From a copy: C.W. 10704. Courtesy: Jamia Millia Library
