614. LETTER TO BHUDEB MUKERJI
Rewritten
November 10, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
Though you have absolved me from having to write to you
in reply to your letter, I must not avail myself of your kind-
ness. You have evidently ascribed to the workers against un-
touchability much more than they have themselves claimed. No
one has ever thought of destroying varnashrama dharma. And
you are wholly wrong in thinking that the movement is carried
on by or is confined to the English speaking people. It is a mass
movement in which even utterly illiterate men and women are
taking part with religious zeal, and are you sure that varna-
dharma and Ashrama dharma are being observed to any apprecia-
ble degree by even those who regard themselves as orthodox?
Again I do not know what you wish to convey by the expression
"levelling", and you write of forcible levelling. I do not know that
anybody has used force to level down anybody else, whatever the
latter expression may mean. And you are surely libelling the
untouchables when you ascribe to them vices from which the
1& Illegible in the source
3 An ex-lecturer of Calcutta University; he had written to Gandhiji on
October 30 (S.N. 18596).
392
touchables, you evidently claim, are free. Not all the untoucha-
bles trade in toddy or liquor dealing, and what is worse—drink-
ing or selling intoxicating liquors? Have you any personal expe-
rience of the private life of untouchables? Do you consider them
to be guilty of the hideous immorality of the lives of many touch-
ables who disgrace themselves and Hinduism? And who is
responsible for whatever is bad about untouchables? I refrain
from saying more. From your letter-head I see that you are your-
self a distinguished product of English learning and have obtained an
upadhi for your knowledge of Sankhya and Vedanta. I have never
seen anything in either Sankhya or Vedanta that teaches a man to
hold in contempt his fellow-beings as you seem to do in almost
every line of your letter. And my grief is enhanced by my strong
suspicion that you have never cared to study the lives of those un-
fortunate fellow-Hindus whom you and I and other Hindus who
have arrogated superiority for themselves have ground down to
dust. I invite you to read the signs of the times and join me
in thinking that purification of Hinduism will not come through
arrogance and slander of innocent people.
Yours sincerely,
BHUDEB MUKERJI
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 18609
