366. LETTER TO ANNIE BESANT
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 13, 1905
MRS. ANNIE BESANT
CENTRAL HINDU COLLEGE
BENARES CITY
DEAR MADAM,
The Managers of the International Printing Press have sent me your
letter to them regarding the reprint of your Bhagawad Gita. The respon-
sibility for the advice, as to the reprint and inclusion of the portrait, must
rest entirely on my shoulders. I know that ordinarily it would not be
considered a proper thing to reprint a book without the author's permis-
sion. A gentleman offered to have a translation of the Bhagawad Gita
printed for distribution among Hindu boys and others if the Managers
printed it at cost price. He was also in a hurry. Reprint of your trans-
lation was suggested. The matter was referred to me and, after much
careful thought, as there was no time left for reference to you, I advised
that your translation might be reprinted for circulation in South Africa.
I felt that the motive of the management was pure, and that when the
circumstances, under which the edition was published, were brought to
your notice, you would overlook any apparent impropriety. Simultane-
ously with the publication, a letter, explaining the whole of the circum-
stances, was sent to you over the signature of the Manager and Proprietor.
It seems to have miscarried. We were all wondering why there was no
letter from you, either of disapproval or approval. Your letter of the
27th March, however, explains the absence of any previous communication
from you. As to the portrait, I can only say that, if a mistake has been
committed, it has arisen from excessive reverence for yourself. When I
suggested the inclusion of the portrait, I had in my mind the interpreta-
tion that was likely to be placed upon the act by some people, but I again
felt that you would not resent the indiscretion, if such it was, when you
came to know that a large number of the copies went to the Indian youths.
Rightly or wrongly, as you are aware, publication or printing of such
portraits in sacred works is not uncommon in India. Only 1,000 copies
were printed. Of these, there are perhaps not more than 200 left, and
these are being distributed or sold now probably at the rate of 5 per
month, and then only among real inquirers.
I have now placed the whole position before you, and it remains
for me to express my deep regret for the offence done to your feelings,
and to apologise for it. If you consider that any public statement is neces-
sary, or complete withdrawal of the book from further circulation, or simple
taking out of the portrait is necessary, your wishes shall be carried out.
I remain,
Dear Madam,
Your obedient servant,
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4238.
