501. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 10, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
I am writing this letter from the village Chandanpur, some
ten miles from Puri.
I am sure you will like the idea of my
walking tour.
I had had it in mind for a long time but the feel-
ing was never so strong as now. Buxar and Deoghar would
appear to have contributed much towards it. There is no doubt
that a scholar like Panchanan Tarkaratna was also involved in
the Deoghar incident. How can such darkness be dispelled by travel-
ling by train? The very idea of collecting funds has left my mind.
This work can hardly be accomplished by money. I find that the
change of heart can be brought about more by touring on foot.
Now I would like to confine my tour to Utkal if I can persuade
the co-workers in other provinces to accept it. I would not like
to go even to Patna.
You must have agreed with my opinion about "National Call".
Sahni has addressed a long letter to Rajendrababu assuring that
he would act in accordance with the wishes of the latter or of
myself. You will have received Rajendrababu's letter.
Ansari
too fully concurred.
I have gone through your prosperity plan. The idea is good.
But I do not find it as attractive as your other schemes. It con-
tains much material on the necessity of a plan but it is not a plan.
A plan should be so devised that it can be put into effect by the
Government and the people right from today.
That they may
not implement it is another matter. Such a plan is not beyond
you. Think it over and if possible do something on these lines.
In my view charkha should be at the centre of it. If you do not
think so, you should produce the arguments against. It should not
be left hanging in mid air. Crores of rupees will be saved at one
stroke if Government, i.e., State-aid, is forthcoming. It is not neces-
sary that all planning should be on the Western pattern.
You
know that I hold strong views on the subject. These have become
strengthened. You can see that people are becoming lethargic in
the absence of the charkha. Our cattle have become a liability
owing to our ignorance of animal husbandry. India can beat any
other country in prosperity by the study and practice of the
charkha and animal husbandry and by solving the problem of
small holdings. We shall discuss this when we meet.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I hope you are well.
If you find it difficult to read my
handwriting I can write in English, i.e., have the letters typed.
From the Hindi: C.W. 7959. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
