149. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
November 29, 1928
I have your cable redirected to me from Sabarmati. It was
received on the 26th. At first I found it difficult to understand
it. I thought you did not know anything about Lalaji's death.
But then I saw that you had alarming telegrams about Lalaji's
death being due to the injuries received. My own opinion is that
the physical injury was not serious, though, having been received
in the region of the heart, it might have proved fatal. And the
injuries would have been very serious had it not been for the inter-
vention of friends who surrounded him bravely and received
the blows themselves. But there is no doubt that Lalaji receiv-
ed a nervous shock from which he never completely recovered.
All his writings, all his speeches after the incident are eloquent
proof of my statement. Government's indifference and elaborate
statement summarily dismissing Lalaji's challenge ignoring even
Lalaji's name added fuel to the fire that was raging in his breast.
He did not feel so much the personal wrong as the wrong done
through him to the whole nation. The prostration of the people
made the insult all the more galling. You will see in the pages
of Young India the appeal issued for a national Memorial for
Lalaji. Sheth Ghanshyamdas Birla has started it with a hand-
some donation of Rs. 15,000. I am hoping that the appeal will
meet with generous response.
I am in Wardha at least up to the 20th December. I shall have
to be in Calcutta for a few days. Then I want to go back to
Sabarmati. I have not the courage yet to bury myself there.
Somehow or other I feel that I must go out for a while and then
there is the often postponed European visit. If you have altered
your views and think that I should not visit Europe, you will
cable so. Your negative decision would be final for me. If you
mean yes, you need not cable, because there may be many things
in spite of my wish to go to Europe that may prevent me. The
going therefore will take its own course.
I enclose herewith copy of a letter received from the Mac-
millan Company. Having got the copyright, they evidently want
the pound of flesh. I wish I had not entered into this. I entered
into it because of Rev. Holmes. But it is all right. Perhaps
they will give the permission to you. I shouldn't mind if they
would only publish the Autobiography in volumes. I have no
notion when the whole thing will be finished, even though I
am omitting many important events and trying to hurry on
to the Non-co-operation days.
I want to break off after the
Special Session at Calcutta, because the events are too fresh and
there are so many contemporaries whom I must describe, if I
am to write further. I feel too that it would be advisable for me
to stop at that stage for thenceforward my life has been too
public. Therefore there is no need for further elucidation. And
then of course there is Young India, a clear mirror through which
anybody who cares can look at me.
Mahadev I had to leave at Bardoli this time because of the
Bardoli Inquiry which is getting on quite nicely.
I hope you are doing quite well.
I have received your article though belated on Gopabandhu
Babu. You will of course send me your reminiscences of Lalaji.
I have your correction about Miss Mayo. It will go in the
forthcoming issue of Young India.
Bristol Times cutting is shocking, but such is modern journal-
ism and such is also the notion about truth of fliers through the
air!
C. F. ANDREWS, ESQ.
112 GOWER STREET, LONDON W.C. 1
From a photostat: S.N. 15099
