88. LETTER TO REVENUE SECRETARY
MOTIHARI,
January 24, 1918
TO
THE SECRETARY TO
REVENUE DEPARTMENT
THE GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA
The Hon'ble Rai Bahadur Purnendu Narayan Sinha has sup-
plied me with the papers given to him about the Champaran Agra-
rian Bill. I note therein a memorandum submitted by the Champa-
ran members of the Bihar Planters' Association, as also one from
the managers of the Sirnie Concern. These memoranda as also
certain other papers call for a reply for the consideration of the
Select Committee.
Before, however, offering my observations I wish to submit
that, if it is at all the intention of the Government to make mate-
rial alterations in the Bill, a representative on behalf of the raiyats
should be appointed to the Council and should also be on the Select
Committee. And I feel that nobody is so capable of sufficiently
representing these interests as Babu Brajkishore Prasad or myself,
and I hope my submission will receive from the Government the
attention it deserves.
In considering the provisions of the Bill, it is, in my humble
opinion, of paramount importance for all concerned to remember
that the Government have proclaimed to the raiyats their decision
upon the Committee's recommendations. It is respectfully sug-
gested that the Bill is in fulfilment of the assurance issued to the
raiyats in the said proclamation. The Bill, therefore, does not
admit of any alteration in any material respect. As it is, owing to
the acrimonious correspondence going on in the Press and all sorts
of rumours set afloat by interested parties, the raiyats are becoming
restive. Bis dat qui cito dat applies in the present instance with pecu-
liar force. Any undue delay in passing the Bill may spell disaster. I,
therefore, urge that the Bill should be placed on the Statute-book
of the province as expeditiously as possible.
Coming to the examination of the papers in question, I shall
first take the Champaran Planters' memorandum. Generally speak-
ing, it is a paper containing a series of misrepresentations completely
disentitling it to any weight being attached to it. The memorandum
states that the Agrarian Committee was "admittedly appointed to
allay an artificial agitation". The fact is that it was appointed
in answer to the agitation set up by the planters in expectation of the
raiyats' agitation being thereby stopped or suppressed. I cite in sup-
port the following extract from the Pioneer, the leading organ of
Anglo-Indian opinion in the country. In its issue of about the
middle of May 1917, it said:
It appears to us that the Government of Bihar and Orissa would do well
forthwith to appoint a commission to investigate the differences which exist
between the planters and the raiyats in the Indigo districts. It is difficult
to see what good can come of Mr. Gandhi's investigations. But an enquiry
conducted with strict impartiality by a commission containing possibly
a non-official element, would give both sides a fair opportunity of stating
their case, and ought to result in a lasting peace.
And by the beginning of June the Government of Bihar and
Orissa decided to appoint the Champaran Agrarian Committee.
On the 8th of June, 1917, the Secretary of the European
Association addressed a letter to the Chief Secretary to the
Government of Bihar and Orissa saying:
My Council observe with great satisfaction the decision of your
Government to appoint a Committee to enquire and investigate into the
relations between landlords and tenants in the Province of Bihar and
Orissa.
The memorandum says that the raiyats' agitation was "arti-
ficial" and organized outside Champaran. The fact is that it was
and has been solely confined to Champaran and an agitation in
which large masses of men took part could hardly be called an
"artificial agitation". The memorandum says "the agitation was
in no way the consequence of any widespread grievances". The
Government's own finding and the voluminous papers produced
before the Committee by the Government completely contradict
this statement.
It would hardly be dignified for me to notice the many un-
called for and groundless aspersions cast upon the Agrarian Com-
mittee.
I will now take up the various amendments to the provisions
of the Bill proposed by the Champaran planters in the memo-
randum.
AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 3, CLAUSE (1): Nothing perhaps can
surpass in recklessness the statement made in the memorandum
that the Bill
proposes to abolish without compensation and for no adequate reason a
system (tinkathia) which has been in existence for over a hundred years.
Such a statement is made in face of the fact that the Bill is design-
ed to give partial and, in my opinion, inadequate relief from the
extortionate compensation taken by the planter for ending a sys-
tem when it had ceased to become a paying proposition to them.
One planter has even made a boast in the Press of the fact that
he has taken Rs. 3,20,000 from his raiyats as tawan and has made
addition to his rent-roll of an annual income of Rs. 52,000 by tak-
ing sharahbeshi . And there are several such planters.
The whole of the argument advanced in the memorandum
about the khushki system simply shows that the signatories desire a
modified revival of tinkathia under the name of khushki. By khushki
I understand a contract voluntarily entered into by the raiyat to
supply a particular produce to his landlord for a fair price to be
mutually agreed upon. Any clause in the contract binding the
raiyat to grow a particular crop on the whole or a portion of his
land or in a particular plot even selected by himself would imme-
diately rob it of the voluntary nature, and the raiyat is deprived of
the right to use his land as he chooses. Such a clause would contra-
vene the provisions of Section 23 read with Section 178 (3) (b) of
the Bengal Tenancy Act. The system of advances has in the past
operated as a bait and as a snare. A khushki contract should
have nothing to do with the land of the raiyat. It should only pro-
vide for the delivery by the raiyat to the planter of so much of
indigo by weight at a rate mutually agreed upon. The raiyat may
produce the indigo on his own land or purchase it from others or
get it from any other source. Once his land is brought in the con-
tract, the inevitable result will be that the same sense of obligation
with which the growing of indigo has up to now been connected
and which it is the desire of the Agrarian Committee and of the
Government to remove, in the interest of the future peace of the
district, will gradually creep in the mind of the raiyat and will in
time overpower him. It might be mentioned that the prime con-
cern of the Legislature is not so much the prosperity or even the
existence of an industry as the welfare of the raiyats. If the raiyat
is to be freed entirely from the baneful effects of tinkathia, the
khushki system must (a) leave him free to obtain the particular crop
he undertakes to supply where he likes and how he likes, his
obligation being limited to supply the quantity agreed upon;
(b) make the period of khushki contracts as short as possible;
and (c) give him the market rate of the produce supplied by
him.
The amendments (b) and (c) to Section 3(1) proposed in the
memorandum, as they fail to satisfy the tests set forth above, are
wholly unacceptable from the raiyats' standpoint.
Coming to the amendment (a) to Section 3(1) proposed in the
memorandum extending the period of termination of tinkathia, whe-
ther as an incident of tenancy or whether arising from sattas or
agreements, to 1920, it is a most dangerous proposition and in breach
of the undertaking of the three principal concerns referred to
in the Committee's report. The Committee's recommendation that
it should stand abolished as from October 1917 is the one recom-
mendation which is already being acted upon. Acceptance, now,
of the proposal of the Champaran planters who have signed the
memorandum, would reopen the sore and give rise to unthinkable
result[s]. The proposal is designed virtually to nullify the effects of
the Committee's report and the Government proclamation based
thereon. The chief reason for continuing the system is said
to be that planters have already got seed and made arrangements
for the future growing of indigo. It must not, however, be forgotten
that khushki is at their disposal and they can make use of the seed,
machinery and everything under it. It is true that real khushki
will not give them that hold on the raiyats which the sattas do and
will not give them the exorbitant profits, too, that they have hither-
to received. But they never had a right in equity to any such one-
sided advantages. Consider [it] how we may, it is difficult to
find a proper justification for continuing the system.
As to amendment (d) to Section 3(1) which seeks to continue
the obligation until advances are repaid, I am sorry to find that
even the Board of Revenue has fallen into the trap. A moment's
thought will show that such a continuance may even lead to endless
continuation of the obligation, to harassments and to [a] crop of law
suits. There will be nothing to prevent a planter from never asking
a raiyat for a refund of the advance and thus an ignorant raiyat may
for ever remain in serfdom. I hope it will not be contended that
the planter should have security for refund of the advances. They
do not need it. The raiyats are their tenants and they have the
fullest hold upon them for any financial obligation, and I cannot
help saying that the proposed amendment is merely a device for
keeping on foot the pernicious system as long as possible. The
whole of the soothing effect of the proposed legislation will be
practically neutralized if the amendment in question is accepted
and [it] will put Champaran in a ferment.
AMENDMENTS PROPOSED TO SECTION 4 (" SHARAHBESHI ") : The
first amendment to this Section is based on a representation made by
the managers of Sirnie Concern. But the amendment as it is worded
proposes to reopen the question of the rate of reduction to be allowed
not only in the case of Sirnie but also of Jalha and Motihari Con-
cerns. There is absolutely no reason why the matter should be re-
opened. Mr. Irwin of the Motihari Concern was party to the
compromise. As to the Sirnie case, I do not know that I am free
to interpret the attitude of the Agrarian Committee in the matter.
I can only say that, without a fresh reference to the Agrarian Com-
mittee, it is not possible to go behind the figures as they are a
result of a solemn compromise, not merely as between the Com-
mittee and the planters, but also as between the different interests
represented on the Committee itself. The compromise was one
and an indivisible whole and one cannot break a part of it without
breaking the whole. It is not true as stated in his representa-
tion that Mr. Bion was not called to give evidence or given opportu-
nity of having any statements recorded. Not only did he come
under the general notice issued to all to send in their statements
if they wanted to give any evidence, but he had received a special
call from the Committee's report to show that, in fixing the rate
of reduction in the enhancements, the sole determining factor was
not the rates at which the enhancements were made. The reason-
ing applied to the case is generally applicable to the case of Jalha
also.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 4(2): There is one point on which it is
possible to agree with the Champaran planters' memorandum.
That the rental fixed under the Bill should be final and binding
is fair; but any amendment that may be made will have to carefully
guard the right of appeal on grounds of irregularity and want of
jurisdiction.
SECTION 5 OF THE BILL: I have already sent in my amendment
to the effect that the words "grown upon the land of his tenancy
or any portion thereof" be omitted from the Section. I have ex-
plained in the earlier part of this letter, when dealing with tin-
kathia, why in a khushki contract no reference to the land of the
raiyat should be made.
There are two amendments to this Section proposed by the
Champaran planters in the memorandum.
The first is that the word "three" of Clause (1) should be substi-
tuted by the word "five". In other words, it is urged that sattas
be limited to five years and not to three years only. The fact that
even three years are granted is a concession. The period of
khushki contracts should be as short as possible. The memo-
randum deplores the proposed termination of long-term sattas
forgetting that not a single planter witness before the Committee
has the hardihood to defend long-term sattas and some of them
went even so far as to say that they did not enforce their sattas.
Speaking of sugarcane sattas, Mr. Gordon Canning said that "there
were sattas entered into when he started sugarcane, but they were
not enforced and might be regarded as a dead letter".
The other suggestion in the memorandum is that the raiyats
should infinitely prefer to be paid at a flat rate based on the area
of the land in which the specified crop is grown rather than by
weight or appraisement. This is contrary to my experience. The
real object, it may be observed, is here too as elsewhere a revival of
tinkathia.
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran
