49. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
March 10, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,
I could read your letter of the 4th only today. Your question
is good. One who is convinced that there is no other way but
brahmacharya should know that the right thing for him is to strive
exclusively to discover the means of perfecting it and should conti-
nue his experiments to that end in the faith that large numbers
of people will adopt it one day. He should also be convinced
at the same time that artificial means of birth-control are dangerous
from every point of view and are bound to loosen morals. Even
if we assume that people will have to suffer during the interval
before brahmacharya comes to be widely accepted, I see nothing
wrong in that. Like an individual, a society also will reap as it
sows. But God is merciful. There is mercy even in those of His
acts which we regard as punishment. When the birth-rate is high,
the death-rate also will be proportionately high. Mankind, there-
fore, will live on. It is true that such life will not be happy, and it
is best that it should be so. This knowledge also will persuade
people to adopt brahmacharya, for even a little experience of it will
show that, when it has become habitual, it is a source of much
greater happiness than indulgence can give. In order that the
world may go on satisfactorily, isn't it also necessary to obey the
other laws of God? One such law is that nobody has a right to
take more than the minimum he needs for his physical mainte-
nance. If everyone obeyed this law, there would be no starvation
even if brahmacharya was not observed by large numbers. Physical
labour is not confined to work in the fields. Every farmer ought to
use his hands and feet fully, especially the hands. In a country
where the farmers have no subsidiary industry, they become al-
most like animals. If the company of animals is necessary, the
experience of using tools is equally necessary. If all men cultivated
manual skill, then even if the population went on increasing, within
limits, everybody would have enough food to eat, cloth to cover
his or her body with and protection against heat and cold in a
home. Remember the meaning of varnadharma which I have
been explaining these days.
I think I have answered all your questions, but write to me
again if I have not.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9056
