289. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
October 31/November 2, 1934
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have been wanting to write to you every week; but it was
impossible. You know the situation now. I am free and it is
all to the good. Here is a copy of my statement to the Press
made immediately after the breaking of silence, that is, made
on the 30th. I want to devote next month at least to Harijan
work and to launching out the contemplated Village Industries
Association.
But I want to pave the way for the Frontier even
from now. I hope to be able to send my letter to the Government
in a day or two. If I do, you will have a copy of it herewith.
This is being dictated on 31st. This may be posted from Wardha
on the 2nd November.
My desire throughout is so to act as to disarm all suspicion
about the character of civil disobedience. At the present moment
there is no question of others participating in it. So far as I can
see the future, there is no likelihood of my initiating or precipitating
mass civil disobedience for some years to come.
I want to test
the genuineness of public feeling by keeping myself aloof from the
Congress and watching from a distance how Congressmen in general
take to the constructive programme. Civil resistance can pro-
perly culminate in civil disobedience only when people learn the
art of civil resistance which is nothing less and nothing more than
refraining from doing anything that would keep up a system which
you seek to destroy.
I observe that without breaking a single law, villagers can
somewhat better their economic condition by reviving their indus-
tries. Hence the Village Industries Association. Hindu-Muslim
tension also enables the system to live, and so does untouchability,
so does the drink evil. People had sufficient experience now in this
kind of training. I am, therefore, resisting every temptation to
invite civil disobedience by the people. There is temptation enough.
Even the prisoners in Bombay who were thought to be discharged
are still in the various jails of the Presidency of Bombay. Build-
ings which have been seized by the Government are not being
returned. I can multiply such instances drawn from various pro-
vinces. Nevertheless I know that I have to live down these irrita-
275
tions and so have fellow-workers.
That appears to me just
now the best form of resistance, if it may be so called. But if I
may not go [to] the Frontier, and if there is no just cause for
preventing me from going there, it may prove the last straw and
I will again find myself utterly incapable of doing constructive
work. I must receive this elementary satisfaction of the soul. Let
me not anticipate. All I can say is that I shall not rush to the
jail. You will have ample notice.
I hope Mira had a successful tour in America. You will
share this letter with C. F. Andrews and whomsoever you like.
Did you get the balance paid to you of the expenses incurred
here?
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not yet drafted the letter about the Frontier.
Encl. 1
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
LONDON
From a photostat: G.N. 1480
