48. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
ON TOUR,
MADURA,
October 1, 1927
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have received your letter. This little injury of yours has
given me a new meaning of, "Do unto others as you would
that they should do unto you." I did unto you about your in-
jury as I would have wished you to do unto me. But I see that
I was hopelessly wrong in applying the principle to you. I should
have done unto you, not only what I would have wished you
to do unto me but I should have done unto you what was needed
for you. Your need and not your wish should have been the deter-
mining factor. And if I had remembered as I should have done
that yours was a very sensitive skin, easily liable to infection and
difficult to heal after an injury I would have thoroughly scraped
the wound, drawn fresh blood and then dressed it. As it was, I
went by my own experience and that of others who had an
equally responsive skin, and in doing so committed a great blun-
der. Thank God that you will come out with only some consi-
derable inconvenience. But I do not know what I would have
done with myself if there had been serious blood-poisoning, as there
might have been.
Your reply to my telegram sent today, I hope, will relieve
me from all anxiety. That telegram also gives you my opinion
about the spinning essay. I know nothing better available but
I do not consider it to be by any means the best that could have
been produced. The writers are capable fellows but their
sadhana of the question is not, so far as I judge, of the highest. They
have done what they considered was their best. But in the debi-
litating unoriginal atmosphere that reigns supreme in the coun-
try just now, no one has the capacity for hard thinking. Slug-
gishness comes over us after a little effort and then the work be-
comes shoddy. I have therefore my doubts about the essay
giving satisfaction to the Viceroy. And then, it is really written
for the Indian reader, and not for an exacting reader like the
Viceroy, who has an overburdening load of inherited and ac-
quired pre-conceived notions and prejudices. I have, therefore,
suggested to you that you should first of all patiently read it,
not as a self-naturalized Indian but as an unsympathetic English
critic, taking nothing for granted, wanting proof for everything.
And if it gives you no satisfaction you should not send the essay
to him at all. I had something prepared for Sir Henry Lawrence
too. It has Pyarelal's and Mahadev's brains in it. But even that
is not what I should want if I was an unsympathetic critic. But
I had to be satisfied with what I could get. I am quite aware
that this subject requires ceaseless industry of a patient seeker.
But, unfortunately, I have no one whom I can set to that work,
and so it languishes. I cannot tell you how this want of solid
research taxes me. I do not half disclose my agony but I have
unburdened myself to you somewhat as you have obliged me to
confess my shame. I know that I ought to have been able to
give you satisfaction and straightway send you a first-class un-
challengeable and readable essay. Now I have sufficiently prejudiced
you against the essay of which I was one of the judges. Read it
with this prejudice and tell me what conclusion you have arrived at.
Up to now there is nothing wrong with me. What you read
in the newspapers was all false. Everyone of these news agencies
deserves to be suppressed.
Of course, the light that you saw in Simla was correct.
Orissa needed you. But I want you to become a hard task-
master. If you are taking part in the relief operations you must
see whether the accounts are accurately kept. I have seen no-
thing yet published. And you must also insist upon every worker
keeping a log-book, giving an accurate description of his doings from
day to day. But what I would like you to do there is not so much
immediate relief work but to find a way out of the annual calamity.
You are somewhat hard upon the Congress politics. Surely
they have also a place in national evolution. If the Assembly
and the Councils have a place, much more has the Congress.
And this I am able to say although I have not the slightest
sympathy with its present programme or present mode of working
that programme. Nevertheless it is a mighty institution-the only
all-India institution with an unbroken record of forty years. I
shall take little part in its deliberations but I must be present so
long as I do not consider it to be an evil in the totality of its
activities. Enclosed is my programme.
With love,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 2621
