500. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
May 21, 1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got your letters here at Nandi Durg. The photos are
excellent. I have sent them to Ramdas and Devdas. What
is Ali doing? Are Ali and Ismail partners in business? What
is the trade they carry on? I hope they are not baffled by the
great rise in population.
I should be glad if someone would look after your work and
you could make a trip here. But avoid the temptation to visit
me if you cannot save the necessary money. Do not incur the
heavy expense merely for the sake of a trip if you all keep well
and enjoy other amenities too.
It does not surprise me to hear that Indian Opinion is under a
boycott. Continue to publish it as long as the people want it;
426
stop it if they do not like it. We surely ought not to be unduly
insistent. What is the present number of subscribers? How
many of them are Hindus and how many Muslims? Do you
sell any copies otherwise?
130 lb. is too much weight for Sushila. She should and can
easily reduce it by 10 lb. She should eat less of starch and take
enough fruit, give up ghee for some time if necessary, but not
milk. This will certainly bring down the weight. She must not
omit to take exercise but walk at least six miles every day, that
is to say, for two hours at her normal speed. She should also
take hip-baths.
Maybe I have written to you earlier about our party here
at Nandi Hill. If I have not, here it is. Sardar, Manibehn,
Tari, Kusum Gandhi, Navin, Kanti, Kanu, Ba, Kumarappa,
Shantabehn (the Englishwoman) and Kakasaheb. Sardar, Mani-
behn and Mahadev have daily walks for four to five hours.
Kusum and Shantabehn, too, walk just as much, and the rest of us
for two hours. The climate here may not be said to have
proved quite beneficial to Tari, though she is better than on
the plains. Her health has suffered pretty much on account of
worry and indifference to treatment. Kusum, too, is weak, no
doubt, but comparatively better.
Recitation from the Ramayana is conducted daily. A fairly
good number of people attend it. The morning and evening
prayers are of course held as usual.
Devdas may now be said to be well enough. I think the
letter is now long enough.
We shall be going to Wardha on June 15.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4851
