230. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
February 27, 1934
BA,
I have not yet received your letter this time. I also am
wandering about in a part where the post is very irregular, be-
cause there is no railway. I am touring small villages on the
coast, and there are so many streams and rivulets that building
a railway would be too expensive. At the foot of the hills is the
sea.
The rivers flowing from the hills form a big estuary which
can be crossed only in a boat.
In a region like this, it is not
possible to travel fast and, therefore, letters take very long to
reach. This morning we boarded a steamer at a place called
Kundapur, and it will bring us to Karwar at night. We shall
be on the sea for twelve hours. You have been to Mangalore.
We were there yesterday. From there we reached Kundapur at
night, crossing many rivers on the way, and at that place we
boarded the steamer. The people here speak Kannada. All these
places are in the region from where Gangadharrao hails. The
province is called Karnataka. On the 5th and the 6th I shall
be in Belgaum. Since we are on the sea-coast, the air is cool.
It has been decided that, after completing Karnataka, I should
go to Patna. I shall be in Hyderabad on the 9th, from where I
will board a train for Patna.
I will most probably meet Sarojini-
devi in Hyderabad. Padma at any rate is there.
In Wardha,
which is on the way to Patna, Pyarelal is likely to meet me. He
has just been released and after his release he has gone to Wardha.
Most probably Jamnalalji also will go to Patna. Thakkar Bapa will
57-15
not come with me to Patna but will go to Delhi instead. He
will have to work there. Lakshmidas is in Patna. He is quite
ill. He has got typhoid. There was a wire from Swami to
that effect.
Chandrashankar has taken leave for 15 days and
gone to see his wife.
I have written to him and asked him to
call on Madhavdas. I have received no reply to my letter to
Madhavdas. Narandas will be released on the 9th and Chhagan-
lal on the 3rd. There was news of Vasumati having been released.
I have not heard from her. Prithuraj is still with me. At the
moment he does not wish to go to Patna. Poor Velanbehn must
be pining to see him. I have not received Manilal's letter as
yet. Mahadev keeps good health. Durga has been to visit him.
She was accompanied by Jivanji. Prabhavati and Jayaprakash are
in Patna. They are doing relief work. And now the discourse.
Last week I wrote about the power of the Name. But the
question arises: how should one repeat the Name?
What good
does it do to keep repeating it when thousands of idle thoughts
distract the mind? Either one should repeat the Name from the
heart, or not at all. This is partly right and partly not. If one
repeats the Name for outward show, it has no meaning. On the
contrary it is a sin to do so since it amounts to deception. But
a person may wish sincerely to repeat the Name, and yet his mind
may be continually distracted by other thoughts when he is re-
peating it. He should not lose heart, however. He should go on
repeating the Name in spite of the distraction of thoughts. If he
keeps up the practice, some day the Name will get inscribed in
his heart. This is the reason why the power of the Name has
been glorified. Even an illiterate or dull person can repeat the
Lord's name. One can learn to do so in one second. After that
one has merely to keep repeating it. By and by this becomes so
much a habit that one does not feel happy unless one is going on
with it. When the habit becomes so strong that one goes on
repeating the Name at all hours of the day, whether eating or
drinking or working or resting, then it may be said that the
Name has sunk in one's heart. Such persons are rare, but they
rise above all suffering. An interesting story about Hanuman
illustrating this was told in the Ashram once by Panditji's guru.
I will narrate it next week.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 16-
