171. LETTER TO S. J. SOMAVANSHI
January 23, 1933
BHAI SOMAVANSHI,
I read your loving letter from beginning to end. I have
received the books also. I also listened to the life story of the
Maharaj. I have read almost all the marked portions of the book.
Both failed to impress me. Chiefly because we find no basis for
regarding the so-called untouchables as untouchables; nor for the
treatment meted out to them.
How am I at fault? I have been saying for the last 45 years
the very thing about the eradication of untouchability that I say
now. My views have been well known in India for more than
25 years. Now and then some opposition was certainly heard but
1 Biographies of a Marathi saint
126
I incurred no one's wrath. Now that I am ready to do penance
for it I am blamed. But the Shastras and the saints have preached
the necessity of tapascharya whenever dharma dwindles and this
is what I am attempting to do. There is no headstrongness
about it. How can that man be headstrong who is ever prepared
to correct his errors?
By pointing out the omission on the part of saints to lay stress
on this particular problem you are doing them and me an in-
justice. The saints do not try to remove all the evils, nor can
they do so. They simply disseminate dharma and in the process
try to remove some evil. Even the avatars are unable to destroy
all evil; they perform their deeds concentrating on the chief evil
of their times.
An important feature of the non-violent spirit is that it always
keeps the popular will in view. The anti-untouchability movement
may also be taken as basically meant to test public will. The high-
est religion is useless for those who are not prepared to live by
it. Compulsion has absolutely no place in the spirit of non-violence.
You are correct in suggesting that I should offer daily prayers
to God to show me the right path. I not only constantly do that
but believe that I take no action without His command; you may
rest assured on this.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 18997
