110. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 7/12, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
Though the Ashram post has not yet been received as it
generally is, in order to avoid pressure on my time I commence
the letters now. Here is the fourth verse1:
"O Goddess Earth, with the ocean for thy garment, mountains
for thy breasts, thou consort of Vishnu (Preserver), I bow to
thee; forgive the touch of my feet."
Bowing to the earth we learn or ought to learn to be humble
even as the earth is humble. She supports the beings that tread
upon her. She is therefore rightly the consort of Vishnu. This
conception in my opinion does no violence to truth. On the con-
trary it is beautiful and is wholly consistent with the idea that God
is everywhere. There is nothing inanimate for Him. We are of the
earth earthy. If earth is not, we are not. I feel nearer God by
feeling Him through the earth.
In bowing to the earth, I at
once realize my indebtedness to Him and if I am a worthy child of
that Mother, I shall at once reduce myself to dust and rejoice in
establishing kinship with not only the lowliest of human beings,
but also with lowest forms of creation whose fate—reduction to
dust—I have to share with them. And if considered as mere life
without the earthy tabernacle, I regard myself as imperishable,
the lowest form of creation is just as imperishable as my soul is.
This attack of diarrhoea is a positive blessing for me. It has
caused no pain, meant no interruption of my work. And it has
taught me lessons. I feel a greedy eater. The bajari and juwari are
new foods for me. I should have taken them sparingly and omitted
them occasionally. Even one bhakhari per day was evidently too
much for me. But I did not do it. I thought I would make up
for lost weight quickly. I know no such thing as full satisfaction of
hunger no matter how much I eat, i.e., within my limitations. I
always rise with an empty stomach. I therefore learn my mistake
after the event. And then everything practically is tasty for me.
I went to bajari and juwari for feeling tangibly akin to the fellow-
prisoners. But for me these bhakharis had a definitely pleasant taste.
In these mixed circumstances to practise not only moderation but
spare eating is a difficult performance. An occasional fast and at
least once per month is a good thing it seems even for light weight
people. But I seem to have full control over this crisis, if it can be
so called. I am not interrupting the experiment altogether but
shall modify it from time to time as may be found necessary. I
took curds, as you know, yesterday. Feeling quite well at 11
o'clock I took finely powdered twice cooked almonds and soaked
raisins. This is how matters stand today (Wednesday). This will
be posted six days after. You will have further developments either
through this letter or through the general letter. I give you these
details to put you and others at ease. The knowledge that the slight-
est derangement in my health upsets you all causes me more anxiety
than the derangement itself. Complete abandonment of dietetic
experiment will be for me the worst evil. It is part of my search.
But the evil is not in the experiment, the evil is in me. I have not
learnt the art of taking food as medicine pure and simple. That
means complete mastery over the palate. I am far from it still.
I believe that if I acquire it, the giving up of milk will be an
easy job. That it is not a healthy human being's food I have
not a shadow of a doubt. In health, I have lived without it for
six years. Through my folly that health was undermined. To
undo the effect of that folly, instead of paying with my life for
it, I went to milk always hoping to struggle out of it again. The
struggle must continue. Every defeat humbles me, chastens me and
opens up newer outlooks. The urge for struggle becomes intenser
with defeat. The continuance gives one peace. Col. Steele the Civil
Surgeon who comes to see me every fortnight and Major Martin
came today. Their first remark was that I was looking exceptional-
ly well. And this after practically three days' fast! And they were
right. I am not feeling any the worse for the 'crisis'. Then and in
any case be careful for nothing.
January 12, 1931
I take up the letter where I left it on 7th. I seem to feel
quite all right. The bowels are again quite regular. My food is
almond paste dissolved in water and dates in the morning, curds
and dates at noon, dissolved almond paste and dates in the evening.
Hot water lemon and salt 7.30 a.m. Cold water lemon and soda
1.30 p.m. If all goes well and the bowels become constipated, I may
take vegetables. So again there is nothing further to report. I
would warn you against publishing anything about these inter-
ruptions in health, as they will be magnified by the public and there
45-
will be unnecessary alarm and unwarranted reflections against the
Government. In this case, at any rate, no blame of any kind can
be cast on them.
I have your letter and the postcard. Let us thank God that
Rolland is quite out of the wood. The world needs him for many
years yet. His work, so far as we can see, is not finished. Please
send him my loving regards and say he must hold on for a while.
Premabehn has described to me the prayer you had for his
recovery. I do not know that these prayers add a single second to
the life prayed for. But they elevate those who pray and comfort
those for whom the prayers are offered. The comfort has the
appearance of prolongation of life.
I finished the translation of the preface two days ago and
have taken up nothing further. But I feel like taking up the
original plan. I am likely to come to a decision tomorrow, after
the Ashram post is finished.
Having taken up the news-sheet, you will give up the formal
editorship if it can be without any disturbance. Not to take up a
service is wisdom, but it is folly to give it up afterwards unless it
is found to be demonstrably immoral. Such is the general princi-
ple of ethics. Of the particular application you and those who are
outside are the only judges. As to secrecy, there seems to be some
confusion of thought as expressed by you. If a butcher asks me in
which direction a cow is gone, I am in no way bound to disclose
the information to him. I may not mislead him but nor may I
lead him to where the cow is. Not only that, I may even hide
away the cow. Indeed, it would be my duty to do so. From this
instance one may shape one's conduct in given circumstances.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Your description of Totaramji's love of gardening is enchant-
ing. I wish some youngsters will learn the art from him. You
should discuss this with Narandas.
From a copy: C.W. 5428. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G. N. 9662
