302. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
November 3, 1934
Note 3: In both (a) and (b), the word "member" is used to denote a primary
member, whereas whenever the word "membership" occurs the reference is
to an elected member. At both places, therefore, you should use either "member"
or "person". "Member" at one place and "person" at another will not be
correct. The word "member" is not likely to be interpreted to mean a member
holding an elective post. All the same, you should use the same word at both
places, whichever you prefer.
Note 5: Bapu feels that the words "every district" throughout will serve
the purposefully, or that, alternatively, the amendment suggested by him
should be retained.
Using the word "town" only will not permit the
additional members in one town to be "amalgamated" with the additional
members in another town in the same district, and will also create difficulties
in forming constituencies with a minimum of five members.
Note 6: In clause (h) Bapu suggests the following amendment in place
of the one suggested by you: "When the number of duly qualified primary
members exceeds the minimum required for electing 2,000 delegates, the
Working Committee shall readjust the minimum of 500 duly qualified pri-
mary members required per delegate so as to maintain the maximum for all
India and the balance between urban and rural areas as per clause f(1) here-
of."
Note 8: Bapu did not mean that when a special session was called the
"A. I. C. C." would stand dissolved and fresh elections would be held. Accor-
ding to the proposed arrangement, the delegates once elected will continue for
the whole year and the composition of the "A. I. C. C." also will remain the
same, and the special session will be attended by the same persons, unless of
course the delegates as a general body wish to dissolve the "A. I. C. C." and
elect a fresh one in its place. That right belongs to every "bigger body".
But
otherwise there should be no need at all to elect a fresh "A. I. C. C." or
"W. C." merely in order that a special session might be held.
Note 11: If an assurance was given to the "A. I. C. C." on Monday that
the conditions mentioned in Article "III" would not, till the 1st of July, be applied
to members elected just now, there is nothing to be said about it. Personally,
however, Bapu could not reconcile himself to giving members permission to
remain idle till then. There was definitely no such understanding when the
constitution was passed.
If, however, the assurance was given to the
"A. I. C. C." in view of some other difficulties it must be honoured.
From Gujarati: C.W. 7559. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
