27. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
UNION-CASTLE LINE,
November 25, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I write this in anticipation of my going to gaol before reaching
Johannesburg.
Your letters are always a study in human nature at its best. Your
last one is more so than usual. I call them a study in human nature
at its best because you lay bare your heart to me - a privilege I assure
you I appreciate very much indeed.
If I were to discuss all I have seen and pondered over, it will
fill pages and yet I should not succeed in explaining my meaning
thoroughly. I fully understand your moral difficulty - how to get out
of the ordinary dishonesty. I should prize this healthy discontent and
nurture it. You will then soon find a way out of it. In the light of
my new experiences and further development I have gone through I
would like to be by your side and as of old go into the life problems
with you. But there need be no impatience. Meanwhile, you have many
desirable things to occupy your mind, chiefest among which is this
Transvaal struggle.
You ask when will you and I be free from it? I know you have
been taxed sufficiently. You have got more than you bargained for.
That unfortunately is the price friends pay for close association with
me. But apart from feelings of consideration for you I see no necessity
for the question when shall we be free. Whichever turn the struggle
takes, it is the best discipline I can have. Whilst I work strenuously
to bring it to a close, I continue in it as if it was to last a lifetime.
And so it may be with you if you can take it cheerfully and calmly.
We agreed when I left for London, that you could not be better
occupied. And I am now face to face with the fact that you have
to be so occupied to the end of the struggle. To say you could leave
it, is to insult you and to underrate your ability to stand fire. No, my
dear Lower House, I can only say you should be absorbed in the struggle
and to that end compel yourself to be calm.
I shall be writing to you officially also, so that you will see how
far the struggle has advanced in London and what effort is necessary
in the Transvaal.
Cordes continues to cause trouble. He has been swearing, it appears,
at Purushottamdas Desai 1 who, so far as I know, is a very quiet and
amiable man. He has felt it terribly. I do not want to write to Cordes
for fear I may offend him without doing good. There seems to have
been some financial trouble also. I fear that Phoenix has to be supplied
with funds. What the condition there is, I do not know. I can only
leave the matter in your hands to do the best you can and to ease
the situation at Phoenix. Devdas, I notice, was very ill and had not
recovered quite at the time they wrote to me. All this shows that I
should be free for a few days and yet I know that I must not ask
for a postponement.
I can understand your repugnance towards Motan. And yet I feel
that some day or other you [would] want to get rid of this sort of
thing. Is he not a member of the same human family? Before you
and I realize the identity of all life, we have to live this prejudice down.
The thing is difficult but there is no escape from it.
This is a very unsatisfactory letter. Instead of relieving you of the
worry and the trouble of looking after the struggle and my affairs when
you are yourself not at ease, this letter invites [you] to take on more.
I can only hope that I may be soon able to relieve you although the
struggle may not end soon.
When I think of you and think of what awaits Mr. Doke, my head
begins to turn. I pull myself up and say to myself : there is nothing
of self in this. Why then worry ? You and he could only do the best.
And there I must leave the situation.
I expect that the house has not gone beyond what you described
in your letter. I would certainly like to poke my nose into it and play
1 Who was in charge of the Phoenix school
the architect and give some of the newfangled notions I am bringing
with me.
With every apology for this letter and with love,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
I have been working very hard on the steamer and have given
myself no rest. It is now after 8 p.m. and there is still much before
me to finish. I have translated a long letter from Tolstoy and written
an original book in Gujarati. 2
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
