238. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
SODEPUR,
December 7, 1945
CHI. JIVANJI,
I got your proof-copy of the pamphlet on constructive work
yesterday. I wanted to use that copy here and did so. But I
had already gone through the proof earlier. As there is no
letter accompanying it, I don't quite understand why you have
sent it. You have given a heading to my preface but there is
no heading on the page on which the pamphlet itself begins.
I infer from this that final touches still remain to be given to
the printing. I have of course asked Pyarelalji to write to you
about this, but I think it is better to dictate this just now in
the morning.
I have the impression that I have already written to you
about the cover. My suggestion is that the eighteen headings
which you have given in the pamphlet should be reproduced
on the cover in their proper order, with the page number given
against each. This will help the reader and we shall be able
to show what topics have been covered. The topics can also be
shown on the cover in the form of a circle. We can have a
174
drawing of the spinning-wheel in the centre and the headings
can be printed round it like the planets round the sun. There
is one difficulty in this, of course. How can communal unity
be represented as a planet? If it is so represented, my ori-
ginal conception would be vitiated, for the basic conception
is that khadi is the chief handicraft and that the other in-
dustries take their place and revolve round khadi like planets
round the sun. If now we can find a place in this scheme for
Adivasis, kisans, students and communal unity, then the concep-
tion will have been worked out. It might be better, therefore,
to give up the idea of the circle, or to form the circle only
with khadi and cottage industries. But we need not waste any
time over this, for it is essential that the pamphlet should be
published as soon as possible. It is also necessary that the
translations should be published simultaneously. It would, also,
be good if at the end a supplementary list of other books to
be read with the pamphlet are given. For example, Rajendra
Babu's book, Gulzarilal's essay, etc. You may drop this also,
if you cannot recollect the names of the books immediately.
Pyarelal will most probably send you a wire today saying,
"Send another copy proof." The idea behind this is that if I
have to correct the proof, the time which would be taken by
an ordinary letter may be saved, for the copy which I have
passed on is not likely to come back to me now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9960. Also C.W. 6934. Cour-
tesy : Jivanji D. Desai
