309. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
Sunday [May 8, 1927]
CHI. MIRA,
I hope you are getting all the letters I have been writing to
you of late. Probably one letter every other day on an average.
I have your further letter. But I see it will be some time
before you regain your balance. I do not mind the ups and
downs so long as you retain the elasticity. My own opinion is
this: it will be perfectly natural for you to come to me wherever
I am after finishing your allotted task, whenever that happens.
An ordinary person may not give up a self-imposed programme.
But if you become highly emotional and your nerves remain un-
der tension, you should come even though your course may not
be finished.
Naturally I am anxious for you to finish your course. I
should not like to have to think that it was beyond you. But
your health is more precious to me than your studies or any other
preparation.
You must not think of coming to me for my health. For it
is good and I cannot be looked after better even if you came.
If I needed your nursing, I should wire for you. But such an
event will not happen, if only because I have got into the habit
of taking nursing from anybody and I train new nurses to my
requirements. There are more nurses than I need here. So if
you come in the hope of doing some personal service, you would
feel idle and yawning.
Now for the necessity of personal touch. My own opinion
is that it is necessary in the preliminary stages. And then the
touch comes through joint work. You come in daily touch with
me by doing my work as if it was your own. And this can,
must and will outlast the existence of this physical body of mine.
You are and will be in touch whether I am alive or dead. And
that is what I want you to be. You have come to me not for me
but for my ideals in so far as I live them. You now know how
far I live the ideals I set forth. It is now for you to work out
those ideals and practise them to greater perfection than has been
given to me to do. He or she who does that will be my first heir
and representative. I want you to be the first if only because
you studied me from a distance and made your choice. And
when in the course of the work, God brings us physically together,
it is well, but it is well also when he keeps us apart in pursuance
of the common object.
But this is counsel of perfection. Having listened to it and
understood it, you are free to do as you choose. If you cannot
contain yourself, you must come and not feel that I shall be dis-
pleased. I should be displeased if you did violence to yourself
and became prostrate.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5226. Courtesy: Mirabehn
