227. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
[NADIAD,]
April 12, 1918
CHI. DEVDAS,
I have your letter. I also wrote one to you, which you must
have received. You have said nothing about your health. I am
greatly pleased to learn that you have been attending on nursing
the sister. We read in our holy books that pupils used to volun-
teer their services to their teachers. Your way of putting the thing
is as natural and sweet as in those books. I do not know how to
measure the height to which this service will raise you.
It is quite easy to understand why I did not ask for 35 per
cent [increase] for more than one day. It was impossible for me
to stretch the matter any further. The employers even now think
that they agreed to give so much not because of any firmness on
the workers' part but on account of my fast. I would have been
guilty of a kind of violence if I had asked for more. In accepting
the minimum when I was in a position to ask for more, I showed
straightforwardness, modesty and good sense. Had I not fasted,
it is certain that the workers would have yielded. They kept firm
because of the fast. A pledge so kept [by the workers] can
justify only a demand placed at the lowest. We can have it res-
pected merely in the letter. This one was so respected and, be-
cause I placed the demand at the minimum, I made up in a way,
indeed in great measure, for the flaws which had tainted my fast.
Esther understood the significance of the fast very clearly. She
wired me a sentence from the Bible. It means :
Greater love has no man than this, that he lay down his life for his
friends.
I look upon that fast as the best thing I have done so far. The
peace which I knew at the time of that fast was no mere human
experience.
I do not get here the joy which I found in my work at
Ahmedabad. I feel uneasy in mind and keep thinking of all
manner of things. Sometimes, I feel people have understood the
idea all right; at other times, I fancy that they have not understood
it and so feel pained. To be sure, excellent work is being done,
but now the mind is fatigued. It is a crushing burden I carry,
that of the fight for Mahomed Ali. I have no choice but to bear
it. I cherish the hope that God will give me the strength for it
and, because of that hope, I am calm in the inmost depths of my
heart. Ba is with me.
Tell Chhotalal that his pen appears to have grown stale again.
Let me have more details about the progress in weaving.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
