162. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
July 5, 1932
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
Only today I got your letter of June 27. In my letter of
June 29 I have acknowledged receipt of the khadi. I have also
asked for some books that came to my mind on reading your
booklets. Numerous questions have occurred to me while reading
the literature but I intend to take them up if any remain unsolved
after the completion of the present study. These days I con-
stantly manage to read something or other that must add some-
thing however little to my knowledge. I am still reading Prof.
Shah's book. After that I shall start on Iyer's book on foreign
exchange which he has sent to me.
At present, mills function side by side with the production of
khadi and it will continue thus for some time. Ultimately a
contest between the two is inevitable as our ideal is to produce
khadi in all the villages. Thus mills will no longer have a place
in India when each village can produce khadi. But for the time
being people like you can have both the activities at the same
time provided the ideal is kept before the public in order to assert
the truth. People so inclined will continue to indulge in criti-
cism, it cannot be helped.
I do not possess sufficient knowledge about jaggery but I have
an impression that mills will remain indispensable for the pro-
duction of sugar. Sugar cannot be easily manufactured in villages,
nor can every village grow sugar-cane, which means that production
of jaggery cannot be a universal occupation. Perhaps I am wrong
in thinking so. However, if a person can advocate mills as
well as khadi he can assuredly talk of jaggery and sugar factories
at the same time.
The more I study of economics the firmer I grow in my
belief that the methods suggested in these books for eradicating
poverty are not at all efficacious. The method lies in working out
a scheme wherein the production and consumption happen to be
simultaneous and this scheme can work only with the revival of
village industries.
I have started taking milk on the Superintendent's insistence,
also chapati and vegetable. Vegetable, I take once a day and
chapati twice a day. But no longer do I notice the cleansing of
the bowels that I experienced formerly on a diet of roti, almonds
and a vegetable. But I will not give up milk in a hurry now
that I have started it. I shall watch the results. These days I
am taking the grapes sent from Karachi by Kripalaniji's brother-
in-law.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 7901. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
