260. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 24, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. I cannot say how long I shall be able to conti-
nue writing letters. A sword is hanging over them. If the delay
in clearing the letters from here continues, I see no benefit in
writing them. Incoming letters are now handed over to me imme-
diately. For outgoing letters, correspondence is going on. If these
letters stop, you may assume that the train is off the rails. But that
need not upset you or make you unhappy. It is for the Government
to permit me or not to permit me to write letters. A prisoner cannot
demand such permission as a matter of right. The fact that I have
been writing so long confers no right on me, and the loss of some-
thing over which one had no right should not make one unhappy.
So you have now received my letter 1 conveying my blessings
to you on the occasion of your birthday. Why should you mind
that you got it late? Perhaps your getting it late has increased
its value. You should not have taken it as an ill-omen when you
did not get it. It is impossible that I would not send you my
blessings though I had your letter asking for them. Why should
you take it as an ill-omen if, because of unforeseen circumstances,
you do not get the letter or get it late? Really speaking, there is
no such thing as ill-omen for a person who has cultivated the spirit
of non-attachment. Do not, therefore, believe for a single moment
that this will be a bad year for you. It will be bad only if we
think bad thoughts or speak or do evil. And it is in our power
not to do that.
If it is the doctor's opinion that you should get the tonsils re-
moved, you should do so. Wasn't his opinion the same when you
consulted him before? The operation takes very little time. Nor
have I heard that there is any risk in it. Your body ought to
become completely free from disease. I believe that ultimately one
is the best judge in regard to one's body.
Doctors have to depend much on what their patients tell them.
This fact itself shows that, if the patient does not know what
happens to his body, he cannot give correct replies to the doctor's
question. If you merely tell a doctor, "I have a headache", what
can he do? The patient should know why he has got a headache.
We can see that this is true about many other symptoms. The
same argument applies to treatment. A doctor cannot know, if
he is not told, what effect a particular medicine had. He has to
depend on the patient for that. But all patients are not able to
understand the effects of medicines. Food is a daily medicine
for the body. What effect a particular food has on a person's body,
only he can understand. Hence, one who knows the effects of
food, water and air on the human body will be able to preserve
his health better than a doctor can ever do for him. I believe,
therefore, that all of us should acquire some general knowledge
about the body, as also about air, water and food. We do have the
necessary literature for this purpose. We need not read all of
it. If we read some of it, that would be enough to help us. Shivaji
made his body very strong by his own efforts. Regarding myself,
I am convinced that if I had not acquired sufficient knowledge
for my purpose, I would have marched away long ago. This half-
broken body endures through my own care. I am sure that doc-
tors have very little share in keeping it going.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10295. Also C.W. 5749.
Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak
