201. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[DURBAN,
December 21, 1913]
SIR,
We understand from the papers that our release from im-
prisonment, before the natural period of the respective terms
to which we were sentenced, was due to the recommendation of
the members of the Commission which has been recently appoin-
ted to investigate the causes that led up to the strike of inden-
tured and other Indians in Natal and other Indian matters. We
fully appreciate the reasons which moved the Commissioners to
make the recommendation, and the Government's acceptance
thereof, and we are desirous of helping the Commission to investi-
gate the causes. We beg to express our gratefulness for the ap-
pointment of a Commission for the purpose above indicated,
but we are reluctantly obliged to inform the Government that
we shall be unable to render the assistance which it is in our
power to do, unless the objections presently to be set forth are
met by the Government. We have ascertained that the Indian
community of South Africa has not been given the opportunity
of making any nomination on its behalf to the membership of the
Commission. We may point out that the spirit of the passive resis-
tance struggle, ever since its commencement in 1907, has been
to secure a recognition from the Government of the fact that,
in matters touching the community, it is necessary to consult and
respect its wishes and sentiments before it can be expected to give
willing obedience to or acceptance of laws or matters affecting
the vital interests of the community. We feel that it was a grave
omission on the part of the Government, in selecting the Commis-
sioners, not to have given an opportunity to the Indian com-
munity of submitting for appointment on the Commission two
names of gentlemen of known South African standing who, in
its opinion, could have guarded and specially represented its inte-
rests. This, in our humble opinion, is a fatal and fundamental
objection to the acceptance by the Indian community of the
Commission.
Moreover, we observe that the appointment of Mr. Ewald
Esselen, K.C., and Col. Wylie shows that the Government, for
reasons best known to itself, intended to give the commission a
partisan character, for it is within our knowledge that Mr. Es-
selen has expressed anti-Asiatic views in very strong language, and
that Col. Wylie has not only done likewise, but has even recently
given his opinion that the £3 tax levied on ex-indentured Indians
should be retained. Again, the acts of the military in connec-
tion with the strike will be before the Commission for investi-
gation. We hold that Col. Wylie, by reason of his prominent con-
nection with the military, is naturally an interested party. Against
Mr. Esselen and Col. Wylie, as South African statesmen, we can
have nothing to say. The first undersigned has pleasant recollec-
tions of his professional connection with both Mr. Esselen and
Col. Wylie; and of Col. Wylie when he served under him during
the late Zulu rebellion as sergeant -major in charge of the Indian
Volunteer Ambulance Corps, that was formed, and whose services
were offered during that crisis to the Government; and we have
no doubt that, in so far as they could, they would endeavour to
sit as impartial judges on the Commission, but we cannot help
fearing that they share the common human failing of not being
able to divest themselves entirely of their bias. Much, however,
as we regret the appointment on the Commission of these gentle-
men, we do not propose to raise any objection to their nomina-
tion; but, in order to counter-balance the effect that their bias
may have on the finding of the Commission, we submit that It is
absolutely necessary to appoint gentlemen of South African stand-
ing, known to possess no anti-Asiatic bias, on the Commission, and,
as such, we venture to suggest the names of the Hon. Sir James
Rose-Innes and the Hon. W. P. Schreiner.
Immediately on our release, without a moment's delay, we be-
gan to ascertain the feeling of the Indian community, and, to our
agreeable surprise, we found that the community had already
anticipated what would undoubtedly have been our humble
advice to it, that it had already sent strong protests to the Gov-
ernment against the nominations, and had submitted to the Govern-
ment the names mentioned above. We found, too, that by way
of further protest, 36 passive resisters, of whom five were women,
had crossed the Volksrust border from Natal, and had been ar-
rested and received imprisonment. In their statement to the
Court, we understand, they informed the presiding Magistrate
that their object in courting arrest was to lodge a respectful
protest against the partisan character which had been given to the
Commission, and we found further that two other parties of pas-
sive resisters had already left for Volksrust for the same purpose.
Our position, therefore, was easy and clear. A mass meeting
was called to-day by the Natal Indian Association. We were invi-
ted to attend that meeting, and all that we had to do was to ten-
der our advice that the protest that had already been sent should
be ratified by that meeting, and this, we are glad to be able to
say, was done. We hope and pray that the Government will be
pleased to accede to the submission and nominate on the
Commission the gentlemen whose names have been proposed by
the meeting.
If the nomination is accepted, we beg to state that, before
we can tender our evidence to the Commission and advise the
community to offer the overwhelming evidence which is in its
possession, it will be necessary to release the passive resisters who
are presently undergoing imprisonment, whether in the ordinary
gaols or in mining compounds which have been turned into gaols.
We hope that the Government will recognize the force of this pra-
yer, for it would ill become us to remain free whilst those who
have courted imprisonment partly through our advice are still
under incarceration, and it would be hardly possible for us to
advise other passive resisters to refrain, pending the inquiry by
the Commission, from courting imprisonment whilst their bre-
thren and sisters are suffering the hardships of gaol life.
If the additional appointments suggested above are made,
and if our request as to the release of the passive resistance pri-
soners is accepted, we would advise the community to suspend
passive resistance pending the Commission's finding. Further, if
we are enabled by the Government's accepting our suggestions
to tender evidence before the Commission, we and other mem-
bers of the community will have to have full and free permission
to enter the different estates and collieries where Indians are em-
ployed, in order to collect evidence, and for the purpose of advis-
ing the people to continue to work under their contracts, pending
the investigation.
We take it that the Commission has sufficient powers to in-
vestigate all the grievances that have caused the revival of pas-
sive resistance as set forth in Mr. Gokhale's letter, and to make
its recommendations to the Government.
Finally, we beg to place on record the advice that we have
tendered to the community, that, whilst the finding of the Commis-
sion— enlarged in the manner suggested— will finally settle the dis-
pute as to the allegations of ill-treatment of workers and others
and the acts of the military, its recommendations on the grie-
vances, whose redress is being sought, will not be accepted by the
community in derogation of its demands. If, unfortunately, the
Government does not see its way to accept our prayer, there will
be no course left open to us but to seek re-imprisonment. We, as
passive resisters, can never rest still, having been discharged before
the termination of our terms of imprisonment.
We beg to reiterate the declaration we have often made that,
as passive resisters, we countenance no violence, even by way of
retaliation, on the part of those who take part in the move-
ment, whether as strikers or otherwise. We have repeatedly given
effective advice, which has been acted upon, to the effect that
passive resisters must submit to personal violence in the course of
their passive resistance, even though such violence may entail
death. It becomes necessary for us to re-declare the above view, as
after our incarceration, we observe that it has been alleged that,
on some estates, strikers used violence.
The last two undersigned, as Europeans, desire to assure
the Government that, in throwing in their lot with their fellow-
South African Indian subjects, they have but rendered service to
the State and to their fellow-Europeans. They have done so after
very careful investigation, and their intimate experience of Indians
of every grade has enabled them to see that the grievances of
which the Indian community is seeking redress are grievances
which are keenly felt by it, and for whose redress it has patient-
ly waited for an unduly long time. It is because we firmly believe
that to delay in granting the demands of the Indian community
endangers the reputation of the Europeans of South Africa as
members of a civilized race worthy of self-government, that we
have so fully identified ourselves with their cause, and we ask
the Government during this season, which for it means, or ought
to mean, peace for all living in South Africa, to give the community
an earnest of its desire to redress its legitimate grievances by
accepting this prayer.
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,
M. K. GANDHI
H. S. L. POLAK
[PS.]
H. KALLENBACH
May we request an early reply, as our dispositions are to
be made by New Year's Day, in the event of an unfavour-
able reply.
Indian Opinion, 24-12-1913
