465. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
April 27, 1934
BA,
It is nearing four in the morning. My eyes feel heavy. I got
your letter. Nimu and Lakshmi have given birth to daughters.
The mothers and the daughters are quite well. Now the delivery
of Bardoli Lakshmi is awaited. Some news about her also is ex-
pected in a few days. It seems Kanti will meet me in Ranchi
on the 30th. Narandas also will meet me there. I get news about
Rami and Kunvarji. They are both well. Since Madhavdas is
all right now, why need I ask him to go to Porbandar? He is
eager to start earning. I write to Bhansali from time to time. He
is still in Than. His health is not at all good, but he is cheerful.
Chhaganlal Joshi went and saw him. Since Bhansali's legs are not
all right, he has stopped travelling. Santok and Radha are all
right. Rukhi had been to see me. She had come for treatment of
her eyes. Prabhavati, Kisan and Om are with me. Miss Lester
also is with me. There is Rajendrababu's sister too. I don't remem-
ber anything about Lakshmibehn of Shikarpur. Sometimes it does
happen that a few lines are scored out in your letters.
I suppose I
needn't do anything now about Lakshmibai. Jamnalalji is in Patna.
Pyarelal also is there. Vasumati has gone to Wardha. She is better.
Vallabhbhai is quite well. Yes, Durga and others have again settled
down. I thought I had written to you about that. My health is
good. There is no cause at all for worry. I am glad that you
liked the slivers. They were made with Keshu's carding-bow, but
were sent by Mirabehn. Assam is a small province where there is
a large number of tea gardens. Most of them are owned by English-
men. The labourers in them come from Bihar. Since the rain-
fall there is heavy, there is greenery everywhere all through the year.
Besides, the Brahmaputra flows through the province and so the
region is fertile and beautiful. The people there eat too much opium
and, therefore, seem lethargic. All the women know how to weave
and they weave the cloth for their own requirements.
Many of
them also spin.
Blessings to all the women from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, p. 24
