119. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
February 25, 1919
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have telegraphed to you today. I could not write the letter
that I contemplated doing when I sent my first wire. I have been
passing through perfect agony, doctors telling me that I should not
undertake any exertion, the voice within me telling me that I
must speak out on the Rowlatt Bills and the Viceregal pronounce-
ment. Conflicting views pressed themselves on me and I did not
know what to do. Many friends have looked to me for guidance.
How could I desert them? We met yesterday at the Ashram. It
was a good meeting. The desire was to take the plunge even if
we were only a few. The last word rested with me. I felt that the
cause was true. Was I to forsake them? I could not do so and
remain true to myself. You know the result. The papers herewith
will give you fuller information. God only knows how I felt the
need of your presence whilst the soul was in travail. I am now
quite at peace with myself. The telegram to the Viceroy eased me
considerably. He has the warning. He can stop what bids fair to
become a mighty conflagration. If it comes, and if the satyagrahis
remain true to their Pledge, it can but purify the atmosphere and
bring in real swaraj. Have you noticed an unconscious betrayal
of the true nature of modern civilization in Mr. Wilson's speech
explaining the League of Nations' covenant? You will remem-
ber his saying that if the moral pressure to be exerted against
a recalcitrant party failed, the members of the League would
not hesitate to use the last remedy, viz., brute force.
The Pledge is a sufficient answer to the doctrine of force.
But this does not close the chapter. I have received a long
cablegram from Mr. Aswat. The situation for the Indians in the
Union is very serious indeed. The lesson of the late struggle is
practically lost upon them. If we here can render no help,
Indians in the Union will be reduced to an absolutely servile state.
If they through their weakness cannot offer satyagraha, we must
all call upon the Government to redress the grievance and to offer
satyagraha if they proclaim their helplessness. You cannot have
hostile interests in the same partnership. I have written to the
Government and I am sending a Press letter today.
There is still a third chapter. The committee that was
appointed to advise the Government upon the case of the
Brothers Ali reported two months ago. I have read the papers.
There is nothing in the charge to warrant their detention. If they
are still not released, there would be a third case for satyagraha
for me.
I am bearing the burden lightly enough because the last two
have caused no struggle with my conscience. If the main struggle
starts, I may tuck on to it the last two and thus complete the trinity.
I shall eagerly await your telegraphic opinion and then a
detailed written opinion to follow. You will not wonder when I
tell you that the women at the Ashram have all voluntarily signed
the Pledge. . .
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
