86. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 22, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in yesterday.
I am defeated. I have taken milk and baker's bread and
therefore salt also. Major Bhandari will not let me make ex-
periments that might endanger health. And he thought it was
time for me to take milk and bread, also fruit. He is of opinion
that absence of salt must reduce weight and that I cannot afford
to lose. I succumbed. The saltless experiment I must reserve
for a future day. I am none the worse for the brief experiment,
if I am not better. I have made certain observations. But they
are of no value as they are based on much too short-lived an
experiment. You will tell me of your experiment, if you have
made further discoveries.
Your previous letter I have sent to the Government in con-
firmation of my letter. Let us see what happens.
You asked what the electrical treatment was. It is called high
frequency-it consists in rubbing with a flat glass bulb charged
with violet rays. Exposure to the early morning sun should
serve the same purpose except [for] this [that the] instrumental
rays are hot.
Then you asked about the Ashram history. I am trying to
deal with every phase of the Ashram activities. But the work is
proceeding very slowly. Somehow or other I do not give it some
time every day. And as yet, I have not felt like giving it resolute-
ly one hour daily. However, if I am here long enough, the history
will, God willing, be certainly finished.
Damodardas has written. He seems to have been hurt by
the last conversation you had under his roof. I have asked him
to talk to you about it. But you will yourself ask him what
hurt him. I know you could have no intention of hurting him.
I have begged of him to give up speculation altogether and be
satisfied with a humble life. Devdas has enteric though of a
mild type. You should write to him. His address is District Jail,
Gorakhpur, U.P.
I do not suppose you have noticed that "The valiant only
taste of death but once" has a deeper meaning conveying the
perfect truth according to the Hindu conception of salvation. It
means freedom from the wheel of birth and death. If the word
'valiant' may be taken to mean those who are strong in their
search after God, they die but once, for they need not be reborn
and put on the mortal coil.
The weather here at this time of the year is always cool.
We, too, had showers.
My congratulations to Shantabai on her taking up the wheel
again.
I am glad you are mothering Tilak . He needs it. Of course
Noorbanu is very good to him. But he does not speak enough
Hindi to be able to talk to her to his heart's content. And
Noorbanu cannot give him what you can. Of course you will
try to see her and Pyare Ali.
Yes, I wrote to Narandas suggesting five minutes' silence. I
forgot to write to you about it. I am not doing it here. It is
unnecessary here and for you it is impracticable. The rapid repeti-
tion of Ramanama in a new assembly is undoubtedly good. For
very rapid repetition, mere Ram, Ram, Ram Ram . . . is
often used. If it is done with proper cadence, the effect is ecs-
tatic. Yes, we get up at 3.40. The prayer at 4 and 7.30.
My love to Nargis and Jal. I am glad the former has so
improved. I do not remember the name Hilla Petit. I may
have met her.
I am glad Gulab and Manilal have seen you. Tell them
to write to me. I do not need the ghee now.
I hope you are not overworking yourself.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
You know that the Quaker practice during silence does not
require the closing of the eyes. In that case the difficulty about
the time is overcome. But for you all this is needless.
From the original: C. W. 6226. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9692
