309. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
November 5, 1934
MY DEAR GANESAN,
I thought that it was understood between you and me that
Khan Saheb could not come and that you would ask Kakasaheb
to give you a week. I do not know whether you asked him. It
is not possible for me to send anyone else.
About the Introduction to Vol. III of Young India, I do
not know that I shall get the time within the limit fixed by you.
Mahadev is not here and he may not be for some time. On his
return he will be overwhelmed with arrears.
I have written to you already about turning your bi-weekly
paper into an official organ of the Village Industries Association.
So long as you are living on the brink of civil debt, I would not
think of putting extra burden on you, or trusting that I would be
safe in your hands. Your desire for extension of your activities
is wholly inconsistent with the opening of the second paragraph of
your letter wherein you say: "I have reached the limit of perfect
recovery. Any further delay may mean a breakdown." I do not
know who the friend is who has promised to meet all the expenses.
If I have a practical, reliable, firm proposition I would be pre-
pared to reconsider my decision.
What will Sastri do as the editor of the Village Industries
Association? It requires special knowledge, and so far as I am
aware Sastri has absolutely none. I do not know what V. S. V.
Chari can do. A man who writes paragraphs for The Statesman is
probably the last man to handle the village industries question
with effect.
But without my identifying myself with your bi-weekly you
should devote its columns to the constructive programme of the
Congress if you can justify the title of your bi-weekly.
I have read your correspondence with Thakkar Bapa. The
only thing I shall be able to discuss with him is the bill for the
Supplements to Harijan.
I might incidentally have to deal with
the other things. I shall see.
The enclosed letter might be of interest to you.
Encl. 1
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
