403. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
December 27, 1932 1
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your letter. The dazzle of my presence is really a
greater embarrassment to me than to friends like you, and I
wish that we can work and speak to one another on a par. I
hate to have any special credit given to my word than would be
claimed by any other person saying the same thing. With this
preface I must say that I wholly dissent from your diagnosis. If I
had written a similar letter say, for instance, to you, I do not
think that you would have resented it. In other words, I would
not have over-rated my influence with you. How could I help Dr.
Roy in securing the co-operation of Babus Suresh and Satis
when I knew that such a thing was not possible unless I simply
coerced them into giving mechanical co-operation, but I would
not think of such co-operation even between Suresh babu and
Satisbabu? Even in the Ashram, where I may be said to have
equal influence with all, there are incompatible temperaments
where I cannot look for co-operation, much less can I impose it;
and inasmuch as I believed that Suresh and Satis Babus were
more effective people as plodders, I naturally desired the work
to be in their hands, and I thought that Dr. Roy would appre-
ciate my suggestion. Why should anybody feel hurt if a burden is
shifted from his shoulders and put on to another, thought to be
more able to carry it? And I, as it now turns out erroneously,
thought that Dr. Bidhan would not misconstrue my letter, take it
in good light, and contest, if he liked, the underlying assumption,
but never resent the letter. And why do you say that I have
rebuked Dr. Roy in my second letter? I think I have fairly put
the position, but if you have not followed it, you may read it
over again. I would like you to understand the motive underlying
the first letter. I shall see if I can think of a good secretary for
you who will work for the love of work.
I would warn you against issuing the English edition, unless
it is properly got up and contains readable English and trans-
lations are all accurate. It would be much better to be satisfied
with the Hindi edition only, than to have an indifferently edited
English weekly.
Of course, I know that there is no question of partiality,
but it is as well to bear in mind how Dr. Ambedkar's people feel
about all we do.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 18825; also In the Shadow of the Mahatma, pp. 85-
