95. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
September 27, 1905
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have received your letter.
There is a letter from Hemchand today saying that a notice dispen-
sing with his services has been served on him. I have thereupon sent a
telegram asking that he be not discharged. I do not relish the idea of
discharging even Ramnath. But if he can be posted with Chi. Jaya-
shanker, you may do so. I am not at all inclined to discharge Hem-
chand for no fault of his. I intend to make some special use of him. I
have already informed you that I have written to Kitchin about this.
I have written a letter to Virji today reprimanding him. I have
written to Kalabhai asking him to pay up the money by the end of the
year.
Hemchand, it appears, does not get my letters. I am enclosing here-
with a letter for him which you may read and then pass on to him. Let
me know whether you receive the letters sent to the Grey Street address
or not.
As he has asked for it, I have written to you to send Suleman Is-
mail the bill for the amount we have acknowledged in the paper. If
after that, he does not pay, we shall write it off.
I do not think I shall be able to train Gokuldas for Gujarati in two
months. He seems to be very weak in Gujarati.
You have arranged Manilal's time-table very well. Since he likes work-
ing on the land, ask him to do some work around the house. The main
thing is to clear the big plot of land and water the plants. He will get to
know more by himself if he looks after the trees. What is he learning?
I shall write to you about his English composing. It will be all right
for the present if he takes training in Gujarati.
I see that your mind has weakened a little. The real need is for
you to stay here with me for a few months, which, however, does not
seem to be possible. It is not enough that you are firm about staying on in
the press. I have already shown you conclusively as in a mathematical
problem that the press won't break down. You had agreed with me in
that, and now you write that the circumstances are unbearable and pre-
carious. This is exactly what I consider a sign of weakness. You have
not been able to consider — nor did you have the time to do so — what
our duty is in regard to the press, what your own duty is or how to
deal with the workers; and your weakness is brought out by the adverse
circumstances. I consider it a good thing that this has happened; but it
1 Not available
can be so considered only if you understand the purport of it. I cannot
explain all this in a letter. But this much I do say that: (1) the
press will not break down so long as even a single man is entirely devoted
to it; (2) I do not see anything better for you or the others than the
press; (3) however bitter a man might be, he is sure to come round if we
bestow upon him pure love in thought, word and deed; (4) but, whether
he comes round or not, our duty is to follow the same course without
misgivings. I believe it will be better if you train Hemchand and free
yourself a little. And I want you to do so.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the original Gujarati: S. N. 4252
