125. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
MALVAN,
February, 28 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have two letters from you.
I have no doubt in my mind that a vow is like a rudder-
a life regulator. And just as a rudderless ship is lost, so is a life
without a vow a lost life. For after all a vow means a religious
determination to carry out a decision for self-restraint even at the
cost of one's life. I should therefore welcome your desire to take
what is perhaps the supremest vow for a man or a woman. But
if it is taken let it be taken after the maturest deliberation. It
would be wrong on my part to prevent you from taking the vow,
if you are clear about the necessity of taking it. Not to take the
vow is to trust one's little self. To take it is to distrust oneself and
to trust only God. I know where I should have been if I had
not taken the vows I have.
But there is the other side, i.e., Andrews's. He says: "I do
not know that the voice within is always the voice of God. What
I may hold to be right today may be found to be wrong to-
morrow. I must therefore hold myself free to do the will of God
as I discover it from moment to moment." This attitude has ans-
wered his purpose. I should be undone. I see a fallacy behind
A's argument. He does not. So it sustains him. Fallacy, error
and the like are relative terms. What is good for one may not
be good for all even though Truth is one for all time. The
difficulty lies in our hopeless ignorance of Truth. Cruel God
has enabled us to see that Truth is one and nothing else is; but
He has disabled us for knowing its content.
If therefore you feel the call within to take the vow and if
you feel it will make you feel freer, you shall take it. Nothing
need be done in haste.
You must keep your health. Of course you will always starve
when you feel the slightest touch of fullness or indigestion. Even
weakness is preferable to apparent strength if it is accompanied by
indigestion or even a feeling of fullness.
You must not worry about your Hindi. You are doing all
you can. The rest must lie in the hands of God. A change may
be necessary after we meet. The fact evidently is that you must
not combine two things-learning Hindi and teaching charkha.
It evidently exhausts you. And you have not been helped to the
extent you needed. However, the experiences you have gained
are inestimable and I am satisfied.
I have only now got Ramachandra's letter. I must see what
can be done when I am there.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
I have no time even for revising this important letter.
From the original: C.W. 5207. Courtesy: Mirabehn.
