563. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
'DILKHUSHA', PANCHGANI,
June 16, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your telegram of yesterday received at 3.45
p. m. My second telegram acknowledging your kind telegraphic
invitation, evidently crossed yours. I am sending you this letter in
reply, instead of wiring, because I am anxious that you should
understand my position thoroughly. However, I am sending you
a wire intimating the despatch of this letter. For ready reference,
I am enclosing herewith a copy of my Press message which was
issued yesterday in the morning. I would like you to go through it.
While it is true that my position is technical, the reality
of it is truer. My official and legal connection with the Congress
was deliberately, and with the consent of the All-India Con-
gress Committee, severed 5 in order to enable me all the better
to serve the common cause. This position therefore cannot be
changed at will. In the forthcoming official conference, I can have
no official position. My presence in it will change the official
colour, unless I become an official representative of the Congress.
But if you think that my help is desirable and that without being
a member of the conference I am likely to be useful, I shall
make it a point to be at your service before and even during
the conference proceedings, assuming, of course, that the Working
Committee wishes likewise.
I want to cite an analogy. You may have known the late
Deenabandhu, as C. F. Andrews was affectionately called by us.
He severed his official connection with the Cambridge Mission and
the Church in order to serve religion, India and humanity better.
The position he occupied as a valuable link between India and
England, whether official or non-official and, between all classes
and parties, grew as days went. If I can, I would love to occupy
such a position. It may never come to me. Man can but try.
You have suggested further consideration and consultation,
both of which I have done. I am within an easy distance of
Yeravda Central prison, where Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and
Shri Shankarrao Dev were recently transferred from Ahmednagar
Fort. Almost immediately after their discharge from the jail yes-
terday they motored to Panchgani and are still with me. I have
shown them all the necessary papers and they concur with me in
what I am writing.
In the task you have undertaken, of which I fully appreciate
the difficulty and delicacy, you certainly need the assistance and
goodwill of all the parties. The Congress help you naturally
cannot have without the Congress being officially represented at
your table. The first and also perhaps the main purpose of the
discharge of the remaining members of the Working Committee
will be frustrated unless you secure the presence at your table of
the President of the Congress or whomsoever he and his Committee
may appoint for the purpose. If my supposition is correct, my
immediate advice is that you should invite the President of the
Congress. I expect that the ban on the Congress had been or
will be lifted to the extent it still exists.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
Enclosure : 1
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
THE VICEROY'S HOUSE
NEW DELHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 19-20
