141. LETTER TO JAMSHEDJI NASARVANJI MEHTA
SINHGADH,
[May 1, 1920]
BHAISHRI JAMSHEDJI,
I welcome your letter. I cannot possibly fail to understand
you or your sentiments; nor can it be said that those who are opposed
to the idea of non-co-operation are not friends of the Muslims.
There can well be a difference of opinion even among friends.
And now I shall answer your questions:
1. It is true that the effect of non-co-operation will be to
create opposition to the Government, but it has not been conceiv-
ed in a spirit of retaliation and, therefore, the question what crime
the Government has committed does not rise; though, of course,
the latter has not done all it could have. If the British Govern-
ment fails to secure justice, the Indian Government can resign.
In a situation like this the Indian Government cannot rest con-
tent with a mere protest. This is where it has failed and so the
people are within their rights in withdrawing their co-operation
and thereby expressing their displeasure.
2. We may not knowingly inflict pain on others. Neverthe-
less, if in consequence of some unavoidable act of ours anyone
suffers, we cannot be held responsible. I have always the right
to resign from Government service and, if the Government feels
unhappy because of my resignation, I am guilty of no violence
towards it. I may be living in my father's house and incidentally
serving him in many ways, but I may quit the house and stop co-
operating with him when I see him doing an injustice and that
would certainly hurt him; even then, my duty would be to leave
the house. My father would have invited that suffering on himself.
If we do not act in this manner, the oppressors all the world over
get a charter of freedom to persist in their evil ways.
3. Thus you will see that if we can organize non-co-operation
without indulging in violence, we have every right to do so; it is in
fact our duty to do so.
4. Shaukat Ali's speech has not alarmed me, for I think I
understand what he means. I do admit that all the Muslims do not
view non-co-operation in the same light that I do. But there is a clear
understanding with them that there can be no violence side by side
with non-co-operation. Besides, though Muslims may adopt non-
co-operation in a spirit of retaliation, we can produce a happy re-
sult from it and save ourselves from an outbreak of violence. All
good actions, by whatever feelings prompted, yield some fruit.
The man who follows truth or exercises self-restraint out of fear or
shame will yet reap the outward benefit of doing so; such is the
power of good actions.
Many others must have sincerely felt the same doubt which
you have and hence I am sending your letter and my reply for
publication in the Navajivan.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 9-5-1920
