65. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA JAIL,
August 12, 1922
TO
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL JAIL
SIR,
There are regarding myself three matters pending for some
time.
(1) In May last, I wrote to my friend Hakimji Ajmal Khan of
Delhi the usual quarterly letter. The Government declined to for-
ward it unless I cut out portions objected to by them. As I con-
sidered the portions strictly relevant to my condition in the Jail, I
could not see my way to remove them and I respectfully notified to
the Government that I did not propose to avail myself of the pri-
vilege or the right of sending to my friend the usual letter unless I
could give him a full description of my condition. At the same time,
I wrote a brief letter to my friend saying that the letter I had
written to him was disallowed and that I did not propose to write
any letter regarding my welfare unless the Government removed the
restrictions imposed by them. This second letter, too, the Govern-
ment have declined to send. It is this second letter which I have
asked should be returned to me as the first has been.
(2) After having received permission from Col. Dalziel to write
a vernacular primer and the assurance that there would be no
objection to my sending it to my friends for publication, I wrote the
primer and gave it to Col. Dalziel for dispatch to the address
mentioned in the covering letter. The Government have declined
to send the primer to the address given, on the ground that prison-
ers cannot be permitted to publish books whilst they are serving
their term. I have no wish to see my name on the primer as
publisher or author. If the primer may not be published even
without my name being connected with it in any way, I would like
it returned to me.
(3) The Government were pleased to notify that I could be
allowed periodicals. I therefore asked for permission to send for
The Times of India weekly, the Modern Review—a high-class Cal-
cutta monthly, and the Saraswati—a Hindi magazine. The last
named has been kindly allowed. No decision has yet been received
regarding the other two. I am anxiously awaiting the Government
decision about them.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
From a handwritten copy: S.N. 8014
