121. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
November 15, 1945
BHAI MANGALDAS,
I have your letter. I see you are working at great speed.
I on my part am doing what I can from here.
I have gone through Motilal's and your opinion. I agree
with it. But there is one thing neither of you appear to have
considered. The words are: "one should not refuse to sell
[khadi] which is worth buying." Now the question is which
khadi should be considered "worth buying". One might say that
the khadi which had been produced according to the conditions
laid down by me was "worth buying". Isn't that so? Why
can't I say that I will sell my khadi only to the person who
pays me the highest price for it? This gives rise to many more
questions but I do not wish to discuss them. They are irrelevant
at the moment. But I have been forced to write this because
it is not irrelevant to point out the snag which I notice and
which prevents me from publishing your views. So if it can be
put right, I would of course like to get it done, so that it can be
published. But if there is something wrong in my way of think-
ing, I should not proceed with it for the moment.
I hope to reach there by the morning train on the 19th.
Sardar and others will be with me. I shall leave for Wardha on
the 20th evening.
Now about Munshi. I did not like the article you showed
me which appeared in the Chronicle. I found malice in it.
Munshi had come here on business of his own. I asked him about
it. He showed me the mistakes in the article and there were
other defects also. Even if Jawaharlal had sent a message
Munshi did not get it. Afterwards Jawaharlal also came and
when I asked him he said that he did not have the slightest
recollection of having sent a message. He might have told
somebody to send one but it was of no value. The gist of this is
that there is very little truth in newspapers and they are full of
falsehood. If a man acts believing in their veracity he must lose.
I certainly do not wish to see you lose.
Blessings from
BAPU
MANGALDAS PAKVASA
29 DOONGERSI ROAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
