42. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
BAREILLY,
June 13, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL JOSHI,
Parnerkar had given me points to be included in the letter
to Sir Purushottamdas. I enclose them with this. They seem to
be all right. In the letter make clear that it will be for him to
get a fencing put up. Give him an estimate of the expenditure
for that. We should get occupancy right for 25 years. After that
period, we should get compensation for the buildings we may
have constructed at a rate to be fixed then. If the two parties
differ as regards the amount, a duly authorized arbitrator should
be appointed and we should be paid the amount fixed by him.
We should be bound for five years to accept their cattle, even if
we are incurring losses. You may also add that, if the society in
Bombay wishes to discuss the matter further, Parnerkar will visit
Bombay.
Have a talk with Chi. Kanti from time to time. We cannot
say yet that he has calmed down.
I send with this Ranchhodbhai's letter; make good use of
his criticism.
The change about the kitchen can be introduced with im-
mediate effect.
I shall make one criticism about the names suggested for the
different places in the Ashram. I see no uniformity in them. There
is a mixture of Bengali, Marathi and Persian words. No thought
seems to have been given to the matter. Why kutir, and not kuti?
Why should we not call the place "Magan Kutir" or "Magan
Niwas"? What shall we gain by having a new name in place of
the suggestive one, "Striniwas"? Why not "Prarthanabhavan"?
Or, why should we not try to find a word which can be easily
understood to indicate that the place where prayers are held is
an open maidan?
I see no reasoning behind the suggestion to call the guest house
"Nandini". I should certainly like Bhansali's name to be con-
nected with Mahadev's dwelling. Why should we not name it
"Jaybhuvan"? Why should the kitchen be named "Sharada-
mandir"? Why not "Bhojanshala"? Since the place serves both
purposes, its name should refer to both. "Kailas" for "Vankar
Niwas" sounds ostentatious. "Rustom Block" should be changed
into a suggestive name. We should find the Gujarati equivalent
for "block". "Goshala" is a suggestive name, and we have no
right to replace it by the most sacred name "Gokul". "Uttar
Prantar" and "Dakshin Prantar" too do not sound well to me.
We should dismiss "Rajmarg". I have some doubt whether to
permit "Vithi" to stay. "Tirtha" should be dismissed.
You will now easily understand what is at the root of my
criticism. Comments were invited at the time of the prayer;
take this as in response to that. Don't think at all that my sug-
gestions must be carried out. It will be enough if this criticism
receives attention along with other criticisms. Kaka will be able
to think better about this problem.
Preserve the accompanying notice. It is necessary that
Chhaganlal should see the Vahivatdar when he goes there. If
they have started any work, there will be no problem at all.
I have gone through the new scheme drawn up by Chhotelal
for the production of khadi in Bahial. I enclose it with this.
The weakest part of the scheme is that relating to carding. We can
succeed only if it is taken up by the new class of people that has
arisen.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 15802; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 114-
