306. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM,
June 1, 1919
CHI. RAMDAS,
I have your letter. Surely, I do dictate letters for you. Hardly
does a month pass without one. You have done well in taking up
service with Mohanlal. I know, of course, that you will not
abuse his generosity, his goodness and his love which you describe
so well. But I want more, that you should be twice as painstaking
and careful at a place such as his and make some return for that
love. There is as much disadvantage as advantage in serving under
a relative or a friend. The advantage is that we may have certain
facilities in such a place which would not be available elsewhere;
the disadvantage is that we may abuse the facilities because of his
goodness and yield to the temptation of shirking work. I should
like you to be most careful. I also want to say, at the same time,
that I have no fear on your account. I know from experience
that you deserve to be loved and am sure that you will earn nothing
but a good name there. Attend to everything in the shop as if the
shop were your very own. If there is anything about which you do
not know what to do, ask others at once. Never try, out of a false
sense of shame, to conceal your ignorance in any matter. When I
first went to South Africa, I did not know what a P. Note meant.
I managed to conceal my ignorance for a few days; but, as days
passed, I became more nervous and saw that unless I knew what a
P. Note meant, I would not understand Dada Abdulla Sheth's case.
And so I declared my ignorance without losing any more time.
When I knew that a P. Note meant a Promissory Note, I burst out
laughing, not at my ignorance but at my false sense of shame, for I
could not find the phrase P. Note even in a dictionary. Hence the
royal road for us, if there is anything which we do not know, is
immediately to consult someone and be instructed. It will do no
harm if people think us foolish, but it will do real harm if, in our
ignorance, we commit an error.
I hope you are keeping well. Be at peace there and earn any-
thing you can in honest ways. Let me know whenever there is any-
thing you would like to tell me or anything you desire. Ba often
tells me that you have grown up, that I should have you here and
get you married. I have emphatically refused to call you over here
and told her that, if any time you wanted to marry, you would
tell me so plainly. I have also told her that I have asked you to be
frank with me. This has reassured her. I have often said that,
in these difficult times, when India is so poor and in such wretched
plight, every Indian has an especial duty not to marry, a duty
one has in a time of distress. Hence, ordinarily I would want you
to exercise self-control and observe inviolate brahmacharya for life.
With the passing of time, desire will grow weaker, your physical
and mental strength will increase and you will forget the thought
of marriage. But I know this is applying my standard to you. I
have promised you that, whatever my own ideas on the subject, if
you think of marrying, I shall give all help I can. You should,
therefore, have confidence in me and let me know, without fear, if
you want to marry. In this matter, forget that I am your father
and treat me as a good friend and see whether I pass the test.
I am keeping well enough for my work. I take goat's milk
twice and fruits thrice. There is less physical energy but the brain
does not seem to have lost any of its power. I am occupied with some
work or other from six in the morning to ten in the evening. I cannot
do now without a nap of 30 to 40 minutes during the day. Despite
so much work, the brain is not particularly tired at ten in the even-
ning. The struggle is on. Civil disobedience will be shortly resum-
ed. I am getting some new experiences, besides the same old ones.
Hope and disappointment have been nearly in the same measure.
You write frequently enough, but Manilal seems to be lethar-
gic. I have heard nothing about his case, either from him or from
you. I am eager to know how he defended himself. Though I do
intend to write to Manilal, I may well fail to do so and, therefore,
you should send this letter on to him in any case. I shall be happy
to have photographs of you two brothers. Do you read anything?
Do you say your morning prayers? If you have not been saying
them, I remind you again to start doing so unfailingly, for I am
convinced that the practice is most beneficial. You will know its
value in the hour of difficulty; actually, the value of morning pra-
yers and sandhya1, gone through thoughtfully, is realized from day
to day. They are so much food you serve to the soul. Just as with-
out food the body gets emaciated, so also does the soul famish
without the right kind of food.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
