503. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
September 14, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I am glad you have written so fully and frankly.
When, on my return from London at the end of 1931, I found
you to have been suddenly snatched away from me, I felt the sepa-
ration keenly. I was, therefore, most anxious to meet you and
exchange views.
With much of what you have said in your letter I am in
complete agreement. The experience gained after the Karachi
Congress has, if possible, strengthened my faith in the main reso-
lution and the economic programme referred to by you. I have
no doubt in my mind that our goal can be no less than 'Complete
Independence'. I am also in whole-hearted agreement with you
when you say that without a material revision of vested interests
the condition of the masses can never be improved. I believe, too,
though I may not go as far as you do, that before India can
become one homogeneous entity, the princes will have to part
with much of their power and become popular representatives of
the people over whom they are ruling today.
I can corro-
borate from first-hand experience much of what you say about
the Round Table Conference. Nor have I the slightest difficulty
in agreeing with you that in these days of rapid intercommunica-
tion and a growing consciousness of the oneness of all man-
kind, we must recognize that our nationalism must not be in-
consistent with progressive internationalism. India cannot stand
in isolation and unaffected by what is going on in other parts of
the world. I can, therefore, go the whole length with you and
say that 'we should range ourselves with the progressive forces of
the world'. But I know that though there is such an agreement
between you and me in the enunciation of ideals, there are
temperamental differences between us. Thus you have empha-
sized the necessity of a clear statement of the goal, but having
once determined it, I have never attached importance to the
repetition. The clearest possible definition of the goal and its
appreciation would fail to take us there if we do not know and
utilize the means of achieving it. I have, therefore, concerned
myself principally with the conservation of the means and their
progressive use. I know that if we can take care of them, at-
tainment of the goal is assured. I feel too that our progress to-
wards the goal will be in exact proportion to the purity of our
means. If we can give an ocular demonstration of our uttermost
truthfulness and non-violence, I am convinced that our statement
of the national goal cannot long offend the interests which your
letter would appear to attack. We know that the princes, the
zamindars, and those who depend for their existence upon the ex-
ploitation of the masses, would cease to fear and distrust us, if
we could but ensure the innocence of our methods. We do not
seek to coerce any. We seek to convert them. This method may
1 Vide Vol. XLV, pp. 370-.
appear to be long, perhaps too long, but I am convinced that
it is the shortest.
In the main I agree with your interpretation of Sjt. Aney's
instructions and my note upon them.
I am quite clear in my
mind that had those instructions not been issued, the whole move-
ment of civil resistance would have collapsed through growing
internal weakness; for Congressmen were deluding themselves into
the belief that there were organizations effectively functioning to
which they could look for guidance, when, as a matter of fact,
under the organized terrorism which the Ordinance Rule means,
organized functioning of Congress Committees had become impos-
sible. A false belief in the functioning of organizations, rendered
illegal and largely impotent, was fast producing a demoralization
which had to be arrested. There is no such thing as demoraliza-
tion in civil resistance properly applied. You have said rightly that
after all "civil disobedience is essentially an individual affair". I go
a step further and say that so long as there is one civil resister offer-
ing resistance, the movement cannot die and must succeed in the
end. Individual civil resisters do not need the aid of an orga-
nization. After all an organization is nothing without the indi-
viduals composing it. Sjt. Aney's instructions were, therefore, I
hold, an affective answer to the Ordinances and if only men and
women belonging to the Congress will appreciate the necessity of
those instructions with all their implications, the Ordinances will
be rendered nugatory, at least so far as the resisters are concern-
ed. They can form a nucleus around which an army of invincible
civil resisters can be built up. Nothing in Sjt. Aney's instructions
or in my note would warrant the supposition that they preclude
organized action by Congressmen in any shape or form.
I would like to warn you against thinking that there is no
fundamental difference between individual civil resistance and
mass civil resistance. I think that the fundamental difference is
implied in your own admission that "it is essentially an indi-
vidual affair". The chief distinction between mass civil resistance
and individual civil resistance is that in the latter everyone is a
complete independent unit and his fall does not affect the others;
in mass civil resistance the fall of one generally adversely affects the
rest.
Again, in mass civil resistance leadership is essential, in
individual civil resistance every resister is his own leader. Then
again, in mass civil resistance, there is a possibility of failure; in
individual civil resistance failure is an impossibility. Finally, a
State may cope with mass civil resistance; no State has yet
been found able to cope with individual civil resistance.
Nor may much be made of my statement that an organization
which feels its own strength can at its own risk adopt mass civil
resistance. While, as an opinion, it is unexceptionable, I know
that at the present moment there is no organization that can
shoulder the burden. I do not want to raise false hopes.
Now about the secret methods. I am as firm as ever that they
must be tabooed. I am myself unable to make any exceptions.
Secrecy has caused much mischief and if it is not put down
with a firm hand, it may ruin the movement. There may be ex-
ceptional circumstances that may warrant secret methods.
I
would forgo that advantage for the sake of the masses whom we
want to educate in fearlessness. I will not confuse their minds
by leading them to think that under certain circumstances, they
may resort to secret methods. Secrecy is inimical to the growth of
the spirit of civil resistance. If Congressmen will realize that all
property is liable to be confiscated at any moment, they will learn
to be utterly independent of it.
I quite agree with you that it is ludicrous for individuals to
send notices to the local authorities of their intention to offer a
particular form of civil disobedience. We do not want to make a
great movement ridiculous. Therefore when civil resistance is
offered it should be offered seriously and in an effective manner,
in so far as this is possible, in furtherance of the Congress pro-
gramme.
I notice one gap in your letter. You make no mention of the
various constructive activities of the Congress. They became an
integral part of the Congress programme that was framed after
mature deliberations in 1920. With civil resistance as the back-
ground we cannot possibly do without the constructive activities
such as communal unity, removal of untouchability and univer-
salization of the spinning-wheel and khaddar. I am as strong
as ever about these. We must recognize that whilst the Congress-
men can be counted by hundreds of thousands, civil resisters im-
prisoned have never amounted to more than one lakh at the out-
side. I feel that there is something radically wrong if paralysis
has overtaken the remaining lakhs. There is nothing to be asham-
ed of in an open confession by those who for any reason whatsoever
are unable to join the civil resisters' ranks. They are also serving
the cause of the country and bringing it nearer to the goal who are
engaged in any of the constructive activities I have named and
several other kindred activities I can add to the list. Ordinance
or no Ordinance, if individual Congressmen and Congresswomen
will learn the art of contributing their share to the work of build-
ing of the house of independence and realize their own impor-
tance, dark as the horizon seems to us, there is absolutely no
cause for despair or disappointment.
Finally, if I can say so without incurring the risk of your ac-
cusing me of egotism, I would like to say that I have no sense of
defeat in me and the hope in me that this country of ours is fast
marching towards its goal is burning as bright as it did in 1920;
for I have an undying faith in the efficacy of civil resistance. But
as you are aware, after full and prayerful consideration, I have
decided not to take the offensive during the unexpired period of
the sentence of imprisonment that was pronounced against me on
the 4th of August last by the court that met in Yeravda Jail. I
need not go into the reasons as I have already issued a separate
statement about it. This personal suspension, although it may be
misunderstood for a while, will show how and when it may be-
come a duty. And if it is a duty, it cannot possibly injure the
cause.
Yours,
BAPU
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
POONA
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(14), pp. 153-61; also Mahatma, Vol. III, pp. 308-11
