247. LETTER TO SHANKARAN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 8, 1928
MY DEAR SHANKARAN,
I was thinking of you only early this morning, that is, just
after prayer when talking to Pyarelal and here is your letter.
Suppose that there is a colony of orphans shipwrecked on an
island, that they are all unmarried males, that they have never
known that they ever had any parents, suppose further that they
have a knowledge of letters and that from their reading they under-
stood that they had all parents; suppose then that they in the
course of their readings come upon a philosophical book called
"Our Spontaneous Origin", should the orphans feel convinced
philosophically that they were all spontaneous creation? Just
as the supposed philosophical book would not unsettle the con-
viction of the majority of the unsophisticated orphans, so should
the philosophical book that you have read about the non-existence
of God not unsettle your belief in God. If you will admit the fact
of your having parents, how can you escape the fundamental fact
of the First Cause? Having made sure of that, I am indiffer-
ent whether you call that First Cause God or some other thing.
And having been also convinced of that fact it is wholly unneces-
sary to inquire how that First Cause disposes of justice or to inquire
about the injustice that we seem to see around us. There are endless
theories. I believe in that of cause and effect, that is, of the law of
karma. It seems to answer all a man's doubts. But if they do not
answer yours, you must wait, watch and pray and you will some
day have the light. But if you do not believe in the First Cause,
there is no hope. For to whom should you pray then? Therefore
hold fast to your belief in God, never mind the reasoning. Can
you reason out the existence of your parents? Will you not say,
'whether I can reason or not the existence of my parents is an
absolute fact with me'? If you cannot prove it to the satisfaction
of your inquirers, you will say 'my reasoning is at fault but not the
fact'. Even so must you say to yourself, 'Though I may not be
able to reason out the existence of God, I must accept the expe-
rience of and the belief of mankind in the First Cause'.
If even now you are not satisfied, you must ask me again.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13175 and 13180
XXXVI-14
