196. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
June 30, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. I have done all that you wished and more.
I have arranged for her coaching in Hindi, music, etc. I ask her to
sit with me. I permit her to eat everything. I have permitted her
to cook her food with chillies, even offered to get it cooked for her.
I have asked Vasumati and Sharda to keep her company. I give
her a good deal of my time too. But she wants you. How can
I give that?
You are safe because you can see your errors sooner or later.
Being at my wit's end I have already sent a wire to Ramachan-
dran. I have asked him or Govindan to come over. There has
been no reply so far. It was your duty to let me know what
happened there.
Now my advice. If you wish to save yourself and Saraswati
you will have to be hard-hearted. You should plainly tell Sara-
swati that you will neither leave Bangalore nor permit her to
come over there; that she will have to stay either at Segaon or at
Trivandrum. She will submit to you. But she knows your weak-
ness. She is, of course, a child but you, too, have proved to be a
child. I had thought that you were mature and had ability to
guide Saraswati. But my judgment has proved to be wrong.
You seem to have become completely infatuated. If you find it
impossible to overcome the infatuation, then there is no other
way for you except to get married. But I would consider it
an outrage for you to marry at present. I would not give my
consent to it. But you do not need my consent. I would regard
it as your duty to do that without which you cannot live. If I
cannot give my consent to it because I don't like it, you should
not feel unhappy.
Give up the idea of going to Nagpur. Complete the course
there.
Permit Amtul Salaam to talk. It would be easy for me if
you did so. You should trust me. I will not let Amtul Salaam
violate propriety.
I will tell you an interesting thing that happened yester-
day. In the morning Saraswati came and asked me to send
you a wire stating: "I will be brave," etc. I asked her to write
down the telegram. She, therefore, brought the enclosed. I told
her that it being Sunday I would send it today. She was pleased.
Before two hours had passed she brought another telegram,
also enclosed. It was of course not sent. This is the position.
Everything depends on you. I wish to give you all possible help.
But all that should be within the limits of dharma. Be mature
and steady of mind. At present you should live purely a stud-
ent's life. Your life will be ruined if you yield to attachment.
May God show you the right path. I will not be in a
hurry to send Saraswati to Trivandrum.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7337.
Courtesy: Kantilal
Gandhi
