67. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
BIRLA HOUSE, NEW DELHI,
March 15, 1939
1. I had hoped to send you this letter in the afternoon. But
from the Viceroy's House I went directly to the prisoners in
the Delhi Jail who were hunger-striking. Contrary to my expec-
tations I had to be with them for full two hours. I am happy
to be able to say that they listened to me and broke their fast
in my presence. They were being forcibly fed. I am now
writing to Sir Reginald Maxwell about their discharge.
2. I now reduce to writing what I tried to explain in the course
of our conversation. As I read your telegram1, the Chief Justice
is to interpret the letter given to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel on
the 26th December last by the Thakore Saheb. Assuming that
it accords with our contention, the Committee has then to be set up
with seven nominees of the Sardar and three officials nominated
by the Thakore Saheb, the Thakore Saheb selecting the President
of the Committee out of the ten.
3. The next thing contemplated in your telegram is that if
there is a difference of opinion between the Sardar's nominees
on the one hand and the officials on the other as to the meaning
of the Notification of 26th December, the Chief Justice is to be
the referee whose decision will be final. This as I read your
telegram is its technical meaning, so far as the two references to
the Chief Justice are concerned. So far as the framing of the
constitution is concerned, the majority decision should prevail.
4. This letter need not go further so far as my promise to
write to you on the two points raised by me is concerned. But
perhaps it is fair to you for me to draw your attention to the
fact that the advisers of the Thakore Saheb have committed him
to certain nominations, from which commitment it might be
embarrassing even for the Paramount Power to recede. I refer
to the nominations of two Mussalman members and one Bhayat.
Perhaps you are aware of this difficulty and also of the several
ways out that I have suggested. If you are not, I shall be glad
to explain them to you. As I reflect upon our conversation,
it seems to me that it was inconclusive in more ways than
one. Consideration for your time was weighing heavily upon
me, and as everything else, as I thought, appeared to you to be
smooth-sailing, I did not wish to tax you any further. You will
agree that there should be no misunderstanding about the several
steps that have to be taken for implementing the conditions in
terms of which I broke the fast. It would be terrible if it
becomes my duty to object to any step after it is announced. I
therefore suggest that I should be made aware beforehand of
the announcement or announcements that may have to be made
in connection with the Rajkot affair.
5. And there are, as I mentioned to you, several other
matters brought out by me in what has been termed my ulti-
matum to the Thakore Saheb and about which assurance has
been given to me in your two telegrams. Another conversation
between us seems to me to be necessary for a proper and final
elucidation of the various points arising out of the interchange
of the telegrams between us. As I think over the hurried talk that
you gave me about the States in general and the policy you con-
template to adopt in the immediate future, a feeling of disturbance
creeps over me. I do not want to reduce to writing, unless you
desire otherwise, the vague fear that is seizing hold of me on the
assumption that I have understood you correctly. I would there-
fore like to have the interview for this purpose also.
Could you please send me a time?
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India. Also from a copy: C.W. 7813. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
