25. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
November 14, 1909
MY DEAR MILLIE,
Though we differ somewhat as to the view of life, there is still
a subtle sameness running through our thought which makes you most
lovable to me. The inner voice tells you one thing, the outer life shows
a contradiction. You rightly decline the assistance of the intellect and
wait for the light of intuition. Some day and somehow it would come.
And if you are more true and I am less so, then pray that I may
have the light. Meanwhile both of us are mad after Truth. So we are,
apart from your being Henry's wife, sister and brother. Miss Molteno 1
will not have us otherwise. She is right. But then I am an exacting
brother. I do not want the obedience of a daughter, that only a daughter
can give and should give. But I do want a sister's full trust and
confidence. Will you please express to me all your wants! I am more
anxious now that I am away from you. It was a relief to me to meet
you twice a week. Now, O God, when shall we who have so much
in common meet again! And yet why complain? We are nearer, than
the passengers who are sitting in the same room as I am.
I want your confidence because I hastened your legal marriage 2
and I have been instrumental in keeping you physically apart. 3 I know
my responsibility. I ask you to help me to fulfil it. If then you suffer
from any want at all will you please promise to let me know ? When
it requires immediate satisfaction, please do not hesitate to let Mr. Ritch
know. Better if you let him know directly but if you have any delicate
hesitation about it, please do so through my adopted daughter. The word
'adopted' jars. It ordinarily shows some separation. To me it signifies
none. But I will not use it often.
But am I worthy to be her father? Yes, if she is worthy to be
my daughter. You know what Mrs. Gandhi used to call Henry - my
first-born. He is too mature to be that to me. But Maud is immature
enough to be all that to me - my first-born daughter. Of Henry Mrs.
G. used to speak out of jealousy. I am sure she would speak of Maud
lovingly if only because she is a woman. She will fill Mrs. Gandhi's
1 Daughter of Sir John Molteno
2 Vide Vol. XXXIX, pp. 246-.
3 Vide pp. 50-1, and Vol. X, p. 332.
32
life. Now that is selfish. A father has a right to be selfish like that.
You see how Maud occupies me. During the past three months, i.e.,
after the first month's work she has never wanted to be away from
me. And yet I never guessed the intensity of affection until that night
when she thought all her ambition was dashed to the ground. But is
all this real or is it the glamour of my presence ? If it is the latter,
it is too terrible. I would then have to revise my enthusiasm. And how
is that possible? Anyhow I look to you to observe Maud, analyse her,
cross-examine her and find out where she is. There is no present need
of anybody in Phoenix. And yet if Maud is what she says she is, she
will always be wanted. She will go to give strength.
Of Celia and Amy I saw little. I know there was little need. They
have your loving care. But let me once more remind you of our
conversation when we were going to Miss Molteno. It is the duty of
every man and woman unless they dedicate their lives to an ideal pure
and simple to serve humanity by marrying. I am not wrong when I
say that the custom of girls making their choice is disastrous. If you
could but quietly contemplate what girls' life today is in England, you
would shake with rage and pity. Do not judge from yourself You are
exceptional. Anyway, your clear vision will show you immediately that
you are bound to select a better husband for Amy than ever she can.
In order to come to this we need not discuss even the higher proposition.
If you agree with me, I am sure you will not think of giving Amy
an intellectual training such as painting, etc., but make her a good and
loving soul. That is the training that the world needs. Don't you agree?
Maud has given me the enlargement of that lovely picture of Waldo 1
and Brownie 2 . May they ever fill your life and grow to be a credit
to their parents.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original
Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 & 2 Addressee's sons
