323. LETTER TO GURUNATH JOSHI
MUSSOORIE,
June 1, 1946
BHAI GURUNATH JOSHI,
I got your letter. It is good that you wrote, no matter
what. In my opinion, you have been guilty of a serious lapse from
the moral point of view. This is the one thing that has dis-
graced many a profession. In theory all professions are supposed
to be altruistic, i. e., they are to be pursued with a religious
attitude. Pecuniary consideration has no place in a religious
attitude. If one pursues any calling in a religious spirit one is
sure to earn enough for one's maintenance. But even that
is not always necessary. Even if one cannot earn enough one
has to keep up one's religious attitude. Vritti in this connection
should be understood to mean drishti, i. e., point of view. You
swerved from such an attitude and succumbed to the tempta-
tion of injections, etc. Ganeshshastri Joshi, your guru, who
initiated you in the Ayurvedic system, has himself told me about
the guiding principle of Ayurveda, viz., that Ramanama forms
the basis of the system. And utilization of the five elements
is symbolic of the permanence of Ramanama. You forgot this
lesson. I had told you that in [Uruli] Kanchan village, you had
to forget your knowledge of the Ayurvedic medicines, i. e., you
were not to make use of them. Your first job was to teach
Ramanama. Only those who have spontaneous faith in it and are
inspired by it in all their actions can testify to the wonders of
Ramanama. For, as I have said, Ramanama is the unfailing
remedy for all the three kinds of afflictions. Like the arrow of
Rama which is said to have never missed its target, the name
of Rama too never fails. All our actions should be inspired
by this principle. Lure of wealth is also a kind of affliction
for which again Ramanama is the cure. Having yourself failed
to imbibe this, how can you expect to treat others by naturo-
pathy? Never mind what has happened; if you now want to
come to Uruli Kanchan village, use the great rejuvenating
herb that Ramanama is wherever you are. Give up the merest
wish of earning wealth through it. Come and see me in Uruli
Kanchan village when I go there after you have completely rid
yourself of your infatuation with wealth and have simplified your
way of life. Read this letter again and again. Write to me if
you don't follow any expression. You can show this letter to
Ganeshshastri Joshi and do as he says.
May you always come to good. Forget Veergaon. It is
enough to be inspired to. . . .1
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
