65. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 16, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Kennedy did come last Sunday. He passed the night too at the
Farm. He may come again. We discussed many things — abstract
and otherwise. It was only at night that he opened discussion on your
relations. He showed me your letter to me. From you we went on
to what should be man's duty in his dealings with friends and fellow-
beings generally. He agreed that the safest course was not to analyse
friends even as a son does not analyse his mother or a husband his
wife. Both simply love one another. I do not think he knows what
he proposes doing on your return. And for my part I would wish that
you would not think of your future relations either. Let them grow
1 From the reference to the water-cart; vide the following item.
themselves. The only thing one may think of is oneself What is our
duty in [the] given circumstances !
Kennedy and I discussed also the question of laying pipes, etc. I
asked him to get quotations from Vereeniging. This he has done. I
need hardly assure you that I would do nothing rashly.
The third hole is likely to be finished next week. Logan said so.
He is now over 200 feet deep.
From your wonderful letters I gather that you are not worrying
about things over here. I am glad.
The fencing still remains suspended. We are making use of the
water-carts and re-laying the principal floors. The school-room and the
kitchen verandah are finished. Men's quarters will be finished by
Tuesday. The verandah between your room and the school will be
finished by the end of the week. Fencing will then be taken up. I trust
you do not mind the delay.
Albrecht is a brick. Now he works practically the whole day. I
must retract much I said about him. His work is splendid. But his loving
faculty is simply grand. Most of the boys adore him. Mrs. Gandhi loves
him. That is saying a great deal in his favour. He is most unassuming.
He quietly sits through the story I give the children in the evening.
At times it must be uninteresting for him. But he does not mind it.
Of course he is progressing in health. I am not sure that you and I
are good enough to deserve him. Did I tell you that Chhotalal now
sleeps with him and mainly through him it is that Chhotalal too is saltless.
A solicitor, Vand der Kessels of Heidelberg, motored from
Johannesburg to consult me. I served him in our ordinary style, gave
him principally a saltless meal. He seemed to appreciate the compliment
paid to him in not making the slightest distinction.
I sent Isaac to see Call in Pretoria. Isaac thinks that Call is not
so bad and could be removed. I hope to go next week myself to see
him. Probably Gordon will go with me. Here is the time table :
Self to get up at 6 a.m. and light the stove and prepare milk for
the boys.
Ring the bell 6.25 for the boys to get up.
Another bell 6.55 for breakfast, the same to be finished by 7.15.
Farm work from 7.15 to 10.30.
School from 1 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.
Going to the engine, etc., between 4.30 and 5.30.
Supper at 5.30 p.m.
School 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. This is largely some reading from the
Gujarati books together with translation in English. For the last 4 days
Mrs. Sodha and Mrs. Gandhi too have been coming. Albrecht has
actually caught the tunes of some of the Gujarati hymns.
8 to 10, or later, correspondence, etc.
Since last Sunday I have been omitting the school largely because
I did not go to Town on Monday.
With your letter from London we received letters from Miss
Winterbottom and Maud. Both speak in most flattering terms of you.
Miss Nicholson also writes saying she would endeavour to see you.
Many thanks for the chart and Dickinson's books.
Hilt has not paid for two months. He had taken in an outfitter in
a sample room. This roused Amies' ire. He asked Lapin to remove
the outfitter. I authorized Lapin to do so even if it cost a few pounds
and wrote Amies not to mind a month. Now Lapin has written saying
Amies is reconciled. The outfitter will of course go at the end of the
month. I shall not weary you with the correspondence.
Kennedy has deposited £50 in your account. He told me he
anticipated no difficulty about reducing the Bank's liability.
I am doing nothing about Mountain View, nor do I know how it
is looking.
Without my asking you, I know you will pass on my regards to
your sister and all your people.
I hope that you receive my letters regularly. I have not missed
a single mail. I mention this as I do not post the letters myself and
I am anxious that you should know that I write regularly.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 British author Lowes Dickinson
