520. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
May 25, 1936
DEAR SISTER RAIHANA,
It is wonderful to have your letter after so many months and
in such excellent Gujarati! You seem to have been improving your
knowledge of the language. How good if I could do the same
with my Urdu! But then, is the teacher or the pupil to blame for
it?
What a way you have of telling me of Abbajan ! Inscru-
table are God's ways of saving him He wishes to! What beautiful
situations He brings about! A master Manipulator of strings, He
makes us dance by plucking at any of the strings He likes. We
do not even feel that He is pulling the strings if we dance as He
wishes. It is when we resist Him that we feel the pull of the
string, and then we begin complaining. Observe Abbajan's face
as you read this to him and write to me what you notice. You
should, however, suppress the letter if he does not have the
strength to listen and the doctors do not permit it.
You have mentioned so many members of the family that
most of them are no more than names to me. I do not remem-
ber any of the faces, and I have to commit to memory the names.
All the same, I am myself a member of the family, am I not?
And such a one as does not even know the names of his own
family members or their faces either! But what can be done?
That must be the plight of a person becoming one of a vast
family. But what is great about knowing name and form? We
are all children of the same Mother. If we truly understood this,
we could do without name and form, couldn't we? Read this to
all, apologize to them on my behalf and make them forgive me.
Anyway, do convey my good wishes and blessings.
Yes, Dr. Ansari's passing away has created a big void which
will be difficult to fill. Poor Zohra is lost in grief. I am sending
her today a second letter in my broken Urdu.
Sardar [and] Kaka are of course here and very much re-
member Abbajan and Ammajan.
My address is Bangalore City up to June 15.
Can you read my writing? Has Hamida come?
SMT. RAIHANA TYABJI
SOUTHWOOD
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
1 Addressee's father, Abbas Tyabji
2 Neither letter is available.
3 Addressee's brother's daughter
