686. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM MAVJI
[Before October 25, 1928]
BHAISHRI PURUSHOTTAM MAVJI,
It is three o'clock in the morning. I have read your letter
carefully from beginning to end. I think the articles I have
been writing these days answer your questions. I therefore ad-
vise you to get those articles if you do not have them and read
them and ponder over them. Nevertheless, I briefly answer your
questions here.
It is not true without exception that no living creature
likes to die in any circumstances. I have seen with my own
eyes persons laid on the floor as dead rising up alive. I have
also heard of instances of persons sitting up on the pyre.
But we can act only on the basis of what we assume to be true
to the best of our knowledge. The reason for killing the calf
was not that I could not bear to see its pain, but that, seeing
the pain, I could not help it in any other way. I assumed that
it would wish to be delivered from that pain, for I have known
many men who so wished to be freed in similar circumstances.
One may err in assuming such a wish in a particular case, but
in countless situations, Nature has provided man with no other
means but to make certain assumptions. I am dictating this
letter on the assumption that I shall be alive till the letter is
finished and that it will give you some comfort. But it is quite
conceivable that I might die before the letter was finished or,
possibly, instead of giving you comfort and peace, it might pain,
displease and trouble you still more. But even if that was its
effect, God would forgive me, because I started writing the letter
with the purest of motives.
1 In the Diary this letter is placed before the item that follows.
2 Vide Vol. XXXVII.
My answer to your question whether the calf was in un-
bearable pain is implied in what I have said above. But one
more point is that in such matters self-deception is quite possible.
I can also reply that in a way I knew it for certain that the
calf was going to die. But I know that you mean otherwise in
your letter. You have not said that I could not know for cer-
tain from its pain that it would die. But that is what you
think. However, I knew that its life was definitely going to end,
if not because of the pain then through some other cause. If
therefore I committed any error in acting on my assumption its
only effect has been to alter the hour of death a little. It need
not be necessary for me to try to become omniscient in order
to save myself from the sin of altering the hour of death. Where
the intention is not to give pain but to relieve pain by ending
life, an ignorant man not only has the right to try but it is also
incumbent on him to do so.
Please do not have the slightest fear that I would hastily
decide to kill the monkeys. But I see that I have gained much
by starting the discussion, and so have other people through it.
Obeying our desire to live, we knowingly destroy many living
things. We know that it is wrong to destroy life in that way.
I for one knew it and yet I am unable to overcome the desire
to live though I know well enough that the desire is not good.
I am therefore trying gradually to wean myself from it. I be-
lieve that all of us should do the same. That is our dharma too.
It is quite impossible to keep the monkeys away from the fields
without harassing them in some way. Even brandishing a stick
at them is inflicting pain on them. Every day I drive away the
mosquitoes to protect myself from their nuisance. That too is in-
flicting pain on them. Though knowing this, out of my desire to
live, I give pain to countless creatures. I therefore daily pray to
God to deliver me this very day from this body and from the
necessity of having to be in a similar body which cannot be kept
alive even for a moment without giving pain to some living
creature, and till I am so delivered, to take from this body such
service as He may wish for the good of others, at least as penance
by me for the sin of living. But God's ways are inscrutable.
Even at this moment when I am praying thus, I am giving pain
in some way or other to countless creatures. Innumerable creatures
are eagerly waiting to settle in the space I now occupy. But what
can I do? One cannot free oneself from the body merely by
wishing it. To bring it about one must strive hard to live in a
spirit of penance. While engaged in such an endeavour I have
to accept innumerable troubles like that of the monkeys and I
solve the problems according to my lights and to the best of my
ability. I do not wish to deceive the world or myself in any way.
You did well of course to write the letter.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32577/22
