259. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
NANDI HILLS, MYSORE,
April 25, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your four letters of which three were received together
yesterday.
You must have got the wire of departure sent to you from
Belgaum on 19th.
One of your letters yesterday prompted me to send you a
peremptory wire asking you to come to Nandi. But I restrained
myself. The other two letters were less gloomy. But even so, if
the separation becomes unbearable, you must come without wait-
ing for an answer or any prompting from me. The love of the
people round you should really strengthen you and keep you there.
Your letter describing the affection of the people there is
most touching and it would be a matter for sorrow if you can-
not be at peace with yourself there. But no one can suddenly
change one's nature and if your effort to compose yourself there
becomes fruitless, you should tell the friends there so plainly and
come away here without the slightest hesitation. On no account
should there be a breakdown there. You must not try your
nerves to the breaking point.
This is the sixth day here. I am not yet acclimatized. I have
not retained the energy and the strength I felt at Amboli, but
doctors assure me that Nandi must in the end be more beneficial
than Amboli. They say that this is an ideal place for blood-
pressure men. There is no cause whatsoever for worry or anxiety.
Since you were so worried about the forgetfulness about the
two fasts, it was well that you fasted. There is no doubt that
fasting is a good thing even physically whenever there is a nervous
strain. It would certainly have been well, if I had fasted before
the collapse came. The strain of that day was terrific. But this
is wisdom after the event. We may profit by that stupid mistake
of mine. I call it stupid because I was aware of the strain and
of the merit of fasting in such circumstances. But the Devil is
ever after us and catches us at our weakest. He found me weak
and wanting and trapped me. Your fast therefore does not worry
me. Only you will know when to take it and how to take it.
You must develop Iron nerves. It is necessary for our work.
God be with you.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5218. Courtesy: Mirabehn
