164. LETTER TO D. HANUMANTRAO
POST ANDHERI,
March 16, 1924
MY DEAR HANUMANTRAO,
I have your long but welcome letter. You need not apolo-
gize henceforth for the length of your letters because you never
write idly. The only way for those of us who, living in isolated,
unprotected places, rely for protection upon God's grace and not
upon force of arms, is to have as few valuables as possible whether
in the shape of money or otherwise, and to cultivate fellowship
even with the roughest element surrounding us. That is what is
being attempted at Sabarmati.
I appreciate your suggestion regarding the founding of an
Ashram like the Sabarmati one in the different Provinces of India.
I would like to do so, but they cannot be founded for the mere
wish. We need the proper stamp of men and I have no knowledge
of them. You have established one and you realize the difficulty
of carrying it on. There is another at Wardha, as you know,
conducted by Vinoba, whom you know. It came into being be-
cause a Vinoba was found. There is another near Andheri, because
a Keshavrao Deshpande has been found. All the four are struggl-
ing. Such Ashrams are an organic growth and they will come
into being in their own time, but I like the centre of your sugges-
tion, namely, that I should remain at the Sabarmati Ashram and
endeavour to make it perfect. I would love to do it. The external
political activity is not of my seeking. I therefore cannot give it
up of my will. If God desires that I should develop the Ashram
by being in it, He will make my way clear. If it is a real orga-
nic growth, I know that it will continue to make progress whether
I am in it or outside. After all, if any such institution has to de-
pend merely upon one man's existence on earth, it has to perish
with him, but if it is to be of a permanent character, it must de-
pend for its existence upon its own independence and internal
vitality. Nor need we be impatient about their progress or success.
It is sufficient if we do the best according to our lights and leave
the rest to Him who disposes of everything.
I think you have
done well in not taking upon your shoulders the grave responsi-
bility of taking young women in the Ashram so long as you have
no woman worker who can stand on her own and who can be-
come a wall of protection to such girls. I shall hope that your own
wife will be such in time.
Now about the Nature-cure. Every change at Sabarmati, so
far as diet and medicinal aid are concerned, is, I know, a fall.
It commenced with my first serious illness. It shook me and I lost
confidence in myself, whereas at Kochrab I handled fearlessly
and with confidence in Nature's healing power two cases of con-
fluent small-pox in the face of medical opposition and serious ente-
ric fever at the same time. At Sabarmati, after my illness, I have
not been able to handle even trivial cases. My theory is that a
man who himself becomes a prey to illness is unfit to guide others.
I tried almost to the point of obstinacy to do without milk and
ghee, but I failed. Had the illness not overcome me, I would
have continued my experiments, but I was nonplussed, and I
must make the same sad confession about medicine. A man who
advises abstention from such things must be prepared with an
effective substitute. Having myself become a broken reed, I have
allowed things to take their own course. This breakdown in the
application of Nature-cure is a tragedy of my life. Not that I have
lost faith in it, but I have lost confidence in myself. Help me to re-
cover it. You can see how Maganlal understands me through and
through. He has sent Shivabhai to you without any reference to
me, because he realizes our tragic fate just as much as I do. We
shall all, therefore, be watching your progress with greatest sym-
pathy and attention. You will therefore not hesitate to write to
me about this whenever you have anything new to tell me.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. D. HANUMANTRAO
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
PALLEPADU (NELLORE DIST.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 8508; also C.W. 5113
