317. LETTER TO MRS. A. SEN AND MISS P. BOSE
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 12, 1926
DEAR SISTERS,
I am thankful for your letter. Beyond knowing the general
trend of the tragic events in Pabna and elsewhere, I know nothing.
I do not read newspaper reports because I distrust them. I would,
therefore, feel grateful to you if you could send me authentic in-
formation that may be in your possession.
The question you want me to answer in the pages of Young
India is rather delicate. I am not sure that I shall serve the
cause you and I have at heart by a public discussion of a delicate
question. The information I have gathered from trustworthy
friends goes to show that wherever violence has occurred, it was
due to the cowardice of men rather than the inability of the
women to protect their honour by physical resistance. I question
the advisability of the formation of an association such as you
suggest, not because it is sinful for a woman to use the dagger
or the pistol when she knows not any other method, but because
in the vast majority of cases such self-defence proves worse than
useless and because it will take generations before our women
take to the dagger or the pistol in any appreciable number. Per-
haps, the quicker method is for women to shame men into per-
forming their primary duty of protecting their womenfolk at all
costs. But, before any step can be taken, you must have incontro-
vertible facts before you. Is the disease general? How many cases
of real violence have happened, say, during the past six months?
Was it impossible in every case for men to protect the victims?
What is the precise method adopted by the miscreants to secure
their victims? I hope you would not take a single step without
knowing the full facts, and without reasonable hope of securing
acceptance of the methods that you may suggest for meeting the
evil.
Yours sincerely,
MRS. A. SEN
MISS P. BOSE
C/O RAJ KUMAR SEN
DINANATH SEN'S LANE
GANDARIA
P . O . FARIDABAD
DACCA
From a photostat: S.N. 12378
once made by Ramananda Chatterji, editor of Modern Review, in his Bengali
journal, Prabasi, that he wondered why Gandhiji said nothing about the
persecuted women of Bengal, though he had stayed and travelled through
Bengal for a long time (S.N. 12378).
