153. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 22, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I was relieved to get your letter. Even worry is a child of
imagination. Why should I worry if I do not get a letter from
you, and why should I feel relieved on getting one? If you ask
me this question, I would not be able to reply to it, or would only
say: "This is what ignorant attachment means."
1 The name has been omitted.
2 Vide "Letter to Vithal L. Phadke", p. 112.
A foolish letter from you would not upset me. If, however,
I see your error or shortcoming and do not point it out to
you, I would not be doing my duty as your well-wisher, co-worker,
friend or father. What I find strange is that you should get angry
with me and sulk for telling you something with a sincere
motive, instead of thanking me for it. Should we not thank a
person for telling us frankly what he feels? I learnt this in my
very childhood. I do want you to learn it from me. If my under-
standing of a situation is wrong, I deserve to be pitied, and, if
it is correct, I would be doing you good. In either case, you gain
something, in that you come to know better the person with
whom you have thrown in your lot. I want that all of you should
know my shortcomings and deficiencies and it is always my effort
to show them myself. I don't wish to hide even my thoughts. I
would even write them down if I had the necessary gift. But
I know I cannot do that. I don't think there can be any power
in the world which can penetrate all the secrets of thought. Pro-
bably we shall be able to know them if somebody invents a machine
to reveal them. Even while I was writing these few sentences, my
imagination traversed the universe many times over.
You will admit that everybody cannot understand whether
or not he has the poison in his heart. Because one does not con-
sciously wish to nurse hatred, it does not mean that there is no
hatred in one's heart. It takes hold of us against our will. You
will probably not admit that anybody whose heart is full of anger
is also full of hatred. If you do not, then the word "poison"
does not have the same meaning for you and me. I remember
that Ba often charged me with having poison in my heart. How
can I deny that charge? I may not have believed that there was
any poison in my words. But that is beside the point. What
should matter to me is that she felt the poison. Words which are
perfectly truthful and spoken with perfect love will never hurt
anybody. They may sometimes hurt one in the beginning, but
such a person himself will afterwards admit their beneficial effect
on him.
I should like you not to be your own judge in all matters.
It is possible that others judge you better than you do yourself.
I will now end this tale of "poison".
The question of your leaving the Ashram does not arise just
now. It will arise only after I am released and return to the
Ashram to stay there. That is how I read your letter. Morally
speaking, it can arise only then, if at all, for, so long as I cannot
return to the Ashram to stay in it, in the eyes of the inmates of
the Ashram I will remain a prisoner. All of you who decided
to stay on when I bade good-bye to the Ashram bound yourselves
thereby to remain there till I returned. If I am right in believing
this, it is a waste of time and energy to think now what should
be done when I return to stay there.
The news you have given about happenings in the Ashram
is very useful to me. You should discuss the problem of Lakshmi
with Narandas, and if both of you decide that she should be mar-
ried, it should be done soon. Her restlessness also is likely to be
the result of an unconscious desire to get married. She is now of
marriageable age, and she does intend to marry. The desire to
wait till I am released should be regarded as nothing but ignorant
attachment to me. You should try and understand her heart pro-
perly, and not wait for her emphatic consent. It seems to me
desirable to take the advice of Lakshmibehn and Durgabehn in
this matter. They would understand the problem better than you
can. I understand from what you yourself have said that you
have no experience of how a girl feels when she desires to marry.
In other words, you have never felt the desire to marry. I also
know some other unmarried women who have never felt it. Some
other women remain unmarried with an effort of will. They know
what marriage means.
What advice should I give you about your health? Ghee
seems to be absolutely necessary for it. Whenever you leave the
Ashram, your weight increases, and as soon as you return to the
Ashram you lose the weight you had gained. You must get over
this weakness. How it can be done, you alone know. I hope you
experience no difficulty now in speaking.
I don't wish to catch anybody in my snare. What would be
my plight if all people became my slaves? And, moreover, I am
sure that any such effort would be doomed to failure. Even if it is
true that I try to catch people in my snare, why should you lose
confidence in yourself for that reason? Your letters are sufficient
evidence that you are vigilant and not likely to succumb. It does
seem, however, that you are perpetually afraid that you will let
yourself be caught. That is a bad sign. Having resolved that
you will not let yourself be caught, why should you feel afraid?
But may it also not be possible that you and I do not mean the
same thing by "getting caught"?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10323
