432. LETTER TO H. F. HUDSON
October 18, 1932
DEAR MR. HUDSON 2 ,
You will, I hope, pardon this presumption.
The restriction you conveyed to Dr. Ambedkar and me in
connection with his interview, I had no difficulty in under-
standing from the Government standpoint. It was faithfully
carried out, and so far as I am concerned I shall breathe not a
word to the public about it. But the threat conveyed at the
end of your note was, I think, gratuitously offensive. You said
that if either of us did not carry out the restriction, all such
future interviews would be stopped. So far as I am con-
cerned, it is easy enough for you to verify that I have meticu-
lously observed the prison regulations. And the threat pre-
supposes that such interviews are a concession, whereas in my
opinion they are the necessary consequence of the Yeravda Pact.
Surely untouchability reform should be, if it is not, common
cause between the Government and the people. Again a prison
was assuredly not the place to spring upon Dr. Ambedkar, a free
man, restrictions accompanied by a threat of which he was not
informed in the telegram acceding to his request for an inter-
view with Srimati Sarojini Naidu and me.
May I in this personal note ask now for a definite reply to
my letter of the 29th ult. addressed to Major Bhandari and for-
warded to the Home Department? In view of your said memo-
randum, a clear definition of the Government policy has be-
come doubly necessary. I hold it to be essential that I should be
permitted to see people and carry on correspondence, strictly
regarding untouchability, without let or hindrance. You may
know that my fast is only suspended. It has to be resumed if
the Hindu public do not play the game by the Harijans. My
contact with the public therefore is inevitable if the reform is
to be carried out in all its thoroughness. Sjt. A. V. Thakkar, the
Secretary of the newly-formed League has already asked for ins-
tructions. I have informed him that I am awaiting clear defini-
tion of Government policy before I could send any instructions.
I would therefore esteem an early reply.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3863. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. I, p. 215
