207. LETTER TO PRIME MINISTER
88 KNIGHTSBRIDGE,
LONDON, W.,
November 14, 1931
DEAR PRIME MINISTER,
I know that letters signed by delegates are being sent to you
inviting you to settle the Hindu-Muslim-Sikh question. You will
notice the absence of my signature in any of those letters. Com-
mon friends desirous of seeing a successful issue to the Round
Table Conference have suggested that it would help you if I sent
a letter explaining why I do not sign the letters.
I should have no hesitation in putting my signature to a letter
appointing you sole arbitrator in your individual capacity to settle
the communal question, so far as the Hindus, Muslims and
Sikhs are concerned, but you will appreciate my hesitation in
consenting to your appointment as arbitrator in your capacity as
Prime Minister, for the simple reason that if I did so, I should
feel embarrassed in presenting the Congress claim on the con-
stitutional issue. But my reluctance does not mean that the
Congress will in any way resist your award; in fact Congress can-
not do so, for it is bound by a resolution to approve of any solution
that is acceptable to the three parties concerned, and if those
claiming to represent the three communities refer the matter for
your decision, the Congress cannot object to your award.
The position regarding the other minorities is different. You
know the position taken up on behalf of the Congress. As I
reiterated at the last meeting of the Minorities Committee, in my
opinion they should be satisfied with complete protection of their
civic and religious rights and of all their legitimate interests. There
are many extra-legal ways that can be suggested for ensuring the
election of deserving candidates from all the other minorities
through the ordinary electorate, and I feel that that is the only
proper and legitimate course.
In any case, the Congress will never be reconciled to any
further extension of the principle of separate electorate or special
statutory reservation.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE PRIME MINISTER
10 DOWNING STREET
S.W.
From a photostat: C.W. 9382. Courtesy: India Office Library
