52. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, January 25, 1932
DEAR SISTERS,
I hope you will understand that it is not possible for me to
write to each of you separately. Of course, whenever it is neces-
sary, and I get time, I write to some of you individually. But
this time, too, I intend to write a joint letter to the women as
I used to do formerly.
During these days, when all of us are passing through a testing
time, I hope that all of you will derive great consolation from
Draupadi's prayer. Really speaking, all of us are now in the
same plight as she was. No human being can save our honour,
God alone can do that. It is true that He often sends His help
through men. But such a man is only God's tool or instrument.
This much in regard to the difficult time through which we are
passing.
Now a little from my experiences in England. I may say
that in England, too, I received from women almost the same
love that I have always received from Indian women. Just as
you have kept no secret from me, there in England also I came
across women who opened their hearts to me. They came from
long distances to accompany me in my early morning walks and
to talk to me. The moral which I drew from this is that non-
violence is a very wide thing. It includes absolute freedom from
impure thoughts.
I also saw that Indian women were in no way inferior to
European women. Much of their strength lies suppressed and
some of it has had no opportunity to reveal itself. Whenever
I observed the European women's superiority, I could also see
the causes of it. If the same causes begin to operate in our
country, the women here also would become like them. How-
ever, we should certainly reflect over the superiority which we
49-
observe in European women. We should not feel elated think-
ing that that strength lies concealed in nor should we be
complacent on that account. They possess the power of organi-
zation and can unite and work very well like the men. They
don't think themselves helpless, but fearlessly move about wherever
they like. In England, if a woman goes out alone either during
day or at night, it is not thought necessary for anybody to ac-
company her. Nursing in hospitals has become an exclusive
province of women, and they do the work very well indeed. The
sacrifices made by some women are beyond praise. Muriel Lester
who came to stay with us at the Ashram is a daughter of rich
parents. Like Mirabehn, she has given away, as a trust to the
Ashram founded by her, all her share of the parental wealth.
She and her sister Doris have dedicated their all to public service.
Doris runs a school for children. She is helped by about ten
women teachers who work for a very small pay. Muriel runs the
Ashram where I was staying. Day and night the two sisters
think only of service. Both have remained unmarried and now
they have reached an age when even the thought of marriage
would not occur to them. We can see their purity marked on
their faces. In Muriel's Ashram no distinction would ever be
made between high and low or between whites and non-whites.
One may suppose that she could expect some publicity by acting
as my hostess. But what shall one say about her having let
Tilakam stay at the place? You may ask Tilakam himself how
he was looked after there. He went to it as a pauper. I had
agreed to pay the expenses on his account. However, Tilakam
gave to the Ashram his full services like the others, so that I did
not have to pay a single penny on his behalf. Negroes too she
admits into her institution, and treats them with the same respect
and love. I have many such happy memories of my stay. But I
hope that for the present you will be satisfied with what I have
given.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II
