374. LETTER TO R. SANKARANARAYANA IYER
December 24, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your two letters of the 15th and 19th instant,
respectively. I am sorry that I have no access to the literature refer-
1 The letter was in reply to the addressee's dated December 20, 1932
red to by you, and even if I had, I would not find the time to
study it, nor is it necessary, because of the way I look at the whole
question.
Whilst I believe in all the Hindu Shastras as such, I am guid-
ed by one supreme canon of interpretation provided in the
Shastras themselves. It is this. Every rule and every interpretation
thereof that is inconsistent with truth or morality (one and the
same thing) is to be rejected. Without some such canon in the midst
of a multitude of texts and interpretations a man in the street would
feel utterly helpless. As a firm believer in the necessity of temples,
I have held the opinion that public temples, except when they
are designed for only particular sects, should be open to all Hin-
dus and therefore to Harijans. If your application of the law of
karma was to hold good, sacrifice becomes a meaningless term and
help given by one person to another a purely criminal act. If an
untouchable, assuming that he is so by reason of his past actions,
may not be helped out of his degraded position, why should other
people suffering from distress be helped? And since I deny divine
authority for rules that are inconsistent with truth, I easily come
to the conclusion that the disabilities that Harijans are labour-
ing under were imposed upon them by caste Hindus. Hence I
regard the latter as debtors.
You ask whether I believe in castes. My answer is "No", but
I do believe in varnashrama-a totally different institution from
the modern castes.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. R. SANKARANARAYANA IYER
TIMBER MERCHANT
COIMBATORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18803
nity and it is the sanatanists who will more truly realize its force and in practice
do material good to the Harijans than the present social reformers. It is the
imbedded religious instinct in a man that more prompts him to do good for
a fellow-being and deters him from doing injury to another. No man how-
ever high, nor any man-made laws can keep an individual's action in the path
of righteousness as the call of religion can do" (S.N. 18745).
