329. LETTER TO W. S. IRWIN
BETTIAH,
May 30, 1917
DEAR SIR,
Owing to certain statements made by your raiyats of Tola Guj-
pura Ramsingh, Chhatauni, I paid on Friday last a surprise visit
to the Tola at about 8 p.m.
I met over fifty villagers and they pointed out to me a piece
of land said to be 51 bighas in extent which (they said) had been
recently converted by you into zirat. They said that in most cases
they were given an equivalent in extent but not in quality. They
pointed out the village pasturage bordering on the converted zirat
which (they said) had now become practically inaccessible owing
to the fear of their cattle being impounded. They showed me also
the only way (according to their statement) leading to the cattle
pound, and said that they could not for the same fear use it as it
passed by the zirat. The men bitterly complained that the disposse-
ssion which they hold was forcible had caused them a great loss.
They stated that at the time of conversion they were made to put
their thumb impressions to certain documents the contents of which
they did not know and the copies of which they were not given.
Hiraman Lohar, who was one of the party, told me that he was
assaulted on Sunday, the 20th instant, by your employees for having
remonstrated with them on their trying to take his bhusa1, and that
he was only released on the importunity of the villagers who inter-
vened on his behalf. Nepali and Japal, nephew and son, respectively,
of Hiraman, told me that as a result of the occurrence they were
on their way to me. The cry was raised that they were going to the
thana. Your men thereupon ran after them, seized them (so it is
stated) and took them to you. They added that you whipped them.
One of them showed strong marks on his calves and on his back.
They were sent by you to the murghikhana and were fined Rs. 10
each. They were released at midnight on their promising to
secure the fines in the morning. For these fines a guarantee was
given by Mahajan Liladhar Sah to your representative the next
morning.
Jadu Rai, of village Katha, son of Man Singh Rai, came to me
at Motihari on the 26th instant and said that he held six bighas
of land, that he had paid Rs. 75 as tawan in lieu of indigo culti-
vation, that for failure to supply a plough to the factory and to
pay a fine of Rs. 10 in default he was dispossessed of his land
and made to sign a document. He showed me a receipt No. 102
dated 1323 [sic] for Rs. 14.6..
I feel it but right that I should bring to your notice matters of
the character above referred to. I should esteem it a favour if you
would throw light on the incidents I have described.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 108, pp. 173-
