378. LETTER TO KUNVARJI K. PAREKH
SRIRAMPUR,
December 31, 1946
CHI. KUNVARJI,
I got your letter . You did well in writing to me. I came
to know about the late Vachharaj from Bulsaria. As you say,
Panchgani will miss him very much. But no institution has
the exclusive privilege of losing its true workers. God picks up
impartially any worker He likes. Why, then, grieve over such a
death? I have met Vachharaj's wife, but as I do not recollect
her name I did not write to her. But I have written to
Bulsaria. You did well in giving me the information about
Vachharaj's brother. I am not writing to him, either. What
purpose will it serve? Send him a copy of this letter. Or do
what you think right. To write a letter of condolence will mean
observing a customary formality. I do not wish to do that. I
only want that both of them should bring honour to Vachharaj's
memory and wipe the tears of all those in Panchgani who believe
292
themselves widowed; serve them and lighten the burden of their
widowhood. The passing away of a man widows not only his
wife but all those whom he was serving, for instance, myself.
I, therefore, liked your resolution to make up for the loss yourself.
It is wholly worthy of you. If Jugatram can spare you without
inconvenience and agrees to your leaving, the climate of Panchgani
is bound to suit you very well.
If the sanatorium authorities are fully agreeable and if
Jayabehn and Vachharaj's brother are unable to shoulder the
burden of the work and, therefore, desire you to go, I can
only say that you should go as early as possible. You should
certainly go there if you wish to serve everybody without dis-
tinction of caste or creed, irrespective of whether he is poor, of
a low caste or a Muslim. The sanatorium should pay you enough
to meet your daily needs. I think they should bear that ex-
penditure. You may show this whole letter to the proprietor
of the sanatorium or anybody else in charge there.
I hope that all of you are in good spirits and that you
enjoy good health. About the situation here Manu will write
in this very letter. If you go, I will be greatly relieved and
our enterprise there will shine forth.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9754. Also C. W. 733. Courtesy:
Navajivan Trust
