22. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 25, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I can see from your language that you
are unhappy. I am sure your replies are not addressed to me, for
I did not want them. I assume that they are addressed to
Chhaganlal.
My view about your honesty and your efficiency has not
changed. When it changes, I shall not be able to protect you.
You should not feel concerned till it changes. I have found
your reply to Chhaganlal's complaint convincing, but I feel hid-
den anger in your language. There is no reason at all for you
to be angry. Chhaganlal wrote down what he thought. There
was no malice in it, but only his inability to see the truth.
You will be able to see this inability in his letter about N. He
can have no reason for malice towards her, but he was frighten-
ed by her immoral life in the past, could not overcome that fear
and so thought as he did. His deficiency, therefore, is of the
intellect and not of the heart. However that may be, you should
learn to adopt a calm attitude towards such criticism and accept
whatever may be worth accepting in it. Such strength cannot
be acquired in a day. It will be enough if you keep on trying.
BAPU
[PS.]
Whether or not it is improper for Prema or other girls to walk
with their arms round each other's neck, I cannot say unless I
see myself what they do. If their behaviour is immodest, it is of
course improper, but there can be no harm if it is within limits
of modesty. I have discussed this point in my letter to Lakshmidas.
Read that letter if you have not done so. If, after reading it, you
wish to ask further questions, you may.
I may have to burden you with one more guest. You know
Margarete Spiegel who stayed in the Ashram for some time and
worked among Harijans. She will probably land in Bombay to-
morrow. Will you let her stay in the Ashram? I need not say
anything about her. She is a very good woman. She has been
writing to me here.
If the sum of Rs. 2,500 has been received from Soniramji, send
it to Ghanshyamdas.
Add five more to the 25 spinning-wheels
[which I have asked you to send]. We shall get Rs. 1½ for each.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8362. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
