128. LETTER TO G. K. DEODHAR
NADIAD,
February 26, 1918
MY DEAR DEODHAR4,
I have your two letters and the report. I do feel that you
have unconsciously injured the cause and have allowed yourself to
be made a tool in Mr. Pratt's hands. You have based your
statement about the undervaluation on the part of the raiyats
on totally insufficient data. Amritlal Thakkar who went into
details, does not think that 3t annas is an undervaluation. You
know that the official valuation has undergone manipulation.
And how can it be said that the substantial concessions have
been made when we know that not a single concession has yet
been made? He was simply with us when Mr. Pratt said that
postponement would be granted when the rabi was over 25%.
Do you realize that rabi does not include cotton, tobacco, tuvar
and diveli 3 ?
Where was the necessity for publishing the report at all?
When I entered upon the scene, you might well have left the
judging of the moment of publication to me.
Lastly, why think that we can only gain what the officials give?
Why not feel that we must get what we deserve?
I feel that you are not doing justice to yourself or the cause
you handle by attempting too much. You are ailing. You have
more irons in the fire than you can handle. You should have
boldly said you could not undertake the inquiry.
I know you will not misunderstand my letter. I love you
too well to do you conscious injustice. The best expression I can
give to my regard for you is to open out the door to my heart
and let you see what there is. No friend can do more. He who
does less is so much the less a friend.
You ought to listen to my prayer and give Amritlal to the
work in Gujarat. He will render great services to the Society be-
cause he will shine most in the work in Gujarat. The council
work can be done somewhat by a man who has a head about him.
The pariah work can only be done by a man with a heart to
guide his head. A[ mritlal] is that man.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai 1
