370. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SRIRAMPUR,
5.15 a. m., December 30, 1946
CHI. VALLABHBHAI,
I have your letter. Jawahar and others will be able to tell
you about what happened here.
I hold strong views about. . . . The work being done here
cannot be carried on with the Congress funds or funds collected
by you. He should collect the money publicly both from Hindus
and Muslims. I am also getting more convinced from experience
that all activities which are carried on with the help of money
alone are sure to fail. You also should give up any idea of get-
ting things done with money. It is essential that . . . should
not deviate even an inch from what is agreed to between him
and me. I am resolved that I will get out of it as soon as I
see even the slightest impurity. This mission is most delicate and
the biggest that has fallen to my lot. God has sustained me so
far. I wake up and start work at 1.30 a. m., standard time, and
there has been no difficulty yet. About tomorrow, God alone knows.
I have heard many complaints against you. If there is any
exaggeration in "many", it is unintended. Your speeches tend
to be inflammatory and play to the gallery. You have lost sight
of all distinction between violence and non-violence.
You are
teaching the people to meet violence with violence. You miss
no opportunity to insult the Muslim League in season and out
of season. If all this is true, it is very harmful. They say you
talk about holding on to office. That also is disturbing, if true.
Whatever I heard I have passed on to you for you to think over.
The times are very critical. If we stray from the straight and
narrow path by ever so little, we are done for. The Working
Committee does not function harmoniously as it should. Root
out corruption; you know how to do it. If you feel like it,
send some sensible and reliable person to explain things to me
and understand my point of view. There is no need whatever
for you to rush down here. You are no longer fit to run about.
It is not good that you do not take care of your health.
I will stop here. It is now 5.35, Calcutta time, and there
are heaps of arrears to be disposed of.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 341-
