322. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
March 23, 1934
BHAISHRI BHAGWANJI,
I have always welcomed your letter. Your frank words al-
ways please me.
You have mixed up two or three issues.
My own experience of Prabhashankar has been different from
yours. But I needn't dwell on that, since my experience doesn't
count.
I agree with your views about Wills. According to the rule that
one can be certain only of that which is in one's hands, I think
it best for parents to make in their own lifetime any arrangements
that they wish. But in this case I must consider the situation as
it exists. From a moral point of view, I look upon the document
308
drawn up by Doctor as a Will. Everybody who wants to accept a
legacy should also observe its conditions. One of the two sisters is
in such a condition that it would have been the duty of the brothers
to support her even if there had been no Will. Ratilal himself
is not capable of looking after himself. Hence, if my voice could
have any effect, I would see that his sister, who is more incapable
of looking after herself than Ratilal is of looking after himself, got
some share. Who knows, such a noble act may bring greater bene-
fit to Ratilal. In any case it cannot harm his interests. Whether
or not the sister gets a regular share, my sense of duty to the
departed friend and to his family, and especially to Ratilal and
Champa with whom I have maintained a special relation, will
urge me to insist that the sisters should get a proportionate share
each from Ratilal's share, even if he pays it in instalments. You
are not right when you generalize from Narbheram's case. I
am sure you know the saying in English "Hard cases make bad
law." I hope you also know that Narbheram does not accept your
charge as true.
The resort to civil marriage in the case of Devdas and Lakshmi
was to satisfy Rajaji. All of us wanted a religious ceremony. But
there was no difference between civil marriage and religious cere-
mony as we understood its significance. According to the mean-
ing which we attach to religious ceremony, its purpose was served
by civil marriage. According to me the Hindu law requires many
reforms.
I think I have now replied to all your questions. I am do-
ing what I can about Bihar. I think you have sent a handsome
amount.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5821. Also C.W. 3044. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
