29. LETTER TO LAKSHMIKANT
BANGALORE,
Jyaishtha Krishna 6 [June 20, 1927]
BHAI LAKSHMIKANTJI,
I got both your letters. I wanted to have a talk with pujya
Malaviyaji and therefore could not reply to your previous letter
immediately. I think you should not have written an open letter.
The problem of caste-reform is very serious and difficult. It calls
for great patience. Malaviyaji bears no ill will towards you.
After having talked to him I am convinced that there was a
difference between your way of working and his. Pujya Malaviya-
ji desires reform of Hindu society; he also wants the narrow caste
restrictions to be liberalized but he believes that reforms cannot
be effected just by the pioneering efforts of one man. But then
he is making all possible efforts if only according to his own me-
thod. He would never think of annoying you.
Now here is my view. Whatever you did was right. Reform-
ers should carry on their mission without cutting themselves off
from Hindu society, bearing no malice and with perfect love of
the Hindu religion, and while doing so, put up with all the
hardships that might come in their way. Those who violate
XXXIV-
social conventions in the course of their activities must submit
to the sanctions laid down by society and have a liberal attitude
towards society while suffering them. This is what is called satya-
graha. It is not for a social reformer to first disregard society's
laws and then to feel sore about having to suffer punishment
for this disregard. I hear if you go through some formal atone-
ment you can be re-admitted to the caste. I am against sub-
mitting to such atonement. We atone for what we regard as sin.
What you have done is no sin. It is therefore needless, even im-
proper, to atone for it. But if you are not prepared to suffer
excommunication you can return to your caste by going through
the prescribed atonement. I was pained to see in your open
letter a reference to Islam which looked like a threat. Every
man follows his own faith not because he wants to oblige
others but because he considers religion as the lifeline without
which life appears impossible to him. If the tenets of Hinduism
are to bring you moksha, there is no ground to revolt against it
even if all the Hindus of this country were to oppose you.
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 12674
