383. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
URULI-KANCHAN,
March 27, 1946
RESPECTED BHAI RANCHHODDAS,
I have your letter. That your eyes are failing is as much a
matter for rejoicing as for sorrow. You will not now have to see
things which pain you. I had gathered from your previous letter
that you did not expect a reply and, therefore, because of heavy
pressure of other work I did not reply to it. Since you want a
reply to the present letter, I am dictating this after the morning
prayer. My eyes are still good enough, but the hand needs rest.
I, therefore, spare it other exertion so as to be able to write for
Harijan.
If your interpretation of ahimsa is correct, what could I
achieve by living up to 125? For India would have to bear the
load of my ignorance for about 50 years more still. However,
so long as my ignorance seems to me to be knowledge, may I
not hope to live up to 125 and go on serving up to the end?
You say, moreover, that ahimsa will work in dealing with friends,
but not in dealing with enemies who do not believe in it; and,
in support of your argument, you cite the example of Rajputs
and stories from the Puranas. Let us, for the moment, leave aside
the examples. If ahimsa was limited to loving those who love
us, how could it be described as the supreme dharma? Even
dacoits and robbers do that. How great was the love of Alibaba's
forty robbers for one another? Does not the aphorism 1 describing
the distinguishing characteristics of ahimsa say that in the presence
of ahimsa all ill-will subsides? If this is true, ahimsa can be
tested only against an enemy. Does not the well-known couplet
of Shamaldas, "For a bowl of water give a goodly meal," [etc.],
teach the same lesson in simple but sweet words? Besides what
do the illustrations cited by you prove? The bravery of the
Rajputs cannot be denied. If nothing could ever be achieved
through violence, would it have acquired the powerful spell that
it has? Are the successes of falsehood, too, any the less impres-
sive? We often see falsehood occupying seats of power and truth
wandering in rags, but are you and I impressed by this fact?
And what do the Puranas, etc., suggest, if not that God alone
may do as He wills? He who creates may destroy, for even
through destruction He creates. Prahlada and others displayed
pure ahimsa in their lives.
He incurred the displeasure of his
demon father, but did not give up Rama's name till the last.
What more need I write? I do not wish to drown myself in
the well of the Shastras. They seem to me like the great oceans,
full of countless alligators. But do they not contain pearls, too?
Let us, therefore, churn them to find that nectar in the form of
the pearls.
I hope you will not mind your younger brother indulging in
such philosophizing. Won't you forgive him? Do dictate letters
to me whenever you get time. Paramanand did call on me and
also gave the book he has written.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
In reply to your three questions, which you must remember, Bapu
says "yes":
I. Regarding recitation of the Ramaraksha.
2. This question pertained to the fact of Rama giving us the strength.
3. Whether Ramanama is an unfailing remedy, occurred for the first
time at the prayers.
SUSHILA PAI
From the photostat of Gujarati : G. N. 4976
