330. LETTER TO DR. HIRALAL SHARMA
April 3, 1933
DEAR DR. SHARMA,
I have your letter and I am glad you are coming at last to
the Ashram. Do please bring your child, and I shall be delight-
ed if the place is found to be suitable both by you and him.
Narandas warns me that the principal patients are just now
out of the Ashram. I do not mind it at all. There are many
things for you to examine and see from the nature-cure stand-
point, and there is the common complaint about constipation wh-
ich you would be able to deal with.
I am glad you have driven out Amtussalaam's superstition
that she is suffering from T. B. She has a very vivid imagination
and she conjures up evil where there is none.
I want from your presence in the Ashram much more than
mere treatment of a few patients. A firm believer in nature-cure
myself, I would like to find in you a kindred spirit given up wholly
to truthful research without any mental reservations. And if I
can get such a man with also a belief in the Ashram ideals, I
could regard it as a great event. I know you too are approach-
ing the visit in that light. You will therefore please make your-
self thoroughly at home at the Ashram and study it in every de-
tail. It is my belief that a nature-cure man should be able to
vanquish the climate. Millions of human beings ought to be able
to live healthy life by understanding the laws of adaptability
to the climate in which they find themselves. They cannot have
changes that rich men can afford and I cannot imagine nature
to be so cruel as to be partial to the rich and indifferent to
the poor. On the contrary I believe in the Biblical saying that
"it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than
for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven", and another
Biblical verse says that "the Kingdom of Heaven is within you".
Therefore I have always imagined that laws of nature are simple
and understandable and capable of being followed easily by the
millions.
I would ask you therefore to approach the Ashram with the
set purpose of discovering the means of preserving or regaining
health in the ordinary Indian climate.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, pp. 22-
