363. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
February 26, 1907
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I am sending in a separate packet the Hamidia Society's job. The
book is to be the same size as a printed copy of a report I am sending
you in the same packet. In addition to the Gujarati rules and their
English translation both of which have already been sent, you have to
print the enclosed Gujarati matter. The Gujarati matter now enclosed
is also to be rendered in English and printed. Will you please let
me know the charge for printing 500 copies of the whole job? You need
not count the cost of translation and let me know also approximately
how many pages the whole thing will occupy. This will be in your
hands on Thursday. If you can send me a telegram for Is, you may
let me know the charge by telegram, as I am likely to be there next
week and I am anxious while I am here to get either the order or its
withdrawal. I raised the question of cost myself, because it seemed
to me that the job was rather bulky, and, if a bill was rendered to them,
that might appear to them to be too big, [and] they might feel dissatisfied.
I thought, therefore, that they should know the true position beforehand.
I have got the Gujarati proof for the rules which I am sending in the
same packet. You need not proceed with the printing because everything
will depend upon the acceptance of our terms. You should keep the
Gujarati matter at present with you, for, in the event of the acceptance
of our terms, I shall be able to translate it there on my coming.
I am sending something more for Indian Opinion. You have sent
me the proof of Messrs Avery's order. I return it. I wonder if you
noticed the glaring blunders in the English portion. I had to telegraph
you.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
[Enclosure]
[PS.]
As regards the article by "The Colonist" which I had asked you to
translate, we might add in the Gujarati translation that the ideas
expressed in the article are 'ours'.
It is not necessary to rule the paper for me. The moneys for the
Madressa that were posted elsewhere are now properly credited. These
and the ones recently received are included in the settlement. Lalbhai's
was received only yesterday. Kalyandas has not sent the customs note.
From a photostat of the typewritten original with a Gujarati postscript in
Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4710
