9. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
December 17, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,
I feel apprehensive in writing to you. I got your letter just
now. I had written nothing that could have provoked you to
write such a letter. How can a son suspect his father? Perhaps
I am not worthy of being a true father!
If no one is keeping well in Khurja, why do you stay on
there? Go to the Harijan Ashram [Delhi] and live in a separate
house there. It will not be very expensive. Or stay in a village
here. I cannot put up with your falling ill and continuing to be ill.
Ramdas will not stay with me. He no longer has faith in
my treatment though he consults me occasionally. He has given
up eggs and takes ordinary diet. Since yesterday he has resumed
living with Nimu.
He is preparing to go to Bombay, for which
he has my permission. He has gained a fair amount of strength
and moves about by himself. I am not worried on his account.
In the end it will be all right for him.
Amtul left for Bombay the day before yesterday and will pro-
bably reach Delhi by the end of this month.
May be I shall be able to go to Delhi only after the 27th.
Your note appeared in last week's Harijanbandhu and in this
week's Harijan. Owing to an oversight it was delayed for a week.
As soon as your letter came I sent instructions for a copy of the
Harijan to be sent to you.
I got a letter today from Dr. Ansari and among other things
he writes this about you:
As regards Dr. Sharma, I would like to see him and find out his exact
requirements and then I may be able to help him.
It would be good if you went to Delhi.
If you wish you
may go there after my arrival. You yourself told me that you
were responsible for your brothers not writing to me. Can they
be so lacking in manners as not even to reply to me ?
If you
have not seen them so far, is it not an instance of your hap-
hazard ways? But if you do not yourself realize this, I can hardly
make you see it. I see nothing but lack of coherence in your
talk, your actions and your letters. I was under the impression
that you were conscious of it. Well, we need not worry about it.
All will be well. Your heart is good and my effort is as vigorous
as it can be.
I always have your good at heart and nothing
else. I hope to take much service from you.
Ask Draupadi to
write to me in detail.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
between pp. 136 and 137
