357. LETTER TO SIR J. G. LAITHWAITE
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
January 16, 1941
DEAR SIR GILBERT,
Many thanks for your letter of the 4th instant.
I am not going to write a serious reply to your extra
serious letter.
My letters are not written either for publica-
tion or for propaganda. They are written in pursuance of the
effort to act non-violently. Nor are they written to a stranger.
So much by way of preface.
The language of officialdom is evidently a thing to be learnt
specially. Your letter is an instance in point.
In my own
plain English I resolve your language thus:
I forgot to tell you that His Excellency's disagreement
with you as to the estimate of the British connection was not
the only reason for not complying with your request. It is
inconvenient to give you the real or the whole reason. So
please regard this correspondence as closed.
Putting this interpretation upon your letter and reading it
together with the last paragraph in it, I have finally decided not
to contrive to secure publicity of the open letter to Herr Hitler.
I have accordingly asked my son not to make any use of the
letter but to destroy it.
I had told you that I had not shown the letter to anyone
else except my son. I have since shown it to an English friend
who believes in my method. She is not to make use of her know-
ledge except among friends such as the Bishop of Calcutta. My
hearty co-operation with His Excellency in preventing publica-
tion does not mean admission of the validity of the prohibition.
It is an earnest of my desire not to embarrass authority wherever
it is possible for me to avoid embarrassment.
But the action of the Censor in prohibiting the enclosed passes
comprehension. I entertain the fond hope that His Excellency knows
nothing of the Censor's action. I would like you very kindly to
let me know whether it commands His Excellency's approval. If it
does and if I am to fall in with it, it will stop all open communica-
tion with the public. That would constitute an undue interference
with the liberty of the Press, and would raise a grave issue. I
shall hope that if it is at all possible, this will be avoided.
As the matter is very urgent may I expect an early reply?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
