343. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 8, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Since Dhurandhar is here, I shall probably see him some
time. Instead of wishing to kill many birds with one stone, why
not wish to bring down many berries with one hit? You should
never wish to kill a bird.
It was fortunate that you escaped being hurt by the tile. We
should conclude from this that you are destined to do much more.
You need not at all feel confused about the problem con-
cerning the women. You may give your services if they want them
and if you have confidence in yourself. Otherwise you should
forget the suggestion as if it had never been made. You should
have confidence in yourself not about your ability to teach the
women, but about your humility, about your ability not to let any
misunderstanding occur and to manage any difficult situation
that may arise. We often hesitate to undertake a responsibility out
of fear of humiliation, misunderstanding, etc. If you can over-
come such hesitation, you may take up the responsibility. You do
believe that all the women are good by nature. They require the
help of someone who can express their thoughts in words and
maintain records for them. An illiterate mother may have more
sense and practical wisdom than her educated daughter, but, be-
ing illiterate, she may not be able to use them. A daughter can
supply this deficiency. I should like you to do that. I certainly
don't believe that the Association was doing very good work when
Gangabehn was there. But on one pretext or another, she could
bring all of them together. It was her ambition to do this work
and she sowed the seed. She is doing similar work here too.
I should like to see that seed grown into a tree. The women cer-
tainly do social work, but as individuals. I should like them to
assume responsibility as a body, for some social service. This will
create in them capacity for organization. When such capacity
has been created, individuals may come and go but the organiza-
tion will remain. God has given such capacity only to human
beings. In our country, women have not cultivated it so far. The
blame for this lies with the men. But that is a question with which
we need not concern ourselves just now. If we believe that women
must acquire this capacity for organization, we should try to culti-
vate it in them. It does not matter if we commence only with
my writing a letter to their Association and their replying to me.
Slowly (no matter, if very slowly) we may take up other activi-
ties. If you have fully understood what I have suggested and if the
suggestion has appealed to you, if the other women also approve
of it and if they are ready to take interest in carrying it out, you
may take up this work. If, however, you see difficulties in carry-
ing it out or see no meaning in it, you may drop the idea.
Don't pay attention just now to my request to you to send
me a list of books. I don't want you, for the present, to send any-
thing besides the books of Upton Sinclair which I have asked you
to send.
I don't at all like the practice of converting a person from
one religion to another. I don't believe that marriage between
a man and a woman professing different faiths is impossible or
always undesirable.
I think the distinguishing features of Hinduism are cow-
protection and varnashrama. Any nation that wants to rise should
follow the path of truth and non-violence.
I think I have answered all your questions.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My copy of the Gujarati Jodanikosh, second edition, publish-
ed by the Vidyapith, is lying there. Send it to me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10280. Also C.W. 6728. Courtesy
Premabehn Kantak
