413. LETTER TO HAJI ISMAIL HAJI ABOOBAKER JOHARI
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
August 14, 1906
MY DEAR SHETH SHRI HAJI ISMAIL HAJI ABOOBAKER,
Now there seems to be very solid ground for hoping that, within a
short time, the land in Pretoria will be transferred to the names of both
of you! Since Omar Sheth has already written to you of this, I need not
dilate upon it.
I have always complained to Omar Sheth about the expenses there.
These are hard times now in South Africa, and they are likely to become
harder still. The prices of land have gone down by 66 per cent., and
it would be no matter for surprise if they fell still further. The rent you
used to get has decreased by a half and will further decrease. Even a
well-furnished shop on the first floor in a place like West Street remains
untenanted. If, in such bad times, you do not reduce your household
and other expenditure, whatever property you have will be eroded. As
it is, you are living, so to speak, on capital. That we are making
some profit in trade is, however, a matter for satisfaction. But, then,
that profit consists of stocks and of arrears collected from clients. The
actual profit from trade cannot be reckoned precisely unless the final accounts
are made up and goods converted into cash. I must say that Omar Sheth
is living a very simple life. The house he lives in does not become a man
of your status and reputation. The food is likewise simple. Besides, he
is at present staying with me and living a more than usually austere
life. I am sometimes pained at this, but allow things to continue in the
hope that he will ultimately benefit by it. For example, last evening he
only had bread, butter, papad and cocoa for dinner, and walked with
me three-and-a-half miles before turning in for the night. I do not mean
to suggest that you yourself should go to these lengths; but I do wish to
say that your monthly expenses should not exceed £25. People will criti-
cise you for cutting down on expenses, but such critics are really no friends
at all, for they will not help you to run your household. It is therefore
the duty of those who realize their condition to think of the hard times
and live accordingly. What more shall I say? I write in this strain be-
cause I wish well of you.
I hope you are all right.
The document pertaining to the sale deed which you have signed
and sent here does not bear the signature of a witness. I am therefore
returning it to you for getting it witnessed. Please return it after getting
it signed by a witness and attested by the Political Agent under his seal
and signature.
Salaams from
M. K. GANDHI
HAJI ISMAIL HAJI ABOOBAKER JOHARI, ESQ.
[PORBUNDER]
[PS.] You may send the enclosed documents through a State pleader
to the Political Agent for signature.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand received from Jhaveri
Brothers, Durban
