240. LETTER TO PYARELAL
JUHU,
May 14, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have received your letters. I have had Mahadev read them all.
You will learn more from Sushila's letter. It is a good thing for
me that Sushila seems to be coming out of her stupor. A great
burden will be off my mind if she returns to her original self
and devotes herself to whatever she considers her duty.
After I had written the above, I got another letter from
you. I can bear this distance because you are with Sushila. I
would not have been able to stand it had she been alone in
Delhi. I have compared her to a tender plant and the com-
parison is very apt. It was not in the least difficult for me to
understand the purpose of Sushila's letter. I have never believed
that she would deliberately resort to a lie in speech or action.
Sushila acted as if in a stupor. With the exception of going to
the toilet, every action of hers was in my view a lie. Once we
accept the state of stupor, it is unnecessary to impute to her any
other fault. The incident of that night only supports this con-
tention. It has no other relevance.
Sushila is unnecessarily being angry with herself. There will
be no time to write separately to her about it. Plead with her
on my behalf and console her. Is she cheerful? Does she
laugh? If she does not laugh, how can she be stupid? If she
accepts the adjective I have used for her, she must forget her
unhappiness and prove her stupidity. Do not the foolish and
the wise have some common characteristics?
If your understanding of [the incidents of] the 14th in day-
time and of the 9th night is different, what is there in it to
make you shudder or render you unhappy? Am I omniscient?
My understanding has not always been correct. And on this
occasion, I see myself distressed and senile; so what wonder if
I act like a jaundiced man who sees everything yellow? Hence,
have no fear about my being firm. Right now, I am beginning
to give more importance to the view of the other party rather
143
than to my own. Please therefore let me know your interpreta-
tion in clear terms and without any fear. If I find it acceptable,
it will not take me long to change my view.
When would you prepare rotis for me? Sushila is confused.
Only you can show her the straight path. Take whatever time
is necessary to do that.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I hope to leave here for Wardha on the 17th.
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
