148. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR
July 2, 1934
DEAR MR. KELKAR 2 ,
The unusual demand upon my time is my excuse for delay
in replying to your letter of 22nd June last.
Instead of dealing directly with the points raised by you I
propose to define my own policy regarding the Indian States.
The policy of non-interference in the affairs of the States that
the Congress has followed is wise and sound.
The States are independent entities under the British law. That
part of India which is described as British has no more power
to shape the policy of the States than it has, say, that of Afghani-
stan or Ceylon.
I wish it were otherwise but I recognize my impotence in the
matter.
India of the States is undoubtedly an integral part of
geographical India. But that carries us no further than where
we stand today. Portuguese and French India are also an inte-
gral part of geographical India but we are powerless to shape the
course of events there. We enrol members from the States in the
Congress. We receive considerable assistance from them. It is not
want of appreciation or will that compels our non-interference.
It is our helplessness.
It is my conviction that any attempt on the part of the Con-
gress at interference can only damage the cause of the people in
the States.
But there is nothing to prevent us from urging the States
to adopt a certain policy.
I am of opinion that whatever we are able to accomplish in
British India is bound to affect the States.
I would like the States to grant autonomy to their subjects
and would like the Princes to regard themselves as, and be in fact,
trustees for the people over whom they rule, drawing for them-
selves only a small and definite percentage of the income. I
have certainly not lost hope that the Princes will deem it a
pride to become real trustees of their people. I do not seek to
destroy their status.
I believe in the conversion of individuals
and societies.
What I said at the Round Table was in the nature of an
appeal made to the Princes. It certainly did not imply that whether
they listened to the appeal or not, the Congress would enter the
federation. I had no authority to bind the Congress to any
such thing. The Congress entering the federation had to depend
upon many other circumstances beyond the attitude of the Princes.
If ever federation comes, it will surely depend on mutual ad-
justment.
I hope I have covered all the points you have raised. If I
have not, please write to me again. I have written this under
great pressure of work.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI N. C. KELKAR
"KESARI" OFFICE
POONA CITY
From a photostat: C. W. 3118. Courtesy: Kashinath N. Kelkar
