372. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
February 11, 1933
CHI PRABHAVATI,
I got your letter only yesterday. It was very good. Those
who recite Gita give up any worry whatsoever. I do know that
your fits are caused by some worry or other. If you need to write
every fortnight to Jayaprakash you must write only to him and
he can send me the news. If a monthly letter is sufficient for him
it will be enough if I too may receive one in the month. Ba
is again behind the bars, she is at Sabarmati. Mirabehn too has
been transferred to Sabarmati Jail as her health was deteriorating.
Your letter to Ba I shall send to Sabarmati. You are doing
well in studies.
Can you understand English well?
It was
excellent that you were given the job of teaching.
Inform Kanta that I deliberately refrain from writing to her
so that she may receive the essential mail due to her without any
hindrance. Her news I continue to get through Sumangal.
Mrityunjaya and Vidyavati do not even write to me but I
get the news about Father's health. There was no serious comp-
laint about the women inmates of the Ashram; anyway neither
your nor Kanta's name was mentioned in it. My work certainly
goes on increasing, but I do have some help now that Chhagan-
bhai is here. Still who can share the work that only I can do?
Either it remains undone or I myself do it somehow or other. Do
see me on your release.
My health is perfect. I take milk and fruit. I take 1¼ lb.
milk, oranges, dates and papaya, sometimes some roasted and
crushed almonds too. The weight hovers around 103 lb. The pain
in the elbow has become chronic. It should not cause any anxiety.
I can spin every day but not much. It is about 100 rounds.
Sardar, Mahadev and Chhaganlal are all doing well. Which
newspapers can you get? Would you be allowed the Harijan that
I am bringing out? Mirabehn's letter comes every week. She
is permitted to write every week as she does not see anyone.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
[PS.]
If I write to you in Gujarati, will the letter be delivered to
you, or must I write only in Hindi?
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3433
