502. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 21, 1936
CHI. PREMA,
Here in Nandi Durg, I may claim, I am able to dispose of
each day's mail practically on the same day. I read your
letter of the 18th last evening, and am replying to it today.
It matters little what hopes I cherish about you. You may
go on striving according to what you think these hopes are and
according to your ability.
You have put the question very well. You could have
put it still more plainly. I have always had involuntary discharges.
In South Africa they occurred at intervals of several years. I
do not remember exactly. Here in India they have been of
months. I have mentioned the fact of my getting discharges
in a few articles of mine. If my brahmacharya had been com-
pletely free from discharges, I would have been able to place
before the world very much more than I have succeeded in do-
ing. But it seems practically impossible that a person who has
indulged in sex gratification from the age of 15 to 30, maybe
with his own wife only, can, on taking a vow of brahmacharya,
control the discharge of his vital fluid completely. One whose
capacity for retention has progressively weakened from day to
day for fifteen years cannot recover it fully all at once. Both
his body and mind will have become too weak for that. I, there-
fore, consider myself a very imperfect brahmachari. But my posi-
tion is like that of the castor oil plant which looks big on a heath
where there are no trees. People know this shortcoming of mine.
The experience which tormented me in Bombay was a strange
and painful one. All my discharges so far had occurred in
dreams and they never troubled me. I could forget them.
But the experience in Bombay occurred while I was fully awake
and had a sudden desire for intercourse. I felt of course no urge
to gratify the craving, there was no self-forgetfulness whatever. I
was completely master of my body. But despite my best efforts
the organ remained aroused. This was an altogether strange and
shameful experience. I have already explained the cause. As
soon as that cause was removed the state of remaining aroused
came to a stop, that is, during the waking state.
Despite my imperfection, one thing has always come easily
to me, viz., that thousands of women have remained safe in my
company. There have been occasions in my life when certain
women, though aroused, were saved by God, or say, I was saved.
I am a hundred per cent certain that it was God who saved us
and, therefore, take no pride in the fact. It is my unceasing
prayer to God that I might remain in the same condition till
the very end of my life.
I have been striving to attain to Shukadeva's condition. I
have not succeeded in that aim. If I succeed, I would become
a eunuch though possessed of the vital fluid and discharges would
become impossible.
However, the views which I have recently expressed regar-
ding brahmacharya have no flaw in them and contain no exaggera-
tion. With effort, any man or woman can attain that ideal. This
does not mean that the whole world or thousands will realize it
in my own lifetime. Let it take centuries to be realized, but
the ideal is correct, is realizable and must be realized.
Man has a long way to travel yet. His instincts are still
those of a beast. Only his frame is human. Violence seems to
reign all round. Untruth fills the world.
And yet we do not
doubt the rightness of the path of truth and non-violence. Know
that the same is the case with regard to brahmacharya.
Those who strive but continue to burn inwardly are in fact
not striving. They nurse lust in their minds and only wish to
control loss of the vital fluid, to refrain from the physical act of
intercourse. Such persons are correctly described in Chapter
II [of the Gita]. They may be regarded as hypocrites.
What I am at present striving to achieve is purification of
thought.
Modern thought regards brahmacharya as adharma and recom-
mends the 'dharma' of self-indulgence and control of progeny
by artificial means. My soul rebels against this.
Sex-craving will always remain in the world, but its moral
basis rests and will ever rest on brahmacharya.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10381. Also C.W. 6819. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
