27. LETTER TO MANASUKHLAL RAOJIBHAI MEHTA
August 17, 1918
BHAISHRI MANASUKHLAL,
I got your letter today. I am down with serious illness these
days. I am confined to bed. Perhaps this will be my deliverance.
Treatments continue, my own. The mind is perfectly at peace.
The knowledge that I have invited this illness by my own stupidity
makes the pain I am going through seem less severe than it is.
I think the present condition of the educated young men is
pitiable. If there is anything by which I can rouse this class of
people to useful work, I can now do it, but it seems to me
that the time is not ripe. That class is now lost in a delusion of
its own creation. I am convinced that this delusion would never
have come to possess them simply through the policies of Tilak
and Besant .
Both these not only keep aside moral principles
in politics but believe that sometimes that is the right thing
to do. "Tit for tat" is a principle which they have delibe-
rately and openly accepted. I don't think I can at present
persuade this class which has embraced their policy to
accept anything from me, do what I will. Let them adopt—and
they will—whatever they can indirectly from my work, my
writings and my speeches. If I come forward to give anything,
they will reject it, as they well might. The policy of Mrs. Besant
and Tilak Maharaj is mistaken, very much so indeed, but their
achievement has been simply heroic. Their services it is im-
possible to measure. It is from them that the young got the
message of patriotism. How can they, all so suddenly, disown
these gurus? I would never ask them to do so, either. All the same,
a time will surely come when the educated will turn away from the
policy I have mentioned, though not ceasing to regard the two
with reverence, such is my faith in the ancient greatness of India.
It is not the Kauravas but the Pandavas who triumphed in those
times and the five men were imagined to be capable of holding
their own against those hundreds of thousands. It is inconceivable
to me that the youth of such a country will accept the perverted rule
of "tit for tat". I shall be patient. For my part, I have been
pleading with these two persons, too, but in doing all this I can
only follow my own way. Sometimes this seems to bring about
great delay but that is inevitable. There are things which are
done, ought to be done, only behind the scene. I have decided,
this time, not to attend the Congress, and for the reasons shown
above. Nor do I intend to attend the Conference of the Moderate
party. My absence itself will strike the people. Everyone will
begin to ask questions; if necessary, I will state my views then.
I have written a long enough letter. It is not to be published.
It is only for you to ponder over.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
