313. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
November 5, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS,
I dare not send for you. How can I say that my treatment
will surely benefit you? How can I experiment with you?
Moreover, once you are here you will surely get involved in a
number of things. After all, home is home. What one happens
to see or hear cannot but affect one. Precisely for this reason I
have left the matter entirely to you. At the moment I find my
dharma of not opposing your wishes easy enough. It is the least
likely to be wrong. Yet I would suggest this to help you to
arrive at a decision. After much thinking I am inclined to select
Poona. It has the best climate and good water. Lady Vithaldas
has been pressing me for it. Try her treatment and as Ba would
be with you, you will find the going easy. If you [decide to] go
there you had better send Sumitra here. Nimu also would like
to come over but if you want to take her with you, by all means
do so. From all this you will see that I am inclined to keep you
away [from me]. Make up your mind after considering my incli-
nation for what it is worth. Don't leave it to me. I do feel that
you ought to come away from there. You may consult Dr. Jivraj
at Bombay if he has the time. I would not mind, though, if you
don't. You are not going to come to the slightest harm. Never
mind if you take time to recoup your strength. Don't lose heart.
Know that I am not at all opposed to your coming here if you
like to do so. If you do come over I shall of course guide you
as best as I can. But on the whole I like Mehta's treatment. All
you need to have is proper diet. The treatment of egg-diet might
prove beneficial if started early. Jugatram writes to say that he
knows no vegetable product which can fully replace eggs. Milk
is inferior to eggs and cannot match them. This had been proved
right in Manu's case. She was given only uncooked eggs.
I trust Ba's cold has subsided.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
