136. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
February 27, 1918
CHI. RAMDAS,
I keep worrying about you these days. I detect a note
of despondency in your letters. It seems you feel the want of edu-
cation. You feel, too, that you have not settled down to any-
thing. If only you were with me, I would take you on my lap and
comfort you. In the measure in which I fail to make you happy,
I think I must be wanting in something. There must be something
lacking in my love. Please think of any wrongs I may have done
as unintended and forgive me. Children are entitled to much from
their parents, being all submission to them. A mistake on the
part of the parents will ruin their lives. Our scriptures place parents
on a level with God. It is not always that parents in this world
are fit to carry such responsibility. Being but earthly, they
pass on the legacy to their children and so from generation to
generation mere embodiments of selfishness come into this world.
Why should you think that you are an unworthy son? If you are
so, don't you see that that would prove that I was unworthy? I
don't want to be reckoned as unworthy; how could you be so then?
You may work for money, but you will not sacrifice truth for its
sake and, though you have been thinking of marriage, you will
exercise your judgment; and hence I, for my part, will always think
of you as a worthy son.
You need not ask my forgiveness. You have given me no rea-
son to be unhappy. I want you to come over to me after your
experiments there are over. I shall do my part to see you married.
If you want to study, I shall help you. If you but train your body
to be as strong as steel, we shall see to the rest. At the moment,
we are scattered wide apart. You there, Manilal in Phoenix, Deva
in Badharwa, Ba in Bhitiharwa, Harilal in Calcutta, and myself
ever on the move from place to place. Maybe, in this separation
lies service to the nation and the way to spiritual uplift. Whether
that is so or not, let us bear with a cheerful mind what has fallen
to our lot.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
