51. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
July 20, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
It pained me to have to refuse to see you. But the proof of my
having done the right thing came the next morning. The Govern-
ment have rejected my offer and therefore there can be no inter-
views now. It would be unbecoming for me to press my view-
point. They are entitled to refuse every facility to prisoners as was
done all the world over only a century ago or even much later. It
is enough that the exchange of letters is permitted. But you will
recognize that even this is a precarious thing. Any moment they
may stop the correspondence or impose unacceptable conditions.
We can only gain by self-denial. Therefore, there need be no
heartburning over this stoppage of interviews. It is better that
spirit meets spirit. No power on earth can stop that blessed con-
tact.
Now for the gifts you left. I note the extraordinary care over
the smallest detail. I began the use of the new wheel immediately.
This, therefore, was the second day of use. Today is Sunday after
the commencement of silence. But whilst this love is deep, it is not
as wise as it might be. Your wheel has not lessened the strain. As
I explained to Mathuradas, the strain was in the having to sit out
for five hours in practically one posture. If I could reduce the hours
and get the same amount of production, it would be another
matter. That the new wheel is not likely to do. As it is, the strain
on the left arm is felt in using the new wheel. For in this you
have to move the arm away from you and raise it too, where
[-as] in the box wheel, the arm is in a horizontal position and
moves towards oneself. Moreover, you could ill afford to give time
to a matter like this and take up that of skilled workmen unless it is
required by me. I must be allowed to be capable of looking after
myself and expressing my wants. Thirdly, I have not yet been
able to draw as fine a thread as on the box wheel. The result is
the use of 50 per cent more slivers—a national waste! Enough
however of criticism. I am not going, lightly, to leave aside a
thing that has come charged with so much love. I am, therefore,
going to continue the use of the wheel and report to you from time
to time. What oil do you use for the holders and the axle? How
often do you apply the resin to the mal?
The taklis I have tried. They are not as good as the one I
have made here. The discs are too large, the bamboo not well
polished. There seems to be a proportion between the thickness of
the rod and the circumference of the disc. If weight is wanting,
it must be made up by making the disc thicker. Next time you
make a takli, you will consider these points and let me know your
opinion.
There is nothing new to report about my health. The weight
keeps steady.
You will please take no liberties with your body during the
tour.
I am putting in more time for the translation of the bhajans.
I have now finished the Sanskrit verses and am now on the bhajans.
Give my love to Hariprasad.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5403. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9637
44-
