217. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
January 27, 1933
I have your letters and plenty of cablegrams. I know their
meaning and the anxiety complex underlying them. I have no
doubt that the Government of India should have given their as-
sent to the introduction of both the Bills. But the sanatanist agi-
tation has frightened them. I do not mind however the refusal to
give the assent to Dr. Subbaroyan's Bill. No doubt it protracts the
agony, but that cannot be helped. After all, it is the Hindu mass
mind that has to be awakened. If the touchable Hindus are not
ready for the removal of untouchability, I do not want even
the all-India Bill, though, as you will see, from my statement on
1 These are not available.
2 The addressee had written in his letter dated January 13 that it
would be better if the proposed legislation regarding untouchability was made
"an all-India question" and dealt with by the Central Legislature rather than
by the Madras Council.
3 Vide pp. 128-32.
162
the Bill, it is perfectly harmless. It simply refuses to give the
sanction of secular law to untouchability, thus leaving free scope
to the reformers and the objectors to carry on the education of
the masses. It is strictly a Bill of non-interference either way.
Nevertheless, I shall be prepared to reconcile myself to the Bill
being blocked by the Government, if it is conclusively proved
that caste Hindus will not have it. My difficulty is to prove the
readiness of the vast mass of caste men for the change, unless the
Government are prepared to accept the ordinary methods of
proof. Just at present a vicious agitation that, so far as I am
aware, has no authority from the public at large is being con-
ducted in the name of sanatana dharma. It is difficult to show
to outsiders that it has no genuine public support. If this agitation
is taken to be the genuine expression of the Hindu mass mind, a
very difficult and critical situation will undoubtedly arise. I am
however moving heaven and earth to ensure purity and trust that
all will be well in the end. Meanwhile, the fast remains post-
poned. I have absolutely no will of my own in the matter. I am
continually praying for light, and if the fast comes, you will know
the source, and therefore not get at all anxious.
I observe what you say about Kunwar Maharaj Singh's
boys, and I am glad that your effort was successful. It was a kind
of temple-entry, as you have put it.
I take it that you are getting all my statements. Nevertheless,
I enclose herewith my statement on the all-India Bill. I would
like you to study it carefully and appreciate, if you can, the
fundamental distinction I have drawn between the temple-entry
and the economic and educational programme.
I hope your ailing mother is better and more amenable to
control.
C. F. ANDREWS
From a photostat: S.N. 19004
