400. LETTER TO PRINCIPAL MEDICAL OFFICER
[JOHANNESBURG,
July 31, 1906]
TO
COL. J. HYSLOP
PRINCIPAL MEDICAL OFFICER
NATAL MILITIA
PIETERMARITZBURG
NATAL
SIR,
The Indian Stretcher-Bearer Corps was disbanded on the 19th inst.,
and the Corps reached Durban on the 20th.
The Corps was called upon to do the work of disinfecting the camp
at Mapumulo, of dressing injuries and wounds, and of marching with the
troops and doing stretcher work. Most of the bearers accompanied the
troops during the operations at the Tugela, the Otimati and the Umvoti
Valleys. In my humble opinion, the men did the work willingly and skil-
fully. The object of the Natal Indian Congress, in offering to form the
1 Vide "Statement Presented to Constitution Committee", pp. 336-44
2 Vide the preceding item.
3 This is in Gandhiji's hand.
4 In his reply, Col. Hyslop, acknowledging Gandhiji's letter as of this date, conveyed
the Militia Commander's thanks to the members of the Ambulance Corps and expressed
his own appreciation "of the very valuable services afforded to the Medical Department of
the Militia, not only as stretcher-bearers, but also in connection with the more important
work of sanitation".
Corps, was to show that Indians recognized their responsibilities as settlers
in Natal, and to induce the Government to utilise Indians as a permanent
portion of the Natal Militia. I venture to think that my countrymen
are essentially fit for ambulance and hospital work. Trooper Forder,
whom we carried from Otimati, had, in addition to being carried, to be
nursed by us, and he was so satisfied that he sought me out specially on
his recovery to express his appreciation of the men's work.
The Corps consisted of some skilled English-educated Indians, as
also of Indians of the labourer type, but all of them were intelligent workers,
and capable in civil life of earning much more than what would be paid
to them by the Indian community. As the community was anxious that
its offer should be accepted, in order to avoid any difficulty, the men were
induced to accept only one shilling and six pence per day, which they
gladly did; but, in my opinion, it is not possible to get intelligent men
for less than £1 per week.
I also think that those who may be called leaders of stretcher parties
should receive five shillings per day.
Members of the Corps were all untrained and untried men; they
were called upon, too, to do responsible and independent work, and to
face danger unarmed. If the Government would form a permanent Ambu-
lance Corps, I think that special training is absolutely necessary, and
that they should all be armed for self-protection.
As one who has been intimately connected with the Indian com-
munity for the last thirteen years, I have ventured to place the above
views before you for your consideration.
[Yours faithfully,]
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 11-8-1906
