330. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
April 4, 1932
CHI. MANUDI,
I got your letter, and read the whole of it twice. You need
not be scared. It was very good that you saw the woeful con-
dition of Harilal with your own eyes. I knew all about him.
However, we should not give up hope of anyone's future. Nothing
is beyond God's power? If there is still some merit to Harilal's
credit earned through good deeds in the past, it will bear fruit
one day. We should not pamper him or have false pity on
him, but should make our hearts purer day by day. That will
have an effect on Harilal too. You have got to harden your
heart and write to him and tell him plainly that, as long as he
does not give up drinking, he will have to assume that you do
not exist. If all of us adopt such a course, Harilal might take
heed. Often a drunkard gives up his evil habit when he is
greatly shocked.
I liked your reply about marriage. I am sure it will be
all to your good if you stick to your resolution. In your child-
hood you were so ill that nobody hoped you would live. You
were saved because of Ba's patient nursing and the treatment of
the Ice Doctor. But owing to that illness, your growth had
practically stopped for five years. You are weak even now,
and but for Bali's care, you would become ill again. On this
account, I always deduct at least five years from your actual
age. We have already fixed the earliest age for a woman to
marry at twenty-one years. The age, therefore, which you have
laid down for yourself for marrying is proper. I would regard
you as barely fit for marriage at the age of twenty-five. However,
I do not wish to bind you to a pledge. I write this only to tell
you that your present resolution is right. When Rami wished
to get married at a younger age, I did not come in her way
though I did not at all like that she should have married at that
age. As for you, there are many reasons why you should not
marry early. May God keep you firm in your resolution. At
present your duty is to apply yourself hard to your studies, build
up a strong, healthy body, understand the path which Gita teaches
and live accordingly.
Write to me from time to time. You may come to see me if
you wish. Try and improve your handwriting a good deal.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1511. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala
