494. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
December 4, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,
I got your letter yesterday. That might possibly help in
locating the articles. All that you have written is enough to
institute a search. How can I call you here for this task? One
strong reason for your going there is to be with and serve
Draupadi and the children. This is the beginning of your train-
ing and this is how naturopathy starts.
And now you write
that you would live in a room in Dr. Ansari's house if he agrees
to it. That too leaving behind Draupadi and Krishna who is
reduced to a mere skeleton! No, your education, your duty
today lies in doing whatever is possible while living with Drau-
padi and the children.
Take them away to some village near Khurja and live there.
If not there then somewhere else in the countryside. Krishnan
Nair lives at Narela near Delhi.
He is a good man, you can
live with him too, i.e., he might keep you with him or find some
place for you. In any case you are not going to live with your
brothers in Khurja. Your brother who is helping you will
continue to do so wherever you might live. Let me know his
Income.
Amtul wants to undertake some work in collaboration with
you. If you can live in a village, this wish of hers can also be
fulfilled. She wants to serve Draupadi and the children but this
has nothing to do with your living in the countryside.
I hope you will not tell me that your studies have been
interrupted because you have not received your anatomy books.
No matter when you get the books, by leading a well regulated
life, you are certainly going ahead with your training. Giving up
all suspicion also does help. Look, the reason why Jnanoba was
not brought before me was to save me [the trouble].
As the
shawl was already found, there was no need to see him. I had
myself sent Kishorelal down to you.
Similarly, the incident
involving Kamalnayan and Mogheji. Amtul was present during
their conversation, she heard all. She says that Kamalnayan
and Mogheji were simply jesting and they did not mean to
express pleasure at your departure. Possibly they were neither
sorry nor pleased at your leaving. One desirous of becoming
a naturopath is not suspicious of anyone, is not hasty and does
not brood over another person's fault.
He should daily ponder
over this couplet of Tulsidas:
God has endowed this world of sentient and insentient beings
with good qualities as well as bad. Good men take in only the good
qualities leaving behind the impurities like the swan that drinks only
milk leaving behind the water mixed with it.
Only then can he treat other people or correctly diagnose
their ailments.
If Ramdas comes along he will travel with me. I shall see
what happens.
How are you spending your time these days? What are you
reading? You have plenty of books, I suppose.
I have received a prompt refusal from Delhi; now further
correspondence is going on. Let us see what happens.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, pp. 127-
