593. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
February 10, 1947
CHI. VINOBA,
I do not at all feel happy in having to take your time, but
you are being drawn into this.
The friends in our circle have been very much upset be-
cause of Manu's sleeping with me. Kishorelal's agony is diffi-
cult to bear. He is so upset that he is on the verge of break-
ing down. The same is the case with Narahari and Swami .
I do not know how the women at Sevagram and elsewhere must
be suffering. Here, on the contrary, everybody knows what is
happening but I see no sign of its having any effect. Maybe
that prevents me from feeling the full impact of people's re-
actions. I keep playing with such fancies, for the co-workers' pain
makes me lose confidence in myself. My own mind, however,
is becoming firmer than ever, for it has been my belief for a long
time that that alone is true brahmacharya which requires no hedges.
My experiments arose from this belief. I did make mistakes in
them. Unthinking imitation may also have harmed the persons
concerned. But I am not conscious of myself having fallen.
Manu's sleeping with me is not a part of my experiment,
but is a part of the present yajna. My mind daily sleeps in an
innocent manner with millions of women, and Manu also, who is
a blood relation to me, sleeps with me as one of these millions.
If she stops doing that out of deference to custom or to
please co-workers, would I not be a hypocrite of the type de-
scribed in chapter III [of the Gita]? If I do not appear to peo-
ple exactly as I am within, wouldn't that be a blot on my non-
violence? I go to this length: Suppose that non-violence has
no effect on the people here and I die. If I don't let Manu
sleep with me, though I regard it as essential that she should,
wouldn't that be a sign of weakness in me, and in that case
would not my death, since I would have failed to realize per-
fect ahimsa, be the best thing for me? In other words, would
not my experiment in ahimsa and truth remain incomplete or
be tainted? Perhaps I have not expressed this last thought clear-
ly. I referred to the subject in three speeches of mine. Fuller
reports appeared in Hindi. I myself drafted the English versions
for newspapers. They do not seem to have been published in
full. I have, therefore, sent to co-workers copies of the extracts
which have appeared. I am sending one to you also. Please let
me have your view.
How is Krishnachandra doing? Ask him to write to me.
How are you?
I finished this letter at 6.15 a. m. local time, that is, 5.15 a. m.
according to our own time.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 10545. Courtesy: Vinoba Bhave
