194. LETTER TO KATHERINE MAYO
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 26, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I was glad to receive your letter before you left and gladder
still to see that you propose to
the whole matter.
Verify for yourself the statement I made and then come to a
judgment. That is precisely what I want American friends to do.
To take nothing for granted, challenge every statement whether
it comes from Indian source or European source and whether they
are anti-Indian or pro-Indian, then come to a deliberate conclu-
sion and act upon it.
I send you herewith the quotations from the books whose
names you will find at the end of the quotations. If you still have
any difficulty in getting hold of the books from which the
quotations have been taken, do please let me know. I would
want to add also that the statement about poverty of India does
not rest merely upon the testimony of the late Sir William Wilson
Hunter but it has been confirmed by subsequent observations
made both by Indians and Europeans. If you want this informa-
tion also substantiated by me, I shall be pleased to send you
proofs. I also suggest to you a method that even a man in the
street may adopt for verification.
1. Is it or is it not true that nearly 80 per cent of the popu-
lation of India is agricultural and living in remote villages scat-
tered over an area of 1,900 miles long and 1,500 miles broad?
2. Is it or is it not true that these peasants are living in small
holdings and often as serfs of big zamindars?
3. Is it or is it not true that the vast majority of them have
at least four idle months in the year?
4. Is it or is it not true that before the British rule these
very people had hand-spinning and industry ancillary to agricul-
ture which supplemented the slender income they had from agri-
culture?
5. Is it or is it not true that whilst hand-spinning has been
entirely killed no other industry has taken its place?
If the answer to all these questions be in the affirmative, no-
matter what statements might be made by anybody, these agri-
culturists must be poorer than they were before hand-spinning
was destroyed. There are many other causes for the growing
poverty of the masses but those that are implied in the questions
are, I think, enough for the ordinary enquirer. I have suggested
this line of enquiry to you so as to enable you to test the tragic
truth of India's growing poverty in many ways.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12451
