11. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
SEVAGRAM,
July 24, 1941
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,
This is about your letter of 14th. I have found you to be weak
in action and that out of your overgoodness. Overgoodness leads to
weakness. It means a disposition not to offend people even at the
cost of suppression of truth. My firm advice to you is that you should
talk to Mian Saheb 3 with the utmost candour and he will respond.
If he has suspicion he will tell you so. He is young and inexperienced
but straight and brave. This is my analysis of him. You should have
gone to Solan and Simla. When he definitely asked you not to go to
Manorlal, it was well to respect his wishes. But you were not bound
always to carry out his wishes except in strict Congress matters. You
must build up your opinions and enforce them when enforcement
1 Kunvarji K. Parekh
2 Jugatram Dave
3 Mian Iftikhar-ud-din
6
becomes a duty. It is wrong to seek imprisonment in order to gain
relief from squabbles or suspicion fancied or real of one's chief. Such
imprisonment is harmful.
I refrain from guiding you in the matters referred to by you, till
you have become even with Mian Saheb. If you have really forfeited
his confidence, my advice would be for you to retire from the Congress
activities without any fuss. You have ample other useful work. Men
like you cannot work half-heartedly or under shadow of mistrust or
suspicion.
I have not heard from Mian Saheb at all for weeks now. I do
not think I had anything from him save one letter to Rajkumari after
the last visit.
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy : Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
12. LETTER TO H. R. STIMSON
SEVAGRAM,
July 24, 1941
DEAR MR. STIMSON,
Here are my answers :
1. No modification necessary. My advice to the Russians would be
precisely the same as to the British. It is a cruel misrepresentation
of my advice to the British to say that it was one of non-resistance.
I suggested non-violent resistance which is any day superior to
violent, blood-thirsty resistance.
2. I am entirely satisfied with the progress and achievements of my
limited non-cooperation campaign as you call it and which I describe
as civil disobedience.
3. It is a difficult question to answer definitely. But I do not mind
it being said that the majority are non-violent only out of policy.
That is the weakest part of my campaign but it is inevitable. In
1 Vide also Vol. LXXIV, pp. 149-51.
2 An Associated Press correspondent had sought Gandhiji's views on the
following points:
(i) whether Gandhiji's policy of non-violence advocated to the British would
apply to the Russians also, or would it need any modification; ii) whether Gandhiji
was satisfied with the progress of non-cooperation; (iii) how many of his followers
really believed in non-violence; (iv) whether in view of the widespread rioting in the
country, India could still have the unity and strength to forge her own destiny.
spite of the appearances to the contrary it is my belief that true
non-violence is growing among the people.
4. I have no doubt whatsoever that in spite of the riots, etc., India
will have the moral strength and unity to forge her own destiny
in her own way. Twenty years of solid work cannot be a waste.
I hope you can decipher my writing and that if you publish my
reply, it will be published as it is, in toto.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
