462. LETTER TO HASAM HIRJI
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Friday, April 30, 1926
BHAISHRI HASAM HIRJI,
Now I have another letter from you before I could reply to
your first. I will answer the main question in your first letter
through Navajivan when I get time. I will reply to your second
letter here.
Aparigraha is an ideal condition. It can be said that an ideal is
never realized perfectly. But we should not lower our ideal on
this account. No one has ever been able to draw the ideal
straight line of geometry but we may not, for that reason, change
its definition. If we draw a straight line, keeping the ideal one
in our view, we shall succeed in drawing a line which will serve
our purpose. But if we modify the definition, we will be like a
boat without the rudder. There is nothing wrong with money as
a piece of metal; evil comes through its use. Keeping this in mind,
we should sincerely try to realize the ideal of aparigraha as best as
we can. Let us now examine the instances which you have ima-
gined. The world will lose nothing if the rich give up their wealth
voluntarily; on the contrary, it will benefit by their action, because
a new and powerful force is generated as a result of a sincere act of
aparigraha. No one can act in such matters mechanically. He
alone who feels a spontaneous urge in his heart will act, and will
deserve credit for his action. There is no danger or possibility of
the entire world acting upon the ideal of aparigraha. But assuming
that it does, I have no doubt that it will find no difficulty in maintain-
ing itself. There are people in this world who do not stock anything
to meet their needs even for one day. You need not believe that
such persons would starve if there were not in the world other
people who stored things.
Just as in the law enforced by governments a crime does not
cease to be a crime for being committed unintentionally, so also
a violation of divine law committed in ignorance does not cease to
be a violation. Adultery committed under the influence of alco-
hol is none the less the same. "To ask for forgiveness" and "to
receive forgiveness" are beautiful ideas. I act on both the principles.
But I have always believed that forgiveness in this sense does not
mean what is commonly understood by it. A sincere desire to be
forgiven increases our humility; we are able to see our weakness,
and this knowledge gives us the strength to be good. Hindus,
Muslims, Christians, and others have employed innumerable epi-
thets to describe God, but they are all products of our own ima-
gination. God is without attributes and beyond all qualification.
But again I am speaking about the ideal; if, however, we do
not understand the ideal and seriously believe that God is subject
to all the epithets with which we describe Him, He would be like
us, an embodiment of errors. We should, therefore, know Him as
stainless and without form, and then we may heap on Him
as many epithets as we choose, for that is the only language which
He has given us. Apart from this, we cannot escape the fruits of
our action. This is the universal law and therein lies His
mercy. This world would not endure even for one moment if He
were to keep amending His laws and commandments, as we do
either to favour some or correct an error which might have been
noticed. The Reality which we call God is a mysterious, indes-
cribable and unique power. If we cannot comprehend Him with
our mind, how can our poor speech describe Him?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10902
