608. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 9, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter as usual.
As against your loss of weight of one pound I show increase
of nearly 3 lb., having shown nearly 102 lb. today. It is due to
my ability to take more milk. I turn a portion into what may be
called cheese and take it with bread. How long I shall be able
to do justice to it I do not know.
You should get rid of your constipation at once. And for
this fruit should be taken on an empty stomach. No other food
should be taken for two hours thereafter. The second thing to
do when one is constipated is to avoid protein foods, i.e., bread
and also milk, and take green vegetables cooked alternately with
fruit. That was how I built up my body after the fast. And
latterly Vallabhbhai has been correcting his constipation, heavi-
ness and cough by such non-nutritious fat-free and starch-free
food. It sustains one's weight fairly well. Dried fruit may be
taken of course. It may be wise not to mix dried fruit with fresh.
Thus one may take four meals, one consisting of say pomegranate
and musambis, the other of vegetables, e.g., dudhi and tomatoes,
third of dried figs or dates or prunes soaked in water over-night
and warmed or cold, the fourth may consist of the same vege-
table or pumpkin and lemons squeezed on it or tomatoes repeated
or it may consist of salad made of lettuce and tomatoes or grated
carrots. Such food repeated for a few days should remove obsti-
nate constipation. Sometimes mere omission of bread or milk may
answer. I take it that your bread is real wholemeal bread and
when it is chapati it is made of unsifted whole-wheat flour. The
wheat has to be thoroughly cleaned before it is ground. The whole
of the bran is absolutely necessary if one is to get the fullest ad-
vantage from wheat. These observations are simply to be used
as a help and must be corrected from your own experience.
Yes, I am devoting practically the whole of my time to un-
touchability work. The elbows continue to give pain when used
in a particular way. Most of my letters I now dictate. For the
few I write I use the hands alternately. This seems to answer
the purpose. I have cut down the spinning just now to 100 rounds
from 200. Of course there is not the slightest cause for anxiety over
this pain in the elbows. They need rest and nothing else. With
returning strength and the filling in of muscle, probably the pain
will disappear.
I am glad Kisen is still with you. Let her be most rigid
about your pronunciation.
We are all well and all send you both love.
BAPU
[Ps.]
You will be interested in the enclosed. Wonderful how even
such a thing should come to me. I am one of the family.
From the original: C.W. 6249. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9715
