283. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
WARDHA,
February 12, 1935
MY DEAR MALKANI,
You must have thought that I had forgotten all about the
bye-laws, or perhaps, having gone to Assam, you have forgotten
them altogether. And if you did so, you would be quite right,
for I had taken over the burden from your shoulders. But I
had not forgotten them at all. I returned to them again and again,
but could not do anything.
I had to read up the whole of
the constitution anew in order to reply to the three posers from
Dewan Bahadur Bhashyam Iyengar. And I realize why I could
not frame them. There is nothing more to do than what you
have done already. The constitution itself is so full that, beyond
what you have drawn up about accounts and the like, no further
provision is necessary.
The function of bye-laws is to provide
for certain routine work which cannot very well be provided for
in the main law. Bye-laws, therefore, are framed from time to
time as the necessity for them arises. They must not take the
place of administrative instructions or of resolutions that may be
passed from time to time.
Early this morning, I was reading your instructions on the
constitution. You will remember you gave a copy to me two
or three days before I left Delhi. I was never able to read them
before early this morning. Having read them, I felt confirmed
that neither I nor you had to draw anything just now. Your
instructions are good and very business-like. Even what you
have drawn up in the name of bye-laws are hardly such. But if
you want to have something which you should call by the name
of bye-laws, what you have drawn up will pass muster. I take
it that you have kept copies of your draft.
If you have not, I
can send it. It is not yet destroyed.
Did I write to you that I had already written to Dialdas,
and asked Thakkar Bapa to transfer his donation to the account
for which he wanted it to be used?
An account of your Assam experiences I expect in the form
of a note for Harijan. When do you shift the office to the Harijan
Home? What is it to be finally known as?
Harijan Colony,
Harijan Home or what else?
Love.
BAPU
SHRI N. R. MALKANI
BIRLA MILLS, DELHI
Copy to Bapa.
From a photostat: G.N. 912
