224. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
December 11, 1932
First about Appasaheb.
One should serve untouchables
wherever one finds them.
Moreover, persons serving the cause
of anti-untouchability ought not to be silent witnesses to people
who are not untouchables being treated as such. Appa's tapash-
charya in this regard is not a new thing, and his demand was not
that he should be permitted to do a particular kind of work in
place of another, but that he should not be prevented from doing
what he regarded as his dharma. I cannot go into further details on
this subject. However, I did not have even a moment's doubt about
the propriety of Appasaheb's step or about the step I intended to
take. Nor have I any doubt about it now after the matter is over.
Now about the issue of temple-entry. It would of course be
illegal on the part of the trustees if they go beyond their authority
in doing anything.
The present movement is not intended to
force the trustees to take any illegal step. However, if the people
on whose behalf they are acting as trustees desire a particular step
to be taken, it becomes their duty to secure legal sanction for it.
If the people are against a proposed step, a fast [to force the
trustees to take it] would be blackmail, and a poll is being taken
to prove that the intended fast is not of such character. If the
majority of people express themselves against Harijans being per-
mitted to enter temples, then I will not fast on that issue. But
other more difficult duties will arise for us then, which it is un-
necessary to discuss now. If a temple belongs to a particular
sect, we cannot insist on people outside its fold being permitted
to visit it, but the Harijans belonging to that sect must have the
right to enter it. This question, however, does not arise at all
in the case of the Guruvayur Temple. The idea of fasting has a
purely spiritual aim. Without it, it would be impossible to over-
come our inertia. Whenever a religion had lost its vitality, men
of sincere devotion went through extreme tapashcharya to restore
life to it. Without such tapashcharya, no religious awakening can
be brought about. If a person disappears into a jungle and
undertakes an indefinite fast, nothing can be said against his step.
It would of course be considered foolish if anyone did that ig-
norantly. But the step would be regarded as irreproachable if
taken with a spiritual aim. A lighter step than that by me in
the present circumstances would be fully justified. I say 'lighter'
because my fast will not be absolute or unconditional. The fast
will end if a certain condition is accepted. In laying down a
condition one should exercise discretion and self-restraint, and I
believe that I have done so in the present instance. Being con-
ditional, the fast will shock the people less to that extent. My
relation with the people has now become a family bond. For
many years I have trained myself for such a bond, and I have
seen from personal experience that, within certain limits, fasting
has a place in domestic relationships. Even in that sphere, one
must of course exercise self-restraint. It is after experimenting in
the small family circle that I have widened the field of practice.
I have tried to explain the idea so as to convince your reason, but
the truth is that I have never undertaken any of my fasts after rational
consideration, but that each one of them was undertaken in obedi-
ence to the inner voice. I do not mean to say that there can be no
error in this. There goes on in the heart a ceaseless battle between
the divine and the demoniac. We cannot always judge when it is
the demon that deludes us or the divine that leads us. It is for this
reason that religion enjoins that everybody who wishes to awaken
the divine in him should walk on the razor's edge of the yamaniyamas.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 320-
