124. LETTER TO VICEROY
[BARDOLI,
February 1, 1922]
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
DELHI
SIR,
Bardoli is a small tahsil in the Surat District in the Bombay
Presidency, having a population of about 87,000 all told.
On the 29th ultimo it decided under the presidency of
Mr. Vithalbhai Patel to embark on mass civil disobedience, having
proved its fitness for it in terms of the resolution 1 of the All-India
Congress Committee which met at Delhi during the first week of
November last. But as I am perhaps chiefly responsible for Bar-
doli's decision, I owe it to your Excellency and the public to ex-
plain the situation under which the decision has been taken.
It was intended under the resolution of the All-India Congress
Committee, before referred to, to make Bardoli the first unit for
mass civil disobedience in order to mark the national revolt against
the Government for its consistently criminal refusal to appreciate
India's resolve regarding the Khilafat, the Punjab and swaraj.
Then followed the unfortunate and regrettable rioting on the
17th November last in Bombay, resulting in the postponement of
the step contemplated by Bardoli.
Meanwhile repression of a virulent type has taken place with
the concurrence of the Government of India in Bengal, Assam,
the United Provinces, the Punjab, the Province of Delhi and, in
a way, in Bihar and Orissa and elsewhere. I know that you have
objected to the use of the word "repression" for describing the
action of the authorities in these provinces. In my opinion when
action is taken which is in excess of the requirements of a situation,
it is undoubtedly repression. The looting of property, assaults on
innocent people, the brutal treatment of prisoners in the jails in-
cluding flogging can in no sense be described as legal, civilized
or in any way necessary. This official lawlessness cannot be des-
cribed by any other term but lawless repression. Intimidation by
non-co-operators or their sympathizers to a certain extent in con-
nection with hartals and picketing may be admitted but in no
case can it be held to justify the wholesale suppression of peaceful
volunteering or equally peaceful public meetings under a distorted
use of an extraordinary law which was passed in order to deal
with activities which were manifestly violent both in intention and
action, nor is it possible to designate as otherwise than repression,
action taken against innocent people under what has appeared to
many of us an illegal use of the ordinary law, nor again can the
administrative interference with the liberty of the Press under a
law that is under promise of repeal be regarded as anything but
repression.
The immediate task before the country, therefore, is to rescue
from paralysis freedom of speech, freedom of association and free-
dom of the Press. In the present mood of the Government of India
and in the present unprepared state of the country in respect of
complete control of the forces of violence, non-co-operators were
unwilling to have anything to do with the Malaviya Conference
whose object was to induce Your Excellency to convene a round
table conference. But as I was anxious to avoid all avoidable
suffering, I had no hesitation in advising the Working Committee
of the Congress to accept the recommendations of that Conference.
Although in my opinion the terms were quite in keeping with
your own requirements as I understood them through your Calcutta
speech and otherwise, you have summarily rejected the proposal.
In the circumstances, there is nothing before the country
but to adopt some non-violent method for the enforcement of its
demands including the elementary rights of free speech, free asso-
ciation and free Press. In my humble opinion the recent events
are a clear departure from the civilized policy laid own by Your
Excellency at the time of the generous, manly and unconditional
apology of the Ali Brothers, viz., that the Government of India
should not interfere with the activities of non-co-operation so long
as they remained non-violent in word and deed. Had the Gov-
ernment's policy remained neutral and allowed public opinion to
ripen and have its full effect, it would have been possible to advise
postponement of the adoption of civil disobedience of an aggres-
sive type till the Congress had acquired fuller control over the
forces of violence in the country and enforced greater discipline
among the millions of its adherents. But this lawless repression (in
a way unparalleled in the history of this unfortunate country) has
made the immediate adoption of mass civil disobedience an im-
perative duty. The Working Committee of the Congress has res-
tricted it to only certain areas to be selected by me from time to
time, and at present it is confined only to Bardoli. I may, under
said authority, give my consent at once in respect of a group of
100 villages in Guntur in the Madras Presidency, provided they can
strictly conform to the conditions of non-violence, unity among
different classes, the adoption and manufacture of hand-spun khadi
and untouchability.
But before the people of Bardoli actually commence mass civil
disobedience, I would respectfully urge you as the head of the
Government of India, finally to revise your policy and set free all
the non-co-operating prisoners who are convicted or under trial
for non-violent activities and to declare in clear terms a policy of
absolute non-interference with all non-violent activities in the
country whether they be regarding the redress of the Khilafat or
the Punjab wrongs or swaraj or any other purpose and even
though they fall under the repressive sections of the Penal Code or
the Criminal Procedure Code or other repressive laws subject al-
ways to the condition of non-violence. I would further urge you to
free the Press from all administrative control and to restore all the
fines and forfeitures recently imposed. In thus urging I am ask-
ing Your Excellency to do what is being done today in every
country which is deemed to be under civilized Government. If you
can see your way to make the necessary declaration within seven
days of the date of publication of this manifesto, I shall be prepar-
ed to advise postponement of civil disobedience of an aggressive
character, till the imprisoned workers have, after their discharge,
reviewed the whole situation and considered the position de novo.
If the Government makes the requested declaration I shall regard
it as an honest desire on its part to give effect to public opinion
and shall therefore have no hesitation in advising the country to be
engaged in further moulding public opinion without violent rest-
raint from either side and trust to its working to secure the ful-
filment of its unalterable demands. Aggressive civil disobedience in
that case will be taken up only when the Government departs
from its policy of strictest neutrality or refuses to yield to clear-
ly expressed opinion of the vast majority of the people of India.
I remain,
Your Excellency's faithful
servant and friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 9-2-1922
