223. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
SODEPUR,
December 5, 1945
CHI. JIVANJI,
I got your letter and the cheque. It has to be considered
whether we should go as far as you suggest regarding the copy-
right. Anybody writing to us for permission and our giving it
will mean that we have read the work or got it read by someone
and approve. In this connection Anand Hingorani had suggested
different Boards, so that the Tamil Board would decide about the
Tamil translation and the Malayalam Board would advise about
the translation in that language. There would, thus, be a separate
165
Board for each language. We have to consider how far it would
be advisable and becoming for us to bother ourselves to that extent.
There are several translations of Tolstoy's books in the same
language. All of them are not up to the mark, and the titles of
the books also have been translated differently. All of them sell,
but the translation which is most faithful to the original, most pains-
taking and beautiful sells more than the other translations. The
same has happened in the case of the Bible. The authorized version
is there but there are many others in the field and their publication
is not prohibited. Every translation has its own circle of readers.
You have raised the question of the Autobiography. A transla-
tion has been brought out by one Tamil publisher and now
this is the second. How would we know which of the two is
really good? Or would it be advisable to stop other transla-
tions from being published? I do not see much benefit in that.
Even when we decided to claim copyright, I did not go as
far as that. This matter cannot be looked at from a purely
legal point of view, nor from a purely financial one. We should
look at it wholly from a moral and practical point of view.
And looking at it thus I feel that we should permit the person
who has written to us to publish the translation. I have not
replied to him, however. Consult all the others and discuss
the matter with them and suggest whatever reply you think
should be given. I will think over it and then send a reply to
the man.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9959. Also C.W. 6933. Cour-
tesy : Jivanji D. Desai
