444. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 2, 1934
MY DEAR DAUGHTER,
I must write in English as I must write during the few
moments I have to spare. You may not blame me if letters I write
do not reach you. But you have lost nothing if any letter has
not reached you. I am moving about so rapidly that there need
be no surprise if some of my letters go astray without anybody's
fault. But my not writing does not mean that I do not cons-
tantly think of all of you. I do. But I write sparingly for want of
time and in order to enable others to have a chance of writing.
My letter to anyone of you should be regarded as letters to all.
By the time you are discharged I shall be travelling in the
extreme south of India. If you think that it is worth while coming
all the way merely to see me, you shall come. I would strongly
advise you to restrain yourself and do all the talking through cor-
respondence.
Of course you should see your mother and also Narandas.
They are both within easy reach. But the final decision rests with
you. My advice to all the others is just what I am giving to you.
I am glad you have kept so well.
I have heard about Velanbehn and Durgabehn, also Lilavati.
They must all write to me when they are discharged. I hope you
have all made the best use of your time.
My health is excellent. The last weight was 108 lb. My food
is milk and oranges and one green vegetable plain boiled with-
out salt. I take other fruit when it easily comes my way. This
is either fresh grapes or pomegranate. Generally speaking I take
no dates at present. I do not seem to need them. My work com-
mences at 3 a.m. and ends generally at 9 p.m. Of course I try
to get some sleep in the middle of the day.
Your Hindi writing as also your Gujarati is not bad. I hope
the Ramadan fast has not weakened you. Has Amina been taking
it? Tell her I often receive news about her children who are getting
on nicely. I have just got a report from their Urdu teacher.
Love to you all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Om and Kisan are with me, keeping well.
From a photostat: G.N. 289
