19. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
THE WESTMINSTER PALACE HOTEL,
LONDON, S.W.,
August 30, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I continue to receive your logical and charming love notes. That
you should describe Mrs. Gandhi as your mother, shows your ultra-
regard for me. You have reached a stage in which you refuse to
recognize my limitations. How shall I retain such an exalted standard !
Do I merit this affection ? Shall I be able to live up to it ? I will
not disturb your love. It can do you good. Me it can drag down if
there be aught in me of selfishness in my relations with you. That
you can make yourself comfortable in my home (have lone?) without
me and with all the awkward ways of Mrs. Gandhi and the children
shows the height you have attained. You remind me of friendships of
bygone ages of which one reads in histories and novels. I promise this
- that I shall ever pray that I may ever retain the seat I have found
in your heart and that I may do nothing to forfeit that love which is
almost superhuman.
Agnes Phillips I have seen. She says she cannot imagine me in
London without you !
But is that Love to exhaust itself in delicate attention towards me
and those that are called mine ? Will it not compel you, lead your
on, to the study you know you need so badly to complete and
complement your life ? You do so many things for me. Can you not
add this much? Nothing is beyond the power of Love. Will your
disinclination for study baffle even that Love ? I am sure you have
but to make the effort and you will do it. A month's hard grind will
make the thing most natural for you. Behind this imploring you will
detect, as I do, my own selfishness also. For if you study, I am less
likely to lose the place I have found in your heart. If you do not study,
you may be dissatisfied with yourself, then with your surroundings and
at last it may be with me.
I am glad that you have found nothing very wrong with Ramdas 1
and that you like the man in West.
1 Third son of Gandhiji
25
It was most considerate of you to have taken Jalbhai with you
to Phoenix.
The rest in the official letter.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
