262. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD MORLEY
[LONDON,]
September 16, 1909
SIR,
On re-reading my letter of the 6th instant offering to wait on His
Lordship, I see that I did not clearly put the position, so as to warrant
the offer to wait on His Lordship.
Although my colleague and I have not yet received any official
intimation of the results of the negotiations which took place between
Lord Crewe and the Transvaal Ministers, rumours have reached us that
concessions are to be made, but that those concessions will fall short of
the one object for which we have struggled and suffered. That object
is the restoration of the 'right' of immigration. We are willing that the
right should be limited in practice to any extent which the Colonial
Government may think necessary or desirable, but we cannot submit
to the deprivation of the right in theory without being false to our oaths
and accessories to the dishonour of India. Indians have enjoyed, and
still enjoy, the theoretical right of entry to every part of the British Empire,
although that right is limited in practice in some of the Dominions. It is
only in the Transvaal that they have been deprived of the right, and
that—only within the past two years. We cannot believe that
Lord Morley, who is regarded all over the world as the type of British
Liberalism, would regard with indifference so reactionary and illiberal a
policy as that which has been adopted by the Transvaal Government,
if he had evidence of the startling fact. It is this evidence which we
respectfully beg permission to give in person, for we venture to doubt
whether His Majesty's Government have actually realised the situation.
If they had, they would surely have taken steps to avert this, the first
deliberate establishment of a 'colour-bar' within the Empire.
1 This is not available.
2 This paragraph was substituted by Lord Ampthill for the second paragraph in the
draft Gandhiji had sent him on September 13. In his letter of September 15, Lord Ampt-
hill observed: "The above is rather strong, but I want you to emphasize the startling
nature of the illiberal and reactionary policy of the Transvaal Government. Your
draft does not quite do this and your reference to the unprecedented nature of the
deprivation of right is buried in the last paragraph where it might well escape notice.
Keep all the details for an interview or for a further possible letter. The thing you want
to do at present is to make Lord Morley aware that his Government are responsible
for the most illiberal step that has ever disfigured Imperial policy. If you get scolded
for the letter, it will be open to you to publish it eventually and to let the world judge
of it and of the further proofs of your contention." Vide also the following item.
As I doubt not Lord Morley is aware, the presence of Mr. Polak,
the delegate from the Transvaal, has stimulated very great interest on
the part of the Bombay public. Cuttings received by me weekly, show
that the papers, representing all shades of opinion, have been giving a
large amount of space to the question. Mr. Polak has interviewed pro-
minent Indians and Anglo-Indians, and has received very great encourage-
ment from them. This activity in Bombay shows that, as it is quite
proper, India is deeply hurt by the insult that is put upon her by the
racial disqualification imported for the first time into colonial legislation,
and is much moved by the sufferings that have been gone through by
hundreds of British Indians in the Transvaal, for the sake of realizing
an Imperial ideal.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy : S. N. 5077
