59. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
Friday [November 19, 1926]
BHAISHRI BEHRAMJI,
I have your letter. You may come whenever you can. I
will start from here on the 2nd December. It is not certain when
I shall return to the Ashram. I had come to know from Devdas
that you were in danger of getting leucoderma. Even if you get
it, what does it matter? There is no need to worry or be per-
turbed about it. I assume that you have enough spiritual under-
standing to be able to live cheerfully even if you have leucoderma.
We can talk about this if you come earlier.
Mrs. Eddy's book is ordinary. It contains nothing new.
Her language has a certain strangeness about it. That lady may
have some ability but I found that she was misusing her knowledge.
The cure for suffering lies in bearing it. Man should never use his
spiritual strength to cure his suffering. If Jesus used his spiritual
power to cure the sick, that does not mean that all of us should
start using our spiritual power to cure ourselves.
If we adopt
remedies to cure the body, which is perishable, they, too, should
be physical.
Hence a sick person should pray to God thus:
"O God! this illness is the result of my sins committed know-
ingly or unknowingly. Deliver me from my sins and give me
the strength to bear this suffering."
If a sick man thinks that he is not sick, it is a kind of delu-
sion. He is a true man who knows that he is sick but remains
unaffected by his suffering. A sick person should analyse him-
self and, realizing that his body and soul are distinct, under-
stand their true relation and the meaning of moksha.
I strongly advise you to leave off Christian science. You may,
if you wish, certainly try ordinary remedies for your ailment, or
do nothing and have faith in God. That's the golden mean.
Take simple treatment and develop the power of endurance.
If you have anything to say to me in this matter, please do.
I have certainly not read Mrs. Eddy's book as carefully as you
are likely to have done. I have just glanced through it. If I
have done her an injustice, it has been done unknowingly. But
how can I hide from you the impression it has made on me?
And, therefore, the last point is that, whatever my views,
you should weigh them and do what your conscience tells you.
We ourselves bind or free us. Others merely advise and keep
away.
Blessings to you both.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7534
