196. LETTER TO MANAGING COMMITTEE
OF THE TALIMI SANGH
November 30, 1945
Yesterday I went to see the Talimi Sangh hostel. You know
Hoshiaribehn who stays in the Ashram. I have sent her son
Gajraj to your school. He insisted that I should see his school.
Even yesterday morning he came and said: "You will come,
won't you?" I said: "What shall I do at your school? I would
rather see the place where you sleep."
I had intended to send
his mother too. Anyway, I went there after my morning walk
to keep my promise. I was pained by what I saw there. I
noticed filth and mismanagement which should not have been
there. I had not wanted to spend much time there, but I could
not bear what I saw there and spent half an hour or three-
quarters of an hour explaining things to Pandey.
I found there were puddles of water in front of the verandah
of the children's hospital. It offended the eye. The children
wash themselves right there. This breeds mosquitoes and so much
of water is wasted. We should collect the water in a tub. Or
we may wash beside the trees near by. If there were a thousand
boys it would be a disaster. Going through the room I found
the same thing in front of the verandah on the other side.
Then I went to the children's dormitory.
Even at the en-
trance there was a lot of dirt. I went in. Mats were not pro-
perly kept. I had the bedding of a boy unrolled. It was very
dirty. The bed-sheet was torn. It was stitched in a couple of
places, but very crudely. The other tears had not been attend-
ed to. They should have been patched. If the sheet was too
badly torn it could have been doubled and stitched. Many times
in jail I had got mattresses made that way. They are warm
and strong. The cotton of the mattress had collected into big
lumps. It was not warm. That cotton should have been taken
out and carded again. Several pieces of cloth were discovered
from under the mattress. They were very dirty. I would have
kept those pieces clean and used them for patching. The mat
was very dirty. It should have been washed.
1 Niece of Balvantsinha. According to Balvantsinha Gajraj had com-
plained to Gandhiji that Talimi Sangh was a very dirty place.
138
I examined the floor. It is used for sleeping but is in a very
bad state. Pandey said cow-dung was not available. It is better
if cow-dung is available. But one can do without it. Where was
there cow-dung in South Africa? We managed with earth. There
was a wooden shelf fixed to the wall for keeping things. When
I touched it my hand was covered with dust. I wiped my hand on
Pandey's hand. It also got covered with dust. One boy had put
his ink-pot on the mat. Where else was the poor boy to put it?
But there was no method about it. I examined each and every
pen and nib. I saw also the ink-pots. That is my way. That
should also be the way of Nayee Talim. Everything was wrong
from my point of view. These are small things. But small things
make up big things. It does not require money. It requires a
keen vision, it requires art. It is our duty to teach these. It is
the purpose of Nayee Talim. It is the teacher's fault if it is not
done. It is your fault. I would say that it is my fault. After
all, the responsibility lies with me. What is the point in starting
a thing and then giving it up? If someone says that in this way
he can look after only one boy, I would say admit only one boy.
Do not admit more. An element of untruth enters if we admit
more boys and cannot look after them.
As I came out, I noticed the sacking you have hung up along
the verandah. For this I must quarrel with you. A verandah
is designed to admit air and sunlight. By fixing sacking around
it you shut out both. And the room at the rear becomes abso-
lutely useless. If you say it can't be helped because the boys
are too many, I would say that we should take only as many
boys as we can accommodate. We should not take more.
Pandey's mother Kodamba was in very dirty clothes. She
looked like a maid servant. She did not even know Hindustani.
And she has been with us for two months. Even Pandey's own
clothes were not quite all right. The neck was open and so also
the cuffs. We are labourers. Our shirts must have half sleeves.
Brass or glass buttons are useless for us.
I had a brief discussion with Asha Devi. But I am writing
in detail because these matters, though small, are very important.
And failing in these points, we depart too far from our objective.
I have read this again. It seems to be all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : C.W. 5888. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah
