55. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
May 8, 1911
MY DEAR POLAK,
Herewith your plate, also Mr. Cachalia's authority2, draft for
£ 116/9/-, and copy of a translation of Harilal's letter. Pater's letter
will be, I take it, sent you by West. You will have noticed that
he did not understand your telegram. Cordes' address is John
H. Cordes Junior, 68 gr. Bleichen, Hamburg. I see that your
passage to London will come to over £45, including what was
paid on the luggage at Park. This does not include the expen-
ses during the voyage, including gratuities. I, therefore, put down
your passage at £55 as far as Waterloo. Here then is my estimate:
Passage to London
£
55
May 20—Oct. 15 at £50 per month
£ 250
Passage to Bombay for you, Milly, Celie
and the boys
£ 100
Stay in India Nov.-March at £25
£ 125
Cable expenses, etc.
£ 100
Passage from India to South Africa
£
60
£ 690
I, therefore, estimate £700 as the expenses. There may be a
saving if you return earlier. Of the above amount, £44 has been
spent here roughly for your passage, and £200 has been now sent
to you on account of the deputation. I have deliberately calculat-
ed £50 for the expenses there, because during your stay the activity
of the Committee will be greater, and so I have put down £25
instead of £18 per month, and that may enable Maud not to
worry; and I have put down a larger amount for your private
expenses also because of your being there, and that will be, I should
say, £25. I think that you should be able to manage without un-
necessary stinting. At the same time, if you find that the amounts
are not enough, you can fall back upon the £100 for cables, etc.,
because my estimate is only rough, and you are by no means bound
down to it. I have not got your account ready yet. It will be
sent next week. The £ 16/9/- included in the draft represents the
balance of the purses after deducting £20 sent to Milly, and £ 5/1/-
your subscription to the Theosophical Society, to the Law Society,
and £2 taken in Durban. But, if I have misunderstood your in-
structions, please let me know, I think that you told me that
manager, on a secure foundation. Though not detailed for satyagraha work,
he was arrested in 1913 for sheltering striking indentured Indians at Phoenix.
from the amount of the purses I should deduct the amount of the
draft sent to Milly and the expenses incurred thereafter.
The Gold Law business will tax your energy and ability.
I send you under separate cover the Statutes of 1908 and the amend-
ment to the Townships Act, 1909. The Klerksdorp people have
put down, among only three of them, £150 towards your expenses.
You will, therefore, realize their anxiety, as also the need for prompt
work. Please give me details of all you do regarding the Gold
Law for publication. You will be somewhat angry with me that
I have not yet got the Natal petition ready. I could not manage
it. I had to go to Pretoria all of a sudden to see the General,
and, as you may imagine, Thursday and Friday were spent in
interviewing people here. Smuts told me that he was going to
give a favourable reply on all the points as soon as he was satisfied
with reference to the number of passive resisters falling under
question 2, that is, pre-war residents. He thought that my answer
permitted of 300,000,000 applications from India, and his appre-
hension was not ill-founded. I have, therefore, defined more ac-
curately whom I consider to be passive resisters outside South
Africa. You will see my definition from the copy enclosed. The
interview was long and apparently cordial. He was eager to
meet us on every point. He certainly mentioned that there would
be an unperceived diminution of the rights hitherto enjoyed by the
Cape, that there would be a stringent education test for the Cape
and Natal also. He is greatly desirous of passing a general Bill,
and asked me to help him to solve the Free State difficulty. I
can see no way out of it without first passing the provincial legis-
lation. I hope to be able to tackle the Natal petition today. You
have, I take it, Gregorowski's opinion on the Gold Law. Khota's
case you will find reported in I.O. on page 148, Vol. 1909. What
we want is an amendment of the Gold Law, and suspension of
operation of Section 130 thereof meanwhile.
Yours sincerely,
[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5531
