230. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 13, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I have your letter. For some time I shall have to write
with my left hand and I shall not, therefore, be able to write
very long letters. The left hand cannot write as fast as the
right hand can. True, Mahadev's help will be available, but
dictating to him will be a new practice so far as letters written
from jail are concerned. I shall see how far I can follow that prac-
tice. I shall have to observe whether I feel at ease in dictating
letters which are prompted purely by love. I will certainly dic-
tate letters of business.
I was not in the least pained by your letter.
All of us must grow or deteriorate in some measure every day.
Nothing remains unchanging.
When I take the blame upon myself, I do not act out of false
humility and do not exaggerate. My taking the blame upon my-
self does not mean that others are exonerated. But the leader must
take the discredit for failure as he does the credit for success.
I accept the need for inter-caste marriages up to a certain
point.
If a husband has the right to divorce his wife, a wife should
also have the right to divorce her husband. But generally I am
against the practice of divorce. The bond of love ought to be
indissoluble.
Boys and girls may be educated either separately or together.
It depends on the subject of study. They will have to study law
together. I cannot lay down in this matter one single rule
which can be followed in all countries and in all circumstances.
The problem is not a simple one. No one has been able to
demonstrate decisive results in any country in this field. The
whole matter is in an experimental stage.
Beauty should certainly be praised, but silent praise is better.
Moreover, ~ (q'l~il ~O:iijl"lT: Of one who is not filled with joy by
the beauty of the sky, it may be said that nothing will please him.
But those who dream, in the delirium of their joy, of building
a flight of steps to reach the constellations live in ignorance.
I liked the curriculum. I don't think I can suggest just now
any changes or improvements in it.
As regards Japan and China, our sympathy is bound to be
on the side of the latter. But the real position seems to be as I
have described it in my letter to a child.
What you write about Jamnadas is true. He seems troubled
in mind but keeps his problem to himself. If Sushila can under-
stand what troubles him, something can be done to help him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10276. Also C.W. 6724. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
