325. LETTER TO SIR J. G. LAITHWAITE
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
December 30, 1940
DEAR MR. LAITHWAITE,
I thank you for your letter of 27th instant, received yesterday.
Your letter raises a fundamental question. I can fully appre-
ciate the fact that His Excellency could only hold the view he does.
The despair of Indian nationalists like me has been that British
functionaries could not be persuaded to see the other side of the
shield. And so the distance between them and nationalists is grow-
ing in spite of all efforts to the contrary. The present struggle
is the latest attempt among many to induce the makers of the Bri-
tish Empire to see things through nationalist eyes. Such attempt
must be continued till the truth is brought home to them. Why
should they constitute themselves the judges of their work among
and on us? The ordinary rule is that those should be the final
judges who are the beneficiaries and not the self-styled benefactors.
But I must not enter into the interminable discussion of a question
on which the British rulers and we must for the present differ.
But that difference can be no reason for gagging me. I sought
for the assistance because all the means of communication are under
the Government control. I was unprepared for the prohibition
against the Indian Press. I was prepared for the gag outside.
His Excellency must be the sole judge of the effect on the bona-fide
war effort of my letter to Herr Hitler being published in the
world in the manner I had intended. But I observe from your
letter that the gag has been placed not for reasons of high policy
but because, in His Excellency's opinion, my characterization of
British rule is not true to facts. This is a dangerous doctrine of
which the logical result would be suppression of all honest opinion
except at the will of the executive head of the State or his deputy
or deputies. This has evidently no bearing on the war issue. I may
draw His Excellency's attention to the fact that the sentiments
expressed by me in the open letter to Herr Hitler are those I have
expressed often enough in the columns of Harijan and elsewhere.
My booklet called Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule contains
similar sentiments.
I should like to know, if I may, whether my interpretation of
your letter is correct.
I may mention that I had copies of the letter prepared for dis-
tribution to the Press. But owing to the Press Adviser's note I re-
frained from distributing the copies. I have sent a copy only to my
son forbidding its publication for the time being. I do not want
surreptitious publication, nor do I want to resort to open defiance,
so long as it is at all possible consistently with the interests of the
national cause as I conceive it. I shall, therefore, anxiously await
a line from you.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
