241. LETTER TO PYARELAL
VISHRAM VATIKA,
JUHU,
May 15, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
You will have received my letter of yesterday. Mahadev has
been terribly hurt by your letter. He has been crying. He had
already been anguished and given to crying. Your letter has
added to his agony. However, it is just as well that you have
expressed through this letter whatever was weighing on your
mind. That is the only way to regain mental composure and to be
cleansed of the kind of suspicions and prejudices lurking there.
Mahadev has not written the letter "under pressure from me" as
a last resort. Yes, the letter was the result of his discussion with
me. But it was not written under pressure. His pen moved
because he felt that his writing the letter would be justified. All
arguments were his own.
Mahadev wrote to you on his own and the letter was full
of anguish. That is why I did not allow it to go. It would
have only intensified the misery and there would have been more
misunderstanding. Now he has decided to stop writing to both
of you for the time being. I have approved of this decision.
You and Sushila may write if you feel like doing so. You can
even write if the absence of Mahadev's letters irks you. Mahadev
had told Sushila that he would write [to her] about my health.
But for the time being even that has been stopped. In any case,
I would be writing almost every day. Hence, you would continue
to get the news. This should not lead to the conclusion that
I have suggested to Mahadev not to write to you, since the
idea was Mahadev's. I have given it my approval for the time
being. The past, except when it is essential for the present,
needs to be forgotten. I wish to discuss the past only to be
certain that I have not done any injustice either to Mahadev or
to Sushila. No one has deliberately committed mistakes. That
is sufficient consolation for me. It should be so for Mahadev
and Sushila as well. Where there was no wrong at all, I saw
wrong and insisted that all of you should also see it. I wish I
had not committed such a grave sin. You can be of great help
in my quest to find out. Do not conceal the truth from me by
showing me undeserved pity. Of course I know that you will
not stay on there a moment longer than necessary and I am not
therefore impatient. My blood-pressure is not checked every day.
What daily news then can I give about my health? My own
diagnosis says that my health is fine. I sleep well. I take my
walks regularly. I eat well. Perhaps mangoes are a little diffi-
cult to digest. I do a fairly good amount of work. It does not
show any adverse effect. I lie down in the bath-tub. I get
sleep. My legs are massaged. My head and feet are massaged
with
ghee. A[mtus] S[alaam] gives me nourishment. She
prepares rotis with her own hands. She is quite successful.
Kanti and Saraswati are here. Manilal and Sushila have
arrived today.
There is a letter from Nazimuddin. I cannot say it is wholly
satisfactory. I shall see what I have to do.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
SV:III. 10
