14. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
September 17, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I had received your letters. I had long discussions with
Andrews. The trouble about Sorabji will go on. But it is desi-
rable that no attacks should be made on the Agent. It would
be better to write to him confidentially. So far as I can judge
from here, attacking him will serve no purpose except giving
vent to one's anger. Andrews liked all that you have been do-
ing except the attack on the Agent. Schlesin also didn't like
it.
You have suggested that Kanti should be sent over there.
But he does not agree to go. He has set his heart on studying.
I believe Ramdas will require a permit. I suspect that they
have taken away the rights of even the Colonial-born [Indians].
Ramdas's plans are still uncertain. Just now he has gone to
Sabarmati with Ba. He had a fairly serious attack of fever there.
It has come down now. He has taken Kanu with him. Since he
gets good company at Sabarmati, he feels quite cheerful. Kanti
has gone far away to Travancore, where he will do Harijan
work and study at the same time.
My future plans are uncertain.
I shall not be able to
leave the Congress immediately. Let us see what happens in
October. I cannot say in what direction my dharma will lead
me after that. Thus everything regarding me is uncertain. But
I don't worry.
He who has dedicated his all to Shri Krishna
feels at rest in his mind even in the midst of uncertainty. Since
I am ceaselessly striving to reach that state, I never suffer
from worries. Where there is complete uncertainty about life
itself from moment to moment, why worry about other
things?
Jalbhai came and saw me. Omar Sheth seems to have lost
his all. How did that happen?
Kishorelal and Gomati are here at present. And of course
Vasumatibehn too.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
It seems to me all right that Sita should be given what-
ever [education] is possible there.
But if you send her over
here I shall certainly make some arrangement.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4826
