189. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 26 [1914]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
Much to our surprise there was no cable from you at Gibraltar.
The inference I drew was that there was no reply yet received. We
reach Malta tomorrow (Sunday). I hope to have a word from you then.
The voyage has been uneventful. The pain in the ribs continues.
The weather is still cold, though the sea is calm. Our menu still continues
the same. I have taught the baker how to make our bread. So I am
making use of Allinson's meal they have on board, thanks to your
1 The source has "Arden".
2 Secretary of the Indian Field Ambulance Training Corps
foresight. He makes it much better than we should. I asked him to
whip the water before adding it to the flour. This aerates the bread
and makes it very light. They supply delicious oranges and now tomatoes
also. So you see we have really more than we want. Though the
temptation to take cooked food is great (the 2nd Steward has offered
to have anything specially prepared) we have hitherto resisted it.
I do not get up early. There is no stove to warm myself at. I,
therefore, remain in bed up to 9 a.m. and keep warm. Mrs. Gandhi
does likewise.
I do fairly decent strolling on deck. The groins are still keeping
well.
For reading what time I get I devote to Bengali. I write as much
as I can in order to get a hold on the alphabet. Not much time however
can be given to study owing to the severely cold weather. One cannot
keep warm for long.
So much for ourselves. What about you, I wonder! Mrs. Gandhi
often misses you. It shows how people are sometimes appreciated when
they are not available.
I can only repeat the formula. Do not allow circumstances to master
you. We are made to master them. If we succumb to them, they unman
and enslave us. If we control them we ever ascend and grow manlier.
Study of Gujarati is a necessity. And do read The Light of Asia, Bunyan,
Thomas a Kempis again and again and yet again.
I take it you are giving some time to Mrs. Olive Schreiner. It may
not be amiss to give W. P. Schreiner a call. His offices are in Victoria
Street.
With love,
From Your
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
