5. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 26, 1935
CHI. NARANDAS,
Enclosed is a letter from Mathew. I have written to him and
told him not to expect Rs. 65 at present. He can't be given
anything more than what I mentioned. I have also told him that
just now he would have to join as no better than a labourer. If he
proves his worth, we may think further provided circumstances per-
mit. He may be given railway fare if anything is owing to him in
the accounts here, otherwise he will have to find even that from
where he is.
The prize of Rs. 1,00,000 has not been awarded to anybody.
But it may be awarded if a good enough model of spinning-wheel
is received. I have still not received a copy of the resolution. It
contains three main points: that the model cannot be considered
"handy"; that only a model which is small enough for a village
house and can be easily lifted and moved whenever necessary can be
considered "handy"; and that such a model cannot be manufactured
within Rs. 150. Would it require frequent repairs? And would the
expenses on repairs exceed five per cent of the cost annually? I
enclose a copy of the specific defects pointed out by Vinoba
and Kakasaheb. If Keshu can remove these defects, let him do so.
Kale's machine is not with me. It had gone to Ahmedabad. I
have asked them to send it back. But I may not get it back and,
therefore, may not be able to have a look at it. It is better that
Keshu should remain there and go on with his experiment. Let
him stay with you. He should fix a limit for the expenditure on
the experiments. If he wishes to come to me, he may certainly do
so. But I won't be able to tell him anything more or guide him fur-
ther. There is nothing more to be explained about this experiment.
Even if his invention does not deserve a prize of Rs. 1,00,000,
whatever improvements he discovers are bound to be useful.
If the machine for making slivers has been perfected, it is
also a good thing. Let him describe in detail what progress he
has made with it. Since I have explained everything in this
letter, I am not writing separately to him.
You may now organize the school as you think best. If it
becomes a technical institute for our work, that would be excellent.
Languages should be taught from a different point of view altoge-
ther. At present they are taught from a literary point of view. We
should teach them simply as languages. The curriculum should
include Gujarati, Hindi and English and a little bit of Sanskrit. The
pupils should be taught the Urdu script. Instruction in these subjects
should be easy. They can be taught while the pupils learn crafts.
The crafts should be such as would bring the pupils some payment.
There should be no fee, the pupil's earning through crafts being
counted as fee. Beyond a fixed limit, the earning would go to the
pupil. The fee should include all the expenses. You can introduce
these changes gradually without much trumpeting or publicity.
Find the staff locally, if possible. There should be no highly-paid
teacher. Kusum Lilavati and others who have got trained
should be your staff. If Keshu helps, nothing like it. Think over
this. If you wish to discuss this matter further with me, you
may do so.
Do something about the inspection of Titus's work and finish
with it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Enclosed is Vinoba's opinion. I am writing to Raghunath
Shastri.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8439. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
