293. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 30, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. There seems to be no limit to your foolish-
ness. When you get angry, you lose all sense. In the very letter
in which you write about having taken a vow to overcome anger,
you get angry and that too without reason. You did not under-
stand the reason for my gentle rebuke. I had complained that
there was no beauty or art in the slips with zigzag edges which
you had pasted on the envelope. I would not find fault with
anyone for spending time on art. But in this case there was no
art at all. What art can there be in pasting slips on an envelope?
And, moreover, you had pasted them so carelessly that they had
half come off. Your anger, therefore, was without reason. It only
amused me. If I were with you, I would have slapped you. But
your having erred is a more serious matter. You spent so much time
on the thing. You entered into unnecessary argument about it and
harmed your health, for scientists have discovered by experiments
that anger has a very bad effect on health. Our people have
always held that belief. Besides, you violated your vow. Don't
get angry like this again. My criticism, moreover, was gentle and
you did not show even sense enough to understand it.
About letters, follow the example of the child who eats up
the carrot when he finds that he cannot blow with it as with a
pipe. That is, you should not feel unhappy if the letters stop. In
any case, you should go on writing from your end. If I decide
to stop writing, I will let you know. Even if I cannot write to
you to tell you about that, your writing to me will not be a waste
of effort.
Greet the new flowers on my behalf. Try to cheer them by
telling them that I hope to sleep in their midst one day.
You are very difficult to persuade. If you grow tomatoes and
some bhajis round the flower plants, you will get them all the
year round and your health will benefit. If the body is not yours,
but is a trust given to you by God, you should certainly give
some time for keeping it fit. Growing tomatoes and bhajis does
not require much time. They don't cover up much plot either.
An English friend of mine who lived with me in South Africa used
to grow, in a few days and with little trouble, a bhaji named cress
which is eaten uncooked.
I have already written to you in regard to the bad health
of the girls. Inquire into the matter carefully and find out the
facts. I was certainly afraid that it was so about Rambhau. Since
he has told you everything, try and win him over.
If your weight has gone down, you must eat fruit. Don't mind
a little additional expense. What is the good of trying to save
money and injuring your health? What is true about food is also
true about rest. You must make it a rule to take some rest in
the afternoon. It is not for me to show how you can spare time
for that. If you are determined to find it, you will succeed.
1 Vide p. 155.
Now about your questions:
(1) Instead of worshipping an individual, one should wor-
ship virtues. An individual may turn out to be unworthy of our
worship, and in any case he is bound to die. Virtues, on the other
hand, never perish.
(2) If you do not like most of those who run the Ashram,
this is a golden opportunity to learn to tolerate their defects. No
human being is without defects. If we wish to regard others as
our own selves, we should have no likes and dislikes.
(3) If you accept the principles on which the Ashram is
founded, differences of opinion regarding its outward form should
not matter. We should be concerned with the principle of a thing
and not with its form.
(4) It is your duty to remain in the Ashram so that you
may overcome the defects of your temper.
(5) If you cannot realize your ideals in the Ashram, the fault
is yours. Everyone enjoys perfect freedom in the Ashram.
(6) Why should the attraction of those whom you love force
you to leave the Ashram? Their love should draw them to the
Ashram whenever they feel the need to see you. Love never requires
the physical presence of the person loved.
Love which re-
quires such presence must be momentary attraction. The purity
of one's love is tested by separation from the loved one after
his or her death. But all this is mere intellectual exercise. You will
live only where your heart is. What can I do or you either, if
your heart cannot accept the Ashram?
The yarn spun by me ought to be converted into saris. It
belongs to a time before I expressed my views about yarn. It was
in fact earmarked for Ba.
Hence it is for her to renounce her
claim over it. I cannot say that it is not for her. She will never
be able to wear very coarse saris. Even the saris, therefore, sup-
plied to her by the Ashram will usually be fine. For that reason,
too, she may wear saris made from the yarn spun by me. But we
should be very strict about the yarn spun in future, though even
with regard to that I will not exercise compulsion on Ba. I cer-
tainly wish that she should, of her own free will, refuse to use it
and be content with whatever she gets as her share. But this is
about the future. As yet all the yarn spun by me recently is here.
In any case, my yarn should not lie unused. In fact no one's yarn
should lie unused. As soon as a person has spun enough quantity
of yarn to be used for weaving, it should be processed for the
purpose.
You know about Dhurandhar. If none else, Lilavati, I believe,
spins. What you say, however, is correct. Most women will pre-
fer embroidery to spinning. What is true about eating is also
true about work.
The mind will run after bhajiyan in preference
to rotli.
There is self-control and renunciation in continuing to
eat rotli, whereas it is self-indulgence to start eating bhajiyan. Simi-
larly, there is self-control in keeping to spinning and self-indulgence
(relatively) in taking up other work.
Your comments on my advice "Judge not lest ye be judged"
are unworthy of you. You have not understood the meaning of the
statement at all. There is much pride behind your comments.
"Lest ye be judged" means that we should not do anything for
which we should be judged by others. We should not be insolent
towards the world. Why should we say, "Let the world say or
do what it will"? We should be humble before the world, that is,
even when we follow the right path we should not use violence
against it or sit in judgment over it. On the contrary, we should
endure its punishment and its condemnation. This is humility or
non-violence. I should not like you to write what you did, though
you probably wrote it sarcastically or in anger. I don't mind
your being angry with me. I can laugh it away. But this other
remark rankles in my mind. You should never be prompted to
pen such a remark, that is, you should not even have such a
thought. Since you had it, I don't mind your expressing it to
me. It is because you expressed it that I am able to explain to
you how it is wrong. I have not written this paragraph so that you
may keep back your thoughts from me. I wish to see you as you
are, whether foolish or insolent or humble. But what I ask of
you is that you should not even let such a thought enter your
mind.
If the girls cannot massage with sufficient pressure, you
should teach them how to do so. That requires not physical
strength but skill.
Now about what you have been reading. The belief which
you refer to was held once. It is no longer held now.
People
have not understood some of Malthus's theories, and some others
are faulty. The law which applies to lower animals does not
apply to man. Lower animals live on one another. Man strives
to grow out of that condition. It is the spirit of non-violence
which prompts him to do so. So long as one's body endures, one
cannot realize perfect non-violence.
If, however, a person
cherishes the ideal of non-violence, he will live so as to commit
the minimum violence. Man's excellence lies in his readiness to
let others live and lay down his own life. As he progresses, his
food also changes for the better. He has capacity to grow still
further.
There have been many more discoveries after Dar-
win's. The book which you have been reading seems to be an
old one. Whether it is old or new, the principle of "the greatest
good of the greatest number" or "survival of the fittest" is false.
Non-violence aims at the good of all. The divine law cannot
be any other but the good of all. It is our duty to discover how
to bring that about and what man's duty is under such a law,
and not to oppose that law by another. But this is a vast subject.
I have dealt with a few points in brief. If you want me to discuss
the subject further, put me some questions.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10296. Also C.W. 5751. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
