242. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
September 10, 1916
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I was examining yesterday one of your boxes to see if time had
done any damage. I did not see much damage done but it brought
to mind the old days when we cooked our own meals. I compared
those times to the present ones. It saddened me to think that you were
not here to share the greater simplicity. Everything in the box that I
examined betrayed greater luxury than is allowed at present. I cannot
give you an adequate picture of it. The life has to be seen. There
is much left undone before the life can become grandly simple. There
is a shoddiness about it which I would like to get rid of But that cannot
be until we have built our own cottages.
News from South Africa show that Polak may leave South Africa
in October for India. He does not want to settle here. He wants to
see if he can get Indian connections for practice in London. There
is not much hope of it.
I know you write regularly but the delivery has become irregular.
There is again nothing from you this week. I hope mine you receive
regularly.
There is again a storm in the Ashram. The Pariah family had
temporarily gone. They returned yesterday. Mrs. Maganlal therefore
suddenly decided to leave. I offered no opposition and she with her
children has gone to Rajkot. Poor Maganlal! He is going through the
most terrible times of his life. He feels most keenly this separation
from those that [are] nearest him. He does not know what his duty
is. He does not want to leave me and he can hardly bear the present
blow. The Maganlal of olden days-robust, jovial, quickhanded and
quickwitted is no more to be seen. He has aged. He is careworn. He
is rarely healthy. He is absent-minded, without hope, without peace.
I do not know what to do for him and how to help him. One can
only trust that time will heal all the wounds and that he will yet be
his old self again.
Manilal is at Madras ever finding out ways of ease and luxury.
The life of discipline is gone for him. That of indulgence has begun.
240
He has seen friends. They have begun to fondle him. He has not been
able to resist them. Heaven knows what he will now be when he returns
from Madras.
Most of the inmates of the Ashram have gone out for a picnic.
They have taken roasted wheat and gram flour with them for food
with radishes as a salad. The distance is only five miles. They return
in the evening.
Yours ever.
OLD FRIEND
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
