133. LETTER TO MOHAMAD NASIM
CAMP BRINDABAN,
November 8, 1929
DEAR FRIEND,
I had the pleasure of meeting your son Prof. Habib in Ali-
garh and it gave me the greatest pleasure to understand that he
was my old friend and co-worker Abbas Tyabji's son-in-law. I
knew that Sohaila was married to a Lucknow man who was a
professor in Aligarh but I did not know that he was also Mujeeb's
brother. I had a chat with him about Mujeeb. You may know that
I dote on Mujeeb. He is one of the purest minded young men
whom I have the pleasure of knowing. Mujeeb is an acquisition
to the Jamia. The Jamia is passing through a financial crisis. Many
professors have cut down their honorarium to Rs. 75 per month.
Hitherto you have been good enough not only to give Mujeeb to
Jamia but to support him. Mujeeb told me that you had now re-
fused to give him your support. Will you not reconsider your
decision and not only bless Mujeeb in his work at the Jamia but
also give him all the financial assistance he may need which I was
glad to be informed you were well able to do? If Mujeeb was not
working in a poor national institution I would fully appreciate
your refusal to support him for I do believe in parents not pam-
pering their children. But here it is not a question of supporting
a pampered boy but supporting an institution to which he has the
spirit of sacrifice enough to dedicate himself without reserve.
Professor Habib was good enough to assure me that he would have
no objection to supporting Mujeeb. It will be a great relief to me
and I am sure to Jamia staff to feel the assurance that you would
support Mujeeb. Yes, I am anxious to have your reply as early
as you can send it to me. I give you my dates during the week
following:
November 10th and 11th Shahjahanpur
"
12th
Lakhimpur or Sitapur
"
13th
Rae Bareili
"
14th
Kalakankar
"
15th-18th
Allahabad
Yours sincerely,
MOHAMAD NASIM, ESQ.
ADVOCATE
BUTLER ROAD, LUCKNOW
From a photostat: S.N. 15752
