219. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
(POONA),
December 11, 1993
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I got your letters. I have had talks with Sarojinidevi and Padma. It is
not permissible to see Sitala Sahai and so I have not met him. I have the
impression that unknowingly you have yielded to impure thoughts about
Padma. The impurity can be clearly seen in your letter. It is not possible for
a man to conceal his impure thoughts. The behaviour of you two towards
each other was not that of a brother and sister. The scandals that were doing
the rounds were justified. Still, I do not wish to blame you. There was no
end to your foolishness. I should not have allowed any girl to come into
contact with you. Now that my eyes have been opened, I will make some
other arrangement for Padma. She has understood. As for Sitala Sahai, he is
extremely unhappy. I have consoled him. Marriage is the best remedy for
you. By all means get married. It will be better if you find a widow as your
partner. If that is not possible in any circumstances, you may do as you wish.
Whomsoever you choose to marry, tell her all the facts about your body. If
you thus marry, the question will arise as to what will happen to the Ashram
which you will have left. At the moment, I can say without thinking over the
matter further that there will be no harm if you stay on for the present. We
can consider later what should be done. If you do this, a salary can be fixed
for you with which you may meet your household expenses and may also
attend to khadi and other work. If you give the Khali to somebody, you will
get money for that. Do not in any way feel helpless. I am not accusing you
of anything. It is only a recognition of the true situation. If you wish to suggest
any change in this, write and let me know. If you wish to see me, you may
come and meet me. Let me know if you have a girl in mind. I have sent
Chhaganlal an account of the matter.
Padma has asked to be permitted to write to you. I have given her the
permission to do so through me. It has not finally been decided what should
be done about her.
I have no fears on your account. In the end, all will certainly be well
with you. I have not lost my faith in you. We are quite happy. Chhaganlal
Joshi is here.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
What is the arrangement for water in Khali, Do they get enough?
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32984
166
