65. LETTER TO RAMNARAYAN N. PATHAK
November 19, 1936
BHAI RAMNARAYAN,
Your first statement is not an indication of truth. It fails
to incorporate many points that should have been there. Even
my opinion has not been quoted correctly. How can a person
ignorant of the background understand it? I have to join issue
with you, should I not, when you do not accept my opinion
and at the same time publish it? If you wish, you may publish
your second statement. However, you need not do anything
under pressure from me. Write and do only what your mind
and your heart permit. I expect nothing more than that you
will weigh calmly the words of one like me.
It is not up to me to forsake or ignore you. To the end
of my life I shall hope, as I do in the case of Harilal, that you
will be reformed.
To me Narmada's staying in Jyoti Sangh, her being consider-
ed a pious woman, your staying near her and other things are like
branding one who has already burnt himself. I do not know
55
what kind of morality you accept. Probably you do not find any
immorality in your conduct and therefore my simile would hurt
you as everything I say hurts Harilal. However, there is no
other way before me to awaken either him or you.
I do not
know you but I do know Narmada a little. She is a foolish
girl and has very little understanding. She is ignorant of truth
and untruth. Any young man can mislead her. You became her
husband instead of being a brother or father to her and did obvi-
ous injustice to Ganga. Narmada could not even stand the talk
she had with me before leaving. I keep on receiving laments
from your brother, Ganga and Hemubhai. It is terrible if all that
they write is true. And if it is—and from what you yourself
write it seems to be—one shouldn't be surprised if you were
playing false with them. I know young men who feel satisfied
that they have done their duty when they partially acknowledge
their sins and if other people are not satisfied with it they get
angry. They think that society is ungrateful to them. I wish
you would not make such a mistake. Believe it that whatever I
have written is for your good and for your guidance. You may
forsake me but I do not forsake myself. So how can I do that
with you or anyone else? 31Hl1ij(8~~R~ is not only a scriptural
statement; it has been woven into my life.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2786. Courtesy: Ramnarayan N. Pathak
