312. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
WARDHA,
December 20, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I have always been indifferent about Dattajayanti etc. I
am not moved by such things. But I do not feel repulsion to-
wards such things either. I do not, however, wish that the public
should come to know about the temple and that people from out-
side may even come to worship there, for I visualize the evil conse-
quences which are likely to follow. I cannot easily imagine any
beneficial results from such a development. Those in the Ashram
who wish to use the temple for devotional purposes may do so, but
I wish that we should not go further than that. Let Panditji also
read this.
I, too, would have decided as you did about Premabehn. I
missed mildness in your decision. It is desirable that we should
not attend marriages. But we have not adopted a rule that no
one may attend a marriage at any time. Of course, I do feel that
we should not spend the Ashram money for such a visit and that
we should dissuade those who would listen to us.
I have already written to you about Somabhai in my letter
of yesterday. If he and Hasmukhrai have settled the matter
between them, the problem is solved. If it is necessary to write
to me further about this, do so.
I wrote to you about Chandrakanta yesterday. There is
no question now of paying Rs. 25. If I like a certain idea from a
distance, it does not follow that you or anybody else should ap-
prove of it. My view may be wrong. Now Kanta's parents are
also accompanying her as guests. I have come to regard Antyajas
and the common kitchen as two shields which protect us. I see
every day that without them we would be blown up.
Send the sums mentioned by Chhaganlal Gandhi. They are
earmarked for such purposes. A note about this is also filed in
the office there. If we don't have a list of all such papers, we
should have one, and on the page on which the account of an
earmarked sum commences the conditions for its use should be
mentioned, or the serial number of the document in which they
are mentioned should be quoted. If that is done, anyone who
takes charge of the work will be able to find the necessary infor-
mation the moment it is required; our method of maintaining
accounts should be thus clear.
If Kashinath is there, tell him that I could not follow what
he says about his widowed sister. He may, however, consult
Gangabehn and they two may decide about the matter as they
think fit.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4167
