26. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
November 15, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I cannot say I am pressed for time today. If therefore there is
anything left out it will be due to my forgetfulness. You are in for
a big dose, so prepare yourself.
As I write Maud is uppermost in my mind. I therefore commence
with her. She cannot tear herself away from me. I was watching her
at the station. She was on the point of breaking down. She would not
shake hands with me. She wanted a kiss. That she could not have
at the station, not that she or I was afraid but it would be misunderstood,
so she stood rigid on the platform. We have not shaken hands for
months. But the night scene I have already described to you has
transformed her and with her me. If all she has shown be genuine
she may eclipse you. If that happens, no one will be more pleased
than you would be. Anyhow please help her all you can. Millie gave
to Sally and Maud in my presence a harrowing picture of Phoenix -
not a single relieving feature - beetles everywhere, spiders, ants in
the milk, no baths, water bad, people half naked, filth too, lift a plate
and you will find an insect underneath, snakes hanging from the tree,
you have not only to tolerate this but love the insect life, you may
not destroy any life, I (Millie) could not do it, my idea of simplicity
different from G. 's, I would not therefore live in Phoenix, etc. It was
a gloriously exaggerated description. I said not a word except to
emphasise the fact that the girls were to accept it as an accurate
description. Well, Sally was off. She would have none of Phoenix. She
had not known it was all that. Not so Maud. She had heard all this.
She knew that I was not available in Phoenix. Still she wanted to go
and live the life. Cheeseman 2 who is Maud's great friend and I believe
pure-minded pleads that I should not disappoint Maud and that she is
perfectly sane in what she is doing. I have told her that I consider
Indian civilization to be the best in the world and that therefore it means
for her to be more Indianized than you are. She revels in the thought.
Such is the condition in which I have left her. Mrs. G. used to describe
you as my first-born. She said so in jealousy. She would accept Maud
as my first-born lovingly. She, I think will fill her life. Mark a father's
selfishness. You are, you remain what you are, to me-Chhota
1 Addressee's sister
2 H. E. Cheeseman
34
Bhai-younger brother and yet more than a brother. You are too mature
to be what Mrs. G. would have you to be. Maud on the other hand
can be my first-born and therefore in some way more than you are
to me. She will claim more of me. Can I give it ? Am I worthy of
all that affection? Is she worthy of it from me? Unless she is a downright
imposter which she is not, she is quite capable of it. The other theory
is that the whole thing is a nine days' wonder due to the glamour of
my personality. If so, I should be shot on sight. For if people can be
so falsely enthused by me, I am useless - a power more for harm
than good. Your saint is then doomed for ever. However that may
be, there is a huge problem for you and for me to solve. May Maud
go to Phoenix? If her affection is real it will be a sin for anybody
to prevent her. I leave her at that. I have commended her to Millie
and Ritch.
Of Sally, what shall I say? She is a butterfly. She said to me that
she was so completely under the influence of that man that he had
but to command and it was for her to obey. Hence she wanted to
go to S.A. I suggested to Mater and then to Sally that the household
should be simplified and that she should have the post she has at present
and do the household work. All this and Millie's description of Phoenix
has put Sally off from Phoenix and made her promise that she will
have none of that man. Here of course she is wrong. It is evident
too that having drawn herself a romantic picture of Phoenix she
exaggerated her misconduct in order to ensure her going to Phoenix.
But when Phoenix is no longer her goal, the thing assumes its true
proportion. However, I consider her position to be unsafe where she
is. I have written again saying that she should leave that post and try
for another if she must have one.
Sally you will not help much by writing in an upbraiding tone. You
should write to her in the gentlest tones and ask her to follow Millie's
advice and if she will do so, leave the present post, leave the suffrage
movement and help you in the struggle you are engaged in by doing
her volunteer work well and truly. For I have I think told you that
she is one of the volunteers for the work.
Maud's letter to you requires some correction but I need not dwell
upon it.
Mother I am sorry has been examined by a palmist or two and
so has Sally. This palmist has told them they are going to South Africa
in two years' time. This is all drivel. I spoke strongly to Mother about
it. You need not say anything on it. I simply pass on the information.
Father is what he was before. I would not discuss him nor Mother.
Them we will discuss when we meet. I am simply informing you of
what you should know immediately.
Millie is a wonder-worker. She is happy in the thought that her
husband is doing good work and that he is being appreciated. Surrounded
by loving sisters and two beautiful children, she is calm and serene
doing good where she can. Her devotion to you is great. May you
ever be complements each of the other.
Your life has affected both the sisters and Maud more so. She
is impatient to read your letters to me. Here endeth the family and
personal history.
Your work there has deeply affected Ritch. You have risen in his
estimation immensely. He calls you a born journalist. I have a better
name for you. You are a born idealist. And if you are not born to
realize your ideal in this life, it will not quite be your fault. Every word
in the last sentence has its significance.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
