132. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
January 17, 1931
CHI. KASHINATH,
I think the more important reasons for your decision to live
outside the Ashram were your own wish to do so and the facilities
which you would enjoy thereby. I too do not believe Narandas to
be a perfect man. But I believe that his mistakes are unintentional,
and that he makes fewer mistakes than others would. I, therefore,
think that we should put up with his method of running the
Ashram. You may take your own time to return to the Ashram,
but if you really had no objection to showing your diary, you
should show it even now, and ask to be admitted to the Ashram
when you wish and are ready to go there. I have not been able
to understand why the teaching of Hindi at the Ashram was
discontinued. Did Narandas forbid it, or did you yourself stop
teaching?
I am glad that your father has joined you. But you should
continue to maintain a firm attitude. I have no doubt that, no
matter how much he insists, you should prevent her from going.
I, however, hope that in the present circumstances she will not wish
to go. If that man decides to marry again, we need not object.
It seems that Mother's health is improving. It will get even
better if she observes the restrictions on diet, remains in the open
air and takes other precautions.
I was satisfied with Kalavati's answer. Just now at any rate
she seems to be progressing.
I know Gadreji. I have carefully gone through the extract
quoted by you. I felt that it showed more emotion than calm re-
flection. It attributes to me something that I have never held or said.
I have never asserted that the Pandavas, Krishna and other cha-
racters are not historical persons. My view is that, though all of
them might be historical persons, the Mahabharata is not a work of
history in the modern sense of the term. Caesar, John, Henry, etc.,
were historical kings, but we know that Shakespeare's plays named
after them are not works of history. He used historical events and
characters for his dramatic purpose in the plays. Further, I never
thought or said that the Gita was composed for expounding non-
violence. On the contrary, I have believed and have said, that at
96
the time of the Gita, war was accepted as normal, though they
believed in the dharma of non-violence. Nevertheless, I believe
that the teaching of the Gita does not justify war, even if the author
of the Gita had intended otherwise. I hold that physical warfare,
armed warfare can never be non-violent. Those who perform ani-
mal sacrifice may, and do, say that belief in non-violence does not
forbid such sacrifice. But whatever they say, animal sacrifice is a vio-
lence. And this also is true about armed warfare. To regard it as
a necessity and not subject to the general rule, and then to regard it
as sanctioned by religion is one thing, but it is quite another to
say that it is non-violent. I feel that Gadreji's article suffers from
looseness and confusion of thought. Being a prisoner, I cannot make
a public reply, but it is open to you to send my reply to Gadreji
for his information.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5283
