11. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
January 12, 193[2]
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,
I got your letter. I often think about you all and also wish
to write. But I got no time at all while I was outside jail. I
see that I shall definitely be able to write from here.
The same diet does not suit all persons. In the last resort,
every person has to decide for himself the quantity and the type
of food he should eat, having regard to his capacity. I have dis-
covered one thing at any rate from my own experience and that of
others, namely, that ground-nut does not agree with any person for
long, and it must, therefore, be given up. In any case, it should
not be given to children to eat. It will not matter if they eat it
occasionally. It will do them no harm if they never eat it. Nor
is it necessary to eat coconut. Almonds are useful, of course. But,
in your case, I think the following diet will be good.
Milk, boiled or unboiled, to a maximum of three seers.
Dates and currants, two or three sour lemons to be taken
either with soda, as I take them, or in warm water with honey or
jaggery. Once during the day raw carrots or radish (of the less
pungent variety) or salad leaves or tender leaves of cabbage. Two
or three tolas of any of these items should be chewed thoroughly.
Eat them with a little salt. If you eat carrots or these leaves,
that will probably satisfy your sense of hunger. The dates need
not be soaked [in water]. They should be put in milk and
eaten as they are. If any of them are not clean, they should of
course be washed. If they are not soaked [in water] you will be
required to chew them and that will probably give you a feeling of
satisfaction. Do not start eating almonds and pistachio nuts
just now. Try the diet I have suggested. You will probably feel
lighter with it and the menstrual flow will become regular. There
is no harm in taking curds instead of milk. If the curds are
sour you may add some soda according to how sour they are.
You should also eat raw tomatoes. This diet will stop gas.
If unboiled milk does not agree with you, you should not con-
sider it wrong to take boiled milk. The addition of soda will most
probably stop the gas.
I had seen the children in Bombay. I saw them coughing
and that had pained me. They also may be given the diet suggest-
ed above. Their weight ought to increase. Just now they should
not be given dry fruit at all. You should give them more honey.
They may take it either with water or with tomatoes. As for
milk, it will be better if they drink it unboiled. Ground-nuts and
honey never form a good combination. I think I have now
answered all your questions. If any question is left out and if
you are still free, you may ask it again.
My blessings to all the women. I will write to all of them
one after another. Rama should write to me. I now look upon
all the women as mere guests. Take care of your health and see
that it does not suffer. I had thought that your health was ex-
cellent.
Ask Madhavji to write to me. If you think it necessary to
send this letter to Calcutta for the sake of the children, you may
do so. The person there who looks after them should write to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Since I got your letter late, this letter will be posted tomorrow
though I have dated it today.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6811
