90. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
PHOENIX,
January 9, 1909
THE EDITOR
RAND DAILY MAIL
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
I notice that there still exists some doubt as to what is wanted
by my countrymen in the Transvaal, who have now been fighting against
tremendous odds for the past two years. I will, therefore, with your
permission, endeavour to state the Indian submission as briefly as
possible.
What we want is the following:
(1) Repeal of Act 2 of 1907;
(2) Legal recognition of the right of highly educated Indians to
enter the Transvaal like any other immigrant, under the educa-
tion test provided by the Immigration Act of the Colony with
such administrative severity in applying the education test
as to exclude all but six highly educated Indians in one year.
Repeal of the old Act is necessary,
(1) for the honour of the country, because it is claimed that
General Smuts is under promise to repeal the Act.
(2) Act 2 of 1907 is in conflict with the new Act of 1908, and,
a recent decision of the Supreme Court has shown, the run-
ning together of the two dissimilar Acts having the same
purpose may lead to dangerous results.
1 This letter appears to have been addressed to Rand Daily Mail. It has
the superscription scored out and the words "Statement for Mr. Cartwright" substi-
tuted. The office copy available is imperfect and words in square brackets have been
supplied in some places by conjecture.
(3) Recent events have shown that Act 2 of 1907 is not meant,
[as] was stated by General Smuts at one time, to be a dead
letter.
(4) The Act, being still on the Statute-book of the Colony,
constitutes an offence to the Turkish Mahomedans, and,
therefore, continues to offend the religious susceptibilities of
Indian Mahomedans.
(5) It is open to the Government, if they wish to harass British
Indians, to enforce the most objectionable clauses of the Act.
As to the educated British Indians, General Smuts [stated that there
will be no] objection raised [to the entry] of such persons, if they apply
under the Asiatic Registration Act. This is highly unsatisfactory, be-
cause
(1) the powers granted by the Asiatic Act refer only to temporary
permits;
(2) such temporary permits, even though they may be of long
duration, would still make the holders prohibited immigrants;
(3) the permits, therefore, would prevent the holders [from] carrying
on their profession;
(4) temporary permits would leave their holders at the mercy of
the Government.
What Indians want, in place of such makeshifts, is the retention of
the undoubted right of highly educated Indians to enter the Transvaal
as free immigrants, provided that they pass any education test that the
authorities may impose.
If it be objected that there is no such power reserved in law as to
enable the Minister to impose severe or discriminating tests—I deny
that the present law is not enough for the purpose—my countrymen will
offer no objection to administrative discrimination against them. Thus,
power can be given to the Minister to set any education test, even
different tests for different classes, the Minister's decision in such cases
being final and not appealable to the Supreme Court. Under such a
severe test, it will be competent for the Government to limit the entry
of highly educated Indians to only six in anyone year.
My countrymen resent a racial bar as regards educated Indians,
it being deemed a national dishonour. Whilst, therefore, the matter
with General Smuts is largely sentimental, with Indians it is one of vital
principle.
Repeal of Act 2 of 1907 is necessary, whether we demand it or not.
Amendment of the Immigration Act is necessary, because of the severe
condemnation by the Supreme Court of its several clauses. Why not,
then, at the time of amending it, free it from the taint of the Asiatic
Act, and alter it so as to give the Minister additional powers regarding
the imposition of the education test? Indians on their part will under-
take not to raise passive resistance over the administration of the
education test, so long as six highly educated Indians are passed under
the test during any single year.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4914
