432. LETTER TO SIR ROGER LUMLEY
[THE AGA KHAN'S PALACE, POONA,]
August 10, 1942
DEAR SIR ROGER LUMLEY1,
After the train that carried me and other fellow prisoners
reached Chinchwad on Sunday, some of us were ordered to
alight. Shrimati Sarojini Devi, Shrimati Mirabai, Shri Mahadev
Desai and I were directed to get into a car. There were two
lorries lined up alongside the car. I have no doubt that the
reservation of the car for us was done out of delicate considera-
tions. I must own too that the officers in charge performed their
task with tact and courtesy.
Nevertheless I felt deeply humiliated when the other fellow-
prisoners were ordered to occupy the two lorries. I realize that
all could not be carried in motor-cars. I have been before
now carried in prison vans. And this time too we should have
been carried with our comrades. In relating this incident my
object is to inform the Government that in the altered condi-
tions and the altered state of my mind, I can no longer accept
special privileges which hitherto I have accepted though reluc-
tantly. I propose this time to accept no privileges and com-
forts which comrades may not receive, except for the special
food so long as the Government allow it for my bodily need.
There is another matter to which I must draw your atten-
tion. I have told my people that this time our method is not
courting imprisonment, that we must prepare for much higher
sacrifice and so those who choose may peacefully resist arrest.
So a young man who was in the party offered such resistance.
He was therefore hauled to the prison van. This was ugly enough.
But it was a painful sight when an impatient English ser-
geant rough-handled him and shoved him into the lorry as if
he was a log of wood. In my opinion the sergeant deserves cor-
rection. The struggle has become bitter enough without such scenes.
This temporary jail is commodious enough to take in all
who were arrested with me. Among them are Sardar Patel
and his daughter. She is his nurse and cook. I have great
anxiety about the Sardar who never got over the intestinal col-
lapse which he had during his last incarceration. Ever since his
release I have been personally regulating his diet, etc. I request
that both he and his daughter be placed with me. And so
should the other prisoners though not on the same imperative
grounds as are applicable in the case of the Sardar and his
daughter. I submit that it is not right to separate co-workers
arrested for the same cause unless they are dangerous criminals.
I have been told by the Superintendent that I am not to
be supplied with newspapers. Now I was given by one of
my fellow prisoners on the train a copy of the Sunday edition
of the Evening News. It contains the Government of India's
resolution in justification of their policy in dealing with this
crisis. It contains some grossly incorrect statements which I
ought to be allowed to correct. This and similar things I can-
not do, unless I know what is going on outside the jail.
May I expect an early decision on the points raised herein?
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1942-44, pp. 1-
