20. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 10, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have another charming letter from you. Everyone considers that
your love for me is excessive. I pass on the thought for what it may
be worth. I have discussed it fully with you.
Manilal 1 tells me you had the buying mania again - that you had
bought sandals, etc. Take care please that you do not spoil the children.
Remember that they have to realize and love their poverty. Let them
toil on. They can well go without sandals, etc.
In this letter I want to write to you about Ritch. He is living from
hand to mouth. He has practice but he is struggling. The burden is
killing him and his family. His father-in-law 2 has become an idiot. Mrs.
Ritch is still in a very delicate condition. I personally do not think that
the S. A. Br. Ind. Committee should be kept at the expense it would
require to keep it going with Ritch. Without Ritch it would be practically
useless. There is no one here to replace him. What is to be done ?
I think that Ritch should return to S.A. His passage amounts to nearly
£ 250. In the official letter I have suggested that the [Committee]
should bring him out. But if the Committee will not or cannot, I suggest
your raising the money - you will have no cash - and lending it to
him for me. If he earns or I do, it shall be paid, otherwise you will
have helped a deserving brother. I do not think the money will be lost.
But if it is, let it be. Will you please cable whether you can advance
the money if the committee does not give it ? Quinn should help. He
used to tell me he would. If the Committee decides to break up the
1 Gandhiji's second son
2 Cohen
3 The original here has 'community', obviously a slip.
4 Leung Quinn, Chinese leader
Committee here and does not vote the £ 250 and if you can advance,
will you cable 'well' to the usual address and I will understand that
you can and will advance. If you cannot advance you need not cable
and I shall understand your silence. I am giving you another cable word
in the official letter. If the money is then wanted I shall cable for
it and it may be sent. My advice is that you should ask the Committee
there to break up the Committee here whether the struggle goes on
or not.
The temptations you describe as having [been] resisted are
interesting. It is useless to ascribe them to me. I am no more responsible
for the resistance than a log of wood. The effort is all yours. As I
have often told you, the capability and the possibility were in you. I
may have been instrumental in awakening the thing. But so may a book,
yes, even a suggestion from nature around you. These are passing
circumstances in one's life. But having seen the capability and the
possibility, it is for you to carry them further and further till at last
you are in tune with the Infinite. In ascribing them to me or any other
outward circumstance, you but hinder your growth and shower
undeserved love on surrounding objects - the victim this time being
myself.
You will be pleased to hear that I have today invested in a pair
of boots 22/. It was a hard thing to part with so much money. I
have bought ill-health for 22/. I could have bought health for 816
invested in walking sandals. But can a delegate walk about in a hotel
or in streets with sandals ? With this problem and with much love,
I subscribe myself,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
My apologies to Buffer House for not writing this week.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
