19. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
BARDOLI,
April 22, 1931
I enclose herewith copies of the latest correspondence between
the Commissioner, Northern Division, and myself. If His Ex-
cellency too takes the same view that Mr. Garrett does about the
Congress mediation, I feel that it nullifies the whole Settlement.
It was only when the Government of India and the British Govern-
ment recognized that the Congress truly represented the people
that there was the Settlement between it and the Government.
To repudiate the Congress as the intermediary between the people
and the Government means repudiation of the Settlement.
In the light of this extraordinary development, the other
matters about which I complained on the 17th instant pale into
insignificance. But I recapitulate the main points here to show
how far Government have till now failed to implement the Settle-
ment.
1. Some of the Sholapur prisoners and several other prison-
ers who the Congress claims are covered by the Settlement still
remain undischarged.
2. Several such prosecutions are still continued.
3. Civil resisters coming under the Foreigners' Act have not
yet had the ban removed.
4. Vatan and Inam cases against civil resisters have not yet
been withdrawn.
5. Officials such as Patels, etc., who resigned during the
Civil Disobedience period still remain unreinstated though the
appointments held by the new incumbents are all, so far as I am
aware, temporary or "until further orders", and although several
new Patels are undesirable.
6. Confiscated movables and immovables have not yet under
some pretext or other been returned.
7. Liquor vendors still continue their unlicensed business in
spite of the knowledge of the authorities.
8. Names and prices of the forfeited lands with the dates of
sales and the way in which they were sold have not yet been
supplied.
9. On the ground of 'non-co-operation' during the Civil
Disobedience period, the Government still withhold grants from
the Ahmedabad municipality for education, dispensation from
revenue dues for lands used for purposes of sanitation and for a
hospital and maternity home. This matter though not specifically
mentioned in the Settlement clearly falls within its scope.
I would like to have Government's final decision on all these
points. I promised to furnish Mr. Collins with details of the cases
under clauses 1 and 4. These are being collected. But I think a
general order will cover these cases. But if the Congress is not
recognized as the proper intermediary, everything else recedes in
the background.
Young India, 20-8-1931
1 For addressee's reply, vide Appendix II.
