224. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA,
January 14, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I received your letter. It seems to me improper that you should have
written directly to Nanabhai. Kakasaheb may write if he wishes to. And it
would be unreasonable for me to burden him with responsibility. We may
keep in mind the conditions you have stipulated but we cannot put them down
on paper. It would be altogether unbecoming to do so. Discuss with Kakasaheb
all that you have written to me and do as he suggests. I can understand your
impatience. Once you have decided to marry, it is best that you should do so
as soon as possible. However, some time is bound to elapse. Or, perhaps it
may not be so.
Certainly the best course is that you yourself should look for a girl
concurrently with the work you are doing and Kakasaheb and others also
may be on the lookout at the same time. Do not worry about what Vinoba
will think. His blessings will always be with you. You cannot have a girl
from the Ashram, for it would be improper to arouse the least trace of such
168
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
169
a feeling in any girl in the Ashram. Even indirectly, such a feeling should
not be encouraged. Hence you should also not think of selecting any of the
girls who have newly joined the Ashram.
What you say about Padma in your letter shows how dangerous was the
close association of you two. Both of you were forcing yourselves to behave
as brother and sister, while deep down in your hearts you felt yourselves to
be husband and wife. But that is an old story now. Padma will of course
know the fact when you get married, but it is too much to expect her to find
a girl for you. It is beyond her capacity, but even if it was within her capacity,
it would be undesirable to do so. We just cannot burden her with such a
responsibility. You have no reason whatever to feel helpless. Write to me
without hesitation any foolish or silly idea that may occur to you. I will not
misunderstand what you say, for, I have faith in you and even blind love for
you. I believe that you will never deceive me. I am not in the least unhappy
at your simplicity of mind. If your simplicity is a cause of fear for you, it
also acts as a shield for me. You yourself may tell G.V. Pant, Harivallabh or
any other of your acquaintances in Almora to guide and help you. Do not
think of the high or low social status of the girl concerned, consider only her
character. Write to Devdas. He may possibly have some girl in view. It would
be good if you spend about a month in Kosamba and learn the harmless
method of extracting honey. The whole course takes a month and a half to
complete. But really speaking, it should not require even that much time. I
am firmly of the view that for industrious people like us, a week or fifteen
days at the most are sufficient.
There is no need at all for you to go out of your way to see Sarojinidevi,
nor to satisfy her with an explanation. If she has indulged in an exaggeration,
it cannot be undone now. Our own way of looking at things should be such
that if we ourselves have committed a little wrong, it should appear to us big
as mountain, so that if the world regards it as such, we are not shocked. The
man who looks upon his failings as if they were diamonds and pearls and
weighs their value as we do that of diamonds and pearls, is certain to commit
big sins and he who looks upon the smallest sin as if it was the biggest,
would certainly be saved from big sins. I would see nothing wrong if you
happen to meet Sarojinidevi by chance and the matter comes up for discussion
but there is no need at all to open the subject intentionally.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32983
