254. LETTER TO SIR WILLIAM WEDDERBURN
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before November 2, 1907]
TO
SIR WILLIAM WEDDERBURN
CHAIRMAN
BRITISH COMMITTEE OF THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
LONDON
[SIR,]
My Society has been moving very actively in connection with the
Asiatic Registration Act. It is hardly necessary for me to state that in
South Africa we have no racial differences. Hindus, Mahomedans,
Parsis, Christians, belonging to the different Provinces, join hands and
work for the common good. In some respects the Asiatic Registration
Act peculiarly affects Indian Mussulmans. We have appealed to all
parties and all sections, and my Society, therefore, ventures to appeal to
you as the mouthpiece in England of the Indian National Congress, and
trusts that the question of the Transvaal Registration Act will be put
in the forefront of the subjects to be dealt with by the Congress, as
distinguished from the general South African question. As you are aware,
we are adopting what may, perhaps, be termed heroic measures, in order
to meet the special difficulty in the Transvaal. The other legislation in
South Africa can be lived down and has been, so far, tolerated, but the
Transvaal Act is intolerable. Under the other South African legislation,
Indians have not felt called upon, by way of protest, to lose all rather
than submit, but, under the Transvaal Act, that step has been considered
and rendered absolutely necessary. The other South African legislation
deprives us, as a rule, of the avenues to wealth; the Transvaal Regis-
tration Act deprives us of our manhood and reduces us to a status almost
of slavery. And, in so much as this question affects Mahomedans
specially, it will, perhaps, be graceful on the part of the National Con-
gress to give the matter of the Transvaal special prominence. By the
end of December, probably, many Indians may have even suffered
imprisonment for a principle, so that a very acute stage will have been
reached by the time the Congress meets.
[I have, etc.,
EMAM ABDOOL CADIR SALIM BAWAZEER
ACTING CHAIRMAN,
HAMIDIA ISLAMIC SOCIETY]
Indian Opinion, 2-11-1907
