227. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD ELGIN
HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON, W.C. 2,
November 20, 1906
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY OF
THE EARL OF ELGIN
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES
COLONIAL OFFICE
DOWNING STREET
DEAR SIR,
With reference to the interview that Mr. Ally and I had with you
and Mr. Just in connection with the "petition" received from Dr. Godfrey
and another and the papers said to be signed by 437 Indians and in
connection with matters arising out of His Lordship's reply to the Deputa-
tion that waited on him on the 8th day of November, in accordance
with your instructions, Mr. Ally and I submit herewith a written state-
ment for submission to His Lordship.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosure
[ENCLOSURE]
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATES ON BEHALF OF THE BRITISH INDIANS
IN THE TRANSVAAL REGARDING THE "PETITION" FROM
DR. WILLIAM GODFREY AND ANOTHER AND OTHER MATTERS
" THE PETITION "
1. The "petition" is signed by Dr. William Godfrey and C. M.
Pillay both of whom are personally known to the Delegates.
2. Petitioner William Godfrey is a doctor of Edinburgh Uni-
versity and is practising in Johannesburg.
3. The petitioner C. M. Pillay is an interpreter of no standing.
He has been found to be the worse for liquor and may be described
as a loafer.
4. So far as the recollection of the Delegates serves rightly, the
points made in the "petition" are as follows:
(a) Delegates have no mandate from the general body of Indians.
(b) Mr. Gandhi is a professional agitator who has made money
out of his work.
(c) Mr. Gandhi has caused an estrangement between Europeans
and Indians and his advocacy has resulted in harm to the
community.
(d) He was mobbed at Durban by the European community.
(e) He is proprietor of Indian Opinion.
(f) Mr. Ally is Chairman and founder of a politico-religious
body which has as its object recognition of the Sultan as both
the spiritual and political head of the Moslems.
(g) A Mr. Abdul Ganie is President of the British Indian Association.
(h) The petitioners have not been able to receive support for their
contentions because of the intimidation on the part of the
British Indian Association.
5. As to (a), the Delegates enclose herewith letter signed by the
Chairman of the British Indian Association. Their election was unani-
mous. It took place at a meeting of the Association that was largely
attended. There was no protest sent to the Association although the
election was before the public for a long time.
6. As to (b), Mr. Gandhi has received no remuneration for his
public work throughout his thirteen years' career. He has from time
to time contributed to the funds of the Association. The work has been
purely a labour of love. His Lordship is further referred to correspondence
that took place in The Star of Johannesburg on the 25th October in
refutation of a somewhat similar statement made by The Star on the
23rd October.
7. As to (c), Mr. Gandhi is totally unaware of any estrangement
having taken place between Europeans and Indians by reason of his
advocacy; on the contrary, his supreme effort has been to bring about
a reconciliation between the two communities, such being the avowed
object of the Natal Indian Congress, of which he was the honorary Secre-
tary and one of the founders, [and] of the British Indian Association of
which he is the present Secretary. On this point His Lordship is further
referred to the following letter from the late Sir John Robinson, which
is one among many received from distinguished residents at the time
of his departure for India in 1901:
I beg to thank you for your kind invitation to the meeting at the Congress
Hall this evening (October 15, 1901). It would have given me great pleasure
to have been present on the occasion of so well-earned a mark of respect to
our able and distinguished fellow-citizen, Mr. Gandhi, but unfortunately
my state of health prevents my going out at night, and I am for the present
debarred from taking part in any public function, so I must ask you to kindly
excuse my inability to attend.
Not the less heartily do I wish all success to this public recognition of
the good work done and the many services rendered to the community by
Mr. Gandhi.
The chief reason for his having organized the Indian Ambulance
Corps at the time of the Boer War and the Indian Stretcher[-Bearer]
Corps at the time of the Native Rebellion, was to bring about such
[re]conciliation, by showing that British Indians were not unworthy to
be citizens of the Empire and were capable of recognizing their
obligations if they also insisted on their rights.
8. As to (d), it is true that Mr. Gandhi was mobbed on the 13th
January, 1897 on his return from India on a misrepresentation about
his advocacy of the Natal Indian cause in India. Public apology was
given to him on the 14th and when the whole of the position became
known, the late Mr. Escombe invited him to see him and ever since
that time he had the privilege of enjoying the late Mr. Escombe's friend-
ship. The late Mr. Escombe at his request blessed the leaders of the
Natal Indian Ambulance Corps and of his own accord gave them a
tea party and made a very eulogistic and public-spirited speech on
the occasion. After the mobbing incident, he remained in Durban up
to his return to India in 1901.
9. As to (e), it is true that Mr. Gandhi is the real proprietor of
Indian Opinion from which no profits are made and to which he has devoted
the whole of his savings. There are two Englishmen associated with him
in that work and they and several Indians have, for the sake of the paper,
reduced themselves to voluntary pauperism. The paper is being run on
Tolstoy's and Ruskin's lines. Its publicly declared mission is to bring the
two communities together and become an educative medium for the
Indian community.
10. As to (f)4, the terms in which Mr. Abdul Ganie has been spoken
of are most derogatory and a product of ignorance. He is the managing
partner of one of the most flourishing firms of Indian merchants in South
Africa. Mr. Abdul Ganie has been the unchallenged President of the
Association since its inception. He is a resident of the Transvaal of 25
years' standing and has come in contact with most of the British officials
including High Commissioners and is very well known and is respected
by European merchants of standing.
11. As to (g)5, Mr. Ally's whole life in South Africa, that is to say
a period of twenty-three years, has been devoted to the service of the
1 Vide also Vol. III, p. 160.
2 ibid., p. 129, and pp. 137-41.
3 ibid., p. 129.
4 This should really be "(g)". Vide summary of petition in para 4, p. 197.
5 This should be "(f)".
Empire. He had the honour of coming in personal touch with Sir Richard
Solomon, the late Lord Loch, the late Lord Rosemead, Dr. Jamieson,
Sir Gordon Sprigg, Sir James Sievright and the present officials in the
Transvaal. He was asked by the Cape Government, at the time of the
Malay discontent, regarding the position of a burial ground, to quell the
discontent which he was successful in doing and for which he was thanked
by the Government. This was in 1885. He has had the honour often
to speak—being a voter himself at the Cape—on public platforms in
support of the British Party candidate as opposed to Bond candidates.
His free services were utilized by the Uitlander Committee for receiving
signatures to the petition that was forwarded to the late Queen in connec-
tion with the Uitlander grievances.
It is untrue that the Hamidia Islamic Society, of which he is the
Founder and President, has as its object recognition of the Sultan as
the political head of the Moslem world. It is formed essentially to help
poor Moslems, to defray the expenses of the burials of poor Moslems,
to do among them the work of social regeneration and to remove their
special hardships.
Sir Richard Solomon, whom Mr. Ally saw on Friday last, has kindly
consented that his name might be mentioned to His Lordship as guarantee
of his intense loyalty and devotion to the Empire, if such be needed.
12. As to (h), the allegation of intimidation is devoid of foundation.
Poor people, who would be the greatest sufferers under the Ordinance,
do not require the slightest encouragement to make an effort for their
deliverance from the impending calamity, for such it undoubtedly is
to them.
The Delegates respectfully claim to be the most moderate exponents
of the sentiments of over 10,000 Indians in the Colony of the Transvaal.
It is not possible to give His Lordship an adequate notion of the bitter
feeling engendered by the Ordinance. Many Europeans, including a
government official, were present at the great Mass Meeting, which
resolved, without a dissentient voice, to send a deputation. The visitors
fully realized the depth of feeling to which the community was moved.
His Lordship is referred for a description of the meeting to The Star,
The Leader and The Rand Daily Mail which published fairly full reports
of the meeting.
SUGGESTED EXPLANATION OF PETITIONER'S CONDUCT
13. Dr. Godfrey is a hot-headed youth, without any experience
of practical life in the world. He only finished his studies over two
years ago. He has never before, except in connection with the Asiatic
Law Amendment Ordinance, come forward to do public work. He
himself attended the Mass Meeting and spoke on the principal resolu-
tions, including the resolutions condemning the Ordinance, appointing a
commission and advocating going to gaol in preference to the submission
to the carrying of passes. When the time came for selecting the delegates,
he came forward as a candidate but was not selected. He sent a telegram
at Cape Town wishing success to Mr. Ally and has given him a note of
introduction to his wife's parents in Edinburgh, which reads as follows :
This is to introduce to you one of our best of friends Mr. H. O. Ally.
He is leaving here to fight the Indian cause and after his battles he will no
doubt take a trip to Scotland. He will wire by what train he will be coming
up and on what date. By religion he is an Islam and as such I will write
you in detail as to the modes of their living especially as regards to their food
and I hope (after my next week's letters) you will make him as happy and
cheery as you can during his stay in Edinburgh. Don't forget to let him have
a sight of the glorious F. Bridge and our ain little wee lael home at Tynecastle
Terrace. John I have no doubt will know Mr. Ally well. It is the same who
gave him the confetti before he left.
Yours aff[ectionately,]
(signed) WILLIAM
The original is hereto attached for His Lordship's inspection. He was
for a long time one of Mr. Gandhi's clients and he was associated with
Mr. Gandhi in nursing the plague patients in 1904 and at the time did
very valuable work for the relief of the patients. The only way therefore
his conduct can be explained is to ascribe it to his hot-headedness. The
disappointment in this connection seems to have unhinged his mind.
That appears to be the most charitable construction to place upon his
conduct, otherwise his strong condemnation of the Ordinance, his strong
recommendation to Mr. Ally, would be inconsistent with the despatch
of the petition. From the following cablegram received by the Delegates
and already sent to His Lordship, it would appear that 437 Indian
signatures taken on a separate document have been received on false
pretences:
Have affidavits Godfrey obtained signatures blank paper false pretences
using name bias (code word for British Indian Association) signatures now
withdrawn cabling (Lord) Elgin papers publish full report conference.
14. The Delegates have been obliged painfully and reluctantly to
make the above statements, not in the slightest degree with the inten-
tion of injuring Dr. Godfrey or his associate and if they have been
obliged to say anything regarding themselves, it is from a sense of para-
mount duty they owe to their countrymen, whose interests they have
the honour to represent. As the personal element has been introduced
here by the "petition" and in Johannesburg by The Star, it has become
necessary to show respectfully to His Lordship that, so far as the personal
element is to count in the controversy, the position held by the Delegates,
in their humble opinion, would weigh, after the most searching exami-
nation in favour of the community. They would very much rather
1 Vide "Letter to Private Secretary to Lord Elgin", p. 145.
that the whole of the Ordinance were examined on its merits and they
would therefore respectfully proceed to dwell upon some of the points
that arise from His Lordship's reply to the Deputation.
LORD ELGIN'S REPLY: No PERMIT UNDER LAW 3 OF 1885
15. His Lordship is under the impression that there were permits
under the Law 3 of 1885 during the Boer regime and that the Boer
administration was lax in the administration of the permit law. The
Delegates respectfully venture to state that the Boer law did not require
any permits at all. The receipts given for £3 therefore were not
inaccurate. They were not permits authorizing entry or residence. There
was no restriction on immigration contemplated by Law 3 of 1885,
as the law itself shows. There was therefore no question of identifi-
cation.
The permits came into vogue only after the introduction of the
Peace Preservation Ordinance of the British regime.
This distinction is very material in order to show that the Asiatic
Ordinance, now for consideration before His Lordship, is not an amend-
ment but a new law. It does not make accurate that which was
inaccurate under the Boer regime. It creates a new disability.
VOLUNTARY THUMB-MARKS
16. It is respectfully submitted that the voluntary act of the Indian
community in putting thumb-marks on permits and registration certi-
ficates was performed gracefully to please Lord Milner and to avoid
legislation compelling such performance. It is therefore hardly fair
to use the act as a precedent against the community.
NEW REGISTRATION
17. The statement that new registration will give a final and in-
defeasible title to those who are registered is again, in the humble opinion
of the Delegates, not in consonance with facts. The title of those who
hold permits is today indefeasible in law. The new Ordinance would
actually cancel that title and not give it. After dispossessing the com-
munity of what it already possesses, it will restore a new title of doubtful
value circumscribed by galling requirements and penalties. It will,
therefore, restore to the community only a part of what will be taken
away from it.
INSPECTION
18. Under the new Ordinance, it is possible to carry on a daily
inspection. The assurance given to His Lordship, that the inspection
will be yearly, is beside the mark. There is no guarantee of the same
executive authority remaining in office. The experience of the com-
munity almost invariably has been that arbitrary power given to the
executive in South Africa has been arbitrarily and almost fully exer-
cised against British Indians. When a restrictive law is passed against
a community labouring under popular prejudice, the executive has been
powerless to resist popular demand for full enforcement of restrictions.
This has happened even with the present executive in respect of Law 3
of 1885 and Peace Preservation Ordinance. So much has this been
the case that the Indian community has had to go to the Supreme Court
in order to resist the attempt of the executive to read into the above
laws meanings they are not ordinarily capable of bearing.
PRAYER
19. It is for the Indian community a matter almost of life and
death. It is respectfully urged that the matter can only be properly
sifted by a judicial commission. If His Lordship is not satisfied as to
the full justice of the Indian contention, it is submitted that the decision
should be suspended pending the inquiry of a commission.
M. K. GANDHI
H. O. ALLY
[2 enclosures]
From a photostat of the typewritten original: C. 0.291, Vol. 113/Ind.; also a
photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4545
