167. LETTER TO ACHYUT PATWARDHAN
January 30, 1935
MY DEAR PATWARDHAN,
You have done well in bringing the weavers' case to my
notice. I had a similar case in Orissa during the walking tour.
It was a question affecting 10,000 weavers. I have resolutely set
my face against doing anything for weavers who weave mill-
spun yarn, for they cut their own throat by weaving mill-spun
yarn, and they know it. But they wrongly plead helplessness. As
I told the weavers of Orissa, in a weaving family where there is
one weaver, the rest of the members help in attending to the
different processes through which yarn has to pass before it comes
to the loom.
My suggestion then is that every weaver family
should spin its own yarn, that is to say, it should do the ginning,
carding and spinning. Such a family should use for itself the khadi
woven by it and put the surplus on the market. This will ensure
spinning of a high order, because all the members of the family
would be interested in spinning as strong and even yarn as is
possible. Of course, the income of the weaver would increase in
exact proportion to the skill employed in producing good yarn.
139
With efficient management, I can show that such a family stands
to gain by taking up spinning. The gain will be threefold. It
will be independent of the middleman who sells yarn and the
fluctuations of the yarn market, and save a portion of the money
spent in buying cloth required for the family, for, except when
the price of cotton goes down very low, the value of cotton re-
quired for domestic use will always be less than the price of cloth
purchased in the market. Moreover, it has been found by experi-
ence that a man and woman use less yards of khadi than of mill-
cloth, and less still where khadi and yarn are respectively hand-
woven and hand-spun. And it is the universal testimony of prac-
tised spinners that when they have khadi woven out of their own
yarn it lasts three times as long as manufactured cloth.
If this thing appeals to you, you can organize [the work].
A . I . S . A . can come to the assistance by purchasing the surplus
khadi that these families will weave.
I am telling the weaver friend whose letter you have enclosed
that you would explain my scheme to him.
If you like the scheme and any of the weavers will take it
up under the conditions mentioned by me, you should, in order
to save time, place yourself in touch with Gangadharrao, who,
officially or unofficially, I do not remember which, represents the
Karnatak branch of the A . I . S . A .
Yours sincerely,
SHRI ACHYUT PATWARDHAN
COURT ROAD
AHMEDNAGAR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
