129. LETTER TO KANTILAL
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Friday, July 9, 1926
BHAI KANTILAL,
Your three letters to hand. From the last one I see you have
had heavy rains there. The first showers here were quite heavy
and we had even two floods.
About your conflicting loyalties I would say that you should
endure the pain that your mother is experiencing, regarding it as
unavoidable. It is my experience that in the face of their parents'
opposition to any good venture if the children remain as firm
as they are humble, their parents give up their opposition. Their
opposition as well as their unhappiness increases only when the
children waver and the parents hope they will succumb to paren-
tal love. Hence if you have not the least doubt about your step
and if you are equally confident about your capacity, you should
tell your mother of your decision and shake off all anxiety. Ask
me anything further if you have to.
Personally, I do not at all believe khadi will benefit by the
publication of its statistics, etc. Nor do I believe that the eco-
nomy effected at Gariadhar can be practised everywhere. But the
work at Gariadhar certainly deserves notice. I noticed two specia-
lities at Gariadhar. One, that all who spin, weave and card are
under Shambhushanker's personal supervision. Two, that he himself
knows these artisans and those who work along with them and has
won their love. He is able to get much of his work done direct-
ly. Not everyone can accomplish all this. Others should learn
as much from this as they can. It is enough if no cause is provi-
ded for the criticism of the Amreli centre. I believe it is easy to
meet criticism actuated either by ignorance or prejudice. I know
it well and I quite appreciate that the present sale of khadi is due
to Abbas Saheb's presence. Once people begin to buy khadi as
a matter of duty, it will not take time to spread. It is enough for
the present if we diligently and by every possible effort increase
the production of khadi and also improve its quality. A sense
of duty can be born only out of this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19661
