109. LETTER TO R. R. DIWAKAR
POONA,
August 1, 1946
BHAI DIWAKAR,
I could read your letter of 17th July from beginning to end
only today. I have serious doubts about the resolution concerning
yarn. I don't think it is right to pass on the yarn to the weavers
and oblige them to weave it before it has been doubled. The
weavers will ungrudgingly accept all the yarn you have if you
give it to them after doubling and twisting it. Only then can
you tell the weavers not to take mill-yarn as long as such hand-
spun yarn is available. I have written about it in Harijan.
Do you have an estimate how many people act on the
resolutions that have been passed and how they do it? If not,
you should try to find out.
Your Resolution No. 22 calls upon the Government to
examine the implements and the raw material of . . .2, which
I find rather impracticable. This job is for those who know
the work. It is the constructive workers who can do this job.
The Government can be asked to provide funds. I feel the
same way about Resolutions 17, 18 and 21.
I have an impression that I have written to you regard-
ing [Resolution] No. 27. I am of the opinion that Manohar
Diwan cannot take up anti-leprosy work outside Wardha. He
does not have enough workers. What you must do is to produce
in Karnataka workers like Manohar Diwan. You can send
them to Wardha to be trained, on the condition that all their
expenses are met by you.
One more word of advice in general. Resolution No. 29
could have been put in nine or ten lines. It could have been
more fully explained in a speech. I assume all these Resolu-
tions were in Kannada and, when we think in our mother
tongue or in the national language we do not do so in an
orderly way. And then we do not attempt to bring precision
and brevity to them. When we speak or write in English out
of very shame we are more careful. This shows that our love
of our mother tongue is not real, or say, not deep enough. It is
the duty of every Indian to overcome this failing. I have ob-
served that true love of the mother tongue embraces the national
language too.
Blessings from
BAPU
SJT. RANGANATH DIWAKAR
HUBLI
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
