138. LETTER TO ADA WEST
[SINHGADH,]
April 30, 1920
MY DEAR DEVI1,
The place where I have arrived today is a lonely little historic
fortress. The scenery around is glorious and the weather most
bracing but mild. I have come here to give tone to a system which
is much run down. I have with me Dr. Jivraj Mehta, Mahadev
Desai, Swami Anand, Prabhudas Balkrishna and Dipak. You
know only Prabhudas. I need not introduce the others in this
letter as I am anxious to finish this soon. I have a splitting head-
ache on me, but having taken out your letter I must finish the
reply.
Mrs. Gandhi has kept remarkably well. She is looking after
Harilal's children. Fatima was married to a nice young man on
the 20th. It was a very simple ceremony, quite unpretentious. It
was performed on the Ashram grounds. We shall meet her often
as her husband lives in Ahmedabad. I have not heard from
Mr. Kallenbach since his expulsion from England. I have in-
quired but without result.
I am sorry to hear about Mrs. West. I hope she is better.
Please make love to Hilda on my behalf. Does she ever remember
or think of me? Building operations are still going on at the
Ashram. I hope one day you will see it and even take your
share in making it.
My life remains as busy as ever. I have not a moment I can
call my own.
Devdas is at Banaras finishing his Hindi studies. Harilal is
going strong about his business. What he will ultimately do, I do
not know.
With love,
Yours,
BHAI
[PS.]
Bhai Kotwal I have not now seen for a long time. I do not
even hear from him. Pragji Desai has joined Mrs. Gandhi's
brother. Medh is vegetating. Chhaganlal keeps books. Maganlal
is the general manager. His children have grown. Prabhudas
is said to have tuberculosis. Mrs. Chhaganlal has a very weak
constitution.
Krishnadas does] not keep over well. Imam
Saheb looks after all the purchases. His wife does a lot of tailoring
for the Ashram. I have given you a fair description of the
activities of all you know.
BHAI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
