367. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
January 10, 1930
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Here is my draft resolution or declaration for 26th instant.
I have nothing as yet from anybody. But I thought I would not
now wait till the last moment. You will cut it up or extend
and amend it as you like. The shorter the sweeter.
Ever since we have separated at Lahore, I have been evolv-
ing schemes of civil disobedience. I have not seen my way clear
as yet. But I have come so far that, in the present state of the
Congress, no civil disobedience can be or should be offered in
its name and that it should be offered by me alone or jointly with a
few companions even as I did in South Africa if you have studied
the History of Satyagraha. If you have not, you should. If I
do finally see my way clear, I shall think out what part the Con-
gress can play in that event. All this, however, I have no time to
discuss through correspondence. If I make further progress, I
shall let you know. If you have any remarks to offer, please
let me know. In any case prepare yourself to come here a day
or two earlier than the Working Committee meeting day. Of
course you can come earlier still . . . 2 before 26th inst. if necessary.
I hope father is going to Bengal on the appointed day.
I am most anxious to come to grips during your year of
office, but that strictly according to my lights. Please therefore
feel free to criticize whatever I say or suggest. I want to do
nothing that would cross your purpose or thwart your plans, if
you have conceived any independently. The more I think, the
more convinced I feel that it was a happy thing for the country
that I did not become President. I would have felt hampered in
maturing plans in complete detachment. As it is, I cannot
conceive a more favourable opportunity for me for making my
experiment than when you are the helmsman of the Congress.
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
Since writing this, I have your letter. In view of what I
have said above, I must not go out. The one who may travel
through a few places with effect is father. The weight that he
can carry in the matter of the councils boycott is not to be ri-
valled by anybody. Can he go?
After reading your notes I did think it necessary to alter my
draft.
BAPU
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-A, 1930. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
