230. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
August 26, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your long and interesting letter as also the cuttings. I am
delighted that you are pleased with the reception you are meeting
with. I wonder whether there was anybody to receive you when you
landed?
Have you seen Dr. Mehta's brother? I hope you will on no ac-
count miss doing so. He is of a very retiring nature and he may have
felt diffident in calling on you, on finding you surrounded by all the big
bugs of Bombay.
The cuttings you have sent make interesting reading and show the
possibility of your being able to do very good and substantial work. I
have your cablegram. I have sent a reply as follows:
"Progress continues very uncertain.
Produce deporteds
meeting. Resolution adopting pice subscription aid struggle as
tangible expression India's sympathy suggested. Bomanjee knows."
Sir Muncherji is very keen on the subscription idea. Ritch seems
to have suggested it before at his instigation. Sir Muncherji thinks that it
will carry very great weight, being a tangible expression of public feel-
ing. The idea is not that we should get pecuniary assistance. We ought
to be able to say that we should do without [it], but the idea is, in their
wishes to take part in the struggle by collecting this subscription, the
value will consist in thousands having given their mite. I will not
labour the point much, because by the time this reaches you, you will
have either acted upon the suggestion or rejected it.
Smuts is leaving this week for South Africa and yet there is no set-
tlement and no reply from the Colonial Office. I am therefore prepared
any day to receive an unfavourable reply. Lord Ampthill has written
to Lord Crewe.
I have had further important chats with Dr. Mehta. I think he is
convinced now that ours is the right plan.
I assume that you have placed yourself in correspondence with the
leading men in the other parts of India also. Mr. Hajee Habib is most
1 In his letter of September 4, Polak informed Gandhiji that a resolution would
be adopted at the public meeting on September 14 to set up a committee, presided over
by Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, to collect subscription for the deportees. Writing on
anxious that you should invite his brother, Mr. Hajee Mohamed, to take
part in the struggle and assist you. He is at Porbunder. His full name is
Hajee Mohamed Hajee Dada.
The Natal friends have sent their statement to all the Members of
Parliament here, to the Press and the Indian papers and public men.
You may do whatever you consider to be necessary on the Natal ques-
tion.
It was very good of Mr. Jamsetji to have offered to print 20,000
copies of the pamphlet. That would be a magnificent stroke.
Maud, Dr. Mehta, Hajee Habib and I went last Sunday to White-
way. We left by the early morning train at one o'clock, reaching
Stroud at 3.40. George Allen was at the station to receive us and we
walked to Whiteway. It was a delightful walk, which you would have
enjoyed. The country was charming. George Allen is all energy. He
is a very fine specimen. I suppose ordinarily he would be considered to
be uncultured. He is perfectly natural in everything he does and is
brutally frank. His devotion to his wife, who does not share his ideas,
seemed to me to be very great and the finest part of his character. His
wife is suffering from a cancer of the breast and is only lingering on. She
has an utterly charming and open countenance. I had a fairly long chat
with her. Allen has four children. The eldest is a daughter, a very
strong and healthy girl, a splendid housekeeper. She looks after her
younger brothers and practically the whole household. Allen does not
believe in putting any restraint on his children; I almost feel that he
carries it to excess. The children squatted on the floor anyhow and ate
in any way they liked. That, however, is a matter of detail. All his chil-
dren were perfectly healthy. Whiteway was at one time a Tolstoyian
Colony. The settlers have not been able to live up to the ideal. Some
have gone, others are living there, but not carrying out the ideal. Allen
seems to be the nearest approach. His ground is kept in a very good
condition and he has brought it to its present condition singly and with-
out having used any machinery whatsoever; simple tools are all he uses.
By profession, he was a shoemaker. Dr. Mehta enjoyed his visit very
well. He came with the greatest reluctance, because he does not believe
in putting himself to any unnecessary trouble. Maud liked it very much.
I was cruel enough to think that she could walk back. Mr. Hajee Habib
saved me from that situation.
Some more books by Tolstoy and others belonging to the School
Life series have been bought for Phoenix out of the £15 given by
Dr. Mehta.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5031
1 This evidently is a slip for Jehangir Bomanjee Petit; vide footnote 1, p. 362.
9-24
