166. LETTER TO SIR J. G. LAITHWAITE
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
November 11, 1940
DEAR MR. LAITHWAITE,
I have to thank you for your letter of the 2nd instant.
I must not offer any apology for this letter. For, in answer
to the Government measures regarding the Press, I have given up
making public statements on the struggle between the Government
and the Congress, and I want to avoid secrecy regarding my
plans. I shall, therefore, continue to send you periodical letters
unless His Excellency desires otherwise.
I had hoped to be able to confine civil disobedience to two
or three typical cases and supplement them, if necessary and if
the call came, with a fast, limited or unlimited. But the mem-
bers of the Working Committee were very much perturbed over
the contemplated fast. Wires also pressed in upon me from all
sorts of men and associations prevailing upon me not to fast.
I felt that if I was not to fast, I must in some way answer the
action of the Government in regard to Pandit Jawaharlal. My
restraint depended upon a measure of reciprocity from the Gov-
ernment as I had hoped in my letter of the 30th September in
the following words:
I shall hug the hope that it will be possible for the Government
to work out their policy in the spirit of the Congress position.
But I do not complain. I must not. Only I feel I should
explain my change of plan. The changed plan consists in extend-
ing civil disobedience to qualified persons selected from particular
groups. The groups touched at present are the members of the
Working Committee, the Legislators, the members of the A.I.C.C.
and a few others. I felt that with the Pandit dealt with in the
manner he was, and the almost simultaneous arrest of Shri Achyut
Patwardhan, who has proclaimed his faith in non-violence, I should
not restrain members of these groups and the like if they satisfied
my test as to non-violence and the constructive programme.
I send you herewith a copy also of the instructions I have
issued to Congressmen which you will please show to H.E.
There is one other matter to which I wish to draw his at-
tention. My son, Devdas, has sent me notes of the recent inter-
view with certain editors by the Hon. the Home Member. In
it the Hon. the Home Member is represented as having said:
"Mr. Gandhi's object is to paralyse India's war effort and thus
to help Hitler." If Sir Reginald said these words, I can only
say that he is wholly wrong. I claim that nothing that I have
said can warrant Sir Reginald's extraordinary statement. Indeed
I have said repeatedly and so have Pandit Jawaharlal and almost
all the numerous Congressmen who have been jailed, that we do
not want to help Hitler. I have never said, I wished to paralyse
Government's war efforts. But I have said that those of us who
do not believe in war as war or in the war on behalf of British
imperialism, which they hold the present British effort to be,
should be free to propagate their views in a non-violent manner.
What will, however, help Hitler and the enemies of Britain is
the present utterly irresponsible and repressive policy of the
Government including the wholly unwarranted arrests and
imprisonments.
I had expected that those in high places would
observe fairness and not go to the extent of putting into the
mouths of humble workers like me words which they have never
uttered.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7856. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
