191. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD MORLEY
LONDON,
July 26, 1909
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA
WHITEHALL, S.W.
SIR,
I shall be obliged if you will place the following before Lord Morley:
At the private interview that His Lordship was graciously pleased to
grant to Mr. Hajee Habib and myself, I was unable, owing to want of
time, to say all I had intended to. I wish, therefore, on behalf of my col-
league and myself to state that the two outstanding questions between
the Transvaal Government and the Indian community—namely, the
repeal of the Asiatic Act and the guarding of the status of educated Bri-
tish Indians on a basis similar to that adopted in the other Colonies, are
the questions which are of paramount importance, because of the solemn
covenant undertaken by the community. This, however, does not mean
that the British Indians do not feel aggrieved about the other disabilities
in the Transvaal, such, for instance, as the prohibition to hold landed
property, riding on the tramcars, etc.
We, however, feel that these questions are not those for which the
community has suffered imprisonment or suffered such personal hard-
ships as it has for the removal of those two grievances. British Indians
will, however, continue to adopt the means they have hitherto adopted
1 (1862-1931); a mining magnate, author of several books on South Africa, a
prominent member of the Progressive Party
2 These were addressed by the Transvaal Indians to the Queen, Dadabhai Nao-
roji and the President of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce. Vide Appendix XV.
3 This had taken place earlier in the day; vide the preceding item.
for the removal of the other disabilities. But the two grievances above-
named have been separated from the others by reason of the terrible
suffering that they have involved and will continue to involve until a
proper settlement is arrived at.
My colleague and I trust that Lord Morley will be able to find time
to give special attention to this matter and, by his friendly offices on
behalf of those whose interests are in his keeping secure an honourable
settlement.
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten
office copy: S. N. 4961
