293. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[On or after April 29, 1929]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I am not surprised to know that Balkrishna
has lost his watch. It could have been stolen by someone in the
Ashram or by an outsider. Such things will continue to happen.
We should take as much care as we can.
I would certainly like it if Pannalal takes on rent the Ashram
land and cultivates it. Can we think of anything better than that
the Ashram should be broken up into different units, and that
our own people should live on the old premises, observe the
Ashram rules to the best of their ability and carry on occupa-
tions which would have been welcomed by it? Living thus, we
should strive to progress towards our goal.
My present state of mind is such that I would not press any-
one. Everyone should settle down to live in the manner he wishes.
I don't see any need for people to wait till I return, for I don't
wish to plead with anyone. Whatever I had to say and plead,
I have done.
If Gangabehn has left for a month, it is all right. She needed
a change. She had suffered in health and had become weak.
Lakshmibehn and Durga can look after the kitchen. What is
going to happen about bread?
You cannot go away somewhere as an experimental measure.
If and when it becomes necessary for you to go, some arrangement
will certainly be made.
Personally, I would see no harm in handing over the manage-
ment to Raojibhai. But you can say more about this; I can say
nothing.
I knew all about the grazing land near Dholka. See that you
make a deal according to your means. In this matter, Parnerkar
is our means. Go in for the thing only if he can manage it.
Enclosed with this is a letter from the Thakoresaheb of Morvi.
The two cows which Parnerkar wanted to have should now arrive
there. When they do, write a letter of acknowledgement to the
Thakoresaheb's secretary. Moreover, a report about the cows
should be sent every month.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5480
