535. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,
August 27, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
Don't be alarmed. I am writing with the left hand to keep
the right fit for Monday.
Your two letters and wire came in duly. Perhaps you will
have to receive Devdas, too, if you have room for him. Poor boy!
He is in danger of being attacked by paralysis. Jamnalalji wired
yesterday saying Ansari had advised change to Simla. Simla must
have come to his lips because of you. What other special recom-
mendation could Simla have? I am simply preparing you for the
application. If it comes, you will know what to do with it. Once
more I warn you. Never hesitate to say 'No' when you mean 'No'.
That is the only way to preserve friendships. You have become
dearer to me than a friend. But if you are to remain a dear
daughter, I must not put an undue strain on your loyalty. And
yet my life is so full of companionships that everyone intimately
connected with me is taxed to the uttermost. May God give you
the strength to carry the burden you have imposed on yourself.
Shummy won't now regulate Kumarappa's life from the
heights of Simla. For he is having Kumarappa under his own
observation. Tell him I am religiously eating daily the beet he
sent. Amtussalaam has found out the way of cooking it well.
I did not have much talk about Puri with Gopichandji. I see
from Pyarelal's letter sent by you that his heart is not in Simla.
Is there no local man there who would take it up? I am writing
to G.
How did you find the paper that was given to you by Chou-
dhury ? You should send me samples of the sizes and the colours
you want.
The meetings of the Board were quite good. I wish you had
been present. But I know it was right for you to go. Of course,
you will come and resume your work here whenever you can come.
Give my love to your two faithful attendants and tell them I
was sorry I was not able to know more of them as I would have
liked to do. But my activities leave me no time for such amenities.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3542. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6351
