72. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Jeth Sud 12 [May 27, 1912]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Dhoribhai is not the kind of man to fit into the scheme.
This is West's view. This contention is based on conversation
with him and is justified. Our functioning is so different at
present that it is doubtful if we should admit only labourers.
Dhoribhai will not understand that he is not qualified. Hence,
there is no need to tell him the reasons. I shall tell him myself.
What seems clear is that we cannot admit him at the moment.
But is it right to tell him why? West had asked me in his last
letter and so I am discussing the matter with you. This is my
attitude. Now you can do whatever you think proper.
Miss Molteno writes : "Your sweet Phoenix is a poem - a
dream of loveliness." Strangers are bound to think that way.
We cannot take pride in her comment because we have known
its bitterness too. Nevertheless we should cherish the aspiration
that the future may justify Miss Molteno's belief. In order to
realize that, I feel that we cannot admit an utterly worldly man
like Dhoribhai. A time may come when only two or three of us
can continue to stay there to realize that ideal. May it be so.
We shall not be cowards from fear of it.
Jamnadas has been there for a long time now. I have re-
primanded him for what Kashi has written in her letter. Please
do not hurt his feelings. He has many admirable qualities. His
physique is such that he can make it hard as steel. It is best
to engage him in all activities. Send him here whenever he
feels inclined. I do not think he would feel comfortable there
for long. I feel that if you engage him in the press it would
be beneficial to you as well as to him. But you must be needing
all the help there right now. Nevertheless, do only what all of
you consider proper. It is enough if you give thought to my
suggestions. Do not insist on putting them into practice.
1 The year has been inferred from the reference to the arrival of Kotwal,
who joined the Tolstoy Farm in 1912.
2 Quoted in English
3 Addressee's younger brother
86
Kotwal can wear the dress he chooses. I shall not inter-
fere or force him regarding this. Those of us who have estab-
lished Phoenix and those whom we specially invite cannot sud-
denly wear that kind of dress. I see the usefulness of trousers,
etc., for the carrying on of our tasks. If trousers imply anything
immoral, we should not wear them whether or not our task is
accomplished. Kotwal has come to meet us. Moreover, Doctor
has made certain recommendations about him. It is possible that
he possesses such a character that we may have more to learn
from him than he from us. Hence, I do not propose to discuss
with him the matter of his dress unless an occasion arises. We
can exercise greater freedom regarding dress, etc., at the Farm.
In certain matters, there was opportunity for this Farm to rise
superior to Phoenix in its way of living. Meat, etc., have got
to be given up here and that is no small matter. Everyone
must eat in the common kitchen, and that too is a big thing.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1164. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
