14. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
November 2, 1945
CHI. NARAHARI,
Your questions are very good. This much is clear to me :
whether public institutions have members of different religious per-
suasions or not, members belonging to the majority communities
cannot celebrate their festivals in a manner which would hurt the
religious sentiments of others. The Ganapati festival, and such
others, are entirely of a political character and have nothing to do
with religion. We cannot, therefore, celebrate them. But celebra-
tions which are part of religious practice must be observed. For
instance, in the Ashram Imam Saheb used to give, at my instance
and request, the call to the faithful and we used to pray. The
call is an essential practice in Islam. It is believed to be super-
ior to the Church bell of the Christians. I think I have now
answered your question regarding public institutions. If I have
left out any point, please ask again.
It is not easy to answer the question what should be done
now regarding Hindu practices. It is very easy for me to describe
what I myself do. And I am also quite clear in my mind about
the correctness of what I do. But I am not so clear how far
the Hindu community should go or which reforms to advocate
even in the face of opposition from it. Probably Kishorelal
remembers—as I do, if I am not imagining it—that he had once
suggested the omission from our prayers of the verses referring
to Ganapati, Saraswati and the Earth. I could not accept this.
I know that the form of Saraswati described in the verse is purely
imaginary. The Ganapati also is an imaginary figure and stands
merely for "Aum". But the popular beliefs about both take the
descriptions literally; hence we have the images of Saraswati and
Ganapati. If, therefore, we were to eliminate all these practices,
Hinduism would be transformed into something quite different;
it would, you might say, take the form of the Arya Samaj. There
is much in the Arya Samaj that I love, but I just cannot accept
Satyarthaprakash as scripture. Dayananda Saraswati was a great
man and he believed in what he preached. He did, therefore,
make an impact. Hinduism, it seems to me, is already assimilating
all that is good in the Arya Samaj, and this is the distinctive
feature of Hinduism. I do not wish to go, or take you, into
still deeper waters just now. If I am destined to live up to 125
years or for many more years still and if my non-attachment
becomes as deep as I wish it to become, my views will become
clearer and firmer and I will also find a language that appeals
to the heart. Till that time arrives, be content with this prosaic
explanation that I have given. I have of course always expressed,
and will continue to express, random views from time to time as
occasion demands. And this will some day lead—if it is so
destined—to perfect clearness. At present my attitude is, neti, neti.
You may derive what comfort you can from this. I am unhappy
that I am not able to answer your questions as clearly as you
have put them.
I have stated my view regarding the Ganapati festival. I will
add this:
1. Wherever there is a Ganapati temple, the arati, etc.,
should continue to be performed for the present. There is room
for reform in the arati and the ceremonial. The arati as it is
performed at present is crude. There is no music in it. It can
easily be made musical and sweet to the ear. The ceremonial
also can be made more solemn by employing a better priest.
2. There is no religion at all in the Dussehra celebration.
Its only sanction is custom. I have always been opposed to it
since my childhood. Even if we wish to equip the people with
arms, the Dussehra celebration has no meaning. Instead of
worship of arms, the people, including even children, should be
taught the use of arms, as is done in the West.
3. Plying the charkha on the Charkha Jayanti Day amounts
to ceremonial worship of it. To introduce into it a ritual is to
bring the charkha into disrepute. If you ask me why, when
they spin, I permit them to have a lamp with ghee during broad
daylight, my answer will be that in a large measure it is due
to my sense of tolerance, also to my weakness. I have always
opposed the ceremonial worship of the Gita or the manner in which
Gita Jayanti is celebrated at present. I have also forbidden the
composing of a hymn in praise of the Gita to be recited on the
Gita Jayanti Day.
4. I do not approve of any leader's photograph being
worshipped or of arati being performed in front of it, but I have
not always opposed these things publicly though I did oppose them
in my mind. Since such worship of human beings runs in the
blood of Hindus, I have remained indifferent to them. In this
matter I am the greatest culprit, as it is the worship of my image
that has become most widespread. Since it cannot be prevented,
do what I will, I derived a kind of false consolation when the
worship of other leaders also started.
This, of course, does not
mitigate my guilt. It is very difficult to say where this thing will
take us. There is some basis of truth in this practice, namely,
that man himself being, in a sense, an image, he will always
remain an image-worshipper. The forms of such worship will vary
for different faiths, but in essence the thing remains image-worship.
5. You may be sure I am opposed to the practice of inviting
Brahmins and breaking a coconut at a foundation-stone-laying.
And yet I have tolerated this. But since the time I learnt to
regard all of us as belonging to one class, namely, the Atishudras,
all these rituals have taken a different form in my mind. The
new form' was first put to use on the occasion of the marriage
of Tendulkar and Indu. It is a long time since then, but I
have seen no defect in the practice. On the day itself the new
form seemed very impressive indeed.
Vanu is getting along very well. If the clinic continues
in existence, she will complete one full year here. She will lose
nothing. On the contrary, I believe she will gain something. I
do feel sorry that I am not able to give her as much attention
as I should like to but my preoccupations have become so serious
even here and I have to husband my time so carefully that I
have no leisure left for anything else.
Sardar will return tomorrow. Dinshaw is with him. He
is returning today.
It is some days since Pyarelal's fever subsided. The weakness
too, is gradually going. My heart is there all the time and urges
me to hurry back. But my sense of dharma keeps me here.
I will know more after Sardar's return.
How is Babla getting on? Is Mani with you or at the
Ashram? Is she all right? Has Durgabehn recovered?
How will Kishorelal be able to stand the Sevagram winter ?
But where else can he go in Gomati's present condition? Think
over this. In any event you can keep the room warm with
a brazier.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9138b
