171. LETTER TO SIR EVAN M. JENKINS
SEVAGRAM,
November 25, 1945
DEAR SIR EVAN,
I write this in continuation of my letter of 10th October.
Since then I have seen other such accounts in the papers and
now I have with me a young man (Shri Prabhu Dayal Vidyarthi)
who came to me while he was yet in his teens, without being
recommended by anybody, as a poor youngster. This was in the
year 1935. Ever since then he has never been out of my observa-
tion. He was arrested in connection with the 1942 disturbances,
and has lately been discharged. He came to Wardha in a
dilapidated condition. I was then at Poona. He reported his
arrival and I telegraphed to him to come there so that I could
look after him better and, if necessary, get Dr. Mehta's assistance
at his sanatorium where I was staying. He narrates tales of
terrible torture, into the details of which I do not wish to go at
this stage.
On top of this I have received a communication from Dr.
Lohia's friends and they tell me that Dr. Lohia has gone through
torture himself. He is an able, cultured man who sacrificed a
position of ease and luxury for the sake of the cause of India's
independence. I know him well and, through him, also his father.
It is difficult to disbelieve all the accounts that have appeared
in the Press and the two incidents mentioned above. I suggest
that His Excellency goes deeper into the matter and not reject
the statements as an exaggeration undeserving of any attention. I
take comfort from the fact that in your letter of 1st November in
reply to mine of 10th October, you tell me that though His Ex-
cellency believes the story to be exaggerated, he is making further
investigations. I plead for investigation into all other such state-
ments and, if he proposes to do so, I am prepared to send you
such details as I possess about the two cases mentioned here and
others about which I may be able to speak with some confidence.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, p. 63
