457. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
Private
AS AT SABARMATI,
July 3, 1931
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your long letter of 17th June.
First about the Gallway incident. I have not the autobio-
graphy with me. But there is no conflict between the two state-
ments. The healthy rivalry between Europeans and Indians took
place during the day on our way to Chieveley camp which we
reached at night and immediately received orders from Col.
Gallway to remove Lieut. Roberts's remains. So you see, there
is no contradiction between the reference to the sultry day and
the removal of the remains at night. Lady Roberts is certainly
not the Field Marshal's wife, but the wife of Charles Roberts.
There undoubtedly you have got mixed up. The late Field
Marshal's wife never corresponded with me.
I have not seen the Times report of my article on the
Working Committee resolution. I hope that long before this
reaches you, you will have seen the full article and found your
doubts answered. My position is this: The general mass of the
population will never be members of legislatures but they will
affect the legislatures when they feel their power. They can do
so if there is adult suffrage. Exercise of the suffrage in favour
of those who will carry out their will will be one form of direct
action. But they may not have adult suffrage. They may not
be exercising any influence over the legislatures so far as the
constitutional position may be concerned, but if they have
imbibed the spirit of non-violence and suffering, i. e., satyagraha,
their influence on the legislatures will be more direct and more
effective than that exerted through adult suffrage, by simply
refusing to assist the Government in the shape of payment of
taxes or in various other ways. They can bring the existing
Government to book and either get their demands fulfilled or
bring it to a standstill. Is this not clear?
Now for the boycott. It is being constantly dinned into the
ears of the public that the boycott has ceased to be used as a
political weapon, i. e., for exerting political pressure but that it
is being now used as an effective economic weapon. There is a
statement reported to have been made by Jawaharlal appearing
in today's papers. I send you herewith a cutting from the
daily press. But even as an economic weapon it certainly re-
quires intensification. Just after the Settlement there was a lull,
that is to say, we were all purposely not doing anything to
egg the people on to picketing. All the Congress committees
were left alone even when we, members of the Working
Committee, knew that the provincial committees were not
keeping picketing up to the mark. When the aggressive form
ceased all the zest seemed to have disappeared and several
committees left off picketing in sullen discontent. This state of
things could not be permitted to continue, for if this laxity was
long overlooked the organization would become inefficient. What
is more, the Committee could not afford, through its own
negligence to see foreign cloth coming in and competing both
with khadi and indigenous mill cloth. A resolution therefore
was absolutely necessary to warn the people that because of the
Settlement they were not to neglect their duty of warning the
people against buying foreign cloth. I see nothing inconsistent
with ahimsa in this or with the terms of the Settlement. Even an
economic boycott requires strict vigilance, if the people are to
be weaned from a habit of practically a century. They have
to be repeatedly reminded that it is a bad habit. The test that
the boycott now is purely economic lies in this, that there is no
boycott of British cloth or British goods as such. That boycott
was most effectively used during the campaign frankly as a poli-
tical weapon and stopped as if by magic immediately the Settle-
ment was announced. This can be proved by producing conclusive
evidence that almost the day after the Settlement orders for
British machinery, British drugs and the like were despatched.
Have I made the position clear? I can assure you that there
is no desire on the part of any member of the Working Committee
to use the economic boycott as a political weapon. That it has
political consequences is not to be denied. The fact was before
both Lord Irwin and myself during our talks and he recognized
that it was inevitable. But you can examine the position in
this way also. Supposing that Lancashire withdrew its trade in
piece-goods from India which is after all 12%, boycott of foreign
cloth will still continue although the competitor will be chiefly
Japan. To complete the case I am sending you the correspon-
dence bearing on the question between the Central Government
and myself.
Much as I should like to have you by my side here, I would
not think of dragging you here from England. You are doing
great work there and I think you are in the right place. If I
do not come to England at all it might then be necessary for
you to come here if only for a short time. But this contingency
we need not discuss just now.
Love.
MOHAN
From a copy : Horace Alexander Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
