88. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LT.-GOVERNOR
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Box No. 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 16, 1905
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LT.-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
13th instant, No. LG 97/3, making certain enquiries about a letter addressed
by me to the Chief Secretary for Permits on the 1st day of September
current.
The writer of this letter has been in the Colony since 1883 with but
brief interruptions, and has been in very close touch with the Indian com-
munity whom he has had the honour to represent now for over twelve
years, and the first proof, therefore, that is respectfully submitted in sup-
port of the statement that there were over 15,000 British Indian male adults
resident in the Transvaal before War is the writer's own experience.
My Association further submits the following in support of the
statement:
1. In the year 1899, the British Agent submitted to His Majesty's
Government a report giving roughly the British population, and
the figures were published in the newspapers. To the best of the
writer's recollection as to the British Indians, the figures given
were 15,000.
2. In the year 1895, a petition was presented to His Majesty's Sec-
retary of State for the Colonies by British Indians in the Trans-
vaal which is published in a Blue-Book on the grievances of the
British Indians in South Africa. A rough estimate was made of
the British Indian population in the Transvaal at the time and,
in accordance with it, there were at least 5,000 adult male Indians,
but those who were in South Africa between 1895 and 1899 know
that the largest increase in the Indian population of the Trans-
vaal took place between 1895 and 1899. The increase was con-
sidered to be so alarming that the late President Kruger was urged
by some of the present anti-Indian agitators to take steps, but
happily, so far as Indian immigration was concerned, the late
President turned a deaf ear to any such suggestion. It was in
1896 that India was visited by the plague followed by two succes-
sive famines of extraordinary dimensions. The largest known
exodus from India took place during that time. The steamers
Courland, Naderi, Hooseni, and Crescent were specially run between
Bombay and South African ports, each having on board per
voyage over 400 Indians bound for South Africa. Most of these,
it was then a matter of common knowledge, found their way to
the Transvaal.
3. It was in the early part of 1897 that the Natal Immigration Act,
was passed. In the December of 1896, the Durban Demonstration
took place in connection with the Courland and the Naderi which
brought together over 800 passengers of whom in that month
alone 500 went to the Transvaal. Each of these steamers made
four trips per year, and, if they brought for the Transvaal with-
out allowing for domiciled Indians only 300 per trip, there would
be a yearly increase of 4,800 Indians between the four steamers
alone, not to take into consideration Indians brought from the
other parts of India by the Kings Line and the British Indian
Steam Navigation Co. The facts as to the number of passengers
per these steamers can easily be verified by reference to the steam-
ship companies or the Port Authorities in Natal.
The writer's opinion is supported by that of other British
Indians who are very old residents of the Transvaal.
4. As to the opposite view, if reference is made to the public state-
ments that have been made by what may be termed the anti-
Indian party, it is difficult to speak of its representations with
moderation. In almost every material particular, the allegations
made by the members of that party have been over and over
again challenged and even disproved, and yet they have not
scrupled to reiterate them and to inflame the prejudices of the
people against British Indians. To take only three instances.
Certain figures were given by them regarding the number of
traders in Pietersburg before War and after War. Both these
Statements have been challenged. Names of the persons trading
before War have been produced, and yet the original statement
has been reiterated. They have said that it was impossible for
British Indians before War to enter the Transvaal and not be
registered. My Association has no hesitation in saying that the
statement is entirely devoid of truth. Hardly one-third of the
people who entered this country were actually registered, and they
were only those who had to take out trade licences and even then
the number did not necessarily include partners. My Association
is in a position to prove from unimpeachable testimony that there
were British Indians in the Transvaal before War who never paid
1 Vide Vol. II, p. 154.
the registration fee. Some of them are well known and can be
identified by respectable European merchants.
The third statement that has been made is with reference to the alleged
Indian exodus to Potchefstroom from Natal. Those that have made this
statement can know nothing of the conditions of the working of the Natal
laws regarding indentured labourers, and the statement has been made
to the effect that it is men drawn from this class who have crowded into
Potchefstroom. The detractors of Indians have, so far as my Association
is aware, never yet succeeded in introducing any proof in support of the
many statements they have made, and have never taken into account the
great fact that it was Johannesburg which, before War, supported the
largest Indian population, and it is from Johannesburg that the Indians
have now radiated into other parts of the Colony. The trade in Johannes-
burg before War, so far as the Indians were concerned, as it was confined
to the Dutch and the Natives, was very fair. Both the Dutch and Native
trade at present stands at its lowest ebb. The result is that many traders
who found it impossible to eke out a living in Johannesburg have now
established in the different parts of the Transvaal. The Johannesburg
Location supported a large number of Indian landlords. These have not
only been impoverished, but have been obliged to leave Johannesburg and
go to other parts of the Colony. If the original condition of Johannesburg
was resumed and security of tenure re-assured to the British Indians which
they enjoyed before War, most of the Indian population, which is dispersed
over the different areas in the Colony, would again gravitate to Johannes-
burg and the anti-Indian gentlemen would have the satisfaction of knowing
that the Indians have certainly disappeared from the many townships.
My Association will be pleased, if an enquiry were to be held, to adduce
proof to verify every word of the statements made above. As the Chief Secre-
tary for Permits has forwarded my letter of the 1st September to His Excel-
lency for direction, may I venture to express the hope that what appeared
to my Association to be impossible rules, as to European references, will
be withdrawn without delay. While all kinds of unsupportable statements
are being made with reference to British Indians, innocent and honest men
have to suffer much inconvenience and loss without any fault of their own,
a hardship which they were never obliged to undergo when they were under
a flag not their own.
I have &C.,
ABDUL GANI,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: L. G. 92/2132: Letter No. 504
