414. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
August 17, 1933
DEAR COL. MARTIN,
With reference to our conversation of this morning, before I
can break my fast the following points require to be settled:
1. I should see Kakasaheb Kalelkar or Sjt. Anand Hingo-
rani before 12 o'clock today for handling manuscript and giving
instructions.
2. All the letters and newspapers in your possession should
be handed to me, subject to the condition mentioned in my
letter of 15th instant.
3. The notes you showed me bind me to the non-publication
of interviews in the Press. This is a physical impossibility as I
can have no control over persons who would see me. It is not
contemplated that I would only see those who would be
subject to my discipline. I would be seeing hot opponents, per-
haps more often, than friends.
4. The notes contemplate two visitors a day. I can never
conduct the movement if I am thus restricted. I have to see
visitors as they come if I am to influence them.
5. As a journalist of 29 years' standing I can say that res-
triction as to the sending of instructions to the Editor three
times per week is wholly unworkable, and it is not clear whether
the Editor or Editors are to see me personally or not.
6. The notes contemplate a limited number of letters to
other correspondents. I do not know what the Government have
in mind by the term 'limited'. I had to send, during the last
dispensation, on an average something like thirty letters a day.
7. There is no mention in the notes about letters. I take it
that it is an unintended omission and that I shall have all the
letters and newspapers, whether received by you or the Harijan
office, my work on them being strictly confined to untouchability.
You will now see what a gulf exists between my requirements
and the concessions the Government are prepared to grant. If
the Government would permit me to handle the tremendous
movement of anti-untouchability affecting millions of human
beings, they should give full effect to the Government of India
orders under the last dispensation. There was in them a frank
recognition of my submission and therefore a full response to it.
I miss it altogether in the notes. So far as I am aware I have
given no cause whatever for change of policy. If permission is
given as requested by me, I can give my absolute assurance that I
shall take no undue advantage of it, I shall confine myself strict-
ly to anti-untouchability work and shall endeavour to the best of
my ability to consult the convenience of the prison staff.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I take it that the convict-typist is also a shorthand typist, and
that, if everything is satisfactorily settled, I shall have the assistance
as before of Sjt. Mahadev Desai and Chhaganlal Joshi.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: G.N. 3905; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (14), Pt. V, pp. 105-
