134. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
May 6, 1933
CHI. MANI,
Like last time, this time too, I am permitted to send you a
letter every day during the fast and you too can write to me
daily. I may be unable to write or dictate a letter daily but
Mahadev will write and, if possible, get it signed by me. Every
such letter will be for both you and Mridula. This letter also
is being taken down by Mahadev.
Both of you are brave girls. I am sure you will not be un-
nerved. You need not worry at all on my account. I think that
I am fresher and stronger this time than I was at the time of the
previous fast. Raja strove hard with me. He is calm now and is
leaving today. But he will return in a few days' time. Vallabh-
bhai is bearing it all very calmly and has promised to Mahadev
that he will co-operate with me-maybe by keeping silent-
without entering into any argument. I like this attitude of his.
For a few days he carried his silence too far. Even the fountain
of his humour seemed to have dried up. But it has welled up
again.
The fast was absolutely necessary. I have no doubt that
this was the best time for it. I have thought about the matter
from every point of view and am fully convinced of the correct-
ness of my decision. The fast is not directed against anybody.
I do not even know what event pained me and precipitated the
fast. Many things had their felt or unfelt influence on me. The
point is that if the workers doing Harijan work under my guidance
are not perfectly sincere, the cause must be some impurity in
me. Moreover, the monster of untouchability is more frightful
than Ravana. The latter had only ten heads, but this one has
hundreds of them. They cannot all be cast off by any number
of organizations or any amount of money collected for the
purpose. It is not enough to secure rights for Harijans. What
is wanted is a change of heart among caste Hindus if they and
Harijans are to embrace one another as blood-brothers.
This
great spiritual task can be accomplished only if we spend all the
spiritual strength we possess. This is an ancient and well-trodden
path. The wonder is that I did not think of it before.
Remain calm both of you and contribute your share when
the time comes. A fast in sympathy with me is out of question.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 105-
