320. LETTER TO VICEROY
1 DARYAGANJ, DELHI,
March 4, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I write this letter in connection with the lands of civil resisters
sold in Gujarat in respect of revenue dues. Overworked as you are,
it is distressful to me to have to write to you on a matter which
may appear to be trivial. But I fear that on it hangs the success-
ful working of the settlement just made. With all the desire to give
the fullest effect to the settlement, Sardar Vallabhbhai tells me that
he will find it utterly impossible to implement the Congress obli-
gation of the settlement unless the lands can be restored to the right-
ful holders. I am well aware that as head of the Government of
India you cannot by reason of a previous undertaking intervene in
the matter, but as an Englishman interested in the successful work-
ing of a settlement built up by your patient and unwearied toil you
can perhaps exercise your influence to see justice done and thereby
assist its smooth working. Shrimati Gangabehn, whose name I have
already introduced to you in a previous communication and who
has been working in the taluk of Borsad in Kaira District, tells
me that the land in Ras, where or near which her social work was
being done, was sold to the Dharalas for a song, and that it was
bought by them at the instigation of the previous Mamlatdar
and in collusion with him. If there was proper enquiry I should
undertake to prove the alleged collusion. But I know that at the
present moment I must not, so far as possible, whisper a word about
the past. That all the lands sold were sold for a song will, I think,
be readily admitted. To say the least it will be conceded that it
was the height of unwisdom, on the part of local authorities, thus
practically to give away the lands.
I therefore ask your assistance so far as it can be given in sur-
mounting the difficulty. It is in the confidence that you will do all
that is possible to obtain the co-operation of the Bombay Govern-
ment in finding a solution which will restore peace that Sardar
Vallabhbhai and I can allow the settlement to go through.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
From a photostat: C.W. 9335. Courtesy: India Office Library
