84. LETTER TO GENERAL MANAGER, C. S. A. R.
[JOHANNESBURG,]
February 18, 1910
SIR,
In accordance with the promise made by Mr. Gandhi and myself
at the interview between us on Saturday last, I beg to enclose herewith
draft railway regulations. You will notice that the draft keeps the practice
hitherto observed as to the travelling of Asiatics, without making any
racial distinctions and thereby offering insult. In my humble opinion,
this draft can entirely replace the regulations which have been the sub-
ject-matter of this correspondence; but, if it is considered by the Railway
Board that these regulations are necessary so far as the Natives are con-
cerned, I venture to suggest that they may be repealed so far as they
are applicable to Asiatics.
If the draft herewith submitted is not considered suitable, I shall
be glad to receive your objections, and will endeavour to meet any
such by framing another draft. In the opinion of my Committee, the
matter is rather urgent, and it is felt that the regulations should be
amended without waiting for the establishment of the Union Govern-
ment.
My Committee gratefully appreciates the conciliatory manner in
which you have been good enough to carry on this correspondence,
and for the assurance given by you that no insult is intended by the
publication of the regulations. My Committee hopes that your assuran-
ces and the good spirit will be carried out in practice by making the
necessary amendment in the regulations.
DRAFT REGULATIONS
1. It shall be lawful for the General Manager to set apart different
compartments on trains for different races or classes, and the class or
race for which the compartments are so reserved shall be able to travel
only in such compartments and no other, and any person travelling in a
compartment other than the one reserved for his class shall be deemed
to have committed a breach of these regulations.
2. The pointing out by a guard or any other railway official to a
passenger of a reserved compartment shall be considered sufficient reser-
vation under the foregoing regulations.
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was signed by A. M. Cachalia.
2 Report not available
3. It shall be competent for the guard or the conductor or any
other railway official to remove passengers from one compartment to
another without giving any reason therefor.
4. It shall be competent for the station-master to refuse a first- or
second-class ticket to any passenger who may be, in his opinion, not
dressed in a decent or cleanly condition.
Indian Opinion, 26-2-1910
