241. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before October 26, 1907]
[THE EDITOR
THE TRANSVAAL LEADER
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
My Association is grateful to you for your temperate leaderette with
reference to alleged intimidation by Asiatic passive resisters. We can have
no hesitation in endorsing every word of what you have said against any
violence being used in the Indian movement. Our aim in connection
with the Asiatic Act has always been to secure redress by suffering
ourselves, not by imposing suffering on others.
The paragraph in your columns is evidently inspired. I have no
hesitation in denying the existence of a reign of terror, unless the very
strong feeling against the Act permeating the whole mass of Indians
in the Transvaal acts as a reign of terror among those who want to cut
themselves adrift from the community and take out certificates under the
Act, not because they like the process, but because they hold their pockets
to be superior to their honour. I admit the fact that several Asiatics who
had left their places of employment with the distinct intention of register-
ing decided not to do so on being accosted by the watchful pickets, who
used the effective argument of placing before the registrants the true
state of the Law and disabused their minds of the subtle inducements
that had been held out to them as a reward for registering. The public
can have no knowledge of the Herculean efforts being put forth by the
Government to induce the community to register. The pickets have
never used threats, and constant watch is being kept by the responsible
members of the community on the doings of the pickets.
The information about a Mahomedan priest being assaulted is,
unfortunately, true, but he was not assaulted by a number of Indians.
The facts are these: The priest in question is not an Indian, but a Malay.
We have in our midst a Dervish, who is a devout follower of the Prophet.
He passes all his time in one of the three mosques, and earns his bread,
whenever he thinks it worthwhile, by accepting the work of breaking
stones on one of the mines. He listens to no one, and is perhaps the most
independent-spirited man going in South Africa. Everyone who has
seen him and his simple life respects him. When he heard that the Malay
priest incited Indians, especially Indian Mahomedans, to violate the
sanctity of their solemn oath and to submit to the Law, he was enraged.
He deliberately walked to the Malay Mosque, met the priest, and entered
into an argument with him. He cited a text from the Koran to convince
the priest that he, of all the people, should have desisted, especially as
he was not an Indian, from interfering with Indian matters and from in-
ducing people to violate the Koranic precepts. Warm words followed,
and the unfortunate assault was the result.
To charge Indians with
responsibility in the matter would, you will admit, be strictly unfair.
Many of us have reasoned with the Dervish and have implored him to
restrain himself, but he recognises no intervention between himself and
his God. To him, needless to say, his home and the jailyard are one
and the same thing, and, when reasoned with, he said he was quite
willing to appear before the Court and justify his action.
As to the poisoning of the dog, the charge is wicked. I have made
very careful inquiry, and I can trace no connection between the poison-
ing and the registration of the master of the dog. Many dogs belonging
to Indians have of late been poisoned. It is generally believed that this is
done by thieves intending to avoid being detected by the barking of these
dogs. It will be terrible if every evil occurrence happening to an Indian
blackleg were to be debited to Indian passive resisters. No, Sir, we have
no desire to resort to questionable methods in order to compel obedience
to the wish of the majority of Indians on the part of the minority. How
can we who wish to be free as to our movements and, therefore, refuse
to submit to the Asiatic Act put restraint upon others who do not think
with us? Claiming independence and self-respect for ourselves, we would
be false to our ideal if we denied the same measure of independence to
others.
As to the Hindu priest in the reef town mentioned by your reporter,
there was certainly no fracas in Germiston. It is perfectly true that the
priest has interested himself, like every other Indian priest, whether Hindu
or Mahomedan in the Colony, in a question which affects the welfare
of the whole Indian community. No Indian prizing his religion can do
otherwise. Cannot a priest ask his congregation to look up to God rather
than to Mammon in a matter in which there is a choice between God
and Mammon?
[I am, etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION]
Indian Opinion, 26-10-1907
