375. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
JOHANNESBURG,
March 2, 1911
MY DEAR POLAK,
You will see from the enclosed my analysis of the Bill. The more
I consider the Bill, the more certain I feel that the Transvaal struggle
will end. The meaning I give to the first section is, I feel, the meaning
Smuts has intended to give it; but what a terrible thing for the Cape
and Natal. You will see from my letter to Ritch what I suggest should
be done for the Cape. I think the same steps might be taken, with the
necessary change, regarding Natal. I think that the Natal people
should immediately send a representation inquiring about the meaning
of the Bill as to the wives and minor children, as also as to the rights
of domicile. This should be done by wire, draft of which herewith. After
the reply is received, a representation should be sent to the Minister of
the Interior, and, failing a satisfactory reply, a petition to Parliament,
which will be presented through Sir David Hunter . Haggar's calum-
nies and other misrepresentations made at the time of the debate opened
by Neser should be answered by a public letter to the Prime Minister,
a copy of which should be posted to every Member of the Union
Parliament. I hope to draft the letter for your guidance, and send it
to you.
Yours sincerely,
1 Vide "Letter to R. Gregorowski", pp. 413-.
2 Vide "Letter to L. W. Ritch", pp. 415-.
3 "Natal Petition to Union Assembly", pp. 441-.
4 and 5 Members of Parliament of the Union of South Africa
6 No such letter appears to have been sent. In his speech, as chairman of a
mass meeting of Natal Indians, Dawad Mahomed said that the slanderous statement by
Haggar, that most of them were not Indians at all, but alien Asiatics, had been 'ade-
quately' answered by The Natal Mercury.
[Enclosure]
DRAFT
Committee Congress seen Immigration Restriction Bill. Before sub-
mitting its views to Government, Committee respectfully desire infor-
mation following points: In absence special protective clause as in pre-
sent Act, what are statute rights domicile or residence this Province
for British Indians, and under what section or how are rights of minor
children and wives lawfully resident Asiatics protected?
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5218
