534. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
March 31, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,
What a gift so early in the morning! But if even one mis-
take is not corrected immediately, it will lead to a succession of
others. All the same I will tolerate thousands of mistakes, but
I can never part with you. Even death at the hands of a bhakta
is preferable to salvation at the hands of those who have no love
for one. There is, therefore, no question of your leaving.
Now I will list your mistakes.
I don't blame Durga or Velanbehn at all. Ba has al-
ready made atonement; not by fasting but by confessing her lapse
to me with utter simplicity.
She thus made holier yesterday our
holy relationship of over fifty-five years.
But what did you do? Either your negligence or your
blind love for Durga let her do a wrong thing. And after-
wards when you came to know of my pain, you started a fast
without thinking. Fasting is no remedy for thoughtlessness or
wrong-thinking. The remedy lies in right-thinking. When I
came to know about your fast, I tried to dissuade you, but
to no avail. I advised you to think carefully instead of fasting.
You did not do that. You did not even try to understand my
point of view. Yesterday I asked you very tenderly whether
you had understood what I said. The reply you gave then was
not proper. Your behaviour was still worse.
Instead of at-
tending Maulana's speech, which it was your duty to do, you
went away to cry. And as a result you threw a silly poem
at me. Last night also you should have given some time to
Maulana, which you did not do. You did not, thus, fully avail
yourself of the opportunity of serving a Mussalman. Had my
words yesterday had their intended effect, you would have gone
today to Puri with a band of workers and would have shaken
up Puri. But perhaps I myself was not sufficiently serious,
otherwise I should have thought of this right in the beginning.
If your duty is as clear to you as daylight, I would even grant
a day's leave and also let you take along with you anybody
who might be ready to go. This may be done even today if
it is possible.
You say that you 'interpret' me, but may I ask to whom?
Is it not to Velanbehn?
Your poetic imagination sometimes blinds you to reality.
There is nothing but cowardice in your letter. If you decide
to leave me, will Pyarelal stay on? And if Pyarelal leaves, will
Sushila stay? Of what use to me is her extraordinary intelli-
gence? She has such intelligence that it sometimes pains me
to think that it will rust if she stays with me. Why does it
not occur to you that I could let all of them go if I let you
go? They will all run away. Lilavati will simply go mad. I
will suffer even that, if such be my lot. But I will never send
away you or anybody else. And yet how can I prevent any-
body from running away? Let this incident inspire poetry in
your heart. Correct your error if you see that you have
made one. If you cannot see it, ask me to explain it to you.
If you think that I have committed any error, correct me.
This is no time for crying or fasting. You should read less,
but think more. Study carefully all that has been done here.
You yourself should utilize Sushila's and Pyarelal's talents
and thus lighten the burden on you. Take work from Lilavati
too. This incident shows me that being crushed under the
weight of external activities, you think less. Thereby you will
be able to do much less by way of 'interpreting' me.
How much more shall I go on writing?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am not revising. I have finished the letter just now.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11594
