145. LETTER TO MRS. MADDOCK
POST ANDHERI,
March 14, 1924
DEAR MRS. MADDOCK2,
Here is a brief statement of my activities as per my promise :
(1) Removal of the curse of untouchability among the Hindus.
(2) The spread of hand-spinning and hand-weaving and the
advocacy of the use of hand-spun and hand-woven cloth to the
exclusion of all foreign cloth and even cloth woven in Indian mills.
(3) Advocacy of simple life and, therefore, of the avoidance
of intoxicating drinks and drugs.
1 The report of the interview concludes: "This subtle defence precluded
any discussion on a controversial subject . . . Gandhi was visibly tired . . . So
I wished my courteous informant speedy recovery to complete health, shook
hands, and went to ponder over this old new message of non-violence . . . "
2 Wife of Col. C. Maddock
(4) The establishment of unaided national schools both for
the purpose of weaning students from Government institutions as
a part of the Non-co-operation struggle, and of introducing edu-
cation, including industrial training, in keeping with the national
problems.
(5) The promotion of unity amongst Hindus, Mussulmans,
Christians, Parsees, Jews, etc.
I carry on these activities through two institutions. The first is
an Ashram near Ahmedabad established in 1916 where all those
who desire to work out these ideals are invited to join. Its expen-
ses are defrayed out of private contributions made by monied
friends who are interested in the activities named. It has at the
present moment nearly 100 inmates, both male and female, who
include several families from the so-called untouchable class. There
is a carding, spinning and weaving school and an ordinary literary
school attached to the Ashram. Simple agricultural work also is
done there, and an attempt is being made to grow our own
cotton.
The second institution is the National Congress which is a vast
political organization with a very simple but, in my opinion, perfect
constitution. This has adopted practically the whole of the fore-
going programme. It has branches in every part of India and has
thousands of members who elect representatives annually. Pay-
ment of 4 annas and acceptance of the Congress creed entitle an
adult male or female to the membership of the Congress and to
vote for the election of delegates. The Congress naturally has a
larger programme of work than the activities above-named, and
being a representative body, has no permanent programme, but can
change it from year to year. Its aim is the attainment of swara-
jya, that is, self-government, by peaceful and legitimate means.
For the last four years it has sought to attain its end by non-
violent non-co-operation with the Government.
My own motive is to put forth all my energy in an attempt to
save Indian, that is, ancient culture, from impending destruction by
modern, that is, Western culture being imposed upon India. The
essence of ancient culture is based upon the practice of the utmost
non-violence. Its motto is the good of all including every living
thing, whereas Western culture is frankly based upon violence. It,
therefore, does not respect all life and, in its progress onward, it has
not hesitated to resort to wholesale destruction of even human life.
Its motto is: Might is Right, and it is essentially individualistic. This
does not mean that there is nothing for India to learn from the
West, for in spite of the acceptance by the West of the Doctrine
of Might is Right, the human touch has not altogether disappeared
in the West. The relentless pursuit of a false ideal conceived as
truth has opened the eyes of numerous men in the West to the
falsity of that ideal. I would like India to copy that spirit of
search for the truth in the place of being satisfied with tradition
without question, but India can safely copy nothing before she
has come to her own and realized that her culture has a very im-
portant place in the universe and it must be defended at all
costs. The importation of Western culture by the British in India
has meant exploitation of her resources for the supposed benefit
of Great Britain. It has brought millions of people to the verge
of starvation, and it has almost emasculated a whole nation.
The foregoing programme is an attempt to prevent the impen-
ding ruin not by Western methods but by Indian methods, namely,
by internal reform and self-purification from the very bottom. To
remove the curse of untouchability is to do penance for the sin
committed by the Hindus of degrading a fifth of their own reli-
gionists. To remove the curse of intoxicating drinks and drugs not
only purifies the nation, but it also deprives an immoral system of
Government of an immoral source of revenue to the extent of near-
ly 25 crores of rupees. To revive hand-spinning and hand-weav-
ing brings back to millions of cottages of India their supple-
mentary industry, revives the old Indian art, removes the degrad-
ing pauperism and provides an automatic insurance against famine.
At the same time, it deprives Great Britain of the strongest incen-
tive for Indian exploitation, for if India can clothe herself without
importing foreign cloth and foreign machinery, the relations bet-
ween Great Britain and India become natural and almost idea-
listic. They take the form then of a voluntary partnership re-
sulting in mutual benefit and, probably, benefit to mankind in
general. Unity between the different religionists of India prevents
Great Britain from pursuing the immoral policy of Divide and
Rule, and the practice of non-violence in resisting exploitation
and degradation, if it becomes successful, is likely to serve as an
example for the whole world to copy.
In following out the programme, mistakes and miscalculations
have undoubtedly been made. Regrettable incidents have also
taken place, but I make bold to say that no movement in which
millions of people have taken part has yet taken place with so
little bloodshed or interruption of the ordinary activities of the
people.
I do not know whether I have succeeded in giving you what
you wanted. I have endeavoured to be as brief as it was possible.
Please tell Col. Maddock that it was not without grief that I
left the hospital. I shall always remember the tender care and
attention bestowed by him upon me. I appreciate the gift of his
portrait. My very best wishes will accompany you during your
voyage and stay at home. I shall prize a line from you or him
whenever you think of me and have the time for writing. The place
in which I am housed is most delightful. The sea is in front of me.
The bungalow is surrounded with the cocoanut palm. The nights
are very cool, and generally there is a gentle breeze all the day
long. Mr. Andrews and I take a walk along the beautiful sandy
beach in Juhu for about half an hour. I fancy that I shall gain
strength day by day.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
[PS.]
My permanent address is Sabarmati, near Ahmedabad.
MRS. MADDOCK
POONA
From a photostat: S.N. 8488
