66. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[YERAVDA JAIL,]
October 5, 1922
I have obtained Superintendent's permission to send this to
you.
In expressing my opinion about Ramdas's intended marriage,
I was hasty and yielded to blind affection-I repented after we
parted and saw how one who considered himself to be a careful
man could become thoughtless and blinded by affection.
I failed yesterday in my duty as father.
I feel that Ramdas would sin if he married before he knew his
ideal and had not found an occupation to his liking. He wishes,
and we all respect his wish, that he should marry not on the
strength of my position but on that of his own merits. Hence he
must now choose his own calling. That would help the parents
of the intended bride to come to a decision and the girl would
know where she has to go. Therefore, our first business-and
now the first business of all of you who are outside-is to help
Ramdas to come to a decision about his future.
If Ramdas wishes to continue his studies, he may do so. If
his father who is now old can study like a boy, Ramdas who is only
just entering upon his youth easily can. Or he may take up the
commercial life or find himself a place in the Ashram or the Ashram
Seminary or he may wish to join his brother Harilal. My strong
advice is that he should not think of marrying until he has tried
himself for one year in the calling of his choice.
For Ramdas to marry a girl belonging to rich parents, even
though she may have an excellent character, is to court unhappi-
ness for himself and his wife and her parents. The safest course
appears to me to find a virtuous girl in one of the poorest families.
He should not mind the time that may have to be devoted to the
search.
I was blindly affectionate to Mrs. Gandhi too. I feel that I
should do my duty by her if I continue to be 'butcher' to her.
Parents ought not for their own selves impede the progress or thwart
the wishes of their children. For the moment yesterday I en-
couraged Mrs. G[andhi] in her contrary intention. My advice to
her now is that she should swallow the bitter pill of separation
from Ramdas and that she should do with contentment. She
should bless Ramdas if he places himself under the care of so good
a soul as Rajagopalachari. I know that she will consult her own
good too by adopting my advice. She must feel happy in the
thought of having children who have a character to lose. It is not
proper to crave for their company for ever.
You have taken upon yourself the role of Devdas. You will
now realize what it means. You have to take the place of all the
children. May God help you. For me, I am trying to deserve
your wonderful affection.
Now for your religious difficulty. He who is altogether free
from impure thoughts has attained salvation. Their total destruc-
tion can be achieved only after severe austerity. There is only one
remedy for attaining the end: To match pure against impure
thoughts. This is possible only through God's grace. That is
attainable only by contemplating God the whole of our time
and by realizing that He is in us. I should not be baffled even
if the mind wanders and God's name is only on our lips. By
unwearied insistence what is on the lips will soon be enthroned
in the heart. Again, we must not allow any of our organs to be
acted upon by a vicious thought. He who allows them to be so
acted upon perishes. We must force our organs out of the
control of a wicked thought. I know that even at my age, if I
were to allow all my thoughts to rule my actions, I should be un-
done. At the same time, we must not fret about these evil thoughts.
Ours is but to persevere. The result is in the hands of God and
He will worry about it. Moreover, when an impure thought
haunts you, you will know that it is disloyalty to your wife. You
are an ideal husband. The thought of her must help you.
Ordinary remedies you know. Moderate eating and a single eye.
When the eye is inclined to go astray, you must be angry to the
point of plucking it out. Good books are the best company.
May God protect you from all harm.
SHETH JAMNALALJI BAJAJ
GHELABHAI MANSION
CHOWPATI
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 8010
