147. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 1, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
You tried to be brief but failed. I am sure you have omitted
something. To be brief means that you should say everything you
want to in as few words as possible. I will show you how to do
this when I have the time and the opportunity to do so.
It was not in anger that I wrote what I did about Burhanpur.
I was not happy about you or Kanchan going there. But know-
ing your limitation, I agreed unreservedly. After you had gone
there, I saw from your letters that your going there had been
fruitful. You made your family happy and you could also improve
things to some extent. Besides, there is certainly work to do in
the town. Hence, in order to see you become steady and have
the proper environment, I also suggested your taking up work
there. My intention of course is that you should stay on here and
1 & 2 Manubhai Pancholi and his wife
83
learn through experience. But even for doing that, you must
have equipoise and you must live in conformity with social norms.
If you do not do that, you will not mature. I, therefore, included
that also in my suggestions.
You may forgive Gopalrao and others, but you must know
their mistake. I saw sarcasm in Pandurang's letter. I did not
like the letter. Their explanation for all this lies chiefly in what
you two, perhaps four, namely, you and Kanchan, Chimanlal and
Shakaribehn, are by nature. These two women cannot be consi-
dered different from other women. Perhaps you do not know how
many of my plans came to nothing because of Ba's limitations.
I exercised as much strictness as I could. But the limitation would
always show itself. You may be sure it will be the same in this
case. I have explained the rule to you. If, after understanding
it, you come to the conclusion that you two should run the Ash-
ram, I would consent to your doing so. Even if you run it in a
way different from the way it is run at present, I would let you
do so. Or if you decide that the Ashram should be disbanded,
I would consent to that too. The correct and best thing would
be that all four of you should wake up now while carrying on
your present work, and do the best you can. You may seek from
me whatever help I can give you.
If Chimanlal also did not understand about Prahlad, ask me
when I have free time and when both are present; I will tell
you. Writing about it will make the letter too long.
I will see about the newspapers.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 5890. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah
