274. LETTER TO ANNIE BESANT
BOMBAY,
May 10, 1919
DEAR MRS. BESANT,
I thank you for your note. Dr. Subramaniam was not over-
persuaded, so far as I am aware, by anybody. He had published
his interview about satyagraha before he saw me. He took the
pledge of his own free will, saying that he had been all his life a
satyagrahi. I remember the occasion during your internment when
I met him at his bungalow; many of your followers were there and
they, one and all, accepted the plan that was unfolded by me be-
fore them. I understood then from them all that satyagraha had
your full approval, and that you had advised that it should be
conducted under my guidance.
It saddens me to see in your writings a new Mrs. Besant, and
not the old Mrs. Besant who in utter disregard of man-made laws,
whether social or political, stood for Truth against the whole
world. It is tragic to think that you should now turn back upon
your own teachings and accuse me of "leading young men of good
impulses to break their most solemn pledges". I cannot accept the
charge, but I would certainly advise everyone to break all the
pledges he might have taken if they are contrary to Truth. You
deprive a fellow-being of his or her human dignity when you
interpose between him and his conscience, an outsider, no matter
how high-placed in spirituality he may appear to be. Those of your
followers who obey the voice of conscience in preference even to
your own instructions are loyal to you as truly as Prahlad was to
his father. Surely, your past life is a striking demonstration of the
truth of my remark. Is not every reformer an avowed law-breaker?
But I do not want to strive with you. I shall continue to think
of the Mrs. Besant whom from my youth I had come to regard
as a great and living illustration of fearlessness, courage and truth.
You have written your note in grief. You do not know what
greater grief you have caused and are causing to those who know
your services to India and who love you for them.
Should you want to see me, I am at your service. I have not a
free hour today. I am free only after 10 p.m. I am free tomorrow
morning.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 6605
