242. LETTER TO A. CARTWRIGHT
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 27, 1908
DEAR MR. CARTWRIGHT,
Mr. Hosken very kindly showed me the Asiatic Voluntary Registration
Bill that General Smuts intends to bring in. I need hardly say that
it will never be accepted by the Indian community, if I know its temper
well. It indirectly puts voluntary registrants in the same category as
those who have accepted the Act. I draw your attention to the fact
that it takes no note of pre-war refugees, whether holding [£] Dutch
registration certificates or not. It rejects even the claims of those
who hold Peace Preservation Ordinance permits and have thus a right
to demand entry, and makes them liable to take out registration under
the Asiatic Act. The Bill is, to my mind, a wanton insult to the intelligence
of the Asiatics, whom it evidently assumes to be a lot of children who
can be pleased by a little bit of gilding on the pill.
I know that the Progressive Party has appointed a committee to
consider this Bill, and then to confer with General Smuts. This party,
therefore, evidently holds the trump cards. Will it play them in keeping
with the title it has arrogated to itself, or will it throw British Indians
overboard?
Although Sir Percy Fitzpatrick, Mr. Chaplin, and
Mr. Lindsay, as you are aware, at the meeting at which you were present,
admitted the justice of the contention that those who re-entered after
the late compromise and had the right to do so should be treated the
same as those who were in the Transvaal on that date, and that the
rights of pre-war residents should be recognized. Now the Bill before
me overrides all these things. It is a very subtle Bill, but it is also, I
hope you will allow me to use the term, a fraudulent Bill. It will enable
General Smuts to say that he does not take away the rights which he
contends are reserved by the Asiatic Act. Here lies the fraud because
he knows too well that Asiatics do not wish to receive any benefits under
that Act.
I am sending you a copy of a communication which I am addressing
to the chief members of the Progressive Party.
I am,
Yours truly,
ALBERT CARTWRIGHT, ESQ.
PRETORIA CLUB
PRETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4852
