22. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 17, 1908
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
SIR,
You will perhaps allow me to state that your persistent misrepresenta-
tion of the Indian standpoint appears now to be wilful rather than
unconscious. You state that I am "willing to accept any education test,
however severe, provided it is applied impartially to Europeans and
Asiatics". This is the exact reverse of what I have stated all along.
My contention is that there should be a general education test in law,
but that, in practice, it may be administered not impartially but
differentially. The law gives the Minister full discretion, to be used
by him as he chooses. If he does not possess the discretion, Indians
1 This appeared in Indian Opinion, 26-9-1908, under the title "Mr. Gandhi's Reply".
The Star had commented editorially as follows: ". . .we commend. . .this morning's
Times. . . .It finds that the weight of the evidence is on the side of the Colonial Secretary
and that the root of the present trouble lies in the endeavour of Mr. Gandhi. . .to secure
concessions. . .not contemplated by Mr. Smuts when he entered into the compact of
last January. . . .[Mr. Gandhi] is willing to accept any educational test, however severe,
provided it is applied impartially to Europeans and Asiatics. But he insists that those
admitted under the present or a new Immigration Restriction Act must be treated with
absolute 'equality'. If we make the educational test very severe, we run the risk of
excluding many Europeans. . .if we maintain the present standard and repeal the Asiatic
Act of 1907, we throw open the portals to countless Asiatics. . .There is no room for
compromise, especially [since] Mr. Gandhi scouts all idea of discriminatory legislation."
are quite willing that the discretion be given. This statement I have
made before the public and to your representatives not once but very
often. Nor, as you have stated in a previous leaderette, is there any
question of a subterfuge. Administrative inequality must always exist
so long as people who are not of the same grade live under the same
flag. All I claim is that the law should be no respecter of persons,
especially with regard to educated Indians. You cite the authority of
The Times, but, if you will pardon me saying so, The Times merely
trumpets what has been passed on to it by or on behalf of General
Smuts. The Times is not, at present, in possession of the full facts of
the case.
I emphatically deny that a new question is now being raised by
my countrymen. The following briefly are the facts: Before the war,
the immigration of Indians was free. After the conclusion of peace,
immigration generally was regulated under the Peace Preservation
Ordinance, under which new educated Asiatics were allowed to enter
the country. The Asiatic Act of 1907 simply provided for registration
of those who were entitled to reside in the country, but, according to
the admission made by General Smuts, did not regulate immigration.
The Immigrants' Restriction Act replaced the Peace Preservation
Ordinance, and laid down a general education test. The Asiatic
[Registration] Act was then dishonestly, without even mentioning it,
brought in to defraud Indians of their just rights, under sub-section
4 of section 2; but, as Indians have never accepted the Asiatic Act and
have always steadily, persistently, and amid untold suffering, demanded
its repeal, how can they be charged with having brought in a new point?
It was General Smuts who, in complete breach of his promise when
the time came for him to repeal the Act, offered repeal on four conditions
three of which he has, yielding to the force of passive resistance, and
finding his administration of the law paralyzed, withdrawn. The
fourth he does not withdraw, and, until that is granted, in the estimation
of British Indians and other Asiatics, he must stand guilty of the charge
of dishonesty.
You and, I am sorry to say, the Progressive leaders, who profess
to have Imperial interests at heart, and who profess to lead the party
1 The Star, replying to this later, wrote: "We emphatically repudiate the charge
that we have wilfully misrepresented either Mr. Gandhi or his compatriots. . . . Our
reply to the foregoing is that no regulation or ministerial decree can override the
express terms of an Act of Parliament. Laws are made to be enforced. If the Govern-
ment. . . .failed to enforce the provisions in this case, . . . it would be lending itself
to a species of dishonesty unworthy of statesmen." To this Gandhiji sent a rejoinder;
vide "Letter to The Star", pp. 54-.
2 Vide Vol. VIII, pp. 306- & 316-.
3 About the entry of educated Indians
of progress, are allied on the side of dishonesty. May I draw a parallel?
With reference to the Vereeniging Treaty, General Botha interpreted
the word "native" to include Asiatics. Lord Milner and Sir Richard
Solomon repudiated it, but they accepted the interpretation that General
Botha put upon it, and Asiatics are today debarred from the municipal
franchise because of such interpretation. General Botha, again, said
that his people were promised immediate self-government by Lord
Kitchener. In order that British honour might remain unstained,
in this instance also his understanding of the promise was accepted
by the Imperial Government. Is British honour or Colonial honour to
be measured differently in connection with the repeal of the Asiatic
Act and British Indians?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 17-9-1908
