207. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 10, 1908
[THE EDITOR
THE TRANSVAAL LEADER
SIR,]
You advise Asiatics to do nothing rash and to await develop-
ments regarding the renewal of the Asiatic struggle. It is, therefore,
with much regret that I have to draw your attention to a circular
letter addressed to the Town Clerks in the Transvaal, over the signature
1 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 342-.
2 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 351-.
3 This was in reply to the Leader's editorial of July 10, 1908, which was re-
produced in Indian Opinion, 18-7-1908, under the title "The Transvaal Trouble: How
Government Promises Are Fulfilled". The Leader had expressed the hope that the
Asiatics would not "take steps of a sensational nature in pursuance of their contention
with the Government" for that might put Parliament, then in session, in its "sternest
mood". Adverting to a comment on the situation by The Friend of Bloemfontein, the
Leader further said that the advice that the compromise should be redeemed could
be given "to both sides", but urged Asiatics to recognize that in no circumstances
would the Colony's Europeans open the door to fresh immigration.
8-23
of the Registrar of Asiatics, and dated as recently as the 7th instant,
which runs as follows:
I have the honour to inform you that it has been decided that Act No. 2
of 1907 is to remain on the Statute-book; consequently all Asiatics applying for
licences to trade must be required to produce a registration certificate issued
under the Act, or in the form of the voluntary certificate, a specimen of which
is attached, and to furnish a clear impression of their right-hand thumb for
examination in this Office. Any Asiatic who fails to carry out these requirements
is not entitled to the issue or renewal of any trading licence.
The thumb-impression should be forwarded as soon as possible to this
office, together with the name of the applicant, and the number of the registra-
tion certificate held by him.
You will notice that the circular states the decision of the Govern-
ment to retain Act 2 of 1907 on the Statute-book, and evidently to
legalize voluntary registration under it. If so, can Asiatics have any
patience, and can they have any trust in the promise, written or verbal,
of the Government? The circular, if it correctly sets forth the Govern-
ment's decision, is a tremendous eye-opener.
However, the mass
meeting advertised for the burning of registration certificates remains
postponed, and every Asiatic awaits publication of the Government's
declarations. The only reason for drawing public attention to the
circular which I have been able to secure is to show that, when Asiatics
take any irrevocable step, it will not be without the gravest provocation.
[Yours etc.,
M. K. GANDHI ]
Indian Opinion, 18-7-1908
