119. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
Monday [August 18, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I am glad the loan is about to be paid up. The calmer you are
in all your dealings, the better you will be and feel. This is a truism
but it is well to see it repeated by a friend in black and white. For
according to yesterday's verse, you have to stare lions and tigers in
the face in lonely mountains unmoved. That day may be far off but
a beginning must be made and the face set forwards. Dickson is friendly
to an extent only. He has to serve not two but three masters - you,
the company and himself. The order of service is, of course, the reverse.
If he can serve you after serving himself and the company, he will
certainly do so, equally certainly not otherwise. Let us realize this fully
and act accordingly. We must not expect the impossible from him.
135
The Doke memorial service may bring me to Johannesburg on
Sunday. I am awaiting a reply from Smuts too. I take it you are taking
an active part in alleviating the grief of the family. You will sign no
documents regarding the loan or anything else.
Of course it would be monstrous if you thanked [me] for anything
done there. Either it is your home equally with mine or it is not. Love
does not - must not - speak, never thank.
Mrs. Gandhi is getting on but slowly. She becomes in the same
proportion that I can become impersonal and therefore purely gentle
towards her, no matter how she behaves. If I consider her my own
specially and then become hot, she too becomes heated and both of
us suffer. How true that we are all in the same boat. One man springs
a leak and if we sit with folded hands, all must sink. Another who
knows repairs it and even the mad one who sprang the leak is
saved ! Why not ? Both did according to their lights.
Here is the 12th verse :
He does not wince even whilst he is going through severe
austerities; he is not pleased because he has delicate dishes spread
before him; he believes that a particle of dust and the riches of
the gods are all transformations of the same matter.
With love,
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
It was very cold here too during last week.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy
National
Archives of India
