490. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
September 13, 1938
CHI. MUNNALAL,
With regard to your previous letter, since you had said you
would be coming over I kept silent. The views that you have
expressed are correct. As long as you do not hear the inner
voice, you should come to no decision. You should, however,
try very hard to come to a definite decision.
I am not weak-minded in regard to my resolutions. My
reputation is just the opposite of that. But when I myself have a
doubt, a resolution made in the past cannot be regarded irrevo-
cable. Whatever I did here was in the nature of an experiment
and there are bound to be changes in an experiment. I had no
misgiving about my behaviour because it was the result of fifty
years of disciplined habit. I therefore felt that I should make no
distinction between Mataji and Parnerkar's mother.
I have
observed that my physical touch has some special effect on men
and women. Mataji had been deeply pained on my account. I
could remove her pain by putting my hand on her. I had
not been able to go to see Parnerkar's mother, but that is
not because I did not care for her. As the treatment was being
carried out under my supervision, I expressed my love for her by
putting my hand on her and made her feel at once that I had
not been indifferent to her.
Is there danger of my being pierced with Cupid's arrows
in my letting myself be massaged naked, or in a thousand naked
women bathing by my side when I am blind? I do feel afraid
of myself in letting the pure-minded Sushilabehn massage me. But
if I am lying blind-folded and those two are bathing, I would
feel no fear at all. By all means let those who are as minutely
scrupulous as I am make themselves perfectly blind and permit
some Rambha to bathe near them. But anybody who lets himself
be massaged is sure to be maligned. If he is sure of himself,
however, let him by all means copy my example. I think I
have replied to all your questions.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8565. Also C.W. 7040. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
