53. LETTER TO ABDUL KADIR
[JOHANNESBURG,]
August 10, 1905
DEAR MR. ABDUL KADIR,
I have not had the time up till now to write to you. Before coming
to business, I wish to write to thank Mrs. Abdul Kadir for the sandwiches
that she sent to me. What was asked for in jest came in very handy.
As you know, Mr. Omar and Mr. Dada Osman were with me, and we
all made our evening meal of them. Then again, there was an accident.
An engine had been derailed, and at midnight all the passengers had to
change trains. The result was that from midnight the train was running
three hours late. The meals were not, therefore, provided at the usual stat-
ions, and the sandwiches were appreciated under those circumstances, not
only by me, but by my other companions in the train, who, although
Europeans, liked them very much. So tasty they were. The basket, there-
fore, before it reached Johannesburg, was half empty. Once more, then,
I thank Mrs. Abdul Kadir for her kindness.
Mr. Abdul Gani has shown me the guarantee taken by the bank.
I think it is totally uncalled for. In my opinion the deed of dissolution
does not in the slightest degree affect the bank's security. I do not under-
stand the reason for altering the bond. However, seeing that all the trans-
fers have to be newly made, it does not much matter. I hope you will
hurry the matter forward. There should be no difficulty about taking
out Mr. Mahomed Ebrahim's name, because even if he does not consent,
the order of court will be quite enough. I understand that it is the desire
of all parties to advertise the dissolution in the Gazette. I think it is as
well. I, therefore, send a draft advertisement . If you approve of it,
it can be signed by all the five partners and advertised in the Gazette there,
the Gazette here, and a daily newspaper there and a daily newspaper
here. I enclose also draft letter to be written to your London agents.
I was pleased beyond measure at the extreme prudence and calmness
with which you approached the conferences we had there, and it is my
earnest hope and prayer that both the businesses may flourish and that
all of you may remain in perfect harmony. I would also ask you to be
extremely cautious about your undertakings, though in the long run the
future of South Africa is assured. We will have to go through yet worse
times, and those who realize this fact will come out best in the end. I
have no doubt that there is a great deal of business to be done, but a
very large measure of circumspection is necessary.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
MR. ABDUL KADIR
C/O MESSRS M. O. CAMOROODEEN & CO.
P. O. Box 186
DURBAN
Letter Book (1905): No. 912
