67. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 29, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your postcard. I will ask Devdas about Manilal's bill.
Panditji and Lakshmibehn came and saw me. Narmada also
was with them. I was pained to hear about Amina. I will write
to her. Read that letter and give it to her if you approve of
it. If I cannot write today, I will write later when I get time.
Meanwhile, manage as you think best. They told me about
Ramabehn also. I intend to write to her too. Show as much
love as you can. But human love must have some limit also, for
how can we know when love may become moha1? One's love,
therefore, should never be at the cost of one's duty, no matter
even if such conduct seems cruel. If anybody who looks at the
matter superficially were to believe that I am being cruel to . . .2,
I would not blame him. At present . . .3 is bound to think me
cruel. But what can I do? My regard for dharma will not let me
adopt any other course. What is true of me is also true of you.
You should, therefore, follow what seems to you to be your dharma
even at the risk of being accused of cruelty or inviting my criticism.
I got yesterday your letter about N. It proved that Vallabh-
bhai's interpretation was correct.
I am, therefore, making
preparations for sending her. I shall probably be able to send
her on Monday. Assuming that she will arrive on that day, send
a cart to the station. Probably Dr. Margarete Spiegel also will
accompany her. Even if I don't receive your consent about her,
I will assume it. At the [Ahmedabad] station they will get into
the metre gauge train which connects with the Gujarat Mail.
You should remember that both the ladies are to be trained for
Harijan work. You must strictly follow the rule that neither they
nor any other European whom we may admit should be per-
mitted to have any connection with the civil disobedience move-
ment. I am specially writing to the Government about those
two women. They and others who may join the Ashram should
strictly follow the Ashram rules and you should see that they
do so. If they do not observe the rules or become a source of
trouble to you, I don't at all intend that you should still let them
remain. If that happens, inform me immediately. The food
requirement of both is simple. I very much doubt if they will be able
to digest Jowar and bajri. You will have to provide fruit and milk to
both in fairly good quantities, otherwise they will not be able to keep
up their strength. N. does not include milk and ghee in her
diet at present. Both eat with relish thick wheat rotlas without
ghee or butter, nine inches in diameter and baked twice till they
are crisp and without ghee or butter. They eat these rotlas and
chew them without the help of any liquid. N. does not drink
milk or eat ghee at present. Her food is such rotlas, papaw, oranges,
and uncooked vegetables like cucumber, tomatoes, cabbage, carrots,
etc. She will, however, drink milk there if necessary. Her son
gets three pounds of milk daily. He also eats toasted rotli and
fruits. If we coax him very much, he eats a little uncooked vege-
table. He doesn't care for sweets at all, but greatly enjoys drink-
ing fresh unboiled milk. He eats every article one by one. I hope
nobody will spoil this child by teaching him to drink tea or coffee
or eat sweets. His energy is boundless. We have in the Ashram
other children who are as self-willed as he is, but he does not cling
to his mother all the time. He has produced on me the impres-
sion that he can live with anybody. It is very desirable that
nobody there should, out of false love, tempt him to eat unwhole-
some things. For the rest, we should trust to his and our fate.
I am sending N. there with great hopes. I have cherished
her like a daughter for the last three or four months. I have
preserved many of her letters. There is nothing in her life which
she wishes to hide. I have advised her to bury the memory of
all persons who had fallen under her spell. But she has assured
me that she does not wish to hide from me a single guilty action
or thought of hers, and thereby won my initial confidence. But
I can give no guarantee about her future conduct. I am acting
on the basis of complete trust in her. Give her suitable work
from time to time within her capacity. She has great ability. She
is extremely active and wants to do good. If she can reduce her-
self to a cypher, she will be able to do much. If she becomes
proud of her ability or her noble intentions or good work, she
will fall. For the present give her such manual work as she can do.
Make arrangements to help her to pick up Hindi quickly. Her
power of grasping is very good. She already knows a little Hindi.
Margarete is of a different type. She is 35 years old and,
therefore, her character is practically formed.
She is a woman
of great learning and is quick in learning things by heart, but she
is not very intelligent. She is obstinate, but her motives are pure.
I think her life has been blameless. She has great love for the
Ashram. But she has no sense of proportion when she speaks.
Ever since she has been here, she has been talking about the
Ashram in season and out of season. She has left the country and
come to India because of the movement in Germany against
her but she has no plan before her. I am sending N. there
willingly and with great joy.
I don't feel such joy in sending
Margarete, but we cannot turn her away. She has come merely
with the intention of living in the Ashram. What can we say to
her? She will of course do whatever work she is physically
capable of. She has been a teacher for some years and so you can
immediately give her the work of teaching English. She is eager
to do teaching. Even as a teacher, however, N. is more capable.
But since she is joining the Ashram to atone for her past life, I
feel slightly doubtful whether you should immediately give her such
work. If you do wish to give it, you may certainly do so.
No other instructions seem necessary.
I have become fairly frightened about Kusum. They are now
talking about tuberculosis of the intestines. I can put no faith
in these amateurs. I cannot guide you or Kusum very much
from here. At present you are her guardian for every thing. Kashi
cannot take any decision, and I am afraid Kusum is not fit now
to decide for herself. Even as her relation, therefore, you are
in the place of her father. Personally I think that, both from
the point of view of our ideals in the Ashram and from a practical
point of view, we should not think of taking Kusum somewhere
else. We should do whatever is possible in the Ashram itself. Carry
out without any hesitation whatever decision you come to, after
discussing the matter with Kusum and Kashi. I can make one
suggestion from here. Tell Talwalkar that he should now obtain
the opinion of some other doctor. He should have a joint consul-
tation with Haribhai and Kanuga and prescribe treatment accord-
ing to the opinion of all three of them. If he does not agree to
do this, have a talk with Dr. Kanuga and Dr. Haribhai and, with
Dr. Talwalkar's permission, get their advice and follow the treatment
which they suggest. If, after the experience that you have had
about Dr. Sharma, you think favourably of him and if he agrees,
put Kusum in his hands. If he agrees, however, he should not
leave the Ashram till Kusum begins to respond to his treatment.
My first suggestion is such as will meet the approval of practical
people. The second will not, but it is consistent with my attitude
in such matters. You probably remember that when Manu was
practically on death-bed, ignoring the advice of doctors I put
her under the treatment of "Ice Doctor". I have experimented
with such impractical treatments on many others, so I don't
hesitate to make the foregoing suggestion in this case. However,
since I am not on the spot, you should not attach any weight to
my opinion. You should decide independently. I will accept
any decision which you arrive at. I will have no objection at
all if you decide to cling to Dr. Talwalkar's treatment and trust
Kusum's life completely to him. I have no doubt at all about
his goodness of heart, nor about his careful attention. Only, he
has not been able to impress me by his methods of treatment and
other doctors also do not follow these. However, we are dealing
with the human body which is a thing as brittle as a glass bangle.
Its fate is not in the hands of any doctor, but rests on the will
of one Power alone, so that there is no harm in believing that
ultimately medical treatment is for our satisfaction only and makes
little difference to the result. Don't we, moreover, sing every
week ?-
Lukman on being asked, "How many days he had lived",
Wringing his hand sorrowfully answered, "A few".
And the Muslim world believes that there has been no hakim
in the world the equal of Lukman, but even he could not save
himself. If that is so, what can Talwalkar or other doctors do?
This part of the letter is positively not for Kusum. It is only
for you to think over. Even if Kashi and others read it, they
will unnecessarily become nervous and get frightened to death.
I have written such alarming things in the full confidence that
not a hair on your body will turn.
The two European ladies will hardly have any letters to
write. Dr. Spiegel will drop a postcard to her mother. N. is
not likely to have any person to whom she might want to write.
All the same, you should personally help them in all such matters.
BAPU
[PS.]
[Letters for ] Dr. Sharma, Keshu and Parnerkar enclosed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8367. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
