55. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
April 26, 1907
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. With reference to the Madressa, it is not
possible for us to give any independent opinion. How can we?
All we can do is to bring out the best points in the report, which
I have done. I have given a note on Al Islam also.
I suppose Apoo has asked for the money for the firm. I have
not said anything . . . because I wanted you to use your dis-
cretion.
I have telegraphed today saying that Kalyandas must prepare
to leave immediately. I have a peremptory letter from his father.
He should, therefore, go. You will perhaps read my letter to
Mr. West, wherein I have suggested that Maganlal should replace
Kalyandas. I am likely to be there before he leaves. All that I
have said before regarding him is applicable today also.
I have received all the cuttings mentioned by you. I am
sending under cover to you the Jaina. I want Harilal to read it
and make selections, but I recommend it for your perusal also.
It seems to me that it is a very ably edited paper. I have been
receiving it regularly for the last twelve months, and each cursory
glance through [it] made me think the more highly of it. You
will see the manner in which news are condensed and given in
its columns. I think that the language also is very good. I used
to send it to the Indian Public Library directly, but, this time,
there are so many things of importance in it that I send it for
Indian Opinion use first, and then, if it is not cut about, you can
send it to the library. Directions about taking some portions of
it are given in my letter to Harilal.
Do you want me to write to D. Ebrahim Ismail regarding
the fifty copies? For the present, as I have already suggested,
even at the risk of having a few copies left unsold, it will be better
to print extra copies, because one never knows when there will
be a good demand, which we ought to be in a position to meet.
I have already suggested to you that you should read the Islam
Gazette carefully, so that we may not duplicate the information.
I remind you again, because I put that paper, also, in [as] fairly
edited, though for condensation and choice of matter, it cannot
stand comparison with the Jaina.
I am glad both the babies and their mothers are progressing.
Please read my letter to Mr. West, wherein I have written
about inviting Omar Sheth. We should give him [a send-off] in
the same style as we had given Rustomji Sheth.
M. K. GANDHI
From the original: S.N. 4738
