199. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
December 1, 1941
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have your letter. It is certainly sad about Sita1, but you
need not get frightened. Such a thing could have happened here,
too, though of course there would be less danger here.
It is clear that you cannot leave. I think it is the duty of you
both to spend your lives there. You may bring up Sita there as best
as you can. If I brought her up, I would do so under my close per-
sonal supervision, as I did the four [brothers] and other [children].
I do not repent having done that. According to me, they have
lost nothing. If Harilal went to school, etc., you see the result.
We cannot see the weaknesses of barristers and degree-holders,
for we are overawed by them. In fact, there are many even
among barristers and doctors who, like Harilal, lead immoral lives
and are given to drinking. But they are big men, holding degrees,
and so their weaknesses are not noticed. And, moreover, I myself
condemned Harilal, and that also is one reason why he is on the
streets. It was my duty to denounce him, though I think "de-
nounce" is not the right word in this context. If, however, you are
not convinced of the correctness of my advice, and if you can
overcome your desire to keep Sita with you and she herself is willing,
you may send her over and she will be educated in the manner
you desire.
Devdas and Ramdas bring up their children as they
think best. You both have the same right. I can only advise you
as a friend. The right belongs to the parents alone, and it is their
moral duty, too, to bring up their children in the way they think
best.
Do ask Virji's son, too. You need not feel awkward about it.
You did well, of course, to explain to Sita a woman's function.
Instruction in regard to sex organs will do her nothing but good.
If the instruction is pure, the children will understand the right
function of the organs and will learn self-control. Everything will
depend on how the instruction is imparted. You yourself should
think over this matter.
Naraharibhai has written something.
Kishorelalbhai also will write to you and send you some useful
literature. Please do not get frightened.
I had Manilal's letter also. I have sent him a reply, too.
I am pained to read about Sorabji and Jalbhai. But that is
how the world goes on.
Everybody is well here. Ramdas's children are here for the
present. Nimu is arriving tomorrow with Sumi She had to under-
go an eye operation.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4925
