100. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL" 
JOHANNESBURG,
January 22, 1909
TO
THE EDITOR
SIR,
Perhaps you will allow me to pass a few comments upon your
leaderette and the remarks made upon what you are pleased to call
the "latest move" of the British Indian community. I will not go into
many side-issues that arise out of your remarks; but I venture to say
that either you do not understand the spirit of the struggle that my
countrymen have been carrying on, or you do not care to understand
it. The latest move is not intended to coerce European merchants
into taking action. Your interviewer received the replies to the questions
he asked. There are, therefore, many gaps to fill up. He took away
from me only one side of the question.
In the latest move, Indian merchants do not desire that a single
European merchant shall suffer. On the contrary, they have undertaken
voluntarily to suffer even on behalf of their creditors. In giving the
notice to his creditors, Mr. Cachalia has simply informed the creditors
of the danger in which the goods entrusted to his care have been placed
by the action of the Government—you will perhaps add by the action
of the British Indians as well. Mr. Cachalia presented to the meeting
of his creditors a balance-sheet of which any debtor would be proud,
and he made a statement before his creditors which I hold to be perfectly
honourable. He has shown not only 20s in the £ on paper, but he
has also stated that he does not desire to receive from his creditors a
clean discharge against the handing over of his stock to them, but he
added that he was willing, in the event of any loss being incurred on
these assets, to make good the loss to the creditors out of his future earnings,
if he is allowed to make any by the Government of the country of his
adoption.
Nor does the latest move consist in British Indian merchants simply
calling a meeting of their creditors, and associating them by force of
circumstances in their sufferings to some slight extent. All British
Indian merchants are not debtors of Europeans only; perhaps 50%
of Mr. Cachalia's creditors are Indian. In any case, British Indian
merchants may be divided as follows : (a) those who have European
as well as Indian creditors, (b) those who have European creditors
only, (c) those who have no creditors. All these three classes have
been advised to close down their businesses and dispose of their belongings.
You will therefore see that only to a small extent will British Indians
have to trouble their European creditors. The latest move, therefore,
is not a matter of any coercion at all. If you imply that European
creditors will now have to take greater interest in the question, I admit
the charge; but it only means that the sufferings of my countrymen
have again told. Passive resistance consists purely and simply in the
undergoing of every variety of suffering by passive resisters. To call
this defiance is a prostitution of terms; and how can the surrendering
of all their belongings, including their profits, by British Indian mer-
chants, the consequent pecuniary loss, and the acceptance of voluntary
poverty be called a degeneration!
You have also remarked upon picketing, and called it intimidation.
Picketing, in the case of the Indians, will deserve to be called intimidation,
when the missionary efforts of the Salvation Army and other such
philanthropic bodies merit the term of open defiance, coercion and
intimidation.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 23-1-1909
