276. LETTER TO UNDER SECRETARY FOR COLONIES
[LONDON,]
September 20, 1909
SIR,
A letter was received addressed to my colleague, Mr. Amod Bayat,
in his absence, from the Natal Immigration Restriction Department
in connection with his application for a temporary visiting pass for a
priest to take charge of the Mosque in Pietermaritzburg and of a
Madressa. This application was made on behalf of and in the name of
the whole of the Mohammedan congregation in Pietermaritzburg. I
beg to enclose herewith copy of the letter above referred to.
I venture to think that the Earl of Crewe will be able to enter into
the feelings of British Indian Mohammedans who, for the purpose of
earning an honest livelihood, have settled in that Colony. My col-
leagues and I consider the letter of the Immigration Restriction Depart-
ment to be highly offensive to our feelings as men, as British subjects
and last but not least, as Mohammedans. A special assurance was
given to the Immigration Officer that this priest was required solely for
religious purposes and that he would not in any way compete in trade
or any other business.
That the community should have to make Herculean efforts to
have a simple application like the above granted, and that it should be
granted in a manner so offensive to it, and that in a matter in no way
touching the economic policy of the Colony, only shows under what
trying, humiliating and difficult circumstances British Indians have to
exist in Natal. Why a visiting pass should be granted for only a quarter,
renewable quarterly and should carry with it a penalty of twenty shil-
lings each time that it is renewed, passes comprehension. A policy such
as this, in the humble opinion of the deputation, can only be considered
as wantonly cruel. It puts an undue strain upon the patience of the
Indian community and, whilst the deputation is still here, I venture to
request very serious and earnest consideration by the Earl of Crewe of
the anomalous position British Indians occupy in Natal. We consider
that a position such as this, intolerable as it is, cannot and ought not to
be prolonged with safety to the Empire to which it has hitherto been the
pride of British Indians to belong. We would be unjust to ourselves, to
the trust that is reposed in us by the community and to the Empire, if
we did not assure His Lordship that the humiliating treatment in
Natal is corroding the hearts of British Indians, and it is difficult for us
to imagine all the consequences that may follow, when it has reached,
as it may any day reach, the breaking point.
I have written with the approval of my co-delegates somewhat
strongly, but no more strongly than the occasion requires.
I have, etc.,
M. C. ANGLIA
Colonial Office Records: 179/255
