220. LETTER TO MARSHALL CAMPBELL
110, FIELD STREET,
DURBAN,
December 26, 1913
DEAR MR. MARSHALL CAMPBELL 1 ,
I learnt only two or three days ago that you had returned
from England. Will you allow me to tell you how deeply con-
cerned I was when I learnt that your men were among the first
to strike on the coast? At an important meeting, when I was
actually asked why I would not advocate a strike on the sugar
plantations also, I replied that we were endeavouring to confine
the area to the collieries only, in the hope that the strike on the
collieries would be a sufficient demonstration to secure relief.
Whilst I was at Newcastle organizing relief for the collieries'
men who had come out, I was asked by my co-workers in Durban
what answer to give to the coastal Indians who wanted to join
the movement, and I emphatically told them that the time was
not ripe for them to do so. Later, too, when I was again approach-
ed, I made the same statement and one of my last letters before
my arrest was that, as we were so much indebted to you for your
efforts to bring about the repeal of the £3 tax legislation, your men
should be the last to be called out; but I am absolutely certain
that after my arrest the workers found it impossible to control the
men and the movement became not only spontaneous, but it assum-
ed gigantic proportions. I would like you to enter into our feel-
ings. Had I been free and assisted in calling out the men, I must
freely admit that I would have certainly endeavoured to call
out your men also; but, as I have already stated, yours would have
been the last estate.
As you know, in this struggle for honour and self-respect,
and for the relief of the distress of my dumb and helpless country-
men, the indentured Indians, it was not possible for us to consi-
der or confine the extent of our sufferings. In this struggle we have
not hesitated to invite our own women and children to suffer
and lose their all, and we could not very well be expected to
consider the interests of individual friends and sympathisers. In
all our struggles of this nature the innocent as well as the
guilty suffer. I hope, therefore, that neither my countrymen nor
I have forfeited the valuable co-operation and sympathy which
you have always extended. I may state that I am just now
carrying on delicate negotiations with General Smuts, in spite
of his rejection of our prayer, and if you have the leisure and
could interest yourself in the negotiations, and if you would
appoint a time and place, I would come over and discuss the situa-
tion.
Both Messrs Kallenbach and Polak, who have pleasant recol-
lections of the luncheon you gave in honour of Mr. Gokhale,
associate themselves in the sentiments I have expressed.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
THE HON. MARSHALL CAMPBELL
MOUNT EDGECOMBE
The Natal Mercury, 5-1-1914
