216. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
December 7, 1928
MY DEAR BHAI,
I have your letter as also the contribution to the Maganlal
Memorial. I do not know what other object to commend to your
attention. There is of course the untouchability work and there is
women'[s] work and there is the general national education work.
There is tannery in terms of cow-protection, Hindi propaganda,
agricultural improvement; these are the spending departments apart
from the activities that can be properly called political. For me
the foregoing constructive activities are an integral part of solid
political work. The other, that is, the destructive type is absolutely
useful and necessary, but it takes up the least part of my time.
What you tell me about Leon does surprise me. With the
strictly abstemious life free of excitement that Millie lived when
she was bearing Waldo and Leon and the hygienic and natural
upbringing that the two boys had, I cannot understand the pre-
mature death of Waldo and the trouble with Leon. I suppose that
the deadly poisonous atmosphere of London is responsible for
shattering even such splendid constitutions as those of your boys.
I am glad that Leon has recovered from the serious part of the
disease and I hope that he will regain his hearing completely. How
I wish it was possible to give Leon an open air life instead of the
wretched solicitor's desk.
I am glad you were successful about British Guiana.
The model of the Welsh spinning-wheel had not arrived when
I acknowledged it. It did arrive safely for which many thanks.
I have at the Ashram a full wheel of that type. It was sent by
some German friend.
The calf incident has provided me with much instruction and
an equal amount of amusement. It has thrown on me a tremen-
dous amount of work in that I have to go through dozens of
letters or rather essays on ahimsa.
The majority of which were
not in ahimsa but himsa tone. I do not know that I ever held
a different view from the one I have now expressed though I had
not as clear a perception of it as I seem to have now. You may
not remember that when West brought to me a cat whose head
was full of maggots and was living in tortures, I endorsed his
suggestion that the poor animal's life should be ended by drown-
ing and it was done immediately. And at the Ashram too I
allowed Maganlal to destroy rabid dogs.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 15108
