198. LETTER TO S. R. HIGNELL
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
July 27, 1919
DEAR MR. HIGNELL,
As you are aware, I am supervising and controlling the po-
licy of Young India by the courtesy of its syndicate. I have seen
a confidential notice dated the 23rd instant served upon Young
India as on other newspapers. It runs as follows
I shall see to it that the desire of the Government of India
is observed by Young India to the fullest extent.
But the notice gives rise to disturbing reflections which I
would like to lay before His Excellency. Why is there this
hypersensitiveness regarding news about Turkey? Why should
the terms of peace with Turkey, if they are honourable, cause
the slightest excitement in India? I was further disturbed as I
came upon the letter addressed to the Prime Minister by in-
fluential Mahomedans at present residing in London. Among
the signatories I notice H. H. the Aga Khan, Chief of Bom-
bay, Ex-Justice Ameer Ali, Sir Abbas Ali Baig and others. I
have no doubt H. E. has seen that very weighty communica-
tion "on the subject of the threatened dismemberment of Tur-
key and on the grave situation of anxiety and uneasiness that
this report has created among the Mahomedans", which the
signatories go on to say will become aggravated if the design
attributed to the Peace Conference is carried into effect.
I have said I was disturbed, because I am daily receiving
communications or seeing Mahomedan friends who tell me that
they are going to be sold. I have reassured them that H. E.
is straining every nerve to place the correct view before His
Majesty's ministers and that there is no occasion for them to
distrust the latter. They have received my assurances with
incredulity. I feel that I ought to place the very serious posi-
tion before H. E. Is it not possible to make some definite re-
assuring pronouncement? If the worst fears of the Mahomedans
are realized, there can only be an armed peace in India, not
a real peace. I am sure that no Reforms, however generously
granted, will ever reconcile the Mahomedans to any dismember-
ment of Turkey or an encroachment upon their holy places. I
know that all these matters cannot be out of H. E.'s mind, but
considering myself as I do to be a well-wisher of the Empire I
should be failing in my duty if I did not bring to H. E.'s notice
serious matters that come within my knowledge. May I hope
that if it is at all possible a statement will be made regarding
Turkish matters?
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 6777
