13. LETTER TO P. S. TO LT.-GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
BOX 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 11, 1903
TO
PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
(1) The Committee of the Association ventures respectfully
to approach His Excellency regarding the Government Notice No.
356 of 1903 published in the newspapers.
(2) It appears to be in reply to the various matters submitted
to His Excellency by the deputation that waited on him at Jo-
hannesburg on the 12th February last. It has filled the Indian
community with sorrow and alarm.
(3) His Excellency was pleased to assure the deputation that
as soon as the enlarged Legislative Council was formed, sui-
table legislation replacing the old anti-Asiatic legislation would
be introduced. The Notice in question would appear to disap-
point the hopes based on the above assurance.
(4) His Excellency has been pleased to order licences to be
renewed for the current quarter to all the Indian traders who,
though they were not trading on the outbreak of hostilities, were
granted licences last year. The Notice is silent as to whether the
renewals will be continued or not. The matter is of such serious
importance that, my Committee submits, a definite pronouncement
is necessary.
(5) His Excellency was pleased to say to the deputation that
if any officers had refused transfers of licences, either for other
places in the same town, or to other persons, he would see that
relief was granted. Contrary to my Committee's expectations,
therefore, the statement that no transfers of licences would be
granted has come as a great shock. And the publicity thereof is
likely to ruin many Indian merchants, unless relief is soon granted.
For landlords will not be slow to take advantage of the Notice
and to raise rents of premises occupied by Indian merchants to a
prohibitive extent. If the Government would fully respect vested
interests, transfers, in my Committee's humble opinion, are
absolutely necessary.
(6) The last clause of the Notice, while it is no doubt intended
to confer benefit on the Indian community, impliedly casts a slur
on the great race to which we belong, in that it assumes every
Indian to be unfit to inhabit civilized townships unless he proves
to the contrary. My Committee with the greatest deference sub-
mits that, barring popular prejudice born of trade jealousy, the
whole of the evidence that could be collected in South Africa,
would go to show that British Indians have everywhere been
found to be amenable to the general sanitary laws of the place
of their domicile. Only a few weeks ago, the Sanitary Inspector
of Johannesburg reported that he had no fault to find with the
manner in which the dwellings of Indians were kept in Market
Street. My Committee would gladly co-operate with the Govern-
ment in promoting a voluntary settlement of the poorer class of
Indians in localities where suitable dwellings can be procured for
cheaper rents. But my Committee ventures respectfully to protest
against a compulsory removal to Locations or Bazaars-a principle
against which Her Late Majesty's Government fought strenuously,
when it was sought to be established by the Boer Government.
My Committee therefore ventures to hope that His Excel-
lency will be pleased to grant relief in the following matters:
(a) Whether an early alteration in existing anti-Indian
laws is contemplated on the enlarged Legislative
Council being formed.
(b) Whether the renewal will be granted in the cases
mentioned in paragraph (4) hereof.
(c)
Whether transfers to places or persons will be authorized.
(d) Whether the principle of compulsory segregation will
be removed.
If further discussion of the above points is desired by His
Excellency, a small deputation will wait on His Excellency.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives: LG. 92/2132 Asiatics. 1902-1906
