443. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 12, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I have your letter. It is enough that I have cautioned you.
Your belief that I do not read your letters carefully is not correct.
I had fully understood what you had said. Such cock-sureness
is itself a sign of pride. The pride shows in your language.
This does not mean that I want you to hide your thoughts or
express them in carefully chosen words. I like you to write as
you feel. According to me it is your virtue that you let me see
you as you are both inwardly and outwardly. If you were to
write with unnatural self-control, I would be helpless and unable
to advise or admonish you.
I cannot teach you to become humble as a dust particle.
If one understands what God is, one naturally feels like that.
That understanding will come to you in its own time.
Nor do I mean that you do not have to endure many things
from others. But the fact that you can wipe out all that in a
moment makes me unhappy.
You believe that an atmosphere of prejudice against you
has been created around me. You are mistaken in this. Sardar
is certainly not against you. Do not take his humour as a sign
of his being against you. I do not at all feel that Mahadev
is against you either. What Chhaganlal has said against you is
nothing new. He knows your worth, but says that till you can
control your tongue you should be entrusted with no responsi-
bility. This is his old complaint. You should know that I rarely
talk with my three companions. There is, except for a little jok-
ing at meal times or during walks, no time for any discussion.
We rarely talk about anybody unless there is an occasion to do
so. With all my work, I never feel in a mood for talking about
other things, nor could I waste my time in idle discussions. I
have hardly been able to discuss even the painful episode of. . .1
and . . .2. I have contented myself with the briefest exchange of
views. There is no atmosphere of prejudice against you around
me, nor is there any such prejudice in my mind. If I admonish
you rather harshly, it is because I regard you as my daughter
and want to see you perfect. Why, then, do you feel hurt by
my criticism? You may accept such of it as you think worth
accepting and forget the rest. For it is perfectly possible that
my criticism may be based on ignorance and that I may not
have correctly understood what you said.
It is quite true that different people may see the same thing
differently. We daily observe that the same energy or strength
is used in different ways.
I do feel that no woman should be asked by others to do
any routine work during her menses. Nobody can know when
she may be having a pain. It would be best not to burden a
woman with any work during such a period. She may do of her
own free will whatever work she feels inclined to do. Some
women feel nothing during menstruation and go on doing their
work as usual. Some others feel unbearable pain. Some don't
feel any pain, but can do no physical work. A woman who
spends the period in the right manner gains fresh energy every
month. Those three or four days are for getting back lost strength,
and for that the woman should be left free from all responsibility.
She should be free to lie down if she wants to. Some ignorant
women do not lay aside their hectic domestic work even during
that period, not knowing the harm which they do themselves.
They should be properly advised. On the whole, therefore, I like
Lakshmidas's suggestion.
What you say about Kisan is possible. I was very glad to
learn that she had recovered. She seems to have waited for my
reply to her letter. But I do not remember having not replied
to any of her letters.
I have already written to you about your slivers.
You will not lose weight by living on unboiled milk. If
you eat boiled vegetables once a day, I am sure you will benefit.
Probably your throat needs them; I think it does unboiled milk.
Why not try?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10336. Also C.W. 6776. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
