456. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 22, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
After many weeks I take up the pen to write Ashram letters
again. The batch I sent you last I knew was held up and so
was the batch from the Ashram. In the circumstances, I did not
want to write. The way now seems to be fairly clear though I
have not yet got all the weekly letters and I know that some have
been withheld. They are from children. I am trying to secure
them. I must have some reminders now and then at least of
prison life.
No visits can be entertained so long as the difficulty remains,
as it does, unremoved. If visits cannot be had on honourable
terms, we must be content with writing letters if they can be
honourably continued. If, therefore, you do not hear from me
regularly, know that I am a prisoner. If I am really ill, walls
will speak. The authorities will themselves proclaim it as they
did last time and you could always inquire from them whenever
you hear rumours, and I expect they will promptly give you the
information. But I am hoping that there will be plain sailing so
far as letter-writing is concerned. Just at present there is nothing
wrong with me save for a trifling constipation. There is no cause
for any anxiety whatsoever.
I have your latest letter, i.e., of the 9th instant. Nothing since.
The instructions you give about the bow are quite good and
quite enough. Yet I have hung it up the wrong way up but it
has worked with perfect smoothness. The bow itself has not requir-
ed any attention. I have finished carding all the cotton I had.
The gut has not given in at all as yet. I used not neem leaves but
leaves of some other tree resembling the tamarind. They are
quite serviceable. You may send two pounds of cotton per anyone
who may be going to Poona. There is no hurry. I have slivers
enough to last till 15th July at least. I need not touch the bow
till then. When I do, I shall rearrange the apparatus in accordance
with your instructions.
About adjusting the wheel on the spindle too I understand.
But here again nature has been kind to me. I adjusted the
438
wheel in my own way and it has remained quite fixed. If there
is trouble I shall try your prescription.
I note all you say about your own work. You shall act just
as God leads you and your strength permits. May God bless
you. More from the general letter.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5398. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9632
