680. LETTER TO PARAMANAND K. KAPADIA
ASHRAM,
October 13, 1928
BHAISHRI PARAMANAND,
I got your letter only yesterday. All your letters are good.
They are well reasoned and are never discourteous. There can,
therefore, be no question of impropriety in them. However, your
letters do have one defect. They are too long for me. I have
thought about most of what you say, and I would therefore
grasp your point even if you put it concisely, and if I did not
understand I would ask. This preface was prompted by your
letter, as long as a pamphlet, placed before me by Kakasaheb
nearly fifteen days ago. I have kept it in my file, so I see it
every day, but being much too long it remains unanswered
for want of time. Even this I do not say as criticism of you
but only as an explanation of my having missed reading your
previous letter. Now the reply to your letter.
You must have observed that I give new meaning to old
words or enlarge their old meanings. I do not do that arbitrarily
or to suit my purpose, but because I think it right to do so.
The words of poets are inexhaustible in their meaning. The
word kavi originally meant an enlightened person. The perfectly
enlightened person is the perfect poet. If, therefore, I do not draw
the right meaning of old words or sayings, I would have to
waste my energy in starting a new religion and would also be
guilty of killing the souls of those words. I have realized that
even words have souls. If, therefore, you wish, you can compel
me to admit that I may be giving a new meaning to the word
'ahimsa'. It seems to me an exaggeration to describe 'ahimsa'
as the supreme dharma in the sense you give to the word. But
I have never quarrelled over the meaning of words. Hence if
my purpose can be served without the word 'ahimsa', I will
certainly give up its use.
Even at the time of the killing [of the calf] the risk was
indeed there that people would draw wrong conclusions from my
action. But I felt that the discernment of the true meaning of
ahimsa had become so weak that I must do what I did even
at the risk. And how could I hide having done something when
the occasion required otherwise?
As for the question about the daughter I would only say I
would not kill her thinking that I would otherwise commit a
sin, but I would kill her if I thought that she would ask for
the gift of death if she could speak. I do not at all subscribe
to the belief that under no circumstance is a person willing to
give up his or her life. I smell cowardice in it and it is against
the experience of many people.
If man is indeed so much at-
tached to life, he can make no progress. How then can he ever
attain moksha? I have seen in innumerable cases that such at-
tachment is very much less in other countries.
As for the nuisance of the monkeys I see that I would
again have to quarrel about the meaning of 'ahimsa'. May I
leave that discussion? How about keeping the question for a full
discussion some time in future when we meet? I have much to
say about the three principles you have put forward. If I get
the time I will discuss the contents of your letter in Navajivan.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 11595
