387. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,
May 27, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,
The occasion for writing this letter is supplied by your capital
letter of the 17th instant to Maganlal of which he has sent me a
copy.
Your suggestions are all perfect, if the premises can be ac-
cepted by us. Probably Maganlal has not even thought of what
I am about to tell you; though I shouldn't be surprised if he has
also thought of the same thing, for I think that he has assimilated
the inwardness of the spinning movement. What I want to state
is this: the movement is bound to fail if we expect to succeed
by adopting the same methods, or very nearly the same methods
with necessary adaptations, as the adversary, if such a term can
be properly used under a plan of life which admits of no enemies.
In my opinion, we have to devise other ways of making the move-
ment a living and universal force at least so far as India is con-
cerned. The adversary believes in the latest appliances and there-
fore is bound to adopt the methods of those who are adepts in
using those appliances; but in the spinning movement, modern
appliances are largely discarded and the few that are retained are
used in a different way. Typewriters, shorthand assistance and the
like are taken in our movement as a temporary measure.
Immediately one goes to the villages, these become a hindrance
rather than a help. If the movement has to depend upon first-
class stenography, it will fail before long. For, it cannot make
any headway under those conditions beyond the cities. It can-
not succeed even if it has to depend upon the English language
for its spread. And so you find that at the Ashram, in the
Association office and even here we are managing with most in-
different stenography. Even if we advertised, we shall probably
not get the best stenographer, because he will know that there is
room only for half a dozen stenographers in the movement, and
then we shall have to pay not 100 or 125, which is the most I
think that is being paid, but we should have to pay anything
between 200 and 400 for getting the assistance such as you have
in mind. I should quite agree with you if you argue that even
that salary would be economy even if only one man has to be
obtained. Experience, however, shows that it is not possible to
retain the services of such a man unless you are prepared to allow
him to become the master and to dictate his own terms in every
respect. Thus it would be useless to have an able stenographer
who has no faith in the movement, who would disdain to wear
khadi and who would require polished furniture before he will
settle down to work. The spinning movement, so far as I can
see, will never afford the high wages that are demanded by good
men in such a line of business. Do you know that if in khadi
service we offer high wages even to one man, there is immediately
and naturally a ferment
throughout
the
rank and file
and they would all begin to compare their low wages to
the high wages given even to one single man? The pro-
per working of the spinning movement is still being evolved. It
is in a state of flux, and it will be some time before it can be
said to be stabilized. It is a movement which has to grow from
within. It is a movement which requires a fair measure of con-
tinuous sacrifice from those who have become accustomed to city
life. The class of men and women required for the movement
have got to be trained and brought up. They cannot therefore
be had by advertising. The reason why we have not got efficient
stenography is because no endeavour has been made to train
stenographers. It is quite possible for instance to make of Chhagan-
lal, Mahadev, Krishnadas, Pyarelal and many others whom I
can name first-class stenographers. But it was considered not
worthwhile doing so. It would have been like throwing away
a rupee for a pice, and so we are managing with fourth-rate
stenographers hoping that if they assimilate the spirit of the
movement they will distinguish themselves in the work they have
undertaken by coming up to the highest level. I have entered into
this elaborate argument-very badly expressed because it is for the
first time that I am reducing to writing this thought about the
movement-because I am anxious that you who are saturated with
the spirit of the spinning movement should understand all that is
at the back of my mind and then give me the benefit of your
criticism. If I have not expressed myself clearly, as I am afraid
I have not, do not please hesitate to ask me for further explanation
and by an interchange of a few letters, probably, I shall be able
to express myself more clearly than I have done. But of course
apart from what I have said above, there is much to be said for
your view.
Young India and Navajivan are not all I want them to be.
There are reasons for it into which however I need not enter just
now. Some are avoidable and some are unavoidable. I hope to
be able to cope with those that are avoidable.
I got the book on vitamins. I read it through as soon as I
got it. It is a good book. But it failed to convince me. The
subject of vitamins has still, so far as I can see, to be investigated.
The author's statement does not appear to me to be the final
word. Their ruling out all the nuts and the pulses in pre-
ference to meat foods goes against the grain and is contrary to
all I have read in the vegetarian literature. If what the authors
have said be the final word about them, it is a severe blow to
vegetarianism. But the authors could not possibly have sufficient
data about the effect of nuts and pulses to enable them to come
to a just decision. Accurate observation about the efficacy or the
inefficacy of vegetable protein foods can only be made on an ex-
tensive scale in India, where alone one meets thousands of born
vegetarians. Their diet and their habits have to be scientifically
observed and analysed before safe deductions can be drawn; and
then, too, there are so many disturbing factors. Climate, harmful
customs and suchlike have to be taken into account before using
the values of foods taken by them. I am therefore taking all the
statements in that book with a great deal of caution. The late A. F.
Hills was President of the Vegetarian Society in London. He was
a good man. I do not know the extent of his scientific know-
ledge. But he indulged in bold speculations about diet. He
carried on a series of experiments himself. He wrote a number
of articles on what he called "vital food". He divided foods into
three or four divisions : one for those whose occupation was pre-
dominantly body-labour; another for those whose occupation was
predominantly intellectual; third for those whose occupation was
predominantly spiritual and the fourth for those who were not in
a healthy condition. His reasoning used to appeal to me in those
days. I do not know whether it would now if I read all his writ-
ings afresh. I followed also keenly the controversy going on in the
medical profession in those days about food values, and I know
that one army of doctors defended white bread for all they were
worth, and another army suggested that white bread was the staff
of death and that the brown bread alone was the staff of life.
There was even a Bread Reform League with Miss Yates as its
energetic Secretary. I used to come in close contact with the
lady. But I learnt even then that either side was fanatical, either
produced statistics and analysis of various types of bread. No one
had sufficient data for its absolute conclusions. For, they could
get a large number of men who would for the sake of their obser-
vations to live purely on brown bread and water or white
bread and water. I remember one example that was given by a
doctor. I think it was Dr. Allinson. He said he put one of his
dogs upon white bread for one month and it died; and another
upon brown bread for one month and it lived. The irresistible
inference was that white bread was the staff of death and brown
bread was the staff of life.
He did not state whether both the
dogs were kept under restraint the whole of the time, nor did he
state whether both the dogs started with the same stamina. Let
me confess that in those days, that is nearly 40 years ago, I sided
with Dr. Allinson and I swallowed his testimony about the dogs
and used to eat nothing but brown bread, and in the brown bread
variety also, largely Allinson's brown bread; because, the worthy
doctor took care to emphasize the necessity of taking Allinson's
brown bread, for that alone contained the whole wheat-meal ground
to the necessary fineness. He was a good man. I read all his
writings. Even in 1914, I consulted him when I was suffering
from pleurisy when I constantly refused to take even milk.
Probably the worthy doctor is still alive. All the same I came
to discount, as experience ripened, most of the argument of the
type I have mentioned. The upshot of all this is to tell you that
I have not made many changes in my food beyond what I re-
ported to you. I still take unboiled milk. I dilute it with water.
The milk that comes fresh from the goats is poured over boiling
water; that gives the necessary warmth to the milk and addition
of water makes it lighter. I am taking yet a little bread or a
little bhakhari made of home-ground wheat, and I am taking one
green vegetable. The authors of the book say that addition of
soda destroys the vitamins in the vegetables. But without soda,
the vegetables refuse to be soft. I have therefore decided to add
soda to the vegetable. It is difficult to digest it unless it is
thoroughly cooked. Uncooked green cabbage, my system rejects.
You will have observed that all the four vitamins are to be found
in milk. They are to be found also in the fruits I am taking and
therefore I do not lose much by adding soda at the time of cook-
ing cabbage or Indian marrow. There is no difficulty about the
cooking of spinach without soda and so whenever I get spinach,
soda is not added. There is no occasion for worry about my
health; for, I seem to be getting better though slowly. No food
will give me personal satisfaction unless I can revert to fruits and
nuts. But it seems to me that I shall have to close this earthly
life without getting that personal satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,
[PS.]
Forgive me this very long letter. I did not know it was going
to be so long.
From a photostat: S.N. 12574
