206. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER"
[After December 22, 1913]
Having known most of these passive resisters for a num-
ber of years and come into close contact with them, I can say
that they are not the men to make baseless allegations. Mr. Rus-
tomjee, an old and respected resident of South Africa, was also
in this batch. He took a leading part in the previous campaigns
and had experience of the gaols in Volksrust, Heidelberg, Diepk-
loof and Johannesburg. This time, on being sentenced at Volks-
rust, he was brought to the Pietermaritzburg Gaol and later re-
moved to the Durban Gaol. He had a taste of the Maritzburg
Gaol, but his experience in the Durban Gaol, he tells me, was the
worst.
Mr. Rustomjee declares, and he is supported by other pas-
sive resisters, that the Native warders used to assault them, with
no fear of consequences. One, Mr. P. K. Desai, was assaulted
so violently that the blow sent him reeling to the ground and from
there he was dragged to his cell. The treatment of the injuries
kept him in the hospital for eleven days. Mr. Rustomjee and his
fellow-prisoners had to resort to a fast to secure him [permis-
sion to wear] his shirt and sacred thread. A good Parsi will
not move a single step in the absence of these two things.
Mr. Rustomjee was also assaulted twice by Native warders. The
matter was brought to the notice of the superintendent, but to
no purpose. A youngster was beaten for standing out of line.
On one occasion, several passive resisters went on a fast to regis-
ter a strong protest against such treatment. At the end of four
days of complete fasting, the boy referred to above was forcibly
fed while he kept shrieking in protest all the time. Even the prison
doctor in charge is reported to have condemned this display of
barbarism and stated that he did not accept responsibility for the
forcible feeding. The fact that the prisoner was a vegetarian was
ignored: the milk which was fed to him was mixed with eggs.
The prisoners were supplied dirty clothes which could be a
menace to their health. The food was poor and was served, half-
cooked, in rusted tin bowls, and the prisoners report that in
consequence many of them got dysentery. Some are troubled by it
even now in gaol. Cockroaches and insects were found in the
food, and, when the matter was reported to the officer, his reply
was that a prison was no hotel and that even in a hotel one found
insects in food.
Most of the passive resisters were men of good education.
Though well used to reading, they were not given books to read
from the prison libraries nor permitted to read any of their own.
Despite protests, all the gaol officers, from the highest to the
lowest, used to address the passive resisters as "coolies". The more
they resented this, the more obstinate the officers became. They
[also] report that the present doctor pays no attention to their
health. During these three months, the magistrate visited the
gaol only once. He did not listen to the complaints of the p r i s o -
ners. Indian prisoners are generally allowed sandals and socks.
In this gaol most of them did not get these; even women were
not given any. Quite often the prisoners were supplied only one
blanket each, and that a torn one. They were refused permission
to see their lawyers and were not even allowed to write to the
Director of Prisons.
All this is but a brief summary of the tales of suffering I have
heard from my countrymen. The affidavits to be submitted to the
Government on this matter are under preparation. This is, how-
ever, quite a serious matter and calls for public attention. There is
no exaggeration whatever in what I am reporting and you are
free to show this to the officers concerned before publishing it.
Mr. Rustomjee and his fellow-prisoners ask for nothing but a
full, fearless, independent and impartial discussion, and demand
an inquiry.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 7-1-1914
