484. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
October 24, 1932
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,
I got your letter. Since the pain in the elbow has returned,
I have again started dictating as many of the letters as I can
to give rest to my arm. None of us was scared by your letter in
which you spoke of "blue brain". I had not the least idea what
"blue brain" was, and as I had been lying under a tree when
your letter came, I said: "Who knows what 'blue brain' is! But
living under a tree might cause 'green brain', and it would cer-
tainly be good to have it." Thus we had some fun about it, as
I showed no symptom at all of what you feared. And we have more
cause for fun now that we can understand how you came to have
the fear.
There is absolutely no reason why I should not let myself
be examined by Bhai Mehta. I would like him to examine me
and make some suggestions. Why should not I learn from Mehta,
when I am always ready to learn from anybody who has something
to give? But the truth is that I would have to obtain special
permission to get myself examined by him, and I am really afraid
I would not get such permission if I asked for it. I do not ask
the permission to spare myself the shock of the refusal. However,
I would certainly think about whatever suggestions he sends in
writing on the basis of any likely causes that occur to him. Like
him, I also believe that disease is lurking somewhere in me, despite
all the self-control I exercise, and that the disease expresses itself
through the pain in the elbow or otherwise. The bowels certain-
ly are weak. After all I have not been a man of self-control all my
life. I lived a life of self-indulgence for a number of years, and
who can measure the self-indulgence that must have mixed with
self-control after I consciously started to lead such a life?
It would be very good indeed if both of you could go to a
quiet place. Do not fight nature.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7554. Also C.W. 5029. Courtesy:
Tehmina Khambhatta
294
