61. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
August 27, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
The second bore-hole is going forward. They have gone down more
than 150 feet now. I have ordered another truck of coal. The Company
will not take the order before getting cheque which I gave. The coal
is now at the station. It will be removed tomorrow.
Miss Schlesin has accepted an educational appointment temporarily.
I am therefore personally attending to the African Building matter. I
am having all the letters addressed at the Farm. You need not worry
about me. That work won't crush me. And as I become more and
more methodical, I shall feel the strain less and less. I cannot send
you a systematic account this time but I shall try to do so next week.
Here are the cheques paid out during the week.
Coal Owners' Association
5-16-
B. a/c Municipality for water
1-11-
Papering and keys
1-19-
Municipality electric bill
0-10-
All the receipts from the Building a/c are being banked through
Amies. The receipts here are being banked through Kennedy. I have
not seen him at all. Please do not hesitate to make suggestions and
give hints as to the better management of this account.
Heymann I understand has written a stiff letter about Lapin's
account being allowed to go into arrears. I shall see the letter tomorrow.
I propose to forward it to Lapin with a personal note. I certainly think
that Lapin could not be allowed to remain in arrears. The Norwick
people will have a good cause of complaint against you in this business.
Ritch, Miss Schlesin, her co-teacher Boltman (a nice fellow) and
Miss Knudsen 1 came to the Farm today. The last named came at my
invitation to examine Albrecht. He is making wonderful progress. I
therefore thought he might be assisted with massage. I have been giving
it to him for the last fortnight in my own way. Now Miss K. has given
me some hints which I shall follow. I hope you will not mind all this.
It is no use keeping a patient on the Farm and not doing all you can.
He is working at the bore-hole business steadily. Fencing is making
slow progress. He is really not fit for work the whole day. He can
do very little after luncheon. I fancy, therefore, that active fencing will
commence after the boring is finished. He might however do more this
week. He does his best.
I cannot again send you extracts from the book I mentioned. I
have absolutely no time to spare.
P. K. Naidoo is now fixed up at Ritch's and Pragji comes to the
Farm. Pragji did not like a lawyer's office and P. K. Naidoo had
to be fixed up. Mrs. Naidoo leaves Wednesday morning.
I have got two Parsee lads 2 in the school. They are nice boys.
The school is certainly flourishing.
Call may be sent to the Farm for attention. I have offered to nurse
him partly in person and partly by deputy. He has, it seems, lost mental
balance. If he comes, I propose to use your room for him.
The boys remain saltless. The Parsee boys too I admitted on
condition that they fell in with the settled plan. Of course, they take
salt on Sundays.
The fruit trees are all now in bloom. The boys confine their attention
chiefly to hoeing.
I have given permission to the native John to erect his hut on the
other side of the fence and somewhere near the Kraal. I have also
1 A Johannesburg masseuse who had offered to train a few young Indian women
2 Sons of Parsee Jivanjee; vide Vol. XI, p. 150.
allowed them to remove some stones from the small Kraal. I hope
that these dispositions of mine will not disturb you. I am endeavouring
to give effect to the spirit underlying the title of the Farm. We should
feel happy in making these poor people happy. I warn them, of course,
that all arrangements are only for a year.
I want to tell you that I am making pleasing discoveries about your
thoroughness and foresight. The foresight in placing a quantity of coal
near the Kraal, in having the strainers for the fence cut and shaved
for tarring, the fencing material taken to the fencing line - all these
[and] many such other things - shows your method and careful
calculation. I notice similar orderliness about the African Banking
account. Anybody can easily pick up the thread. Importance of this
method and thoroughness into matters relating to the soul will make
you a far better man than many so-called holy and religious men. I
cannot boast of any such thoroughness or orderliness in my own
disposition. I envy you and wish to copy you in our joint lives.
When I reach the end of your letter, I am so tired that I do not
attempt to write about many thoughts that come to me during the week
and engage in a heart-to-heart conversation with you. I feel that my
first duty is to give you all the necessary information.
With love,
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
