544. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
AS FROM SEVAGRAM,
"VIA" WARDHA (INDIA),
CAMP: SRIRAMPUR (BENGAL),
December 2, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
I got your touching letter yesterday. I had heard that you had aged
considerably and that you were passing through physical suffering. I
hope it was an exaggerated statement and that this will find you in
enjoyment of health.
I understand and appreciate your remarks about Dr. Ambedkar .
I suppose you are aware that I know him very well and that I have
met him often enough. He represents a good cause but he is a bad
advocate for the simple reason that his passion has made him bitter
and made him depart from the straight and narrow path. As I know
to my cost, he is a believer in questionable means so long as the end
is considered to be good. With him and with men like him the end
justifies the means. Have you read his book ? It is packed with untruths
almost from beginning to end. I am sorry to have to say this of a
countryman who has himself been obliged to put up with insults which
have embittered men mightier than Dr. Ambedkar. You need not take
all I say as gospel truth. I have written this to you in order to give
you my. . . that if I do not go out of my way to seek contact with
Dr. Ambedkar it is not for want of will or want of regard for you
and friends like you but because I know that such seeking will, in my
view, harm the cause[rather] than help it. No question of prestige will
deter me from walking to him. I can say that the question of prestige
has never interfered with my doing what I believed was a duty. I have
laboured to show that in this case duty points the other way.
You are at liberty to share this letter with all mutual friends.
With regards to yourself and your wife.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1 The addressee in his letter of November 14, had referred to the bitter
attitude of B. R. Ambedkar "largely directed against yourself" and asked
Gandhiji to secure political justice for the untouchables. He had further asked
him to invite Ambedkar to see him.
2 B.R. Ambedkar (1891-1956); leader of the Depressed Classes, jurist and
author; in 1942 formed the Scheduled Castes' Federation; member, Constituent
Assembly; Chairman, Drafting Committee for the Constitution of India
3 Omission as in the source
311
