136. LETTER TO A. RANGASWAMI IYENGAR
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR RANGASWAMI,
I have your letter. You have made all the amends that it
was possible for you to make. From Salivati's letter of yester-
day received by me I thought that he had done likewise, but
now I see that the fault seems to have been entirely his. His motive
was no doubt good, but his judgment wholly bad, but before I
can give my final opinion, I would like you to send me his des-
patch as it was received by you. In his letter of yesterday,
which I enclose herewith, as you can see he protests innocence
and if his despatch was as he describes it to be, I fancy that he
stands exonerated. So far as my own memory is concerned, it is
not at all at fault, and Mahadev, who is ever vigilant, and aspires
to be another Boswell, has notes of my conversation with Salivati
1 Vide p. 80.
2 In his Diary Mahadev Desai recorded Gandhiji having said: "They know
my views. They will not do anything without full deliberation. And as for the
future I am simply jealous of my power, and will not fritter it away. There
are so many things which are likely to happen in which I am interested.
But why should I anticipate? God will give me the strength to deal with them
as they arise." (Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 51)
104
which confirm me and in no way support him if he reported me
as he appears to have done according to The Hindu of the 16th.
The unfortunate report came at such an awkward time when the
slightest error on my part could have undone a structure that is
being built up with patient toil and most delicate care. Happily,
the A. P. interview I really gave most reluctantly, both out of
my regard for you and solicitude for Salivati, and your prompt
publication of my telegram averted what might have proved a
dangerous situation. The only reason now for my pursuing the
subject is in order that no injustice may be done to Salivati.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. A. RANGASWAMI IYENGAR
EDITOR, "THE HINDU"
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 18987
