257. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
May 5, 1919
I got your letter of Chaitra Vad 10. My health has begun to
feel the strain now. There is much too heavy a pressure on the
brain. God will keep this body going as long as He wants work
from it. I have not read The Englishman and I do not read it
generally. Yes, I think it will be good if you keep sending me
cuttings from there.
Mrs. Besant is in a pitiable condition. She is completely at
a loss what course to adopt.
How could you ask whether the Government would really
disallow [sic] the Rowlatt Bill? How can the Bill remain [on the
Statute-book] while satyagrahis are alive? Personally, I believe that,
if no violence breaks out, the Bills will be repealed in no more than
a few months. I do not say this from inside knowledge, but from
my unshakable faith in satyagraha.
I did not stop Pragji. I have left him to himself entirely.
It seems he has now decided on going to Madras. He is taking
Parvati with him. I did not stand in his way in this either.
I do not like your idea of going to South Africa. My own
wish is that all of you, having called yourselves satyagrahis, should
content yourselves with lower profits and do business only in
swadeshi goods.
The children are quite happy. I did not notice that they
were particularly homesick for Rajkot or Calcutta. The thing to be
most happy about is that the climate has suited them. Rami
seems to be improving gradually. I have sent some Jeevan of the
best quality for her from here.
Madhavdas told me of your financial difficulties. He has
accepted my advice. It was that you should go forward without
monetary help from anyone, that is what I would have you do.
Medh, a man of sudden impulses that he is, is naturally apt to do
things without thinking and enter into too many forward deals;
you think nothing of risks and want to get rich quickly. Pragji
cannot resist the temptation of joining a public movement. In
these circumstances, you will find yourself in trouble before you
know where you are. Hence it would always be my wish that
you did not depend on other people's money for your ventures.
Moreover, they may send me out of the country or imprison me
at any time and I take it that you will not be able to continue in
business then. How can you, in this situation, invest others' money?
In a country where injustice prevails, there is no dignity except in
poverty. It is impossible, in the prevailing condition, to amass
wealth without being a party, directly or indirectly, to injustice.
Blessings from,
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
