82. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
AHMEDABAD,
May 14, 1915
DEAR MR. SHASTRIAR1,
I want to have a quiet chat with you regarding your health.
I feel very strongly about it. I am sure that you can by regulat-
ing your diet and taking water treatment completely cure yourself
while there is yet time. You owe it to the Society and the country
to get cured when it is so easily possible to do so. In the treat-
ment I suggest, there need be not a day's interruption in your public
work. The one thing needful is to follow the cure religiously.
Prolonged treatment is not necessary to notice its results. And here
it is :
2 hip baths per day of at least 20 minutes' duration, the baths
to be taken not before the completion of three hours after a meal.
Two hours' gentle walk in the open air morning and evening.
Only two meals per day, the last not after sunset.
Every morsel of diet must be chewed with deliberation so that
it goes down the throat not as a solid mass but as a smooth thick
liquid. Whether you have done this or not can always be noticed
in your stools.
1 (1869-1946), scholar, statesman; President, Servants of India Society,
1915-27
The diet to consist of bananas, mangoes, oranges, oats, figs
(fresh or dried), sultanas, grapes, lemons, tamarind, papaw, pine-
apple, prunes, cocoanut, groundnuts, almonds, pistachios, walnuts,
olive oil, if necessary.
Only two varieties of nuts may be taken during the day. In
quantity no more than 4 ounces of both during the day. At the
commencement, i.e., for 4 days nuts may be omitted altogether and
then gradually introduced.
Either lemons or tamarind may be taken. Figs, dates and
other dried fruit should be well washed and soaked for six hours
before eating. The water in which they are soaked should be
drunk.
If olive oil be taken, no more than an ounce per day may be
taken. Nine fair-sized bananas should be enough per day along
with the other fruits.
However, quantity may be regulated by each one for himself.
A month's trial without a break is sure to show you that com-
plete recovery lies in this direction and no other. Of course, all
drinks—coffee, tea, soda water, etc., and betel leaves, etc., must
be eschewed during the treatment. Later on you will go back to
your old diet with variations that you may have picked up during
the treatment.
Do please think of this thing seriously.
Pray remember us both to your mother and Mrs. Shastriar.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 6287
