202. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
WARDHA,
December 19, 1935
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I wrote to you last week about the sudden breakdown in Bapu's
health. 2 He is progressing well, but it will be some time before his blood-
pressure becomes normal again. He seems to have worked at high pressure
all these months and Dr. Jivraj and Dr. Gilder who examined him two days
ago are definitely of opinion that he must have a couple of months' rest. This
he has agreed to do. For ten days now he has been in bed resting and
sleeping, never reading or writing or dictating. But you will be surprised to
know that he continued to do his reading on the commode even during these
days! And he finished the 9th Part of your magnum opus—which it really is—
this evening.
And as soon as he finished it he called me to his bedside and asked me
to send you his impressions.
If he had been well he should have written
himself or dictated something but he did not want to strain himself in the
teeth of the doctors' advice and so told me in Gujarati in a minute or
two what he felt. What I say will, therefore, be in my language and not his.
He said:
It is needless to say that it is a brilliantly written book, and
a great literary production. There are parts where I have my
fundamental differences with you and which I would like to cri-
ticize, but I will not do so as it is scarcely necessary or useful. For
when all is said and done it is a highly introspective narrative
containing an expression of your innermost thoughts and convic-
tions. Even if you could be persuaded to moderate or soften that
expression, I should not attempt it, as it would result in taking
away from its naturalness, if not also its truthfulness. After all we
are helpless actors in the mighty flow of events, we have to act
according to our lights allowing or expecting the events to correct
us where we err. There is just one thing where perhaps I might
make a helpful suggestion. The attack on the Liberals seems
to have been overdone. It seems to obtrude on the reader's at-
tention over and over again and sometimes mars the grace and
beauty of the narrative. Not that there is any venom in any-
thing that you have said; far from it; but you should not be even
unconsciously guilty of doing an injustice to them. What you
have said about Sastri leaves that impression on me. These friends
served the country in their time according to their lights, and
whilst we may have our serious differences with them we do
not exactly serve the cause of the country by publicly pillorying
them. If you have not, therefore, already sent the book on to the
publishers, you might alter these portions. . . .
Yours affectionately,
MAHADEV
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1935. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
