67. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
Immediate
DETENTION CAMP,
February 16, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS
POONA
SIR,
This is in continuation of my letter of the 14th instant.
When I asked for Vaidyaraj and took upon myself the re-
sponsibility of changing Shri Kasturba's treatment, and absolved
the Government physician of all responsibility, I naturally took
for granted that the Vaidyaraj would be allowed such facilities
as would in his opinion be necessary for carrying out his treat-
ment. The patient's nights are much worse than her days and
it is essentially at night that constant attendance is necessary.
The Vaidyaraj considers himself handicapped in his treatment of
the case under the present arrangement.
In order to be within immediate call, he has been good
enough to sleep in his car outside the gate of this camp for
the last three nights, and every night he has had to be called
up at least once. This is an unnatural state of things and,
though he seems to have infinite capacity for suffering incon-
venience for the sake of the patient, I may not take undue ad-
vantage of his generous nature. Besides, it means disturbing the
Superintendent and his staff (in fact the whole camp) once
or more often during the night. For instance, last night she
suddenly developed fever with rigor. The Vaidyaraj, who had
left the premises at 10.30 p.m., had to be called in at 12 mid-
night. I had to request him to leave her soon afterwards, al-
though he would have liked to have stayed with her longer,
because so long as he stayed in, it would have meant keeping
the Superintendent and his staff awake which might have been
even for the whole night. I would not do this even for saving
my life-long partner especially when I know that a humane
way is open.
As I have said already, the Vaidyaraj considers it neces-
sary to be in constant attendance on the patient. He varies
the drugs from moment to moment as the patient's condition
requires. Drs. Gilder's and Nayyar's assistance is at my dis-
posal all the time-they are more than friends and would do
everything in their power for the patient. But, as I have said
in my last letter, they cannot help while treatment of a wholly
different nature from theirs is going on. Besides, being in its
very nature impracticable, such a course would be unjust to
the patient, to the Vaidyaraj and to themselves.
I, therefore, submit below the following three alternative pro-
posals:
I. Vaidyaraj should be permitted to remain in the camp
day and night so long as he considers it necessary in the in-
terests of the patient.
II. If the Government cannot agree to this, they may
release the patient on parole to enable her to receive the full
benefit of the physician's treatment.
III. If neither of these two proposals are acceptable to
the Government, I request that I be relieved of the responsi-
bility of looking after the patient. If I as her husband cannot
procure for her the help she wants or that I think neces-
sary, I ask for my removal to any other place of detention
that the Government may choose. I must not be made a
helpless witness of the agonies the patient is passing through.
The Government have kindly permitted Dr. Mehta to visit
the patient at her repeated requests. His help is valuable, but
he does not prescribe drugs. She needs the physical therapy
given by him which soothes her greatly but she cannot do
without drug treatment either. Drugs can only be prescribed
by the doctors or the Vaidyaraj. The doctors' treatment has
already been suspended. In the absence of a satisfactory reply
to this letter by this evening, I shall be constrained to suspend
Vaidyaraj's treatment also. If she cannot have the drug treat-
ment which she should in full, I would rather that she did
without it altogether.
I am writing this by the patient's bedside at 2 a.m. She is
oscillating between life and death. Needless to say she knows
nothing of this letter. She is now hardly able to judge for herself.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3933; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, pp. 311-
