562. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
SRIRAMPUR,
NOAKHALI,
December 20, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
I wrote to you three letters - one dated 3-12-46 on the general
situation, a second dated 4-12-46 regarding Sardar Bahadur Sir Datar
Singh's suggestion and a third in reply to your letters of 2nd and 3rd
December. 2 I am sorry that all the letters have remained unanswered.
I can only ascribe to heavy pressure on you the absence of any
communication from you.
I took the liberty of sending to Abdulla Saheb three complaints which
had come under my notice - one of very recent murder, another of
rape and third of loot. He was good enough to call on me yesterday
and to tell me the result of his investigation which he was good enough
to hold very promptly. The first one he said was true as to the event
itself but not sustained about the culprits named. I believe the guilty
parties are being traced. The second has been found by him to be
a concoction. The third is found to be true and is being pursued. For
me the relevance for the purpose of this letter lies in the fact that
the trouble is not over and the fear is not wholly without foundation.
Indeed, complaints have been almost daily coming to me showing how
difficult the problem is. If you can possibly regard me as a well-wisher
of your Ministry and of the Muslim League, you will please continue
as you began to let at least one Minister to be on the spot and keep
himself in touch with me. If this expectation is too great or cannot
be fulfilled, you will please tell me whether you approve of my keeping
in touch with the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police
1 & 2 Vide Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 185- and p.195.
to whom I could directly refer the matters which come under my notice
and which I consider to be worthy of being put before them.
Yours sincerely.
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Just as I was about to sign this, two messengers from Comilla came
in and handed me your letter. I have not read it. I am letting this
go and shall write again if necessary.
THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF MINISTER OF BENGAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
