10. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 17, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Not that I cannot use the right hand but it is better to use
the left. I have begun this before the morning prayer just mak-
ing use of the odd minutes before the little family gathers together.
You should not be surprised if you find my letters shorter than
usual. The Harijan work has become too heavy to allow of any-
thing else being done. The mere reading of the voluminous cor-
respondence takes over two hours. The (here comes Mahadev)
(I resume after the prayer) interviews take from two to three
hours. Therefore I must reduce the other work. Since the doctors
here are firmly of opinion that the elbows have nothing wrong
about them except that they require rest from the spinning motion,
I have cut off the wheel altogether and just do the takli for about
half an hour. The takli requires the use of other muscles. This
compulsory saving of time has come when it was just wanted.
(There was another interruption here for the drink and fruit,
dressing and eating).
I do not mind your omission of salt. Take it again when the
benefit of abstention has been exhausted. I do not know if
Juwari or bajri chapati will suit you. Is there no prison-ground
whole-wheat meal? Anyway one Juwari or bajri chapati ought
not to do you any harm at all. But you will fare all right by
taking dried and fresh fruit liberally.
Kisan must attend to her eyes and become strong and well.
For me I have still progress to report. Another increase of
1½ lb. total 103½ lb.! This is due to a dietetic discovery as
I imagine. It synchronizes with the untouchability work. But
the latter has little to do with the increase. I am taking nearly an
ounce of fresh, dried milk. This is called mavo in Marathi and
Gujarati. You evaporate the water. It should prove heavy.
But for me it seems to have come as a godsend. It is too late
to pronounce upon its efficacy. That the present increase is due
to it there is no doubt.
What you say about Amir Ali's introduction is too true. He
is safe when he talks of Islam itself.
Ba is still at the Ashram. There has been the usual crop of
sicknesses there. Kusum Gandhi is rather bad, fever won't leave
her.
We are all well and send you both a cartload of love.
BAPU
[PS.]
It is now after 5.30 a.m. I must now go to the 'library' and
then to the walk till the goats come, i.e., about 6.30.
From the original: C.W. 6250. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9717
