278. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
PRIVATE
JOHANNESBURG,
August 20, 1908
DEAR MR. LANE,
Mr. Cartwright told me that I should write to you what I told
him as to the decision of the meeting today, and to give my impressions
also.
1 This letter was published with the following introduction: "Owing to the
manner in which the Transvaal Colonial Secretary made public use of a private letter
in such a way as to induce in the minds of members of the Assembly a belief that the
Indian community had forwarded an ultimatum on the question of a settlement,
Mr. Gandhi, in his speech last Sunday, explained the circumstances fully. In view of
General Smuts' breach of etiquette, we publish below the full text of Mr. Gandhi's letter,
of which unauthorized extracts have already appeared."
Writing of these events from Yeravda jail some 15 years later, Gandhiji perhaps
mistook his letter of August 14, 1908 to General Smuts (pp. 451-2) for this letter, and
the mass meeting of August 16 (pp. 456-60) for that held on August 23 (pp. 473-6).
The following excerpts from Chapters XXVI and XXVII of Satyagraha in South Africa,
compared with extracts from contemporary statements or reports (in square brackets
below), may throw some light on the genesis of this confusion.
"The weekly diary in Indian Opinion, asked [Indians] to hold themselves
in readiness to burn the certificates if the Black Act was not repealed. [cf.
"Johannesburg Letter", p. 369. "A mass meeting will be held on Sunday" (July 19, 1908).
"Registers will not be burnt, not yet. . .the wisest course will be to wait till General
Smuts publishes his draft bill". The draft bill was published on August 11;
vide p. 454]. The bill was about to pass through the Legislature to which a petition
[dated August 13, 1908, pp. 449-51] was presented. . .in vain. At last an ultimatum
was sent to the Government by the satyagrahis. The word was not the satyagrahis'
but of General Smuts who thus chose to style the letter. . . [Gandhiji himself preferred
to call it an "Asiatic submission" rather than an "Asiatic ultimatum" (p. 470). The
I placed before the meeting1, for the third time today, the terms
that I told them the Government were prepared to offer, and I told
them further that these would form an acceptable compromise, if some
provision was made for highly educated Indians and Mr. Sorabjee's
re-instatement; but the meeting would not listen to anything short of
repeal of the Asiatic Act and the recognition of highly educated
Indians under the general clause of the Immigrants' Restriction Act.
All I could persuade them to accept was that, the statutory right being
recognized, there would be no objection to an administrative discrimina-
tion against educated Indians so that only the most highly edu-
cated Indians could enter. The meeting was most enthusiastic, and
what was intended to be a meeting for a few delegates only became a
general mass meeting. It was attended by three of the most eminent
Indians in South Africa, who have, as you know, come over from
Natal, but who were pre-war residents and who had a large stake in the
country before the war. Most of the influential Indians from Pretoria
who have submitted to the Act also came and sympathized. After much
difficulty, I was able to persuade the meeting to unanimously agree to
the following:
1. Mr. Sorabjee to be re-instated, with full residential rights.
2. All prisoners to be discharged.
word "ultimatum" is not found in the text of General Smuts' speech in the Transvaal
Legislative Assembly of August 21 as reported in Indian Opinion. He did, however,
mention the letter which, he said, disappointed his hopes of a settlement. For an abbre-
viated text of speech, vide Appendix X. This word was used in Indian Opinion as a title
for Essop Mia's letter to the Colonial Secretary of July 6, 1908 (pp. 342-5) and later
to describe this letter of August 20.] One reason why this letter was held to be an
ultimatum was that it prescribed a time-limit for a reply. [Neither the letter of August
14 (pp. 451-2) which Gandhi speaks as the "ultimatum", nor the letter of August 20
which appeared in Indian Opinion under the title "What Is an Ultimatum?" prescribes
any time-limit. Was there a further letter by the satyagrahis, which has not been
traced?]. . .The ultimatum was to expire on the same day the bill was to be carried
through the Legislature. [The first reading of the Asiatics' Voluntary Registration
Validation Bill in the Legislative Assembly was on August 13. This Bill was, according
to Indian Opinion, subsequently dropped and an amended Bill, which made further
concessions to the Asiatics, was passed finally by the Legislative Council on August
22.] A meeting had been called some two hours after the expiry of the time-limit to
hold the public ceremony of burning the certificates. [Registration certificates were
burnt at both the mass meetings of August 16 and 23, 1908.] We had all reached the
place of meeting early and arranged for the Government's reply by wire. . . the meeting
was held at 4 o'clock on the grounds of the Hamidia Mosque at Johannesburg (August
16, 1908) . . . .A volunteer arrived with a telegram from the Government in which
they. . .announced their inability to change their line of action."
1 No report of this meeting is available. The proceedings, like this letter,
may well have been intended to be private.
2 Dawad Mahomed, Parsee Rustomjee and M. C. Anglia
3. The Asiatic Act to be repealed.
4. A general education test, with discretionary power as to its
severity regarding educated Indians.
5. The terms as per [Sir] Percy's notes to be embodied with the
necessary changes in the new Bill.
6. Free re-issue of burnt certificates.
7. The essential clauses of the Asiatic Act, in so far as they may
be necessary for a proper check over the Asiatic population and for
prevention of fraud, to be re-enacted in the new Bill.
8. The draft Bill to be shown to the Committee of the Associa-
tion for suggestions as to details.
It will be seen that this submission does not materially alter the
terms as per Sir Percy's notes. I cannot see any difficulty in show-
ing the Parliament and the country that repeal of the Act is simply a
graceful act to soothe an unrepresented community in the Colony, with-
out in any way relaxing the hold of the legislature on that class.
The Sorabjee incident raised the enthusiasm of the people to a
white heat. It caused intense irritation. I assure you that the meeting
as a whole went much further than I should ever care to go under the
present circumstances, but it was by my deliberate promise to lead them
in passive resistance if the promised repeal was not granted that I could
persuade them to restrict the community to the above terms. I was
disinclined to impose on my countrymen further suffering and was,
therefore, prepared to waive a substantial repeal of the Act, so far as
it became inoperative against all save those who had accepted it; but
I am glad to say they would not listen to it, and they said they were
prepared to suffer to the uttermost. I hope, therefore, that the Gov-
ernment will be pleased to accept the above terms and close the
controversy. If they do, I, for one, shall refuse to go any further so far
as the Asiatic Act is concerned.
One thing more. One speaker actually got up and suggested that
the terms should include a clause asking for Mr. Chamney's removal.
It was, however, not embodied in the terms; but I cannot help record-
ing my opinion that Mr. Chamney is ignorant and hopelessly in-
competent. This I say in the interests of the Colony at large. I have
personally nothing against him. I have always received courtesy from
him, but in spite of all my efforts to the contrary, I have not been able
to see any competence in him for the office he holds. I am sure that
he never knows from one hour to another what his decision should
be, and the largest amount of irritation was caused in the initial
stages of the working of voluntary registration purely through his vacilla-
tion and ill-considered decisions. I could give several instances,
1 Sir Percy Fitzpatrick
but I do not think it is necessary. In my opinion, what is required
is a man of judicial talent and wide sympathies. If this suggestion is
not accepted, I fear that there will always be irritation and consequent
difficulty in the administration of any Act however well devised.
I am sending copies to the Progressive leaders.
I remain,
Yours truly,
ERNEST F.
C. LANE, ESQ.
PRIVATE SECRETARY TO GENERAL SMUTS
COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA
Indian Opinion, 29-8-1908
Also a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4859
