8. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
[CAPE TOWN,]
Wednesday [April 5, 1911]
MY DEAR RITCH,
Saw yesterday Dr. Hewart, the Opposition whip, and Sir
Bisset Berry. J. W. Jagger I meet this afternoon. And so I shall
continue till I have seen all I want to see and all who would see
me. The members I saw yesterday were introduced to me by
Alexander. They have promised to support Alexander. They
themselves had not much time but agreed that the point was
very simple. General Botha's dispatch to Lord Crewe does the
trick. I feel sure that if the Bill comes up at all, General Smuts
will not dare to bring it up without the amendment we are
asking for. I think he has dropped the charge of bringing a
new point.
1 Louis Botha (1852-1919); "an Afrikander, Natal-born and Transvaal
trained . . . a Liberal in the old republican days, bilingual, genial, boundlessly
tactful" (Eric Walker, A History of South Africa, p. 535) and one of the moderate
Boers "familiar with all the intricacies of agriculture . . . there was hardly anyone
in Europe . . . as good a judge of sheep as he was" (Satyagraha in South Africa,
Ch. II); outstanding Dutch commander during the Boer War; in 1904- founded
the Het Volk party pledged to conciliation and self-government (Walker, op. cit.,
pp. 515-6); accepted proposal for self-government under the British although ex-
treme Boers were sceptical and managed to get through "drastic anti-Asiatic Bills"
(ibid., p. 519); first premier of self-governing Transvaal in 1907, and in 1910
became first Union Premier; opposed educated Asiatics' entry in Gandhi-Smuts
Conference following the compromise of January 1908; vide Vol. IX, p. 332.
2 Of December 20, 1910; vide Vol. X, p. 485.
3 Robert Offley Ashburton Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe; Liberal
statesman and writer; Lord-Lieutenant for Ireland in 1892- cabinet; Secretary
of State for Colonies, 1908; succeeded Morley at India Office in November, 1910;
quitted active party politics in 1922 but became Secretary of State for War
in 1931; author of Stray Verses and other literary miscellanies.
4 Jan Christiaan Smuts (1870-1950); Gandhiji found him "as able a general
and administrator as he is a lawyer", but mentions that he was warned that "slim
Janny", as Smuts was known, was a "trimmer"; vide Satyagraha in South Africa,
Ch. XXV. After a brilliant academic career at Cambridge, Smuts was admitted
to the Cape Town Bar in 1895; commander-in-chief of rebel commandoes in the
Cape during Boer War; in 1902 urged compromise with the British at the
Vereeniging peace negotiations; strongly opposed Milner's policy, especially the
importation of Chinese coolies for the gold mines; founded in 1904, along with
Botha, the Het Volk party; after Responsible Government became Transvaal's
Colonial Secretary; an advocate of Union along with Lionel Curtis (Vol. VIII,
pp. 226-7) and an author of the South Africa Act of 1911; in 1910 became
Union Minister for Interior, Mines and Defence; in 1912 took over the
treasury, retaining Defence; in 1916 during World War I, accepted Imperial
command in East Africa; joined War Cabinet and initiated unification of the
flying services; after Armistice, wrote his Memorandum, The League of Nations:
A Practical Suggestion, which subsequently became the covenant of the League.
Speaking of his controversy with Smuts over the 1908 compromise, Gandhiji
says, "Even today, I look upon the incident as a breach of faith. . .not per-
haps . . .an intentional breach of faith"; vide Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XXV.
5 On March 10, 1911, Indians had requested that, in the Union Immigrants'
Restriction Bill, an amendment be made exempting educated Asiatics from pro-
vincial registration laws and protecting the rights of wives and minor children of
registered Asiatics; vide Vol. X, pp. 448-.
6 Smuts made this charge in his telegram of March 21, 1911 (Vol. X, p. 482)
in response to Gandhiji's request (Vol. X, pp. 467- and 476-8) that educated
Sorabji has been writing to me that I should go to London
for the Imperial Conference. I do not know. If the struggle
ends, it may be worthwhile. The Gold Law business worries me.
It is such a damnable business. One might be able to do something
in that connection. If the struggle does not end, it seems to me
that I cannot leave at all. Let Sorabji discuss the thing with
you. I have instructed Maud about the Gold Law, suggesting
that she should copy my remarks and forward [them] to the Colo-
nial & India Offices.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5419
Asiatic immigrants be exempted from Orange Free State registration laws as well.
The Transvaal Leader, under its new editorship, also shared the view that the
demand was a new one. Polak wrote to the editor pointing out that "the
limitation of the number of educated Indian immigrants" was accepted by
Gandhiji only for the Transvaal, and that "Natal Indians cannot be expected
to permit themselves to be deprived of rights that they already possess". Ritch
also wrote saying that, while it was true that the immigration bill would
"repeal the Transvaal immigration and registration laws of 1907, it virtually
re-enacts the Free State law which is . . . specifically insulting to Indians".
He gave the assurance that "if the objections raised . . . are met by amend-
ments to the bill. . .the 'agitation' to which you take exception will automati-
cally end . . . the racial bar must . . . not apply to any part of the Union."
Indian Opinion, 15-4-1911.
