238. LETTER TO A. C. C. HARVEY
AS AT THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
January 11, 1927
DEAR FRIEND1,
Your letter written on Christmas Day has followed me in
my travels and I am able to overtake it only today. I would ask
you to believe me when I tell you that I have nothing against
General Dyer or even Sir Michael O'Dwyer. They were both
creatures and symptoms of a deep-seated disease of which I
had not sufficient knowledge when I pleaded for co-operation at
Amritsar. Whatever force there was in my plea was in my
honest belief behind it. The Rowlatt Act and the subsequent
events having opened my eyes, I cannot summon to my aid the
fervour of Amritsar. My belief is shaken. Nothing has hap-
pened to restore it, though I am eager for its restoration. It
gives me no pleasure to disbelieve men and measures. But I shall
be false if I shut my eyes to facts as I see them. I think that
non-co-operation is a fundamental fact in God's plan, even as
darkness is. There is no such thing as co-operation if there is no
non-co-operation. If we give our co-operation for the prosecu-
tion of that which is good, we must withdraw it from that which
is evil. I believe that the present British administration of India is
on the whole not good but positively evil. The military policy
and the revenue policy which includes the hideous traffic in drink
and drugs and the preference given to English interests over
Indian are causing progressive deterioration both moral and
material of the people of this unhappy country. English people
are not all conscious of this tremendous wrong that is being done
to the country and they will never be if we continue to give
our co-operation whether through ignorance, through hypocrisy
or through weakness. Non-co-operation, therefore, is the only
alternative to an armed rebellion. It has been suggested that the
object can be achieved by persuasion and argument. In my opi-
nion, which is based upon extensive experience, argument has
only a limited place in an endeavour to persuade people. In
deepest matters argument hopelessly fails. But whilst I feel so
strongly about my position, let me assure you that my non-
co-operation is itself designed to bring about co-operation. I
need hardly assure you. . . .1
[A. C. C. HARVEY
GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE COLLEGE
LUDHIANA
PUNJAB]
From a photostat: S.N. 12804
