425. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
November 18, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I see from your three letters that you have not got a clear
picture of the Village Industries Association in your mind. The
idea behind it is that we should exclusively buy from villages
whatever articles they can produce. We can thereby repay a
little of the debt that we owe to them. Whether or not we shall
be able to do this is another matter.
We need not proceed
on the supposition that we shall not. What was started by
only six or seven of us has now spread all over the country. If it
is our duty to do what I am suggesting, then all of us should
use pens, ink, knives, soap, jaggery and sugar manufactured in
villages and flour and rice ground or milled in villages. I have
mentioned these things only as examples. Maybe we shall not
carry out this idea in respect of many of the things enumerated;
if, however, we believe that it is our moral duty to use such
articles, we shall be putting crores of rupees into the pockets of
villagers and the importance of villages will increase. Only then
shall we be able to establish the swaraj of our dreams, devoted to
the welfare of villages, and only then will it be non-violent swaraj.
All other things can be deduced from this.
The Association can function only if it gets five or six full-
time workers. We are trying to attract for it some Congress-
minded persons who are not regular Congressmen.
Of course
some of the workers will have to be Congressmen. I am trying
to persuade Jairamdas, hoping that Rajendrababu and you will
be able to spare him and that he will agree to be released. If he
cannot do this work, he will be of no service.
I am discussing
the same problem with Khan Saheb. I don't know what Jal-
bhai's attitude will be. If he refuses, I intend to invite Khur-
shed. Such at any rate are my dreams. I am indifferent whether
or not they are realized. They help to preserve my peace of
mind. If you are now free please come over. The treatment of
your nose must get priority, of course. How many workers from
Gujarat may I engage in this work? Raojibhai has written to me
and expressed his willingness. I have replied to him saying that,
even if he can be free, he can come only if permitted by you.
371
We shall also have to think about the headquarters.
The election results were really wonderful.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 141-
