565. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
November 5, 1932
I have endeavoured to explain the position in the Press state-
ment which you must have seen. I wonder whether it gives you
satisfaction. I draw, as I have always done, a sharp distinction
between castes and varnas. Castes are innumerable and in their
present condition they are a drag upon Hinduism. Therefore you
and I do not observe caste distinctions. Varna stands on a differ-
ent footing, and it means profession. It has nothing to do with
inter-dining and intermarriage. People belonging to the four profes-
sions used formerly to inter-dine and even to intermarry and
by so doing they naturally could not and did not leave their
varna. This is absolutely clear from the definitions of the different
varnas in the Bhagavad Gita. A man falls from his varna when
he abandons his hereditary profession. Today, however, varna-
shrama is a lost treasure and there is utter confusion. Therefore
so far as I can see there is only one varna and that is Shudra.
That there is confusion of varnas is humiliating. That we should
call ourselves Shudras is no humiliation, for in religion there is
none high and none low. Profession of Shudra is just as honour-
able and necessary as that of Brahmin. Equally so of Kshatriya
and Vaishya. But even if it should hurt our pride to consider
ourselves as Shudra, there is no escape from it as a moment's
reflection will show. This fortunate circumstance if it is generally
accepted solves the difficulty of ranking the Harijans. To what
varna should they belong on admission? If we say, 'to the Shudra
varna' we immediately accept the gradation in varna dharma
and the Harijans will have every right to resent the lowest rank
being given to them. If we are all Shudras there is no difficulty
left. I remember a learned Shastri in 1915 suggesting at a Social
Reform gathering in Nellore that there was confusion of varnas
and that as originally there was only one varna, viz., that of
Brahmins, we should all now call ourselves Brahmins. I could not
reconcile myself to that proposition then and I could do so less now.
Whilst we can all serve and hence be called Shudras, we do not
all possess learning nor do we possess divine knowledge. There-
fore it would be untruthful to regard ourselves as Brahmins. If
we rob inter-dining and intermarriage of religious significance
in the manner it is understood, it becomes purely a matter of op-
tion, where we dine and where our children marry. And removal
of untouchability would then have exactly the meaning I have
always given it. This ought to be quite clear.
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 205-
