238. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
July 19, 1932
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,
I got your letter only today.
The Sanskrit Readers came
earlier but I was awaiting your letter. May I thank you for the
Readers? I have received so many books from you! Purushartha
and other things keep coming. You will be gratified to learn that
Sardar has completed the first two Readers and has gone on
to the third. We are jotting down the errors that come to our
261
notice. We had already decided to inform you of them even before
the receipt of your letter. There is no doubt that on the whole
the Readers are very well planned. Whatever mistakes we ob-
serve will be pointed out to you only with the purpose of en-
hancing the utility of the series.
My arm does not give too much pain. The left elbow pains only
with a particular movement. The Superintendent gave me Lak-
shadi oil to be used for massage but it did no good. In fact, this
oil helps only when the pain is caused by rheumatism but the
pain in my elbow joint is not rheumatic. So far the doctors have
diagnosed it as the result of constant employment of the elbow
in plying the charkha. For that reason I have given up using the
left arm in spinning for almost a month. It cannot be said that
it has resulted in any improvement. So now I am to undergo in-
tensive treatment. There is no cause for worry; my health is, on
the whole, good enough.
What you have written about Vishwaroopadarshanayoga is quite
correct, but it does not in any way contradict what I have
written in the preface to that chapter. The man who sees the
whole world as a manifestation of Vasudeva is bound to have
a vision of the Cosmic Form but the Form will be that of his own
imagining. A Christian who considers the creation as a divine
manifestation will visualize an image to suit his notions. Our way
of worship determines the form of God in our mind. One born
and bred in the Hindu culture will never tire of reading the ele-
venth chapter and if he be a devotee, he will be able to picture
to himself the magnificent form described therein. Such imagery
is not beyond a man's imagination in this world. We may call
the divine force as Brahman, Atman or Vasudeva, yet it remains
formless. Only for the devotee it acquires dimensions; that is its
expression and therein lies its poetic appeal. We can make only
one deduction which you have already drawn. We must be able
to see Vasudeva or God even in a dacoit. When we have acquired
the strength to do that, the dacoit will give up his wickedness.
And until we acquire this power all our learning and knowledge
is worthless. You have not expected my comments upon your
writing on Vishwaroopadarshana, yet I have written all this as I
am engrossed with the same thoughts. It gives me great pleasure
to carry on such conversations with you through letters.
I have finished reading 'Vaidik Vinay' by Abhayji. Now I am
reading Swadhyaya Samhita by Vaidikmuni Hariprasadji. But I
find great difficulty in reading the Vedic hymns. You are acquain-
ted with my knowledge of Sanskrit, it is of the most elementary
order, and as regards Vedic Sanskrit it is almost nil. I know this
much, that Vedic hymns have been interpreted in several ways by
different scholars-by Sanatanis in one way, by Arya Samajists in
another and by Western scholars in yet another. Even among the
sanatanis I find difference of opinion. All Arya Samajists too are
not agreed upon the same meaning. You must be remembering the
correspondence between yourself and Vaidyaji that I initiated. In the
light of all this I feel bewildered when I try to study the Vedic hymns
and find myself at a loss to decide upon any interpretation. At present
I am memorizing Ishopanishad. I think Shankara's interpretation
of it differs from that of Aurobindo Babu; and your interpreta-
tion that I saw last year while in jail differs from both. I have now
received a translation in Gujarati. This and Hariprasadji's trans-
lation are again at variance.
I have understood this Upanishad
in my own way which seems somewhat presumptuous in view of
my scanty knowledge of Sanskrit.
Is there any work available
from which I may learn the rudiments of Vedic grammar and does
a collection exist containing different annotations by various
scholars? In short, what should a man like myself do when confront-
ed with interpreting correctly the Vedic mantras? I have not faith
enough in any sect to accept their interpretation as gospel truth.
Luckily or unluckily I possess just enough knowledge of Sanskrit
to choose from several interpretations available to me. But I
have no desire to collect a large library while I am in jail nor do
I wish to involve myself in a deep study. Gita suffices for my own
contentment. But I do like to dabble in the Vedas. Therefore
please oblige me by giving whatever information you can. We
are all well.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 4763. Courtesy: S. D. Satavlekar
1 Vide Vol. XXXV, p. 56.
