474. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
[CAPE TOWN,
March 27, 1911]
Here is roughly the purport of the conversation between J.C.S.
and me:
SMUTS: You see, Gandhi, I am giving you everything. I
could have done so by regulation but now I am protecting wives
and children in the Bill. I do not know why, but I know that
everybody suspects me. I am also recognising domicile. But you
are very unreasonable. Your point is absolutely new.
GANDHIJI: How can you say so, General Smuts? Are you
not creating a racial bar?
S.: No, I am not. Can you show it to me?
G.: Certainly. Will you admit that throughout the four
years we have been simply fighting against the racial or colour bar?
1 The addressee's name is not available, as the first two pages of the letter are
missing; but from the instructions given in the last four paragraphs, it appears to have
been written to Miss Sonja Schlesin, who looked after Gandhiji's Johannesburg office.
S. started and said after some hesitation, 'Yes'.
G.: You know that in the Transvaal Immigration Law there
is no colour bar, but you read sub-section 4 and the Asiatic Act, and
you have the bar.
S.: You are not stating it fairly.
G. :
Then you shall state it in your own words.
S.: In the Transvaal we wanted total exclusion and that is
brought about by the combined effect of the two laws.
G.: And now you want the same thing for the Free State. The
combined effect of the Free State Law and the new Bill will be [to]
shut out the Nizam of Hyderabad, and I assure you that the pas-
sive resisters will fight against it.
S.: There you are unreasonable.
G. :
I must deny the charge. I am not at all anxious that a
single Indian should actually enter the Free State. I am sincerely
anxious to help you.
S.: You do not know my difficulties.
G.: I do. And because I do, I suggest that only so much
of the Free State Law should be a basis for exemption as will en-
able a highly educated Indian to enter the Free State. If you send
for the Law, I will show you what I mean.
S. (Sends for the law): But the Free Staters will never con-
sent.
G.: Then why did General Botha write to Lord Crewe that
educated immigrants will be able to enter any province?
S.: You do not know all the dispatches. We have not printed
everything, you know. Lord Crewe knows that we never wanted
to give the rights as to the Free State.
G.: But you repeated the same thing at the second reading.
S.: Yes. I was simply sounding the Free Staters, and I noticed
that they were very much opposed.
G.: If they are, it is your duty to persuade them, and if they
cannot be, you may simply amend the Transvaal Legislation.
S.: But I am bound to the Imperial Government to pass this
Bill. (Reads the Law and asks G. to go over to his side. G. points
out the section from which the exemption is to be granted.) Yes,
I now see what you mean.
G.: Yes, the educated Asiatics will be still prohibited from
owning fixed property and from trading. I am not raising that issue
at all. We have still to fight you on the question of Law 3 of 1885.
But this has nothing to do with passive resistance. I for one do not
wish to offer passive resistance for material gains, but the racial
bar we can never accept.
S.: But you have no idea of my difficulties.
G.: I know that you are quite able to overcome greater diffi-
culties.
S.: All right, I shall now talk to the Free State members.
You should leave your address with Lane. I hope you will keep
the Cape and the Natal Indians silent.
G.: They will certainly not remain silent. I have just got a
wire from Natal. It is absolutely necessary to protect existing rights.
The question of domicile is ticklish and section 25 requires amend-
ing. Certificates should be issued for the asking.
S.: But discretion is always reserved.
G.: Not in the existing statutes. But of this I shall talk later
if you will let me.
S.: What are you doing in Jo'burg, etc. ?
G.: Looking after the families of passive resisters, etc.
S.: It has hurt me more than you to imprison these people.
It has been the unpleasantest episode of my life to imprison men
who suffer for their conscience. I should do the same thing for
conscience' sake.
G.: And yet you are persecuting Mrs. Sodha.
*
*
*
Please let Sorabjee and those on the Farm read the interview. I have
written it more for their sakes, and then you may send it to Mr. Polak.
The notes of the interview are not for publication. But they are
not to be destroyed.
I hope you received Mr. Hosken's permission to publish the corres-
pondence.
Do please get Sorabjee to write daily to the people at the Farm.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5376
1 Vide Appendix XII.
