313. LETTER TO UNDER SECRETARY FOR COLONIES
[LONDON,]
October 19, 1909
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 15th
instant.
The letter leaves my colleague and me in a state of great uncertain-
ty. The Earl of Crewe was pleased to tell Mr. Hajee Habib and me
when we waited on His Lordship on the 16th ultimo that he agreed that
the proposal submitted by me was reasonable, and that he would place
it before Mr. Smuts for his acceptance. The letter under reply does not
say whether the proposal was placed before Mr. Smuts and, if it was, what
his decision was in respect of it. His Lordship will, I have no doubt,
appreciate the fact that, in order not to prejudice the negotiations that
have been carried on, we have remained, so far as the public are con-
cerned, entirely inactive, and we should consider it our duty to do so,
so long as the negotiations are carried on on the basis of the proposal
submitted by me. The great and prolonged suffering British Indians
in the Transvaal are undergoing can only end with the security of the
theoretical right of British Indians of culture being attained in accor-
dance with my submission. If, therefore, Mr. Smuts intends only to place
his own original proposal made at the time of his departure for South
Africa before the Transvaal Ministers and the Transvaal Parliament,
it is respectfully submitted that, so far as British Indians are concerned,
nothing is to be gained by a policy of inactivity. I feel sure that His
Lordship will agree that we should know the exact position under the
negotiations, in order that we may thereby guide our conduct and, so far
as it lies within our power, facilitate them. May I, therefore, request fuller
information on the subject of the negotiations at an early date?
1 This was in reply to Gandhiji's letter of October 8 and ran as follows:
". . . the proposals referred to in the letter from this Department of the 4th instant as
a possible basis of legislation with regard to the British Indian question in the Trans-
vaal were those made by Mr. Smuts before his departure, not those made by you at
the interview on the 16th ultimo.
"I am to add that the question of the action to be taken by you in connection with
the controversy can only be one for your own decision. You will, however, no doubt bear
in mind the effect which your proposed course may have on the attitude of the
Transvaal Government and Parliament towards Mr. Smuts' proposals, and will consi-
der whether it is not preferable to await a declaration of their policy in the matter be-
fore taking further action."
I may add that a cablegram received from Johannesburg states
that to a newspaper reporter Mr. Smuts said that he was waiting for a
reply from the Earl of Crewe before he made any public statement re-
garding his proposals on the question. This cablegram adds to our diffi-
culty as to the course we should adopt, so long as we are uninformed as
to the action which His Lordship proposed to take when the interview
of the 16th ultimo was granted.
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten office
copy: S. N. 5136
