151. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Thursday, November 29, 1928
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I am sure you have sent the accompanying papers to me
through some mistake. I often receive papers like these which
need not have been sent to me.
In your letter you make no suggestion concerning Shanker-
lal's letter. Should I get another resolution passed here?
I will inquire a little further into the Chalala affair and then
write to you. I return with this the letters of . . . behn and . . .
lal . It is certainly a painful chapter.
The reason why Mahavir, Durga and Maitri fall ill fre-
quently is nothing but their food.
I wanted to write to you about myself when I had leisure.
There is no trace of impatience in the experiments I am making.
It was all along my intention to experiment with the use of oil
after coming here. I had not been taking fruit even when I was
there. Even then I ate nothing but fruits during the journey. Here,
too, I do not exclude fruits altogether.
Today being Lalaji Day, and for other reasons, I have eaten
only fruits. The only material difference is that I take no milk.
I naturally feel sometimes that I should compete with all of you.
But you have no reason to feel worried about this. No one here
feels worried. Everyone knows that I will attempt nothing
beyond my strength. It is many years since I overcame the
attachment to life; this is not a new thing.
It is enough that you keep on striving. You should never
worry that you will not be able to attain the level which you
say I have done. It is easy enough to attain that level; in any
matter in which you find it difficult to do so, put yourself in God's
hand. If you stop worrying, your efforts will succeed better. If
you lack fitness for anything, you will acquire it by patiently striving
for it. If even after this, you have any questions to ask me, ask
them.
The problem of Chi. Santok and Keshu is difficult. I have
been thinking what to do. At any rate, this sum cannot be paid
against wheat. I will write about this later.
You have done well in relieving Somabhai. He cannot be
continued for six months, or even for one month.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 13-
