396. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
April 13, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Today is a day of fasting; we are on the deck of a ship sail-
ing from Tezpur to Gauhati. On one side of me is Thakkar
Bapa, on the other is Om and all around are sitting the rest of
the party. In front is the lavatory.
It is not very dirty. The
rains have already set in here.
There was a heavy downpour
yesterday and so it is stuffy today.
Deck journey, therefore, is
bearable. It is nine in the morning now. We shall reach
Gauhati at about twelve. Mirabehn will have arrived there. She
had taken ill and so we had left her behind in Patna.
My
health is good. I allow myself sufficient rest.
I don't overstrain
the body. If one were to listen to all the advice that doctors give,
one would never leave one's bed.
In the dispute between the workers and the mill-owners in
Ahmedabad, in my view the latter are more at fault.
They them-
selves admit this. The part which Kasturbhai has played this time
does him no credit. The mill-owners' resolution was so utterly ab-
surd that I thought I must write something. I wrote to Kastur-
bhai and remonstrated with him gently. The resolution was no-
thing but a threat. But there was a risk of the system [of arbitra-
tion] built up through twelve years' labour breaking down.
My
letter had an effect. It may be said, rather, that differences arose
among the mill-owners themselves. Chimanbhai and Sakarlal3,
therefore, came to see me.
Kasturbhai did not come as he was
preparing to go to Geneva. I told them that wages could not be
reduced without evidence to justify such a step; but that, if they
were ready to link wages to profits and fix minimum wages, I would
agree to whatever relief such an arrangement might give them.
They liked this suggestion but told me that it would be difficult
to persuade other mill-owners to implement it. That is true, of
course. I will see now what can be done.
You must have read about my decision.
I am eager to know
your view. I have assumed that you will understand without
explanation both decisions of mine.
I have no doubt at all
that both are correct. There will be no danger to satyagraha now,
and the party favouring Council-entry will no longer be forced to
remain inactive. Their inactivity was painful to them. Let them
go ahead. If they maintain purity in their methods of work, they
can do some useful work even in the legislature.
Devdas is taking rest in Delhi. Lakshmi is in the last stages
of her pregnancy. Raja is in Delhi and will remain there till
Lakshmi's delivery at any rate.
The senior leaders will certainly come and see me again.
I
am surprised to learn that you do not get Harijan. I am inquiring
how this happens.
The trouble in your nostrils is certainly difficult to treat. But
it must be cured though I don't know what should be done to
cure it. Ultimately you yourself will have to think about it, for
I have seen that in such cases even doctors feel helpless.
Improve-
ment takes place only if the patient himself discovers some method.
I believe that pranayama and some of the asanas are bound to have
an effect. Since in pranayama one inhales twice as much oxygen
as in normal breathing, or even more, I believe that the extra
oxygen which the affected part will get is bound to have an effect.
If you try to do the whole process of pranayama and observe the
effect, you will also realize that it has an intimate connection with
the functioning of the nostrils. Hence pranayama must have some
effect, good or bad, on them. But there is no possibility of a bad
effect and so it can only be good.
Pranayama must be done in a
place where the air is pure. It would be desirable, therefore, to do
it in an open plot of ground. I have never asked you where you
sleep. But I assume that the doors of your room are kept open.
Dahyabhai had sent me Mani's letter. It was a brave one,
though also painful. I have met Aminbhai.
How long will he
be there?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 91-
57-25
