338. LETTER TO INDENTURED INDIANS
[CAPE TOWN,
After June 22, 1914]
TO
INDIANS COMING WITHIN THE SCOPE OF ACT 17 OF 1895
MY DEAR BRETHREN,
You must have known by now that the £3 tax which you,
your wives and grown-up children had to pay every year has
been repealed and that the collection of arrears has been suspended.
This means that you can live in freedom in this Province without
re-indenturing yourselves. The Act of 1891 which applied to those
who arrived before 1895 will now apply to you as well. It was
in order to bring this about that you, I and hundreds of our
brethren put up a struggle and went through suffering. But
The Natal Mercury has stated that your position has become
worse than it was and that now you will be either compelled to
re-indenture yourselves or sent back to India. This is not true.
The Government has stated categorically in one of its communica-
tions that the inference which the Mercury has drawn is not
correct. The Imperial Government and the Government of India
are parties to the settlement. I know how they understand it.
They have no doubt that the repeal of the tax means that you can
live as free men and that, if you live so in Natal for three years,
you will get the same rights of residence as Indians who arrive as
free immigrants. And finally I want to tell you that, if, under
the new Act, you are treated as prohibited immigrants, as The
Natal Mercury says you will be, no matter in what part of the
world I may be, I shall use all my strength to get so terrible an
injustice removed. I am convinced, however, that the Government
intends nothing of the kind and also that the Act bears no such
meaning. This is the view of Mr. Marshall Camp bell, too, who
worked so hard to secure the repeal of the tax. You need have,
therefore, no apprehensions on this score and I hope that no
Indian will henceforth re-indenture himself out of fear of being
expelled from this Colony.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-7-1914
