275. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
June 30, 1903
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I enclose a copy of my letter to Haridasbhai. It gives all
the news about me. Read it out and explain the situation here
to your aunt. It is highly desirable that she should decide to
stay on there, as life here is rather expensive. If she remains
there, savings made in this place will enable her and the children
to lead a comparatively easy life in India. In that case, I may
be able to return home in two or three years' time. But if she
insists, I shall not retreat from the promise I made her on
the eve of my departure. If, however, she decides to leave, make
all requisite preparations by October and take the first avail-
able boat in November. But do try to convince her that it will
be best for her to remain in India. In consultation with Revashan-
kerbhai, she may choose to stay either in Bombay or in Rajkot.
If you have not already started with Harilal, and your
aunt intends to accompany you, bring Ramdas and Devdas
also along with you. Proper arrangements should be made in
regard to the accommodation and education of Manilal and
Gokuldas in Bombay. Otherwise the education of both will suffer.
But if Manilal is not willing to stay behind, let him also join
you. It will be good if Gokuldas continues his studies in Bombay.
Let me know his mind and also what Raliatbehn has to say about it.
Chi. Maganlal seems to be getting on well. Now there is
nothing left out.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Show this letter to Revashankerbhai. It has been written in
great hurry and will be difficult to decipher. Sit with him and
read it out carefully.
Bring as many books and photographs as you can from the
list I sent you. It will be good if all the money is deposited with
Revashankerbhai. Please see that Fuli is paid off. Go to Rajkot,
if necessary and settle the account of Shivlalbhai. That will leave
you with enough money for the journey.
If your aunt decides to stay in Rajkot, it will be better
to bring Manilal here.
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 10994. Courtesy: Prabhudas C. Gandhi
