129. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 15, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
This is in terms of our talks of Wednesday the 13th instant.
For the moment I have shunted the Rajaji Formula and with
your assistance am applying my mind very seriously to the famous
Lahore Resolution of the Muslim League.
You must admit that the Resolution itself makes no refer-
ence to the two nations theory. In the course of our discussions,
you have passionately pleaded that India contains two nations,
i.e., Hindus and Muslims, and that the latter have their home-
lands in India as the former have theirs. The more our argument
progresses, the more alarming your picture appears to me. It
would be alluring if it was true. But my fear is growing that
it is wholly unreal. I find no parallel in history for a body
of converts and their descendants claiming to be a nation apart
from the parent stock. If India was one nation before the advent
of Islam, it must remain one in spite of the change of faith
of a very large body of her children.
You do not claim to be a separate nation by right of
conquest, but by reason of acceptance of Islam. Will the two
nations become one if the whole of India accepted Islam? Will
Bengalis, Oriyas, Andhras, Tamilians, Maharashtrians, Gujaratis,
etc., cease to have their special characteristics if all of them
become converts to Islam? These have all become one politically
because they are subject to one foreign control. They are
trying today to throw off that subjection.
You seem to have introduced a new test of nationhood.
If I accept it, I would have to subscribe to many more claims
and face an insoluble problem. The only real, though awful,
test of our nationhood arises out of our common political sub-
jection. If you and I throw off this subjection by our combined
effort, we shall be born a politically free nation out of our
travail. If by then we have not learnt to prize our freedom, we
may quarrel among ourselves and, for want of a common master
holding us together in his iron grip, seek to split up into small
groups or nationalities. There will be nothing to prevent us
from descending to that level and we shall not have to go in
101
search of a master. There are many claimants to the throne
that never remains vacant.
With this background, I shall present you with my difficulty
in accepting your Resolution.
1. Pakistan is not in the Resolution. Does it bear the original
meaning Punjab, Afghanistan, Kashmir, Sind and Baluchistan, out
of which the name was mnemonically formed? If not what is it?
2. Is the goal of Pakistan pan-Islam?
3. What is it that distinguishes an Indian Muslim from every
other Indian, if not his religion? Is he different from a Turk
or an Arab?
4. What is the connotation of the word "Muslims" in the
Resolution under discussion? Does it mean the Muslims of India
of geography or of the Pakistan to be?
5. Is the Resolution addressed to the Muslims by way of
education, or to the inhabitants of the whole of India by way
of appeal, or to the foreign ruler as an ultimatum?
6. Are the constituents in the two zones to constitute "Inde-
pendent States", an undefined number in each zone?
7. Is the demarcation to take place during the pendency of
British Rule?
8. If the answer to the last question is in the affirmative,
the proposal must be accepted first by Britain and then im-
posed upon India, not evolved from within by the free will of the
people of India.
9. Have you examined the position and satisfied yourself
that these "Independent States" will be materially and otherwise
benefited by being split up into fragments?
10. Please satisfy me that these Independent Sovereign States
will not become a collection of poor States, a menace to them-
selves and to the rest of India.
11. Pray show me by facts and figures or otherwise how the
independence and welfare of India as a whole can be brought
about by the acceptance of the Resolution?
12. How are the Muslims under the Princes to be disposed
of as a result of this scheme?
13. What is your definition of "minorities" ?
14. Will you please define the "adequate, effective and
mandatory safeguards" for minorities referred to in the second
part of the Resolution?
15. Do you not see that the Lahore Resolution contains only
a bare statement of the objective and does not give any idea as
to the means to be adopted for the execution of the idea and the
concrete corollaries thereof? For instance : (a) Are the people
in the regions falling under the plan to have any voice in the
matter of separation and, if so, how is it to be ascertained?
(b) What is the provision for Defence and similar matters of com-
mon concern contemplated in the Lahore Resolution? (c) There
are many groups of Muslims who have continuously expressed dis-
sent from the policy of the League. While I am prepared to ac-
cept the preponderating influence and position of the League
and have approached you for that very reason, is it not our
joint duty to remove their doubts and carry them with us by
making them feel that they and their supporters have not been
practically disfranchised? (d) Does this not lead again to placing
the Resolution of the League before the people of the zones con-
cerned as a whole for acceptance?
As I write this letter and imagine the working of the Reso-
lution in practice, I see nothing but ruin for the whole of India.
Believe me, I approach you as a seeker. Though I represent no-
body but myself, I aspire to represent all the inhabitants of India,
for I realize in my own person their misery and degradation, which
is their common lot, irrespective of class, caste or creed. I know
that you have acquired a unique hold on the Muslim masses. I
want you to use your influence for their total welfare, which must
include the rest.
In this hastily written letter, I have only given an inkling of
my difficulty.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
