410. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February 15, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
In the hope of giving you a good letter against your splendid
letter I have been postponing writing to you. But I can do so
no longer. Daily the work is increasing. I must therefore write
now and do the best I can. I wonder if you are allowed an
innocent paper like Harijan. I am sending it in the hope that you
will get it. If you do, you will please let me have your opinion.
The fight against sanatanists is becoming more and more interest-
ing if also increasingly difficult. The one good thing is that they
have been awakened from long lethargy. The abuses they are
hurling at me are wonderfully refreshing. I am all that is bad and
corrupt on this earth. But the storm will subside. For I apply the
sovereign remedy of ahimsa-non-retaliation. The more I ignore
the abuses, the fiercer they are becoming. But it is the death dance
of the moth round a lamp. Poor Rajagopalachari and Devdas!
They are also in for it. They are dragging out the engagement
with Lakshmi and weaving round it foul charges. Thus is untou-
chability being supported!
Sarup and Krishna saw me the other day about untouchabi-
lity and Indu as part of the domestic interview. Indu was in excel-
lent health and seemed to be quite happy.
Sarup is having a
brief tour in Kathiawar and Gujarat for anti-untouchability and
Krishna was to have gone to Allahabad. Devdas is in Delhi help-
ing Raja who is moving the M.L.A.s for the anti-untouchability
Bills. Our time is being wholly occupied by the untouchability
work. Sardar Vallabhbhai contributes all the envelopes for the
ever-increasing number of outgoing letters.
He is the diligent
newspaper reader who digs out odd bits of information on un-
touchability and what not. He is also a factory for the inex-
haustible supply of mirth. The inspection day is just the same to
him as any other day. He never has any request to make. With
me never a day passes but I have some request to make. But I
do not know which is the happier. Why may I not be as happy
as he, if I can take my defeats without pulling a long face!
We all envy your solitude and your studies. It is true that
our burdens are of our own making or more accurately of my mak-
ing. I have dashed to pieces all Vallabhbhai's hope of becoming
a good Sanskrit scholar. He can't concentrate on his studies in
the midst of the excitement of Harijan work and the daily dish of
spiced criticism which he enjoys like the Bengal footballers their
game. Mahadev continues to be what Shaukat described him to
be-the hamal of the party. No work is too much for him or be-
yond him. Chhaganlal Joshi is still finding his feet. But he is
flourishing. With the spring now well on us, he cannot fail to
blossom out. We are not a bad assortment. We observe the rules
of the game and so make a fairly decent family strictly regulated
by the code of varnashrama which between Dr. Ambedkar and me
will soon provide a new sensation for the sanatanists. More trou-
ble for me but none of my seeking, I assure you.
I have now
only space and time enough to say we all hope your progress
all round continues steadily.
Love from us all.
BAPU
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 109-10
