198. LETTER TO PRIME MINISTER'S SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
September 21, 1907
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE THE PRIME MINISTER
PRETORIA
SIR,
The Committee of my Association desires me to draw the Prime
Minister's attention to the following report in the papers:
He regretted that Asiatics were objecting to registration on such a flimsy
excuse as that of the taking of finger impressions. It was enforced for white people,
and he did not see that anyone suffered from the rule.
If the report referred to is correct, I venture to draw the Right
Hon'ble gentleman's attention to the fact that finger impressions
themselves have never been a primary cause of the opposition to the
Registration Act. While they undoubtedly constitute a serious item
among many others, my Association is free to admit that, by them-
selves, they would never justify the very great and intense irritation
that the Act has caused. I take the liberty to quote from the
grounds of objections framed:
1. It is manifestly in conflict with the past declarations of His
Majesty's representatives;
2. it recognises no distinction between British and alien
Asiatics;
3. it reduces British Indians to a status lower than that of the
aboriginal races of South Africa and coloured people;
4. it renders the position of British Indians in the Transvaal
much worse than under Law 3 of 1885, and therefore, than
under the Boer regime;
5. it sets up a system of passes and espionage unknown in any
other British territory;
6. it brands the communities to which it is applied as criminals
or suspects;
7. the alleged influx of unauthorised British Indians is denied;
8. if such a denial is not accepted, a judicial, open, and British
inquiry should be instituted before such drastic and uncalled-
for legislation is enforced;
9. the measure is otherwise un-British, and unduly restricts
the liberty of inoffensive British subjects, and constitutes a
compulsory invitation to British Indians in the Transvaal
to leave the country.
Thus, it will be seen that, when the Law was first introduced
last year, the main objections did not contain even so much as a refe-
rence to finger prints. The whole flavour about the Act is, in my
humble opinion, that of criminality, and submission to it would make
the lives of British Indians in the Transvaal intolerable.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Essop ISMAIL MIA,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 28-9-1907
