59. LETTER TO HIRALAL A. SHAH
November 23, 1932
I was fully aware that the analogy of a dyer did not apply
in all respects, but it was good enough for my purpose. You think
that the problem of untouchability has been solved in prisons.
But that is so only on paper. Nothing of the kind that you
suppose is being done. I am speaking from personal observation.
Whether in jails or outside, the fact is that in most parts of India
and for most of the year the Bhangi's dress is no more than loin-
cloth. I myself did a Bhangi's duty continually for nearly one-
and-a-halfyears. I used to do it dressed like an ordinary labourer.
In the Ashram it is done with the dhoti tucked in. A person doing
Bhangi's work does not become as much soiled as a dyer. If he
does his work scientifically, he need not do anything more than
clean himself with earth. You probably know that according to
Smritis and Islam, such cleaning is as good as a full bath. But there
are occupations in which this is not sufficient, nor is even washing
with water. Soap and antiseptic medicines are required for clean-
ing oneself properly. Such occupations are those of the Chamar,
the doctor, the dyer and the worker in a coal mine. There are
many others besides these. Thus the cleanliness of Bhangis has
very little part in the removal of untouchability. Think over all
this very carefully. You should not lose your sense of perspective.
If you wish to discuss the matter further, come and see me.
I did not see anything objectionable in the note in the
Chronicle. It is true that at present Bhangis work for all classes of
people. If, however, Hindus had given them a place in their fold,
their condition would never have become as bad as it is. The
status of Bhangis in Europe or in any other part of the world
is not inferior in any respect to that of other workers. There
are no special localities for their residence nor is there a special
dress for them. Nowhere outside India is there a special section
of the community like our Bhangis.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 271-
