45. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
June 16, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in only today.
I am glad you have left Damodardas's roof. It is ominous
that there is no letter from him as yet. Let us hope that he will
do nothing shady and that [he] has done nothing of the kind. I
have always held a high opinion of him. It will distress me to
find otherwise.
I have no doubt you will make sure that Shantabai is not
embarrassed in any way by harbouring you.
Yes, I have been saltless since Sunday. As the doctors removed
the splints and found that there was no relief from their use, I im-
mediately thought of you and knew that you would be more at
ease if I gave up salt. It was no deprivation to me and so I stop-
ped it at once. It meant giving up the loaf and going to chapati.
Whether it was the chapati or the absence of salt, the bowels be-
came looser than I would care. Therefore from yesterday I
have been on grapes, mangoes and a vegetable. This at once put
the bowels right, though not absolutely. I would, therefore, conti-
nue the chapatiless and almondless diet for a little longer and
watch the result. I was weighed yesterday and had lost 1½ lb.,
nothing to grumble about. Strength is maintained. The condition
of saltless ought not to mean reversion to milk. If I revert to milk
and the pain in the elbow disappears, the disappearance will
justly be attributed to milk. If in spite of milk, the pain does not
leave the elbow and does after giving up salt, the experiment
may be claimed to have succeeded. Dr. Mehta is positive that
there is nothing organically wrong and that the only thing re-
quired is rest for the affected part. This I am giving so far as the
wheel is concerned. Anyway, having taken up the saltless, I shall
watch its other effects and take to milk if need be. I am
watching myself carefully. There is, therefore, not the slightest
cause for anxiety. The system is quite good in every other respect.
As Vallabhbhai rightly says, if there was anything organically
wrong, the mischief should spread to the other parts of the body.
I am not repeating all these details in my letter to the Ashram,
since you let them see what I write to you.
I understand what you say about your activity. I shall see
if I can make use of the information.
I suppose you know that Devdas is down with fever. The
telegram received says there is nothing serious. I have wired
for more particulars. And Manilal, Sushila, their daughter and
Pragji were all down with that deadly malaria. But they seem to
have escaped with extreme weakness. There is a splendid passage
in Sir James Jeans' book: "Life is a progress towards Death."
Another reading may be: Life is a preparation for Death! And
somehow or other we quail to think of that inevitable and grand
event. It is grand even regarded as a preparation for a better life
than the past, as it should be for everyone who tries to live in the
fear of God.
Remember me to Shantabai. Of course, you will be seeing
Damodardas often and help him with your advice. Is Keshav
there? What does he say? Ask him to write to me fully.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
In the envelope you will admire Vallabhbhai's art.
From the original: C.W. 6225. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9691
