16. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[POONA,
August 13, 1919]
I have just received the following cablegram from Mr. Ibrahim
Ismail Aswat, Chairman of the British Indian Association, Johannes-
burg:
Bill assented 23rd June, promulgated 3rd instant. Restricts companies
acquiring further fixed properties and holding bonds as prior to company
law. Reaffirms Gold and Townships Acts operating on new licences
after 1st May and restricting present traders and successors to particular
townships. Deputation waiting His Excellency urging withhold assent
on ground class legislation. Government promised another commission
during recess investigate Indian question throughout Union as concession
(to) the detractors in Parliament. Fear further restrictive legislation. Com-
munity request you appeal Viceroy propose Royal Commission India re-
presenting Union (local) Indian (interests). Convened Union Indian
Conference 4th August, great success. Decided united action. Many of
(the) associations pledged resist any cost—Aswat.
The words in parentheses have been added by me to make the
meaning clear. The cablegram bears out what I have said in
my letter to Sir George Barnes and what I said at the recent
meeting at Poona. The restrictions are clear: (1) no further
holding of landed property in the Transvaal; (2) no new trade
licences within the area affected by the Gold Law and the Town-
ships Act; (3) the present holders and their successors in title to
be restricted as to trade to the townships in which they are now
trading.
As I have already remarked, this means virtual ruin of the
Indian settlers in the Transvaal. The only means of livelihood to
the largest number is trade, and the largest number of Indians is
to be found probably within the gold area. If the Act stands,
they must die out in the natural course.
In the cablegram, the word "assent" occurs twice. It says
the Bill has been assented to and it refers to a deputation that is
to wait on H. E. the Governor-General of South Africa requesting
him to withhold assent. The second use of the word "assent"
refers probably to a clause in the Letters Patent providing for the
vetoing of class legislation. The clause is undoubtedly to be used
under exceptional circumstances. No one can deny that the
Asiatics Act constitutes a very exceptional circumstance warranting
the exercise of the Royal veto.
The most important part of the cablegram, however, is the fact
that the commission promised by the Union Government is to
be appointed as a "concession" to "the detractors" of Indians in the
Union Parliament. Unless, therefore, the Government of India take
care, there is every likelihood of the commission, like the committee
of the South African Assembly, proving to the British Indians a
curse instead of a blessing. It is, therefore, not unnatural that the
British Indian Association urges that H. E. the Viceroy should
propose a Royal Commission upon which both the Union and the
Indian interests are represented. Nothing can be fairer than the
proposal made by Mr. Aswat. I say so because, as a matter of
right, no commission is really needed to decide that Indian settlers
are entitled to trade in South Africa where they like and hold
landed property on the same terms as the European settlers. This
is the minimum they can claim. But under the complex consti-
tution of this great Empire, justice is and has often to be done in
a round-about manner. A wise captain, instead of sailing against
a headwind, tacks and yet reaches his destination sooner than he
otherwise would have. Even so, Mr. Aswat wisely accepts the
principle of a commission on a matter that is self-evident, but
equally wisely wants a commission that would not prove abortive
and that will dare to tell the ruling race in South Africa that, as
members in an Empire which has more Coloured people than white,
they may not treat their Indian fellow-subjects as helots. Whether
the above proposal is accepted or some other is adopted by the
Imperial Government, it must be made clear to them that public
opinion in India will not tolerate confiscation of the primary rights
of the British Indian settlers in South Africa.
M. K.
Young India, 16-8-1919
