3. LETTER TO DHARMENDRASINH
ANANDKUNJ, RAJKOT,
March 2, 1939
MAHERBAN THAKORE SAHEB 3 ,
I write this letter not without hesitation, but duty compels it.
You know the reason for my coming here. For three days I
had conversation with Durbar Virawala. He gave me cause for
intense dissatisfaction. He seems to be incapable of keeping his
resolutions from moment to moment. Such is my opinion based
upon my three days' contact with him. In my opinion, his guid-
ance has harmed the State.
Now I come to the object of this letter. At the time of
leaving Wardha I had resolved that I would not leave Rajkot
without inducing fulfilment of your promise. But I had never
thought that I would have to be here for more than one or two
days or that I would have to suffer what I have suffered.
My patience is exhausted. I should hasten to Tripuri if it
is at all possible. If I do not go, over a thousand co-workers
will be disappointed and lakhs of poor people will become discon-
solate. Time, therefore, has a special value for me at this junc-
ture.
I beseech you, therefore, to adopt with a full heart the follow-
ing suggestions of mine and free me from anxiety by speeding
me on my return journey tomorrow.
1. You should announce to the people that our Notifica-
tion No. 50, dated 26th December, stands.
2. You should cancel your Notification No. 61, dated
21st January. Names 2, 3, 5 and 7 of the Reforms Committee
announced by you should stand and you should accept on behalf
of the Rajkot Rajakiya Praja Parishad the following names:
1. U. N. Dhebar,
2. P. P. Anada,
3. V. M. Shukla,
4. J. H. Joshi,
5. S. V. Modi.
The underlying motive of this suggestion is that the Parishad
should have a majority on its side.
[3.] Shri U. [N.] Dhebar should be appointed as President
of the Committee.
4. You should appoint three or less than three officials as
guides and advisers to the Committee. They should be such as
I could accept on behalf of the Parishad. They should have no
vote in the proceedings of the Committee.
5. You should issue instructions to the heads of the several
departments of the State to furnish to the Committee such papers,
figures and other material and assistance as it may need. You
should appoint for the use of the Committee suitable quarters in
the Secretariat.
6. My advice is that the advisers whom you may appoint
in terms of Clause 4 should form the Executive Council and
that Council should be responsible for the management of the
State in the spirit of the Notification of the 26th December so as
not to do anything likely to be injurious to its main purpose. One
of them should be the President of the Council. You will unhesitat-
ingly endorse the actions of the Council.
If you deem it fit to
appoint other persons than the advisers of the Committee as Coun-
cillors, the appointment should be made in consultation with me.
The Committee should commence its proceedings on the 7th
instant and finish them by the 22nd instant.
The enforcement
of the recommendations of the Committee should take place within
seven days of their being in your hands.
7. The satyagrahi prisoners should be discharged tomorrow.
Fines and execution orders should be stopped and fines already
collected and confiscations should be returned.
I gather from the conversation with Mr. Gibson that he will
not interfere with whatever you may do in connection with the
Notification of the 26th December.
If you cannot see your way to accept my suggestions before
noon tomorrow, my fast will commence from that time and will
continue till after acceptance.
I trust that you will not regard the language of my letter to
be stiff. And if I do use stiff language or my action appears to
be such, I claim that right in connection with you. My father
had the privilege of serving the State when your grandfather was
its Chief. Your father regarded me as a father to him. Indeed
at a public meeting he called me even his guru, but I have been
guru to no one; therefore, I have never regarded him as a disciple.
You are therefore as a son to me. It is possible that you do
not regard me as father. If you do, you will accept joyfully my
submission in a moment and, in addition, you will express
your regret for what has befallen your people after 26th Decem-
ber. You will please not consider me your or the State's enemy.
I can never be anybody's enemy and have never been. I have
implicit faith that in the acceptance of my submission to you lies
your good, your prestige and your duty. If you will observe that
in some of my suggestions I have gone outside the four corners
of the Notification of the 26th December, such departure will be
found to be merely superficial. You will note that in not interfer-
ing with your nominations of the persons outside the Parishad I
have had solely in view your prestige.
Thus the departure is
purely in favour of the State. If the other departures may not be so
1 E. C. Gibson, Resident of Rajkot State
considered, they are solely due to, what I have considered, your
breach of promise. In my view they are for the protection of
both the parties and the people and for the purpose of prevent-
ing another breakdown of the Settlement.
In conclusion, I give you my word of honour that if I am
then alive, I shall critically examine the report that the Reforms
Committee may prepare. If I am not, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
may do so, and the examination will be such as to make sure
that no damage is done to your prestige or to the State or
your people.
I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr. Gibson. I am
not handing this letter to the Press and I entertain the hope
that you will kindly adopt my suggestion so that I may never
have to publish this letter.
May God bless you and give you right guidance.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
Harijan, 11-3-1939
