413. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 10, 1911
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram
in reply to mine of the 9th instant informing my Association that Gene-
ral Smuts is not prepared to depart from his decision not to recognize
Mr. Ritch, as he feels that there is no necessity to bring into the matter
at this stage one who is an entire stranger to him, and that the leaders
of the Indian community may rely that their representations already
received from Mr. Gandhi and any further suggestions that they may
put forward will receive the fullest consideration of the Government,
and that it is entirely unnecessary for anybody to come to Cape Town
to emphasise the points put forward. My Association is grateful for the
assurance contained in the telegram, and, in accordance with General
Smuts' desire, no representative will be sent from Johannesburg.
It is but right for my Association to state that Mr. Ritch having
been intimately connected with the controversy for a long time, having
made an exhaustive study of the subject, and having lived in Johannes-
burg for many years, is a gentleman pre-eminently qualified to make
representations to the Government. He enjoys the fullest confidence
of the community, and it was felt that much might be done towards end-
ing the struggle by personal interviews. Hence it was that Mr. Ritch
was deputed to wait upon General Smuts if necessary. My Association
trusts that the Bill will be so amended that it will be found in the end
that the deputing of Mr. Ritch was unnecessary.
My Association has read the correspondence between General Smuts
and Mr. Gandhi; and I am desired to endorse Mr. Gandhi's submission
to General Smuts, namely, that passive resistance will end on the Bill
being amended during the Committee stage so as to exempt educated
Asiatics who may be admitted under the immigration test from the ope-
ration of the registration laws in the different provinces, especially
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was sent by the Chairman,
British Indian Association, and reproduced in Indian Opinion, 18-3-1911, as a part of
the Gandhi-Smuts correspondence.
2 Vide "Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior and L. W.
Ritch", pp. 443-.
3 Vide "Letter to E. F. C. Lane", pp. 425-.
Act 36 of 1908 of the Transvaal, and unequivocally to provide for the
protection of the wives and minor children of Asiatics registered or en-
titled to be registered in the Transvaal or to remain in this Province by
reason of the education test, whether such wives and minors are within
the Transvaal or without.
My Association trusts that, if the struggle, which has been so pro-
longed, happily ends, those who are now undergoing imprisonment as
passive resisters will be discharged, and that those who have suffered for
conscience' sake will not be penalised, but that the rights which they
would have under Act 36 of 1908 will be respected.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5267
