59. LETTER TO THE PRESS
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
September 6, 1919
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
SIR,
I had the privilege of being a guest of Maulana Abdul Bari
Saheb of Firangi Mahal some time ago. We on this side of
India, barring the Mohammedans, know little of this great and good
man. He is one of the foremost religious preceptors in Islam and
has thousands of followers all over India. His unassuming and
truthful nature turns his opponents into friends when they begin
to understand him. He and I discussed many problems of mutual
interest, in the course of which I told him that so far as I could
interpret Hindu opinion, I had no doubt that it would be solidly
for the Mohammedans in the very difficult task of securing justice on
the Turkish claims, difficult because the question was burdened with
so many European complications that the Allied Powers might in
a weak moment fail to decide it on grounds of justice alone. He
said to me with calm deliberation, but without any hesitation, "If
we do not help you and do justice to you, Hindus, I for one can-
not claim nor even take for my fellow-religionists your active help."
I said, "Surely, you do not for one moment consider that I have
spoken in any spirit of bargaining. The question that is behind
the thought you have just now expressed, viz., that of cow-killing,
can be decided on its own merits and can await solution, for
the ripening of true friendship between us and for an impartial dis-
cussion." He immediately intervened as soon as I had finished
the sentence and said, "Please excuse me. I know you want to
help, because our cause is just and because we are children of the
same soil, and not because you want any quid pro quo. But do we
not owe a duty to ourselves? Islam will fall to pieces if it ever
takes and never gives. It must be faithful above all. The nobility
of our creed (he used the expression khandani) requires us to be
strictly just to our neighbours. Here it is a question of taking
service. The Hindus will judge our faith, and rightly, by our
conduct towards them. That is why I say: if we take from
you, we must give to YOU." I have only given the tiniest bit of the
wonderful conversation I had with a priest who combines in him
learning, true wisdom and humility. The Maulana has been true
to his word. I know ever since this conversation, he has been
preaching amongst his followers and friends the necessity of abs-
tention from cow-killing and today of all days, one of the most
sacred of Islam, he has thought of the Hindus and sent me the
following telegram :
In celebration of Hindu-Muslim unity no cow sacrifices in Firangi
Mahal this Bakrid—Abdul Bari.
To which I have sent the following reply:
Delighted with your great act of renunciation. Pray, accept Id
Mubarak.
Would to God that all of us, Hindus, Mohmmedans, Christians,
Parsis, Jews, belonging to all races, have the same virtue of charity,
justness and breadth of vision. The world will surely be the better
for it.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-9-1919
