163. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
Tuesday [March 10, 1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
The greatest grief imaginable has befallen me. My brother died
yesterday, I suppose simply thinking up to his last breath of me. What
a passionate wish it was on his part to meet me !2 And for me I was
hurrying everything on so that I could go to India with the quickest
despatch and fall down at his feet and nurse him. But it was not to
be. Now I must go to a family of widows with my poor self as the
head. You who do not quite know the Indian patriarchal [system] cannot
quite realize what this may mean. Anyway my desire to go to India
is keener than ever. And yet who knows! I doubt very much whether
I shall ever realize that desire. However, I must prepare for the
pilgrimage and then calmly leave it in the hands of Him who wields
the almighty power.
1 Lakshmidas Gandhi; vide also Vol.XII, p. 385.
2 Vide p. 165.
These shocks make in me still more intense fearlessness of death.
Why should the event agitate one? The grief itself has a selfish touch
about it. It is no calamity that my brother is dead, if I am ready to
meet death and consider it as the supreme and welcome crisis in life.
It is because we fear death so much for ourselves that we shed tears
over the deaths of others. How can I who know the body to be
perishable and the soul to be imperishable mourn over the separation
of body from soul. But there is a condition attached to a real belief
in this beautiful and consoling doctrine. He who believes in it must
not pamper the body but must be its ruler. He must regulate its wants
so as to make it serve the dweller within and not allow the body to
master him. Not to grieve over the death of others is to accept a state
almost of perpetual grief for this connection between body and soul
is itself grievous.
These are the thoughts that rule me just now. I shall not write
another such letter just now. This has written itself Please, therefore,
pass on to Polak. Let Manilal read it. And then you may pass on
to Chhaganlal for West and others to read.
I am revolving the idea in my own mind of help for the indentured.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
