315. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
SRIRAMPUR,
December 20, 1946
CHI. KAKA,
Your letter of the 6th arrived at Kazirkhil on the 12th. It
seems to have been given to me on the 16th. I have been
meaning to reply to it every day since then, but could manage to
dictate this only now at 5.15 (local time) after the morning
prayer. I am so helpless at present.
I am dictating this to Manu who arrived from Mahuwa
yesterday. I wished to write the letter myself, but could not
do that. I have been awake since 2.30 this morning. I have,
therefore, been dictating letters lying in bed.
I have just left
the bed to drink warm water and honey. After that I shall lie
down again. On careful reflection I feel that you are inclined
now, on Mavalankar's persuasion, to join the new University.
By all means do so. I have no doubt at all that you will adorn
whatever work you take up.
But I will blame you if there is the slightest slackening in
Hindustani work. I will not then accept the reply that you
joined the University with my consent. I should like you to
join the University with this understanding. But you must know
that your headquarters will necessarily be at Wardha. You should
also tell Mavalankar that Sardar and other Gujaratis should agree
to your joining the University. It will be enough if you inform
him to that effect.
Your shield will be Dada.
I could not follow your defi-
nition of "residential". I have understood the word merely to
mean that colleges and other institutions outside the University
area should not be placed within its jurisdiction. For instance,
the Aligarh University. Any student may join such a univer-
sity, but there will be no affiliated colleges. Why does Dada
insist that the Committee should have only Gujaratis as mem-
bers? You are regarded as a Gujarati, and so is Mavalankar.
But suppose it were not so; according to me it would be
narrowmindedness then, if, on that ground, you could not be
elected. If the U. P. or Bihar were to reject Kripalani as being
a Sindhi, would it not be an illustration of the dog-in-the-
manger attitude? One cannot oneself eat but would not let
others eat. If, therefore, it is considered necessary to add a fifth
qualification to the fourth mentioned, I would suggest this:
Nobody will be appointed a member of this Committee merely
because of his status or to please him, though any such person
who possesses the other qualifications for passing the test will
be accepted.
I understand about Narahari and Kishorelal. See that the
latter does nothing at the cost of his health. I would describe
my health as excellent. The climate here wholly agrees with me.
Bisen is working with Satis Babu. The latter had sent him
today to me for my final decision. I had a long and frank talk
with him. I have also understood what kind of a man he is. I
will now think and decide in a day or two where to post him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 10986
