173. LETTER TO AMARNATH JHA
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
November 20, 1941
BHAI AMARNATHJI,
I venture to write to you without earlier acquaintance.
Your election as President of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan
made me glad as well as sad. Who would not be glad at the election
of a scholar like you? But I must confess that I was sad, too; be-
cause I had, in the interest of work, wanted Rajendra Babu to be the
President this year. That is why Seth Jamnalal Bajaj proposed the
name of Rajendra Babu.
You are of course aware that I have been closely associated
with the Sammelan for many years. I had a hand in framing the
policy of the Sammelan towards propagation of Hindi. It has de-
veloped some political overtones too. I shall not be able to attend the
Sammelan. Hence myself and a few friends thought that the election
of Rajendra Babu would safeguard the interests of the Sammelan.
But this did not happen. Now all my hopes rest on you. I
hope to secure your help in what I had expected from Rajendra Babu.
It will be common ground between you and me that all of us
should endeavour to do our best, keeping in view the accommoda-
ting attitude of Tandonji who is the soul of the Sammelan, and all
the other things we know he stands for.
I do not know whether or no you approve of the policy
adopted at Indore and Nagpur Some attempts were made at
Poona to change that policy. The attempts did succeed to some
extent. I do not however regard these changes as intolerable.
But further steps in that direction will become unbearable for per-
sons like me. My efforts would be to move a step further than at
Nagpur. I am convinced this would secure the progress of Hindi
and the welfare of the nation. Hindi-Urdu controversy should
not have been started nor should it be continued.
There have been sharp differences about the Wardha office.
That office must be subordinate to the Sammelan but I think it
should have as much autonomy as the Madras office. If it is agreed
that the Wardha office has well served the cause of Hindi, it
should, I think, enjoy greater autonomy than it has today.
Rajendra Babu's presence at the Sammelan is uncertain. He
cannot stand the December weather of the Punjab. Nor can Seth
Jamnalalji go. Kakasaheb Kalelkar and Acharya Shriman Nara-
yan may go. Please lend your ear to them. I wish there should be
no conflicts at the Sammelan nor any meaningless controversy. If
there are differences on principles, let them be expressed in a
friendly spirit. Therefore I would request you, if you can spare the
time, to come here for a day so that all of us can meet and
talk things over. Rajendra Babu and Jamnalalji are here for the
time being.
If you cannot come for want of time or for other
reasons, I can send Kakasaheb and Shrimanji to you. Please let
me know your convenience.
Kindly excuse me for the trouble.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI AMARNATH JHA
GEORGE TOWN
PRAYAG, U.P.
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 10262. Also G.N. 65
