123. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON SOUTH
AFRICAN SITUATION
[ AHMEDABAD,
February 25, 1919]
TO
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
BOMBAY
SIR,
The cable received by me from Mr. Aswat, Chairman of the
Transvaal British Indian Association, and given below, shows
that a revival of satyagraha with all the attendant sufferings is
imminent in South Africa, unless the danger that threatens to
overwhelm the Indians of the Transvaal is averted by prompt and
effective action by the Government of India, and if necessary, by
the public also. The situation warrants a repetition of Lord
Hardinge's action and the immediate despatch to South Africa
of a mission consisting of, say, a distinguished civilian, and an
equally distinguished Indian publicist.
What is the situation? The Precious and Base Metals Act
referred to in the cable affects the gold area of the Transvaal in
the largest part of its Indian population. Krugersdorp is an
important town near Johannesburg, and contains many Indian
merchants, some of them owning stock probably worth 3 lakhs
of rupees. If no relief is provided, it means ruin for the merchants
and for those residing in the whole of the gold area. The goal of
the Union Government seems to be, as has been openly declared
by several Union statesmen, to reduce its Indian settlers to the
position of hewers of wood and drawers of water. It is possible
that the Court's interpretation is correct. If so, the Act itself
must be changed and the Indian community must be saved, not
merely because of their status as British subjects, but also because
of the Passive Resistance Settlement of 1914, which protects
vested or existing rights.
The judgment is a direct attack upon Indian liberty in pur-
suance of the policy referred to by me. The Government want
further to harass the community throughout the Union by refu-
sing facilities for conservation of its present Indian population.
They cannot remain in it, if they may not receive occasional
visitors, if, on the death of a propertied man, his trusted rela-
tives may not enter the Union in order to administer his affairs.
I can understand the dominant community in South Africa not
wishing to have an unlimited influx of people alien to them in
civilization. But it is impossible to understand a policy of ruthless
extermination, side by side, with a profession of loyalty to a com-
mon Empire. Moreover, this refusal to issue temporary permits
is a breach of the Settlement. It has been all along understood
that temporary permits would be granted, whenever the neces-
sity arose. Surely nobody could question it in the late Mr. Maho-
med Essak's case quoted by Mr. Aswat in his cablegram. The
reference to the late Mr. Gokhale in this connection is a libel
on a sacred name. After the termination of the interview,
Mr. Gokhale came directly to the hotel where we were staying. I
had the privilege of being his secretary and he related to me the
whole of the conversation between ministers and himself and there
was not a word about his having consented to the stoppage of
temporary permits under any circumstances whatsoever. He had
no authority to enter into any agreement. He went only to
learn and to plead. Your readers will recall that at the historic
meeting held in Bombay upon his return from South Africa, he
declared publicly that he had no authority to negotiate a settlement
and that he had agreed to nothing. As representing the Indian
community, I was party to the Settlement of 1914. If any such
agreement had been made, surely it would at least have formed
part of the many discussions between General Smuts and myself.
It is worthy of note that General Smuts is not now in South
Africa. If he was asked, I doubt not that he would repudiate
Colonel Shaw's allegation.
The cablegram adds that there are many other harassments
going on throughout the Union. We are supposed to be on the
eve of embarkation upon Reforms that are to eventuate in the
near future in full Responsible Government. What answer has
India to give to Mr. Aswat's pathetic appeal? The hundred
thousand Indians of the Union have a right to look up to the
Government of India and the people for the protection of their
elementary rights.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 27-2-1919
