163. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
November 1, 1921
It is dawn. Your letter is lying before me. Why should you
apologize for what you wrote?
There may be an element of egoism in my article or conduct
without my being aware of it. The word klesha [anguish] here
should be interpreted in a different way, though I cannot say how.
I feel pain when I see others suffer. It is the nature of compassion
that whenever one is unable to relieve the suffering of others one
suffers unbearably. Logic will not avail when one is describing
the condition of one's mind. I have given a graphic description of
my feelings. It may be that these feelings were not quite pure.
However, my state of mind at the time of writing the article had
also in it a yearning for moksha-my aspiration for moksha was by
no means weak then—but the fact is that I am no more than
an aspirant after moksha. But I am not yet fit for moksha in this
life. My tapascharya is not intense enough. I can control my
passions no doubt, but I have not yet become completely free from
them. I can control the palate, but the tongue has not yet ceased
relishing good food. He who can restrain the senses is a man
of self-control; but the man whose senses have become, through
constant practice, incapable of enjoying their objects has trans-
cended self-control, has in fact attained moksha. I would not be
tempted to give up my striving after moksha even for the sake of
swaraj, but that does not mean that I have attained moksha. You
will, therefore, notice many defects in my language. For me, even
the effort for attaining swaraj is a part of the effort for moksha.
Writing this [letter] to you is also a part of the same effort. If I
find it a hindrance in the path of moksha, my pen would drop down
this very moment, such is my yearning for moksha. Nevertheless,
the mind is like a drunken monkey; mere effort is not enough for
controlling it. Our [past] actions also must be coming in our
way.
In my article "Optimism" I have suggested a rule of con-
duct, viz, that we should cease to have any dealings with a
person who breaks a promise. This is the sign of a detached person.
If even next year I find that the atmosphere in India is unfavour-
1 Vide "Optimism", 23-10-1921.
able and still we go on harping the same tune, it would be an
outrage. In that case, I must first acquire the necessary fitness.
This is why silence has been considered the best speech. What-
ever I may do will be, I am sure, quite natural to me, for I will
say and act upon nothing but what I believe to be the truth.
But "Enjoy what you get today, who ever has seen tomorrow?"
has been accepted as their motto alike by libertines and the self-
controlled.
May the new year bring happiness to you.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 38-
