53. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
[1924]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
Now you must get into the habit of writing short letters.
One can make a point in one sentence. Arrange your thoughts and then
write them down. Arrange what you have written. Write it out again. Condense
it by combining a number of arguments and then reconstruct the sentences in
a way that they include all arguments. While doing so, many problems will
be resolved on their own.
Work, work, and work means constant activity. Writing accounts, reading
books and cleaning toilets can be called work or no work. To a great extent,
cleaning toilets is work for us because we dislike doing it. So, another
definition of 'work' is engaging in an activity which we dislike. This definition
is relevant at the moment.
One must have time for individual as well as social 'work'. One need
1 From the postmark
2,3,4& The source is illegible at these places.
6 As supplied by the addressee
45
46
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
not have to look for it. The organisation of the society should be such that
everyone gets such work. But it is not so. Primarily, it is my responsibility
and then that of Maganlal. I have realized the problem; the cure will be found.
We are not competent enough to take in students. Our experiment is such
that there is little possibility of other students joining us.
Do not call those who are teaching there 'teachers'. They too are students
but a little more literate. They should teach the illiterates and in turn gain
practical knowledge and learn to discipline their body, mind and speech. All
of us are both teachers as well as students. No one has any right here to
keep personal money.
I have not made any distinction between the Ashram [inmates] and the
teachers. But still the distinction is there and it is intentional. Otherwise we
could not have brought together even the teachers who are here and who
know English, etc. I find that the trend is to follow in one direction only.
This covers replies to all the issues —either implied or expressed by
you. If you feel something is missing, think over what I have written and
you will find it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 32966
