188. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEVAGRAM,
November 28, 1945
CHI. KANTI,
I got your postcard, as also the report sent by you. The
latter seems to have been drafted by you. If so, your English is
weak. Ordinarily this should not count as a deficiency in one,
but in India it is; for we take pride, though we ought not to,
in being able to speak and write a foreign language correctly.
I am a lover of all languages and take scrupulous care to write
correctly, but I am more eager to convey my meaning and am
not scared of making mistakes. Were it not so, I would never
have been able to speak in Hindi and other languages. Having
said this, my criticism of the report is that its English is not
correct. I have no time to revise it and return it. The report
itself is good and, therefore, I show it to everybody who is in–
terested in it. I am now sending it to Jajuji to read.
I shall not feel sorry that you will be breaking up an
organization which you have brought into being. Your leaving it
will amount to breaking it. I only hope that your action will
not be an expression of the rashness and anger which I have
observed in your nature. Sometimes it becomes one's dharma to
humbly cling to the organization one has set up, despite the co-
workers' coolness towards oneself. I have been doing this from
a much earlier age than you are at present and it has certainly
benefited me. Endurance is a virtue worth cultivating. You are
a student of the Gita. Ponder the profound truths contained in it.
After cautioning you thus, I unreservedly accept your decision.
If you teach the students who come to you and take more inti-
mate interest in their lives, you may perhaps be able to create
another organization with their help. In future lay stress from
the very beginning on all the processes relating to cotton. I have
come to realize from daily experience that this is of the utmost
importance.
My good wishes for the result of your examination.
The tour starts on the 30th. Manilal arrived last evening
and Devdas left for Delhi yesterday morning. He had come in
connection with Kasturba Fund work.
Blessings to Chi. Saru and Shanti.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 7380. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
