223. LETTER TO S. D. NADKARNI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 29, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I do not propose to publish your letter suggesting the adop-
tion of Devanagari as the all-India script. I have denied myself the
pleasure of publishing a similar and more elaborate letter from
Kakasaheb Kalelkar because it would merely lead to confusion.
The reform of Devanagari, however desirable it may be, is a
side issue. If we can but induce leaders of thought to adopt
Devanagari as a common script its reform wherever necessary is
bound to come.
Personally I like your suggestion for dropping the horizontal
caps as I would call them. Kakasaheb goes one better and sug-
gests the Gujarati script which is really re-formed Nagari. But I
have suppressed Kakasaheb's proposal because it would simply
lead to an interminable controversy and take the mind of think-
ing India away from the main issue. Whilst I believe that the
re-formation of Devanagari in some shape or other is necessary,
I am only indifferent to it at present. It would be a tremendous
saving of national energy and a move on the part of different
linguistic provinces towards one another to adopt one script
however imperfect it may be.
For your information I give you the reason for not printing
Navajivan in Devanagari. Navajivan has its own work cut out. In
order to make good its message it has submitted to a curtailment
of its subscription list. You may not know that at one time it and
Young India had each nearly 30,000 subscribers. But today it has
come down to less than 7,000. I do not mind its coming to zero for
enforcement of the mission for which the papers were brought
into being. Adoption of Devanagari was not part of that mission.
I have a large number of women readers and Parsis and Mussal-
mans who can struggle even through Gujarati type with some
labour. They find it difficult even to understand the moderate
number of Sanskrit words that have got to be used in editing Nava-
jivan. If I adopt Devanagari all these would be helpless and give
up Navajivan and me in sheer disgust. Amongst what may be called
the upper ten, I have, I fear, very few readers of Navajivan.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. S. D. NADKARNI
KARWAR
(N. KANARA)
From a photostat: S.N. 12625
