361. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
BANKIPORE,
July 7, 1917
DEAR MR. MAFFEY,
I am on my way to Ranchi in connection with the work of the
Champaran committee. I write this regarding the Annie Besant
agitation. As I am taking part in it by keeping myself in touch
with the leaders and pressing on their attention my views regarding
it, I feel that I could not do so without His Excellency knowing the
fact and knowing also my position in the agitation.
In my humble opinion, the internments are a big blunder.
Madras was absolutely calm before then. Now it is badly disturbed.
India as a whole had not made common cause with Mrs. Besant
but now she is on a fair way towards commanding India's identity
with her methods. Having had breathing time, I had gone down to
Ahmedabad for some work connected with the institution I am con-
ducting there, I passed through Bombay and Allahabad on my re-
turn and I was able to gauge the situation. I myself do not like
much in Mrs. Besant's method. I have not liked the idea of the
political propaganda being carried on during the War. In my
opinion, our restraint will have been the best propaganda. But
the whole country was against me. And no one could deny Mrs.
Besant's great sacrifice and love for India or her desire to be strictly
constitutional, nor could the country's right to carry on the propa-
ganda be denied if it chose to do so. Many of us have respectfully
differed from Mrs. Besant but all have recognised her powers and
devotion. The Congress was trying to 'capture' Mrs. Besant. The
latter was trying to 'capture' the former. Now they have almost
become one. I plead with all the earnestness I can command for the
boldest policy, i.e., to acknowledge the blunder in the frankest
manner and to withdraw the orders of internment and to declare
that the country has the right to carry on any propaganda that is
not subversive of the British Constitution and is totally free from
violence. Such an act will be a demonstration of strength, not of
weakness. Only a government having the desire always to do the
right and the power to crush the wrong can do it.
If unfortunately timid counsels prevail, there will be no rest in
the country and the cult of violence will surely spread. Open
violence one could understand and deal with. That may not be
practised, but secret violence would be attempted. No one would
be or feel responsible for it. Young minds without any lead from
anybody in particular are, I regretfully observe, drifting in that
direction. My life is dedicated to the preventing of the spread of
the disease and its uprooting in so far as it has gained a foothold.
I have presented to the youths and to Indians in general in my
humble way a better and more effective method and that is the
method of soul force or truth force or love force which for want
of a better term I have described as passive resistance. And I am
asking the leaders to adopt this method fully and boldly at this
critical juncture. It involves self-suffering and that alone through-
out. No government in the world can afford continually to
imprison or molest innocent men; the British Government cannot
afford it. It is its great secret and character that even when it
does wrong, it seeks to justify it before the world on moral grounds.
I think I have sufficiently explained myself. I hope, I shall
not be misunderstood. I ask for forgiveness for the presumption
in writing this letter and earnestly pray for the acceptance of my
proposal.
Please place this before His Excellency. If my presence is re-
quired at Simla, I am at H.E.'s disposal.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
PS.
I shall be in Ranchi care of Hon'ble Mr. Sahay up to the
11 th instant, and then at Motihari, Champaran.
M. K. G.
From a photostat of the original draft in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6372
XIII-30
