703. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
WARDHA,
October 20, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have not received copy of Andrews's letter.
In my opinion, the money should be sent to Harakhchand,
for he might be regarded as an agent of the Committee.
If the money is sent from Calcutta, commission on the bank
draft will be saved. Harakhchand's report can be treated as
fully authentic. The Utkal Committee should also know that
the money will be sent through Harakhchand.
You do not have to go wandering in the sun to collect the
money. If it is necessary to write to anyone, I will do so. I take
it you will be publishing reports in the Press from time to time.
There is no alternative but to guide Kamaladevi. One cannot
go by rumours. I asked her many frank questions. But she only
declares her innocence. I am not trying to stop the divorce. It
has become necessary.
The wedding of Prabhudas took place the day before yesterday.
I am enclosing Thakkar Bapa's letter. You can see how
guileless he was in his previous letter. He was not at all at
fault in what he wrote. I have heard many complaints about
your temper. But I have always defended you. You should
remove the cause for complaint. Forgive Kodanda Rao for his
jest and write a nice letter to Thakkar Bapa. "Caesar's wife
must be above suspicion" does not mean that Caesar's wife may
never be suspected. What it means is that C.'s wife should never
give cause for suspicion, and if she is even then suspected, she can
afford to remain unconcerned about criticism. It is in man's
hands to remain pure. That others should consider him pure
is in nobody's hands. Do you know that there are many in the
world who find fault with God's creation?
Taramati and the child will be doing well.
Today is the New Year day. May it bring good to you all,
that is to say, may the country receive greater services from you.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Send me Gokhale's address. Then I shall write to him.
Surely you do not wish that I should send back all your letters?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
