140. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
Aso Vad 0 [October 22, 1911]
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,
I have your last letter written from Europe.
I keep writing to Harilal from time to time saying that his
hankering after examinations is not right. If he writes to you,
please tell him the same thing. If he still does not give up his
notion, there is nothing for it but to bear this punishment for
my sins.
It is imperative that you go [to India] during the famine,
whatever people might think. As for me, how can I get away?
I don't see how I can leave before the end of next year.
It looks as if there won't be any occasion for me to attend the
Congress.
It appears that the cable from Calcutta was not an
invitation, only an enquiry. There is a cable from Gokhale saying
that the President will be elected on the 28th.
And so I have cabled that it would be best if my name were not
discussed. I have also said that my views might sound peculiar
and appear contrary to [those of the Congress]. I believe, there-
fore, that I shall not have to go. For a variety of reasons, it is to
be wished that I don't have to go.
I live on saltless diet consisting mainly of fruit. It is not to
mortify the body that I do this but so that the body, mind and
atman may be in fuller command of themselves and purer. I com-
mend the diet to children also. I believe that salt, being an irritant,
is harmful. By inducing an artificial appetite, it makes one eat
more and arouses the senses gratuitously. This mayor may not
be true, but our shastras speak of the virtue of abstaining from salt.
It is therefore likely that the practice is a beneficent one. I have
not noticed that it has had any bad effect. I have observed that
all sick persons, to whom I had suggested the giving up of salt,
have if anything benefited from it.
If, on the basis of your
medical knowledge, you see anything wrong in this, please cor-
rect me.
Manilal is here. It is more than a week now since he arrived
here. He is a pleasant and good-natured person. He appears
to be enamoured still of a literary education. To my way of
thinking, he does not seem to have a sound physique. He has
too much fat which is due entirely to the way he lives. Many
persons had told him that at the Farm one could not, after meeting
me, resist manual work. To disprove this false notion, he made a
vow in jest while at Phoenix, and in order to live up to it, he has
done no work at the Farm. The Farm stood in no need of his work;
only it was essential for his body. But he did not work. In a
way, I think it is just as well. That work is done only because of
me is utter superstition. It might partly be dispelled by Manilal.
Personally, I think, whoever works does so because he knows that
it is good to work. It is true, of course, that some persons work
out of regard for me. This, however, is another matter.
On the other hand, I also noticed that, in a settlement such
as the Farm, where a certain method of work has evolved, the up-
setting of that method by a well-behaved person like Manilal sets
impressionable youngsters and novitiates an unintended bad
example. It should be considered gracious of a thoughtful person,
— in fact, it should be his duty to a certain extent—to conform
to the regulations of a settlement such as this. A guest is under
no obligation to work. But Manilal cannot be reckoned among
this category of guests. He held to his course, ill-conceived as it
was, in a superb manner, that is, with a cheerful and innocent air
—so that I feel somewhat hesitant in making these comments.
Manilal has done commendable public work in Mauritius,
and he appears to have won the affections of the Hindus in
abundant measure. Thanks to his lack of patience, he could not
gain the goodwill of the Muslims, neither did he make a determined
effort to do so.
His own intention, it seems, is definitely to leave Mauritius.
He does not think he can make a living there, and if there is a
possibility of his being able to do so after a few years, he says
frankly that he does not have the patience to wait.
He has come here only because you were so insistent. Although
I do not see that he has repented having come.
He is inclined to settle here or in Natal. If he does decide to
stay on, he would assuredly earn enough for his needs. If he does
not, I should blame only him.
Now that he has been in Mauritius, done all that public work
and won the people's affection, the best course for him, as I see
it, would be to brave all hardships and stay on there until he could
earn a living.
But it is pointless to think about that. The other thing he
could do is to come here and devote himself to teaching and other
activities small and big at Phoenix and we shall then pay his
expenses.
Neither is this idea acceptable to him. Therefore, the only
thing that remains is legal practice, so far as this country is con-
cerned. He would like it, for some time.
It would be best to marry him off now. He says that Jeki
is also impatient. Even if Jeki is not well, I don't think it would
be right to stand in their way. If she is unfit for conception, let
us hope and expect that they will behave thoughtfully. If they
do not, or cannot, there is nothing for it but to leave Jeki to her
fate.
If, therefore, Manilal comes here, he hopes to bring Jeki
with him. Manilal desires that, if she comes, she should live at
Phoenix and come under my influence. He himself finds it too
great a strain to conform to my way of living, but he approves of it.
So, if it suits Jeki, he will be glad.
I am sure that there is nothing about my mode of living that
is too great a strain on others. It of course happens that a person
who has been to England or who has come under the influence
of English ways does not like my way of living or finds it too much
of a strain.
Besides, Manilal has not the least faith in you. He charges
you with having changed your views too often and jumped from
one extreme position to another. He makes a similar charge against
me also, if not as vehemently. And so he thinks that, by taking
up the middle position, he would profit from both East and West.
I have told him that this is a confession of sheer helplessness, im-
potence and laziness. But he is in no condition to realize this now.
I believe he will come round with time and experience, being a
sincere man.
I give him the money he needs from what I have. I shall
debit the amount to your account. I don't suppose anything more
remains to be said in this matter. You will get this letter about the
same time as he arrives. He intends to attend the Congress. I
shall give him letters [of introduction] to Professor Gokhale and
others. If it is settled that he should occupy himself with the work
here, please send him back in time. As for the wedding, we can
as well arrange to have it here, if so desired. If he is coming here,
it will be best for me to stay on in South Africa if only for a short
time. It will be right for me to leave only after he is properly
settled. He could be fixed up in partnership with Ritch any time.
Ritch's practice is well established.
Bande Mataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5631. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt
