434. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
CUDDAPAH STATION,
January 1, 1934
BA,
Send me a copy of the discourse I sent you last time. I got
your letter only today. I am writing this letter on my silence
day. Do not worry about Manilal. I am sending your letter to
him. You need not get alarmed by what Pragji said. Both
are mature persons. If they have made a mistake they will correct
it.
Arrangement has already been made for Jame-e-Jamshed.
Mathuradas informs me that this has been done, and so I have
done nothing further about it. I hope you get it now. All the
same, I am inquiring again. I will try about the Ramayana
and the Bhagavata. Don't feel the slightest hesitation in writing
to Premlilabehn for anything you want. After all, what are
you likely to want? What few things you want she will send with
great love. But about anything which you do not require imme-
diately, it will be enough if you write to me. I will then make
the necessary arrangements.
Can you use your dentures? Do
you gargle with potassium permanganate water? Thakkar Bapa is not
in the party with me this time. He will meet me on the 15th.
Just now Malkani is with me. He also is working very hard,
along with the others. Chandrashankar keeps fairly good health.
Om and Kisan are taking good care of their health. Om works
as hard as she can. She is a simple-hearted and straightforward
girl. And so is Kisan. Surendra has regained his strength.
The Andhra tour ends on the 3rd.
After that we shall go
to Mysore. Wherever I go, there is bound to be a lot of acti-
vity and some hardships too. But I am carefully protected by
everybody and so don't feel the hardships much. As Mirabehn
looks after the smallest detail, I don't feel the discomfort of travel-
ling at all. You will be permitted to receive a letter from me
every week only if you forgo your right of receiving visitors. I for
one will go on sending a discourse every week. Be satisfied with
visitors who come to see the other women. However, do as you
wish. If you are keen on having visitors, there would be many
ready to go. They would even wish to go. We have deliber-
ately made it a practice to receive the fewest possible visitors.
But let me know your wish without any hesitation. Janakibehn
is all right. I think I have already written to you about her
son Ramakrishna's tonsils being removed. Kamala has now re-
sumed solid foods. Kishorelal is still not free from fever. But
there is no cause for worry. These days my silence commences
on Sunday night. I, therefore, don't speak till Monday night.
The silence will be broken today at ten minutes past nine. Hence
I shall hardly have to speak to anybody, since soon after it will
be time to go to bed. I have to get up at three in the morn-
ing. Brijkrishna's fever has come down. But he has yet to re-
gain strength. Hemibehn is no more. Now the discourse.
Last time I wrote about the attributes of a bhakta. I also ex-
plained that there could be no bhakti without service. This time I
will write about how one can serve, since people frequently ask
me that question.
Some say that service is possible only under
certain conditions.
Some others that it is possible only after
certain studies.
I explained last week that these were wrong
notions. One can serve under any conditions. If we offer up to
Shri Krishna all our gifts and possessions, we shall get full marks.
Anybody who can give one crore but gives only half a crore, will
not get more than 50 marks. But he who has only one pie and
gives it will get 100 marks. If, therefore, you and the other women
prisoners there behave in this manner towards the women with
whom you come into contact or towards the officials, you are
fulfilling the dharma of service. Behaving towards the officials in
the spirit of service means never wishing them ill, showing them
due respect and not deceiving them. All the rules should be
obeyed and the women undergoing imprisonment for criminal
offences should be treated as if they were your blood-sisters. If
you let them feel your love and see your purity of heart, that
also will mean practising the dharma of service. In both cases
one's motives must be clean. If a person behaves in a good way
with a selfish motive or through fear, his actions cannot be reckon-
ed as service. We often see one person doing a thing with a self-
ish motive and another doing the same thing with a benevolent
motive. There can be no room for self-interest in anything done
as an offering to the Lord. One who serves in this manner daily
gains more strength. His studies and his work, both are in-
spired by the motive of service. Even the laughing or playing,
eating or drinking of a person who is thus dedicated to service
56-27
are informed with the spirit of service. All his actions, therefore,
will be innocent. The Lord always gives to such bhaktas the
strength they need. You probably remember the three verses in
the women's prayer which have a bearing on this. They are
as follows:
As for those who worship Me, thinking on Me alone and nothing
else, ever attached to me, I bear the burden of getting them what they
need.
With Me in their thoughts, their whole soul devoted to Me,
teaching one another, with Me ever on their lips, they live In content-
ment and joy.
To these, ever in tune with Me, worshipping Me with affectionate
devotion, I give the power of selfless action, whereby they come to
Me!
Refer to the Anasaktiyoga for the meaning of these verses. You
will find them in Chapters 9 and 10. Remember that we read
the Gita to put its teaching into practice. All that I have said
above is, you should know, on the basis of the Gita.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 4-
