256. LETTER TO MANIBEHN
December 14, 1932
It is but natural that palate of a person in good health should
be sensitive to, and relish for himself, the tastes of various foods,
and even the man of the highest degree of self-control will recognize
and ought to be able to recognize, such relish. Only he should
have no attachment to it. When one becomes accustomed to
abstinence from a harmful thing-whatever the reason for ab-
staining from it, such abstinence benefits the soul as well as the
body as the hankering for that thing disappears. The effect of
a complete or a partial fast varies with different men according
to their natures and in the same person at different times. You
will be able from your numerous experiences to think of cases in
which the mind or the body or both of them were the cause for
such difference. Not only do I feel no hardship in observing
silence, but every week I eagerly look forward to one o'clock on
Sunday. The fact is that we feel hardship in doing a thing for
which we are not mentally ready. Anything for which the mind
is ready or is made ready becomes quite easy to do. The person
who becomes absorbed in silence ceases to hear the idle chatting
of people around him. I hope you remember the secluded hut
erected for Kishorelalbhai. There could be nothing but peace
and silence in such a place. For two or three days Kishorelal
found the rattling noise made by running trains unbearable,
and I suggested that he should close his ears with cotton plugs.
However, when I went to him the next morning, he told me that
he had heard neither the train whistle nor the noise of the run-
ning wheels on that day. Of course both these things had been
there, but he had stopped paying attention to them. In other
words, he had become accustomed to silence. My suggestion
about the cotton plugs had roused him, for such artificial aid
would be repugnant to one who has voluntarily retired into soli-
tude and taken a vow of silence. Those who come to love silence
begin ultimately to listen to the divine music within, and are so
absorbed in it that they cease to hear the sounds occurring around
them.
Our cat family has three members. They present themselves
daily without fail at both the mealtimes, without a bell being
rung for them or without being called. If we all become as
punctual as these dear creatures, we would save millions of hours
of time. And we have doubtless been taught how time is money.
This is perfectly true, and so money saved is money earned. Who
can compute the loss of wealth to this world through people who
do not value time?
I certainly do not wish that the number of anti-untouch-
ability workers should increase artificially. I would never wish that
those who have a clear duty before them should leave it for
Harijan work no matter how dear such work may be to them.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 334-
