360. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Friday, April 16, 1926
BHAISHRI GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your letter and the cheque for Rs. 26,000. I shall answer
your questions regarding the Hindu-Muslim riots, but the replies
are not for the Press. I have told you that I have no influence at
all now over the Hindus, at any rate over that class among them
which interests itself in these disturbances. My views, therefore,
are misunderstood. Hence I believe that it is best for me to say
nothing.
If the Government has banned processions and it is neces-
sary to take out one on some religious occasion, I would think
it right to do so despite the Government ban. But before start-
ing the procession, I would apologize to the Muslims. If they do
not respond even to such a courteous gesture, I should go ahead
with the procession and submit to any violence on their part. If I
do not have the strength for such non-violence, I should provide
myself with means for fighting before taking out the procession.
I would not dismiss grooms and other Muslim servants merely
because they are Muslims. But I would not retain a Muslim who
was not sincere in his work or behaved rudely to me. I do not
believe that the Muslims are more markedly ungrateful than mem-
bers of any other community, but I have observed that they lose
temper more quickly. It seems to me altogether wrong not to have
a Muslim simply because he is a Muslim.
Those Hindus who do not approve of the non-violent way
or are not equipped to follow it should acquire the strength to fight
it out physically.
If the Government takes sides with the Muslims, Hindus need
not worry on that account. They should not care for the Govern-
ment. They should fend for themselves, relying on their own
strength without seeking its favour.
When the Hindus have
cultivated sufficient courage for this, the Government will on its
own maintain an impartial attitude, and the Muslims will not
then look for its support. In seeking the Government's help, we
neither serve our dharma nor give evidence of manhood. I would
advise you to look at the matter dispassionately and go on with
your work. That is in the best interests of the Hindus, the only
way of serving Hinduism, as I can say from my long experience of
not less than thirty-five years. I was very pleased with your calm
and brave attitude during the riots. You should keep up that
attitude and do what you think the situation calls for. If there is
anything in my reply which is not clear to you, please do write
to me again.
I propose to accept a part of the loan you have promised for
the All-India Spinners' Association against the stocks in Bom-
bay. The Association has two godowns in Bombay. If you wish,
you may take possession of one of them and acquire sufficient stocks
to cover the loan to be kept there. If you agree, we should like
you to keep even more so that we may be saved rent on one go-
down. In that case, it should be so arranged that we can draw
from those stocks whenever we want to. There will be frequent
additions to or withdrawal from the stocks which the Spinners'
Association will maintain besides what is required by way of
security, so that you will have to permit easy access to them.
Yours,
MOHANDAs
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 6125. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
