449. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 18, 1941
CHI. MUNNALAL,
You did well in writing to me. It is your duty to draw my
attention whenever my interference hurts you. There is no ques-
tion at all of my feeling offended. If I myself break rules, who
will observe them? Hence behind my seeming breach of a rule
you will discover that I really observe it. If I had known about
Kripalani, I would have stopped him. Nevertheless it is our duty
when a guest turns up unexpectedly that we should spare for him
some food even from the measured quantity that has been cooked.
One should exercise one's discretion. The sparing of such food would
be dharma only if it is willingly done by the person concerned. Ba's
interference is of course to be regretted. But that is part of her nature.
We have, therefore, no option but to put up with it. Ba has changed
herself a great deal with patience. If I made more effort, she
would improve still further. But I save my time. Yet I will see.
You must take charge of datan. Anybody who uses one must
pick it with his eyes shut. Nobody should select and choose. Those
that are altogether bad should be thrown away.
Personally I would certainly like your making a liquid solution of
soap. I think we are using too much soap. I do not know how to
prevent this. See if you can think of some way. The matter should be
discussed with all. The use of 501 soap must be stopped. Why should-
n't we ourselves make soft soap? See if you can do something about it.
I approve of the other changes you have suggested.
I am not surprised to learn that the kitchen is working all
the time. There should be some arrangement for looking after it.
The persons in charge must be sthitaprajnas If we have such per-
sons, the whole set-up would function smoothly. If you need my
help, ask for it. Do and persuade others to do everything with
good humour. And be patient about what cannot be done.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8512. Also C.W. 7120. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
