199. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
August 4, 1909
MY LORD,
I have to thank you very much for your letter of the 3rd inst., and
for the valuable suggestions made by you with reference to the statement .
I know how hard pressed the authorities are with work and, know-
ing that you lose no opportunity of bringing the question home to them,
both Mr. Hajee Habib and I are content to wait.
1 (1840-1900); Indian administrator and member of the British Committee of
the Indian National Congress; vide Vol. I, pp. 381- and Vol. VI, pp. 244-.
2 Vide "Statement of Transvaal Indian Case", pp. 288-301; also, Appendix XIV
for Lord Ampthill's suggestions.
Your Lordship's question was whether passive resistance was finan-
ced or fomented from India. As to the "fomenting", I did not go into
details; I very nearly did so and then refrained for fear of making my let-
ter too long and burdensome, but, as you have kindly invited me to
express myself more fully, I gladly avail myself of the opportunity. I
am fully aware of the allegation that we are acting in co-operation with
the Extremist Party in India. I however give Your Lordship the empha-
tic assurance that the charge is totally without foundation. Indian pas-
sive resistance in the Transvaal had its rise in that Colony and has been
continued absolutely independent of anything that is being said or done
in India; indeed, sometimes, even in defiance of what has been said or
written to the contrary in India or elsewhere. Our movement is abso-
lutely unconnected with any ex-[tremist movement in] India. I do not
know the extremists per[ sonally ]. . .2 is the. . .3 Moslem League and some-
time Secretary in London of the Pan-Islamic Society, and this corres-
pondence has been carried on with a view to interesting Indian opinion
in our matter and arousing public sympathy. We are also in close touch
with the Editor of The Times of India and I used to be in personal touch
with the late Mr. Saunders of The Englishman who, I may say, gave me
most valuable assistance and advice when I first undertook public work
in South Africa. Our complaint has always been that our countrymen
in India have, as it might have appeared until recently, almost studi-
ously ignored the question of its Imperial importance. The greatest
prominence has been given to it by the suicidal action of General Smuts
in having forcibly deported innocent Indians, in most cases penniless,
from the Transvaal through the Portuguese territories to India. This
has advertized the cause as perhaps nothing else has done, and now
Mr. Henry S. L. Polak is in Bombay, from the Transvaal, in order to place
the position before the Indian public. He has gone there with definite
instructions not to come into touch with the Extremist Party, but to be
guided largely by the Editor of The Times of India, Professor Gokhale and
the Aga Khan.
What I mean by passive resistance will appear somewhat more
clearly from the enclosed cutting which gives a summary of my address
to the Germiston Literary and Debating Society. Germiston, I may
say, is seething with anti-Indian feeling. Yet the members of that
society, including the Mayor of Germiston, were good enough to re-
cognise that the fight we are carrying on is perfectly clean.
It would be improper for me not to add that I follow what is going
on in India with the keenest interest and some of the [phases] of the [nat]-
ional movement with the gravest anxiety. With . . . 1 [sym]pathy, and by
people and my countrymen is fraught with advantages to both
and also to the world. I believe, too, that the fullest expansion of na-
tional sentiment is quite consistent with the stability of British rule in
India and I further believe that much of what we suffer in India is easy
of remedy by effort from within. I know that under the British constitu-
tion, British subjects, no matter to what race they belong, have never
got and never can get their rights until they have performed their cor-
responding duties and until they are willing to fight for them. The
fight takes the form either of physical violence, as in the case of the
extremists in India, or of personal suffering by the fighters, as in the case
of our passive resisters in the Transvaal. In my opinion, the first form of
seeking redress is largely barbarous and, in any case, inconsistent with
the genius of the people of India, not because they are physically too
weak to take that course, but because their training has adapted them
to the latter mode, and I am free to confess that passive resistance in the
Transvaal is a practical demonstration to the party of violence in India
that they are entirely on the wrong track and that, so long as they pin
their faith to violence for obtaining relief of any kind whatsoever, so long
are they beating the air.
I am quite aware that this exposition of my own view may not be of
any use to Your Lordship and possibly is devoid of any interest whatso-
ever. The only reason why I mention it is to guard myself against being
misunderstood. I am most anxious not to withhold anything at all from
Your Lordship and I am anxious also to retain, in any work that I under-
take, the support of one who so loves the Empire and the country of my
birth as yourself.
With many thanks for the deep interest you are taking in our
troubles and with apologies for the unavoidable length of this letter.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4976
1 A few words are cut off here.
2 Here one line is missing.
3 Acknowledging this letter on August 7, Lord Ampthill wrote about Gandhiji's
categorical statement regarding the alleged connection between passive resistance
in the Transvaal and the extremist movement in India: "Your answer is exactly what
I expected, and while I have not failed hitherto to deny the charge indignantly from
my own inward conviction, I shall now be able to do so armed with the certainty of
your complete and candid explanation. I have never had a moment's doubt myself
as to your freedom from complicity with conspirators in India, but I have found myself
obliged to meet suggestions to that effect proceeding from high and responsible quarters."
