253. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
December 14, 1932
DEAR BABOO BHAGWAN DASS 1 ,
I have your most touching letter of the 10th instant. I do
not know in what connection I could have told Devi Prasadji
that you and Paramarth Baboo should go to Guruvayur. I
knew the condition of your health. I cannot now recall the con-
versation. I can blame no one, least of all Devi Prasadji, but it
is not yet, thank God, too late to mend.
In reply to Dhruvaji's letter I sent a telegram saying it was
unnecessary for you and Paramarth Baboo to come to Poona, or
to go to Guruvayur. If your presence had been a necessity, I
would not have hesitated to risk damage to your health, but
there is no such necessity. I did want Dhruvaji, not merely as a
Sanskrit scholar, but also as Malaviyaji's accredited agent, and I
told Kerala friends long ago that they should telegraph to
Malaviyaji not to trouble to go to Kerala. We do not want to
rush to Guruvayur. If the caste Hindus near Guruvayur are
ready to admit the out-castes to that temple, nothing can stop
their entry; if they are not, we shall have to wait for their con-
version. I wanted someone, well-versed in Shastraic lore to see
the Shastris of Malabar face to face, and if that someone went with
Malaviyaji's authority at his back, it was enough, but now even
that may be unnecessary. Nevertheless, I want Dhruvaji to meet
some sanatanists here, if only for the satisfaction of the latter.
Some of them have been at me. I told them that whilst my
conviction was deep and had been proof against assault for the
past 45 years, since I was a fallible mortal I was open to be
acted upon by any of the sanatani friends, and if I discovered
that I had mistaken darkness for light, I would have no hesi-
tation in going back upon 45 years' conviction and be witness to
truth, and it is in that spirit that I shall approach the 23rd
instant, if the sanatani friends will attend the contemplated
meeting. If, after all this, you feel drawn towards Yeravda, do
by all means come, and if you do, do not come to rush away.
There will be work enough and to spare for you for a few
days. It is unthinkable to disturb Malaviyaji. I know that he
has his hands full.
I hope you did not miss my statement wherein I whole-
heartedly endorsed your suggestion that whilst there is and
should be no untouchability regarding birth, there should be as
there always has been throughout the world untouchability with
regard to particular kinds of work, and that such untouchability
was always curable after due cleansing.
Your last paragraph is the most touching in your touching
letter. I would not be truthful if I did accept your certificate,
for it has been a lifelong effort to hear the voice of silence and
to reduce self to zero. It has been a terrific though joyful struggle.
It has not ended yet. The final result God only knows. I have
no doubt that my recent acts have given a shock to dearest
friends but all of them have been more than good to me. I was
helpless, for in reality the acts were not mine. I was dominated
by the Architect of us all.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18706
1 Vide pp. 151-.
2 This read: "Together with the large majority of the Indian people, I have
great faith in the dictates of your pure heart, even when we may not be
able to understand the reasons for them; for indeed always prayerful heart
must see much further and much deeper than any head; and I feel that I should
obey your least wishes at this juncture as far as may be possible for me, trust-
ing that the needed fitness will come to me through your good wishes. Dhruvaji
and Prem Nathji possess, of course, all the Sanskrit learning and debating power
that may be needed, and it will be a pleasure and a privilege to work in com-
pany with them."
