182. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
July 21, 1909
MY LORD,
I am extremely obliged to Your Lordship for your letter of the
20th inst. I am very sorry for the proper address not being on my
letter. The fact is, I have a special index of addresses, which was
prepared when the deputation was last here. Miss Polak, who is still
new to the work, looked up the index book and took down from among
the three addresses given against your name the first one, which was
put in there from a directory. The Bedford address was the third on
the list, but as the work has been done somewhat under pressure, she
hurriedly took the first, hence the mistake.
I agree with Your Lordship that Mr. Merriman's letter is rather
discouraging. At the same time, I respectfully venture to think that, if
somehow or other you could come in personal contact with the South
African politicians, it will be useful for future action in connection with
the Imperial work that you, as President of the South Africa British
Indian Committee, are engaged in.
There is no doubt that, under the Union, a great deal of trouble
is in store for British Indians throughout South Africa.
The Hon'ble Mr. Sauer, to whom also I wrote, has not said any-
thing in reply, from which I assume he retains still the same position
that he did on board.
I am obliged to Your Lordship for offering to see Sir W. Lee-Warner.
I can well understand the pressure on your valuable time. It is therefore
a matter for grateful satisfaction to all who know Your Lordship, as
it is to my colleague and myself, that amid your many duties you find
time to give so much attention to the British Indian question in the
Transvaal and other parts of South Africa.
I have already addressed a letter to the Private Secretary to the
Earl of Crewe asking for a private interview, and a similar application
has gone forward to the Private Secretary to Lord Morley.
I beg to remain,
Your Lordship's obedient servant,
LORD AMPTHILL, G. C. S. I., G. C. I. E.
CURZON HOTEL
CURZON STREET, W.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4953
