115. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Monday Morning, January 12, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I take up your letter last for replying.
I have
started writing after the evening prayer. You must have received
the postcards I wrote including Saturday's. After that, my health
has remained all right. You will find details in my letter to Mira-
behn. It contains something else, too, which will interest you. It
is desirable that the news about my health should not spread out-
side.
Though Mahadev's name was in your list, I believe that you
carry the impression that there was a letter by Mahadev because
Chandrashankar's handwriting is very much like Mahadev's. Was
there really a letter by Mahadev in his own handwriting? If there
was, what were its contents? Durga would certainly know. There
has been no special letter about her health, so I believe that she is
all right. You must have got the letter in which I made a sug-
gestion about her. Champa recovered even the lost ring! All this
seems a miracle. Perhaps this is how God protects the fools. Champa
had said in her letter that they might all go to Rajkot for some
time. She said that that was the advice she was given by Nanalal's
wife. If she wishes to go, I certainly like the idea. You must have
thought about the matter independently and done what you
thought proper, or you will do what you think proper. I don't
remember to have encouraged Parasram to hope that we might
give him some help. If, however, his work is efficient and clean,
I would certainly be tempted to help him. Before you do any-
thing, consult Shankerlal and follow his advice. You can send to
me the small box received from Polak. If it is of a kind which you
think should be preserved carefully, keep it there or put it in the
Gujarat Vidyapith museum. If you don't think that necessary, you
can send it to me through Trivedi. A lady from as far away as
Canada had sent to me a bag containing about two pounds of
salt. The authorities passed it on to me.
Take careful measures and help Kusum to get rid of her
fever. Consult a doctor, if necessary. Chandrashankar has discovered
1 Vide pp. 80-.
85
a Punjabi vaid. He will probably give you some ordinary medicine.
If you think it worth while, inquire about him.
Have a quiet talk with Bhagwanji and draw his attention to
his shortcomings.
I let you off with this today.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Two conclusions can be drawn from my experiment. Per-
haps three. One of them is as good as proved. Two require to be
tested further. Those who suffer from constipation should live for
some days only on fenugreek leaves, tandalja, tanko and spinach.
That is how I overcame my constipation. Pyarelal, too, seems to
have overcome his. For the past four days he has been eating only
fenugreek leaves. The jelly of almonds which I have described,
besides being nourishing, is free from the defects of milk and so
does not cause constipation. The rotlas of jowar and bajra seem to
have a laxative effect on those who are not used to them. Ghee
should not be taken during this experiment. All the vegetables
should be merely boiled. But I cannot say that the experiment of
jowar and bajra has proved successful. I do not think, either, that
it has failed. If I have had to suspend it just now, it is in order
that people there may not feel worried.
BAPU
[PPS.]
There are 83 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
