180. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
C/O LADY VITHALDAS THACKERSEY,
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
May 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have been released a little unexpectedly, otherwise Maha-
dev would have written a letter and a long one. But now I myself
must dictate one. I got your letter. Please go on writing to
me daily.
Anybody who has something special to write about
may also write. I welcome the changes which you say have been
introduced, but there is one danger. Read about it in my letter
to the women. If all the people have accepted them willingly,
there will be no difficulty at all and their health will soon im-
prove. Everybody should eat as one takes medicine, and be fully
satisfied with the type and the quantity of the food that he gets.
Any item which one does not like should be declined. It is not
likely that one will not like anything from among milk, wheat,
fruit and uncooked vegetable. If that happens, the only remedy
for such a person is a fast. I have not known any person who
did not like fruits. Let everybody start drinking fresh, unboiled
milk without any fear. The person who is in charge of cooking
should take care that every item is well cooked. If anything is not
cooked sufficiently well, it should be thrown away. You should
make it a general rule to serve only the vegetables which grow
55-11
in the Ashram itself. Totaramji should know that he must supply
tomatoes, salad, etc., all the year round. I will not mind if this
means more expense just now. Similarly, fruit-trees also should
be planted. While everybody should realize the necessity of learn-
ing self-control, care should also be taken to see that the fruit-
trees are not raided.
I have sent you a wire regarding Parashuram. As he was
very keen, I have permitted him to go there. If he does not
abide by the conditions which you impose and gives you the
least trouble, ask him immediately to leave. He need not come
to me again. Give him the railway fare for Delhi or Kanpur or
any other place where he may wish to go. Nobody should
stay if he cannot feel happy in the Ashram. You should not have
the responsibility at such a time of pleasing anybody so that
he might stay. It is, of course, your duty to see that everybody
receives love and courtesy. However, those who cannot be pleas-
ed should be permitted to leave.
This rule applies to Dr.
Sharma and Duncan also. I have not been satisfied with the
former. He has not impressed me as being truthful or polite. I
had written a note to him asking him to leave and go to Delhi.
But he seems to have returned there. I have expressed my dis-
satisfaction in my note to him. Even if he remains there, he
should not treat N., should not touch her or talk with her. If I
get time, I will write to Sharma also and tell him this plainly.
Read that letter. I will mention it in my letter to N., too.
Duncan seems to be a really good man, but I have found
that he is not very intelligent. I am afraid only of Sharma. I
am returning today by registered post the report about cow-
protection. Don't let anybody give up milk or ghee. The truth
is that those who can willingly accept the changes which I have
suggested need not give up anything. It is not a great thing to
give up this or that thing. What is necessary is to train one's
mind so that one learns to eat as one takes medicine, to eat only
to keep the body alive. Moreover, when we give up every
article of food which is unnecessary for health, there is no
need to practise further self-denial. What I have been begging
from the Ashram just now is a big thing. I want inner purity,
control of the mind itself. Explain fully to everybody the sixth
verse of Chapter III [of the Gita].
Those who restrain the sense-organs but dwell in their minds
on sense-pleasures are hypocrites.
The seventh verse, on the
other hand, says that those who keep their minds under control
and let the limbs and organs of the body function without at-
tachment, are hailed as karmayogis. These two verses explain the
secret of how we should live. If, while fasting, I dwell in my mind
on the pleasures of the palate and keep thinking when the 21
days will be over, my fast will be only the outward show of an
ignorant man. It would not benefit the world and earn for me
a sinful existence in my next life. What is true, in the wider
context, about my fast, is also true, in a limited context, about
the rules of self-control being introduced and followed in the
Ashram. Anybody who stops eating rice and dal but dwells on
their pleasure in his thoughts does not practise self-control by
refraining from eating them. Such exclusion may be beneficial
physically, that is, from the point of view of health. But the
various forms of self-denial which are being practised in the
Ashram just now are intended as a preparation for under-
taking indefinite fasts. Those who cannot join in that need not
take their meals in the common kitchen. If anybody who does not
eat in the common kitchen but observes as much self-control as he
can in his own home in the matter of food, I will regard him
as bringing honour to the Ashram. For, his conduct will be
truthful and not unnatural. There will be humble confession
of his weakness in it.
It should be remembered that the
self-control which I have advised does not apply to anybody
who is ill.
Explain this repeatedly to the women on my behalf. No
woman should undertake anything beyond her strength. The
women, and others too, should understand that what we are
doing at present is to try to prepare the ground for a chain
of indefinite fasts. If anybody practises self-control for my sake for
a short time and gives it up afterwards when somebody else
in the Ashram may be fasting, how bad would that seem! I am
far away, but fasts following mine will be going on in the Ashram.
Everybody, therefore, should practise only such self-control as
he can keep up. Nobody should go further than that at all. I
don't expect more from anybody. Let us not attempt too much
and fail. It would be better to rise step by step. I don't insist
any more now that the old families ought to take their meals
in the common kitchen. My fast ought not to result in any kind
of coercion on anybody. On my behalf, you should see that it
does not. Tell Ramdas that gradually he will understand the com-
plete propriety of this fast. Even if the fast is like a pistol, it is
worth firing. I believe that dharma cannot be saved in any
other way.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8379. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
