104. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before April 25, 1908]
THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have been desired by the Committee of my Association to
approach the Government regarding the Draft Gold Law which the
Government intend to introduce during the forthcoming session of
Parliament.
In the humble opinion of my Committee, the Draft [law] imposes
on British Indians disabilities graver than those found in the existing
law. My Committee had hoped, as it still hopes, that the legal disabili-
ties of the community represented by it would be lightened by the
Government instead of their being increased.
My Committee desired me specifically to draw the attention of the
Government to the following:
1. The Draft retains in the definition of the term "Coloured per-
son" the word "coolie" which, as applied to the present Indian popula-
tion of the Colony, is an offensive term, there being in the Trans-
vaal very few, if any, coolies in the proper sense of the term. Moreover,
the bracketing together African natives and Asiatics, British subjects
and non-British subjects is to ignore the peculiar position occupied by
British Indians.
2. The retention of the original law as to dealing in unwrought
gold, in so far as it specially affects Coloured people besides their coming
under the general prohibitions of the law, assumes that Coloured
people are the greater offenders in respect of dealing in unwrought gold,
whereas in the opinion of my Association the contrary is the fact in so
far as British Indians are concerned.
3. Moreover, the definition of unwrought gold probably prevents
Indian goldsmiths from carrying on their business of manufacturing
jewellery even out of gold bars prepared in and imported from Eng-
land. This, it will be readily admitted, is a grievous hardship for the
goldsmiths in question.
1 This letter was republished in Indian Opinion, 25-4-1908, under the title "The
Draft Gold Law of the Transvaal: An Important Letter of Protest".
2 Residents of the Transvaal who were not subjects of the British Empire
4. Section 127 of the draft law is, it is submitted, rather vague
and seems to contemplate entire prohibition of acquisition by Coloured
people of any rights under it. The prohibition, under the same section,
to holders of rights acquired previous to the draft law, to transfer or
sub-let such right[s] to a Coloured person makes the law retrospective
in its effect.
5. Finally, section 128 which contemplates the compulsory segre-
gation of Coloured people residing within proclaimed areas, would, if
carried, make it impossible for a large majority of British Indians
even to remain in the country.
In this connection, my Committee begs respectfully to remind
the Government that my Association represents a people who claim to
belong to a cultured stock in the human family, and trading and other
interests which are sufficiently large to warrant the statement that the
segregation of the Indian community means utter ruination to it from
sheer inability to protect those interests in Bazaars, Locations or
Compounds.
My Committee further reminds the Government that the majority
of British Indians domiciled in the Transvaal live within the mining
areas.
My Committee therefore respectfully trusts that the clauses com-
plained of will be withdrawn by the Government or will be so amended
as to give the desired relief to the British Indian community residing
in the Transvaal.
I [am] etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives; also Colonial Office Records: 291/132
