249. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
VALMIKI MANDIR,
READING ROAD, NEW DELHI,
August 28, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
I write this as a friend and after deep thought.
Several times last evening you repeated that you were a
"plain man and a soldier" and that you did not know the
law. We are all plain men though we may not all be soldiers
and even though some of us may know the law. It is our pur-
pose, I take it, to devise methods to prevent a repetition of
the recent terrible happenings in Calcutta. The question before
us is how best to do it.
Your language last evening was minatory. As represent-
ative of the King you cannot afford to be a military man
only, nor to ignore the law, much less the law of your own
making. You should be assisted, if necessary, by a legal mind
enjoying your full confidence. You threatened not to convene
the Constituent Assembly if the formula you placed before
Pandit Nehru and me was not acted upon by the Congress.
If such be really the case then you should not have made the
announcement you did on 12th August. But having made it
you should recall the action and form another ministry enjoy-
ing your full confidence. If British arms are kept here for in-
ternal peace and order, your Interim Government would be
reduced to a farce. The Congress cannot afford to impose its
will on warring elements in India through the use of British
arms. Nor can the Congress be expected to bend itself and
adopt what it considers a wrong course because of the brutal
exhibition recently witnessed in Bengal. Such submission would
itself lead to an encouragement and repetition of such tragedies.
The vindictive spirit on either side would go deeper, biding for
an opportunity to exhibit itself more fiercely and more dis-
gracefully when occasion occurs. And all this will be chiefly
due to the continued presence in India of a foreign power strong
in and proud of its arms.
I say this neither as a Hindu nor as a Muslim. I write
only as an Indian. In so far as I am aware, the Congress
claims to know both the Hindu and Muslim mind more than
you or any Britisher can do. Unless, therefore, you can wholly
trust the Congress Government which you have announced, you
should reconsider your decision, as I have already suggested.
You will please convey the whole of this letter to the British
Cabinet.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
THE VICEROY'S HOUSE
NEW DELHI
The Transfer of Power, Vol. VIII, p. 322; also Gandhiji's Correspondence with
the Government, 1944-47, pp. 221-
