356. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
Phagan Sud 6 [March 14, 1913]
CHI. HARILAL,
After many months I have had a letter from you. Every time
you express regret and say you are sorry for not writing regularly.
Your repentance has no meaning either for you or for me. Repen-
tance will bear fruit only when it relates to one's failure to do a
thing despite one's best effort and when it is followed by greater
vigilance in guarding against further failure. Your regret amounts
to a mere formality. Do children have to be formal with parents?
As soon as I knew of your examination [result] from another
source, I wrote you a letter. But it could not be posted until now,
because the diary containing your address had been misplaced.
You will therefore get that letter as well as this one about the
same time.
I am not the only one to wait anxiously for a letter from you.
Ba keeps on inquiring, and so do Miss Schlesin and the others.
Your mind has not become calm even there. I do not under-
stand what it is that you want. All that I can make out is that you
want to live in Ahmedabad and with Chanchi. Perhaps you wrote
to the Doctor4, too, about this. You may live as suits you best.
In reply to the second portion of your letter, I shall say only
this: "Live in any way that suits you, [but] strive to realize God
anyhow." I shall not argue.
Our paths may well be different. If our destination is the
same, we shall meet there. What would it matter even if we
should follow contrary paths? I am not so arrogant as to believe
that I am wholly right and others, in the wrong. Of course, I hold
on to the idea that I must do what seems to be my duty. Though
I know that we do not become equal even if I give you this free-
dom, because, in following a course opposed to my ideas, you have
to depend on me for money. I wish I could release you even from
this situation [of dependence] and then argue with you as an equal.
But how is this possible? If, impelled by my sense of duty, I have
erred in giving up the source of my income, I shall of course have
to repent for that. Have I not, however, done an injustice because
in doing this I failed to take my sons' interests into account? My
answer is "No". I did consider their interests, too, according
to my own lights. Whether my judgement was right or wrong time
alone will show to us both.
I observe that England is still on your lips. Please overcome
the desire. Your time is not yet.
Send me the question-papers of your examination if you have
preserved them.
Manilal is deep in his studies. He is interested in them. I give
him an hour and a half every day. Let me know what books you
read—for your examination, I mean. Send me some samples of your
English composition.
Blessings from
BAPU
PS.
Ramdas and Devdas also study fairly well, but they have
developed no interest in their studies. Ba is well, more or less.
Anandlal has left Phoenix that he may be able to look after Abhe-
chand's business.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 9539
