301. LETTER TO "GUJARATI PUNCH"
[LONDON,]
October 8, 1909
TO
THE EDITOR
GUJARATI PUNCH
[BOMBAY]
SIR,
You have requested me to write something for the Special Diwali
Number.
My life is taken up at present by one single thing-the life-and-
death struggle for the fulfilment of the pledge taken by the Indians
living in the Transvaal in South Africa. The pledge was taken by thousands
of poor Indians-Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Punjabis, Bengalis, Madrasis,
Gujaratis and others-to uphold India's honour. A tiny country like the
Transvaal refuses entry even to a person like the Dada 1 of India, a country
as vast as the ocean. The few Indians here, illiterate traders, hawkers
and labourers, cannot, will not, bear this insult. To obliterate it, to
uphold their religion, be it Hinduism or Islam or Zoroastrianism (for
every religion teaches us that failure to honour a pledge taken is a viola-
tion of one's religion), 2,580 persons out of a total Indian population of
13,000 in the Transvaal have already suffered imprisonment. Even
now many of them are in gaol, and many will go to gaol in future.
I must say that the gaol here is a terrible place. We do not get there
the food that we are used to, and are classified with the Kaffirs. Many
strong-minded Indian women, the so-called weaker sex, bear separation
from their husbands in order that the latter may carry on the fight.
Some of them, along with their children, go starving. Many of those
who suffer thus are Gujaratis, for Hindus and Muslims from Gujarat
are in a majority [among the Indians] in this land.
If this letter is published, the readers of the Gujarati Punch must ask
themselves on this festival of Diwali what they propose to do for the
Transvaal Indians. There will be a Diwali, or Id, or Pateti for them
only when they return from the battle-field victorious.
Yours etc.,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Egypt-no Uddharak athawa Mustafa Kamel Pasha-nu Jivan Charitra tatha Bija Lekho
1 Dadabhai Naoroji
2 The original has a word meaning "army" which appears to be a misprint for
another meaning "battle-field".
