314. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Kartak Shud 13 [November 15, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
India has come to a very bad pass. I have given much thought to
the plague and I think there is nothing surprising in its occurrence. It
may be eradicated from all other countries, but not from India. The
plague does not leave India because we have made this sacred land
profane, either by a misreading of religion or by giving up religion al-
together. People have learnt to run hither and thither, but they do not
change any of their tendencies. They go on practising irreligion and
do not care to know even the rules of sanitation, etc. It is only the
magic remedies known to them that they are prepared to adopt. No
one bothers, while running away, about what happens to the poor who
are left behind. How can we prosper in these circumstances? Our own
family, too, is open to this charge. What wonder then if we receive news
of fever, etc., from India?
In these circumstances, I can well understand the hesitation and
the sense of discourtesy you feel in sending for Kashi here. However,
this idea is worth considering. Chhaganlal, having taken away Kashi
with him, is now penitent and is trying to excuse himself by saying that
1 From the reference to Kashi, this letter appears to have been written about the
same period as the following item.
2 Wife of Chhaganlal Gandhi, who was in India at the time
3 This letter appears to have been written during Chhaganlal Gandhi's absence
from South Africa in 1910, in which year Kartak Shud 13 corresponded to November 15.
such was the will of God. We can talk of God's will only after first admit-
ting our mistake. It is sheer ignorance to speak of His will otherwise.
And what, after all, is God's will?
You need not have any hesitation in sending for Kashi here, for the
others will not come without her. And even if they wanted to, there
would be difficulties in their way. You should try to find out if any real
help can be had from Kashi.
I have a constant feeling that you alone and none else will be
able to master Tamil; hence keep at it under any circumstances.
The number of children that are come together here is rather
large; some of them are without their mothers. It is a difficult experi-
ment and somewhat risky too. I am not sure what will happen to
Rama and Deva.
I hope you will have some relief now that Thaker has joined duty.
Let him also read Tolstoy's book.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4942
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
