104. LETTER TO GIRIRAJ KISHORE
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 6, 1927
MY DEAR GIRIRAJ,
I have your letter. I like your heart searching. There is
always one danger in this process. A man who is not self-
possessed becomes morose and imagines all kinds of things about
himself. This is the state of a hypochondriac. Do you know
what that word means in the medical world? It means a person
who imagines every disease to be in himself of which he reads a
description. Whilst, therefore, it is the most proper thing to rid
oneself of any weakness of which one is conscious there must be
nothing imagined and there should be no brooding. Instead of
saying to yourself, 'I am wretched, so evil and I shall never
be good', the proper formula is, 'I will be good; for, God is good
and merciful; He will make me good.' The first formula is
weakening and the second is invigorating.
Your statement that an ideal cook is he who feels about the
diners as a mother does for her children is perfect. It is of
course difficult to feel like that; but by practice everything becomes
easy. Be patient with everybody, return a kind answer to every
enquiry and give up the last chapati and the last spoonful of
dal, even though there may be nothing left for you and those
who may be the last to dine being waiters. You may prepare
something for yourself to satisfy hunger. This may mean addi-
tional time. Never mind it. And, therefore, cooks and waiters
should never have any fixed appointments after the completion
of kitchen work. There must always be a wide margin left for
emergencies.
You must not regard yourself as unfit for the work. A man
who wants to do work for society and in society, that is, in com-
pany with others, has to have practically the same qualities whether
it is in the kitchen or in the sanitary yard or in the weaving-shed,
and no man becomes a worthy human being unless he has gone
through these purifying fires. I, therefore, want you to compose
yourself completely, and find your satisfaction in your work, deal-
ing with every emergency that may arise. I know that all this is
easy enough to say. It is not so easy to practise. Nevertheless all
our learning and everything we do has to be done in order to
arrive at this equableness. I hope, therefore, you will never
accept defeat.
Do please write to me whenever you like. Always try to
cultivate a compact style. But if you cannot say what you
want to, briefly, I do not mind even your long letters. But it
will be a good practice for you after having written your long
letter to reduce it to a quarter and see whether you cannot say
the same thing in quarter length.
Yours sincerely,
GIRIRAJ KISHORE
ASHRAM
SABARMATI
From a photostat: S.N. 14180
