43. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 22, 1927
I have your letter from Geneva. I hope you have received
all my previous letters including the last one which was in Eng-
lish. I see that you are observing things with your customary keen-
ness. I hope however that you will form no hasty conclusions as
so many of our superior men have often done. All is not gold
that glitters. The converse of it is also equally true. All is not
dirt that appears dirty. And how often do we not see the two
co-existing, riches and poverty, virtue and vice, Jekyll and Hyde,
God and Satan? The combination that you have described of
wine-drinking, womanizing, etc., with physical strength, orderli-
ness, common honesty and ardent patriotism is not to be denied.
The fact seems to me to be that one virtue does not lead at any
rate all at once to all the other virtues, and a particular quality
ceases to be a virtue when it solidifies into a custom. Vegetarian-
ism with us is really no virtue. We are vegetarians by custom. It
would be a sacrifice for us a large majority of vegetarians to be
otherwise. But vegetarianism in Europe will be a virtue. It
would be an active force in the life of a European vegetarian, and
if he is a seeker of truth that one reform will lead him to many
others. Foreign visitors to India have remarked upon our gene-
ral domestic happiness and family affection. This quality is part
of our being. A father loves his children and children render will-
ing obedience to parents without much effort on either side. People
in Europe have found by experience that it is necessary for them
to extend the family idea and regard the society to which they
belong as a nation. Hence patriotism there is not a virtue which
needs to be cultivated. Want of it would be noticed as a strange
thing and would lead to excommunication of the type familiar
in Europe. They have also understood the doctrine of honesty
being the best policy and so up to a point, you will find that
quality abundantly in evidence. With us patriotism has got to
be cultivated. We have in practice not gone beyond family affec-
tion as a nation. But I shall not elaborate this point further as I
must keep an appointment which I have put off to finish this
letter.
It will be an agreeable surprise to me if you succeed in enlist-
ing 500 paying subscribers for Young India. It would be further
proof of European interest in what Young India stands for.
I am making steady progress. And doctors are of opinion that
I should be able to resume touring on a moderate scale early next
month.
Yours sincerely,
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
C/O THOMAS COOK & SONS
LUDGATE HILL
LONDON
From a photostat: S.N. 14170
