497. LETTER TO LORD WILLINGDON
YERAVDA PRISON,
January 15, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
Your wire in reply to mine was a painful surprise to me.
Your very cordial letters written by you after I had left for
London had led me to expect a message from you awaiting me
on my return to Bombay. Such a message would have been in
keeping with your past as you had let me see it. Do you
remember 1915 when I returned to India from self-imposed
exile? You had sent me a message through the late Mr. Gokhale
that I should see you before expressing my views on Indian
matters. Your astounding wire therefore in reply to mine seeking
interview and guidance I could not understand at all. Nor do I
understand it even now.
But I do not write this to blame you for your action for
which no doubt, in your own opinion, you had the best of State
reasons. But I would like you as an Englishman to review the
immediate past and see whether you did not commit a grave
error of judgment in repelling my sincere and well-meant
advance. I ask you to believe me when I tell you that I was
desperately anxious to avoid resumption of struggle and to
tender my whole-hearted co-operation if it was at all possible.
I am anxious to do so even now. But the difficulties are
obviously much greater than before, unless you retrace your
steps or convince me that I was wholly in the wrong.
Will you not realize that it is impossible to crush the
Congress spirit though you have in law killed the Congress
organization? Is it wrong for Indians to desire complete inde-
pendence for their country? Is it wrong to seek to do so through
non-violent direct action, when negotiation fails or becomes
impossible?
Englishmen have negotiated with men whose hands were
dyed red as in Ireland but after committing a series of inhu-
manities. They negotiated with the Boers after trying the
method of concentration for women. Even in India the same
thing was done last year after trying repressive measures of a
particularly strong character against most women who never did
the slightest violence. Must such history be repeated again? It
seems to me that you invited trouble, so as to enable you to
put the Congress out of your way. Even if you succeed in
producing a dead calm in India you must know that it can
bring no lasting peace to the land. I ask you therefore to give
me and my comrades the same credit for honesty of intention
and action that you would claim for yourself and your collea-
gues and with such a mind reconsider your position and if you
feel sure of its correctness try to convince me of the error of my
way. Why do you say I want to impose my views on the
Government? Argument is not an imposing. The Congress does
seek to convert the Government to its views by reason,
negotiation and even by direct action, i. e., self-suffering, so long
as the Congress is sure of the correctness of its own position.
Is not this what every citizen or organization has done all the
world over? The Congress has indeed struck a new path. It has
replaced the method of armed rebellion by self-suffering. If you
believe in this profession of the Congress, surely you would wel-
come the coming in of a method that more becomes man's
dignity than the old law of the jungle.
But whether you feel with me as to the method or not I
invite you still to try negotiation with the Congress and especially
with me as its representative whom you gave no chance of even
knowing the Government side of the case. Remember the door
was shut by you and not by me. Open it in a gentlemanly
manner and you will find me eager to enter in.
My regards to Lady Willingdon. She must not be angry with
me that I am causing worry to her husband. I do not want to.
If at all, she must be angry with you in that in your anger or
distrust, you banged the door in the face of a poor old man
who knocked and was denied entrance.
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: India Office Library and Records. Courtesy: The
British Library, London
