583. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NANDI DURG,
May 21, 1927
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I have read your letter to Jamnalal and
also those to Chhaganlal. I understand about Ramachandra and
Ganesh. Do what all of you think proper.
It occurs to me that there is one thing I should write to
you about. Ramchandra and Ganesh are both good and honest
persons. Such persons should be retained if possible. But while
they are retained, we must be firm with them as well as gentle.
We should not have the slightest hesitation in pointing out their
faults. That is what I mean by firmness. You must frankly
tell Ramchandra: 'You exaggerate. You are hasty and hot-tem-
pered and never willing to see your own faults. You can stay
here only by recognizing those faults and overcoming them. It
is no use appealing to Gandhi, because he has delegated all
powers to us.' If he stays on even after such frank talk, he should
be allowed to stay and if he wishes to go, he should be allowed
to go, whatever the inconvenience caused thereby. You must
also tell Ganesh frankly: 'We suspect that you do not wish to
teach the others the craft you know. We can carry on only
if you teach others and train them. If not, you are free to go.
But we shall not drive you away if you should wish to continue
here even after you have trained somebody. You will continue
to receive the help you are having today. We want you to stay.
But you can stay only on our conditions.' In other words, firm-
ness lies in telling a person what we think about him. We should
be gentle in conveying this and it should not be an expression
of hasty judgment. Gentleness also means an effort to see what-
ever good may be seen in a fault. But ultimately, we can pro-
ceed correctly and carry on our work only when we have fully
expressed our view about a fault of which we are convinced.
Then alone can we consider ourselves true satyagrahis. I see
that relations among people are not smooth. At present there
is hesitation in frankly expressing our views on the faults of
others which are clear to us. If that veil of hesitation is removed,
427
much of the work can become easy. This is intended only by
way of guidance.
I am returning the letter from Ramachandra in case it is of
use to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy:
Sabarmati Museum and Sangrahalaya
