378. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
NADIAD,
August 3, 1917
MY DEAR ESTHER,
You have raised big questions. I think the command of Jesus
is unequivocal. All killing is bad for one who is filled with love. He
will not need to kill. He will not kill. He who is filled with pity
for the snake and does not fear him will not kill him and the snake
will not hurt him. This state of innocence is the one we must
reach. But only a few can reach it. It seems to me to be impos-
sible for nations to reach it. Equal progress in all is an inconceiv-
able situation. Nations will therefore always fight. One of them
will be less wrong than the other. A nation to be in the right can
only fight with soul-force. Such a nation has still to be born. I had
hoped that India was that nation. I fear I was wrong. The utmost
I expect of India is that she may become a great restraining force.
But she must acquire the ability to fight and suffer before she can
speak to the world with any degree of effect.
The pertinent question for you and me is what is our duty
as individuals. I have come to this workable decision for myself,
'I will not kill anyone for any cause whatsoever but be killed by
him if resistance of his will render my being killed necessary.' I
would give similar advice to everybody. But where I know that
there is want of will altogether, I would advise him to exert his will
and fight. There is no love where there is no will. In India there
is not only no love but hatred due to emasculation. There is the
strongest desire to fight and kill side by side with utter helpless-
ness. This desire must be satisfied by restoring the capacity for
fighting. Then comes the choice.
Yes, the very act of forgiving and loving shows superiority
in the doer. But that way of putting the proposition begs the
question, who can love? A mouse as mouse cannot love a cat. A
mouse cannot be commonly said to refrain from hurting a cat. You
do not love him whom you fear. Immediately you cease to fear,
you are ready for your choice—to strike or to refrain. To refrain is
proof of awakening of the soul in man; to strike is proof of body-
force. The ability to strike must be present when the power of the
soul is demonstrated. This does not mean that we must be bodily
superior to the adversary.
This is not a satisfactory letter but I think you will follow my
argument. But in matters such as these, prayer is the thing.
With love,
My Dear Child, pp. 18-
