190. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
December 7, 1932
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,
I have had a long chat with Sjt. Ghanshyamdas Birla, as also
Satisbabu regarding the Anti-Untouchability Board for Bengal.
I have also several letters from Bengal complaining about the for-
mation of the Board. Before it was formed Ghanshyamdas had
told me that he was going to ask you to form the Board, and
1 Vide also p. 122.
2 The reference is to the play Brahmacharyashrama mentioned in "Letter
to K. M. Munshi", pp. 65- and 149-50.
138
without giving any thought to the suggestion I at once endorsed
it. But I see that the idea has not found favour in Bengal, espe-
cially so far as Satisbabu and Dr. Suresh are concerned. They
think that the Board is bound to have a party colour about it.
I do not know how far this fear is justified, but I do know this
that the work of anti-untouchability should not become a party
affair in any way whatsoever. We want all who desire the re-
form to associate themselves freely and whole-heartedly with any
organization that may be formed. I would therefore suggest
that you should call all the workers representing different groups
and parties and place yourself at their disposal and let them then
choose whomsoever they like as President, offering to give your
whole-hearted co-operation to the President and Board of their
choice. I know that this requires self-abnegation. If I know you
well, I know that this is not beyond you. Of course if you feel
that there is nothing in the complaints made and that you will
be able to smooth down all the difficulties and that you will be
able to bring all the parties together, I have of course nothing
to say. In making the suggestions that I have made I have
assumed the impossibility of securing the association of all parties
with the Board as it is constituted at present. I have now placed
the whole thing before you. You will do whatever is best in the
interest of the cause.
Sjt. Khaitan gave me your message about Basanti Devi. I
told him that I wanted her to make her own choice, but wanted
her to work effectively and ceaselessly in the cause of anti-untouch-
ability. I am not enamoured of her accepting any office in any
organization. When I was there at the time of the Deshbandhu
collections, both she and I had come to the conclusion that hers
was not to run any organization, but simply to work whenever
she was free and had the mind for it.
You will please tell me all about Dr. Alam .
Yours sincerely,
DR. BIDHAN Roy
WELLINGTON STREET, CALCUTTA
From a copy: C.W. 7907. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 18667 and
In the Shadow of the Mahatma, pp. 76-
