77. LETTER TO S. K. RUDRA
MOTIHARI,
January 16, 1918
DEAR MR. RUDRA,
I am dictating this letter to Mr. Desai as, owing to an acute
pain in the left side, I am disinclined to do much writing. What
I want from you, if I can get it, is not a hastily written letter about
the vernaculars, but a full, enthusiastic and eloquent plea for them
which I can use for rousing the public to a sense of its duty in
this matter. Why should you have teaching [in] the vernacular and
answers in English? Why should every lad have to know English?
Is it not enough if some men are specially trained in English in
each Province so that they may diffuse among the nation through
the vernaculars a knowledge of new discoveries and researches?
So doing, our boys and girls will become saturated with the new
knowledge and we may expect a rejuvenation such as we have
never witnessed during the past sixty years. I feel more and more
that, if our boys are to assimilate facts of different sciences, they
will only do so if they receive their training through the vernaculars.
No half measures will bring about this much needed reform. Un-
til we attain this state of things, I fear that we shall have to let
the Englishmen think for us and we must continue slavishly to
imitate them. No scheme of self-government can avert the catas-
trophe if it does not involve this much needed change. If you
feel with me, I want your letter expressing the above views in your
own language.
I had a very nice time of it in Calcutta, but not in the Con-
gress pandal. It was all outside the pandal. I was enraptured
to witness the "Post-Office" performed by the Poet and his com-
pany. Even as I dictate this, I seem to hear the exquisitely sweet
voice of the Poet and the equally exquisite acting on the part of
the sick boy. Bengali music has for me a charm all its own. I did
not have enough of it, but what I did have had a most sooth-
ing effect upon my nerves which are otherwise always on trial.
You will be glad to learn that, at the Social Service Con-
ference, I made full use of my privilege as President and as a
lover of so much that is good in the Bengali life to speak strongly
against Bengali provincialism. The audience did not resent it.
It seemed to appreciate my remarks. I am sending you a copy
of my address which, of course, does not contain the personal
appeal mentioned above.
I have not given you a tenth of my experiences, but Mr. Desai
reminds me that I must give you one more. I attended a Humani-
tarian League meeting. There, too, I was the President and I
felt that I should be untrue to myself and the audience if I did
not touch upon the devilish worship going on at the Kalighat.
I therefore spoke about it without mincing words. I was watching
the audience while I was speaking. I am unable to say whether
I made any impression upon it. Anyway I eased my conscience
by referring to the matter fairly fully. If I had sufficient fire in
me, I would stand in front of the lane leading to the Ghat and
stop every man and woman from blaspheming God in the name of
religion.
I return your letter on the vernaculars to you to refresh
your memory.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
