438. LETTER TO N.
April 12, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
After having kept me waiting for four days and holding me
in suspense, you have given me a long letter.
I do not like the boil on your left foot and right leg. I
hope that you know the simple treatment of boils and that by the
time this reaches you, nothing will have been left of them. It is
much better to stop all work than to run the risk of dirt getting
into them when they appear on inconvenient parts of the body.
If you do not know simple treatment of simple diseases, you have
got to learn it quickly. Truly, this new life is a new birth for
you. May you come safely through it.
As for S1. I do not know what you mean by giving him
another chance. I hope you have written to him strongly about
his unwarrantable familiarity. Unless he is truly repentant, no-
thing whatsoever can be accepted from him, and it would not be
proper to accept his mere word in order to enable you to rece-
ive a gift from him. It is demoralizing to receive gifts from those
whom you want to reform or from those with whom we had
questionable relationship. Therefore S. may have all the chances
for showing his repentance.
Nothing whatsoever should be
received from him, or, for that matter from R2. The only person
whom I regard as quite reliable is Ramachandra. Get every-
thing you need from him and no one else. I shall write to
Ramachandra to look to your wants. He told me that in reply
to your letter asking for soap, he offered to send you a remittance
so as to enable you to buy soap locally. This was meant to save
railage for a small parcel. The local purchases you could only
do if you knew the bazaar prices or if you had a reliable person
who would not cheat you. Somehow or other I do not feel quite
safe about R3. He is for me an unknown quantity. He may
be a very good man, only I do not feel quite safe.
This brings me to soap. For cleaning the body, as I told
you when you were with me, no soap was required. Clean water
and a rough towel is all that is necessary for keeping the body
quite fit. For washing the hair there is nothing to approach the
soap-nut. It is to be had all over India. A few nuts soaked over-
night and then well mashed with hand in the water produces
soap suds with which you can clean the hair perfectly. But I
have an easier method. You have abandoned everything for
the Harijan service and for self-purification. Hence, you are, to
all intents and purposes, a sannyasin. Therefore you have to
remove the hair from your head and have a close crop almost
amounting to a shave. Mira has that. Tens of thousands of
widows have that crop. If you can easily let your hair go, I
need not prescribe elaborate things for keeping your hair in a
clean condition. I do not want to press for the crop. I do not
know what attraction your hair has for you. Much as I would
like every girl in the Ashram to have her hair cropped, I have
been able to persuade only a few. If you have the same partia-
lity for your hair as these Ashram girls have, I have nothing to
say. But if you would let your hair go as easily as you pare
your nails, then I would say: Get hold of the closest barber,
get him to wash his hands and his scissors in hot water and get
him to take off your hair. If he has not the clippers, then let
him do so with the ordinary scissors. It won't be as close a
crop as I would like, but it would be close enough to save you all
the anxiety about your hair and it would save you also a great deal
of time. If you do not want your hair to be cropped, I must
write to you in my next letter what you should do to keep it
clean without having to resort to soap. Remember that millions
in this country do not know what soap is. Again, in asking you
practically to do without soap, I am asking you to do something
I have not succeeded in inducing all the Ashram people to do.
Now for the washing of the clothes. I wonder if you have
enough firewood to heat your water. If you are a bit of an
engineer, you can even heat your water by the sun-heat. It
requires a metal pot and a bit of piping undoubtedly. An Ameri-
can educational missionary, Sam Higginbottom, is heating his
water by the sun-heat in Allahabad. But this is not yet for you.
I am simply whetting your appetite for doing simple things in
the villages. But if you can heat your water all you need to do
is to obtain the crude washing soda. Add that to your water and
it becomes as soft as soap water. Soak your clothes in that water
while it is boiling and let them lie in that water overnight. Wash
them well the next morning and they are free from dirt though
not white as snow, because they take somewhat the colouring
of the crude soda. But that should not matter and is in keeping
with the village life. But the clothes will be as clean as if washed
in a first-class hotel in America, and all you want is cleanliness.
The change you have made in your apparel seems to me to
be quite suitable. You have almost anticipated me if the robe
is in addition to the skirt I have mentioned in my letter. You
are hard on poor Ramachandra.
I think that his remark was
well meant. Your argument about the women is quite logical,
but unfortunately we are not governed by logic. I must not enter
into the history of the women whom you see bare-bodied. You
will however realize at once that you cannot afford to vie with
these sisters. Truth demands that your external appearance should
be as near a representation as possible of the internal condition.
You cannot afford today to claim unassailable internal innocence.
When you have attained it, you won't need to demonstrate it. Do
you know the story of Shukdevji and Vyas? If you don't, you
must ask me to give it to you some other day.
I am not at all satisfied about your food. The ragi bread
should go. You must have got whole wheatmeal flour by this
time. If you have, you must bake your own chapati. If you
have not got that, you should live on milk and such dried fruit
as you might have. It would keep you in good health and give
you the needed energy. Milk for yourself you should beg, if the
people will willingly supply to you. Buffalo milk is fairly rich
and if you get one pound, it will serve the purpose. Of course
S.'s portion is a first charge. Whatever fruit and vegetables you
may get now and again will really be enough to give you the
necessary vegetable salts and vitamins. So far as health is con-
cerned, a daily supply of fresh vegetables and fruit is not an ab-
solute necessity, especially when you are living out in the open
air and are not called upon to undergo extraordinary physical
or mental strain.
You must control your temper, even with reference to S.
You should be patient with the people who surround your little
cottage and would not let you have even a little bit of privacy
when you want to sleep. A little reasoning with them will set
them right. Whilst you are still becoming inured to your new
life, you should insist on taking an hour's sleep during the middle
of the day and giving it to S. It will be good for your body and
good for your temper, and if you and S. have a close crop, you
will use a wet rag for the head, as you saw me use. It cools
the head and the whole body instantaneously.
You should have sent me R.'s letter as he wrote it. Let me
know him as he is and not as you would have him to appear.
I think I have covered all the points in your letter.
May God the Truth surround you and S. with His protec-
ting care. I know that if you will have complete faith in Him,
it will be all well with you. Here is a note for S.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20910
