30. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL PATWARI
MOTIHARI,
Kartak Sud 4 [November 18, 1917]
RESPECTED BHAISHRI,
Your letter brought the same calm to my mind that one
from Kalabhai would have done. I am all love and admiration
for the Patwari family. I can never forget the help you gave me
at a critical moment. I have looked upon you as an elder
brother. No one can say what way I would have gone if you had
not helped me in Bombay.
I can make only one return : I can so live as to make you
think that the help given to me was well deserved. I have a feel-
ing that you are saddened after I have taken up my work for
Bhangis. I could not, and I cannot, give up my work for Bhangis.
But your being unhappy makes me sad and so, when I received
your letter, I knew that, though you disapprove of my work for
Bhangis, on the whole you don't disapprove of all my activities.
This came to me as a blessing.
But I hope for more. In the name of Vaishnava dharma that
most sacred dharma is being destroyed; in the name of cow pro-
tection, destruction of cows is brought about; in the name of
religion, the most irreligious practices are prevalent; posing to be
men of religion, irreligious people lay down the law on religious
matters. If I can see these things, how is it that you, who cherish
Vaishnava dharma, should not see them? I find myself constantly
asking this question. Contact with a Bhangi can never be sinful ;
killing a Muslim for [saving] cows can never be a righteous act ;
the holy books can never have enjoined untruth; men who give
free rein to their desires ought not to rule in matters of religion ;
all this is axiomatic. How can there be any difference of opinion
about this? Would you not like to use the influence you have
acquired over the Vaishnava community towards this end? Can you
not help men like me at least with your verbal support? What
tapascharya can I go through to make you see things as I see
them? I keep asking these questions. Please think [of them]
inwardly again.
I send you [reports of] my speeches and should like you to
read them again from this point of view.
Though I may not be able just now to read the books you
mention, please send them to me.
We have purchased, for the Ashram, 55 bighas of land on the
banks of the Sabarmati. Construction is proceeding, though the
progress is slow because of the plague.
Respectful greetings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 4124
