41. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 27, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
This is Thursday morning before prayer. Your letter came
in yesterday with Ba's.
A book on Astronomy is being sent to you. I enclose also a
map for the month. You will find herewith also Dr. Saunders's
letter. It is satisfactory on the whole.
Letter for Ba will also accompany this.
You may pursue the conduct of the Ashram as much as you
like. It won't tire me. It will assist me. It will enable you to
understand my viewpoint better. You must not accuse yourself
of want of faith in me or my wisdom because you do not see a
point of mine at once or because having seen it you cannot agree
with me. I am not a perfect being. Why should you see eye to
eye with me in my errors? That would be blind faith. Your faith
in me should enable you to detect my true error much quicker
than a fault-finder. What I would like your faith to do is that
when you cannot convince me of my error you should think
that it is likely that I see more clearly than you do in matters
where I have thought and experienced more. That would give
you peace of mind. Therefore you should not paralyse your
thought by suppressing your doubts and torturing yourself that
you do not agree with my view in particular things. You should
therefore pursue the discussion of the Ashram till you have the
clearest possible grasp of all my ideas about it.
You need not have argued about the man being the worse
sinner of the two. I have always held that view against most, if
not all, of my male friends who have expressed their opinion on the
point. Of course I agree with you also that man's superiority, if
it is that, over the brute creation, consists in his capacity for
observing brahmacharya. It must therefore be an Ashram ideal to
be attained immediately if that were possible.
There is therefore complete agreement between us so far as
the fundamental thing is concerned. The difficulty or the difle-
rence comes in when we begin to devise ways and means of
encompassing the ideal.
I am becoming more and more confirmed in the view that it
must go on as it is now doing, with ample liberty to the manager
to regulate fresh admissions.
Our life should become daily
simpler and not more complex. We should be progressively more
self-restrained. But we should remain a composite family that we
now are.
The present composition is not the hindrance. The hindrance
is that we have so few real complete brahmacharis. All were broken
vessels, all had their own individual passions to conquer. But I
hold that most of them were and are sincere strivers. Therefore
we are blind leaders of the blind and ever stumbling. When some
of us have, by constant striving, become at least matriculates in
the effort, we shall certainly do better. Therefore the problem
resolves itself into each one of us striving to the utmost to approach
the ideal. Remember my definition of brahmacharya. It means not
suppression of one or more senses but complete mastery over
them all. The two states are fundamentally different. I can sup-
press all my senses today but it may take aeons to conquer them.
Conquest means using them as my willing slaves. I can prick
the ear-drum and suppress the sense of hearing by a simple,
painless operation. This is worthless. I must train the ear so that
it refuses to hear gossip, lewd talk, blasphemy, but it is open to
the celestial music, it will hear the most distant cry for succour
from thousands of miles. Saint Ramdas is said to have done so.
Then how [to] use the organs of generation? By transmuting the
most creative energy that we possess from creating counterparts
of our flesh into creating constructive work for the whole of life,
i.e., for the soul. We have to rein in the animal passion and
change it into celestial passion. Read here Chapter II, Verse 64,
of the Gita. The burden of the Divine Song is not "fly from the
battle but face it without attachment". Therefore you and I and
everyone of us have to stand unmoved in the midst of all kinds
of men and women. There is no physical seclusion except tem-
porarily for some. The Ashram is all right where it is but we
must branch out for larger growth. But that would be a natu-
ral evolution coming in its own time.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 6269. Courtesy: Mirabehn
