290. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
October 17, 1910
SIR,
Most of the newspapers published a telegram from Pretoria some
days ago to the effect that at last the Asiatic question that has agitated
the Colony for the last four years was about to be satisfactorily settled.
This news was supposed to be officially inspired, but was immediately
followed by the arrest of one of the staunchest and best respected Indians
in this province, namely Mr. Sorabji, and his arrest was followed by
that of three of his co-passive resisters, equally brave, that is, Messrs
Thambi Naidoo, Sodha and Medh.
1 Narayansamy, referred to in the letter, died on 16-10-1910.
2 This was published in Rand Daily Mail under the title "Death of a Deportee",
and in Indian Opinion, 22-10-1910, as a letter to the Press. It was published also in
The Transvaal Leader of October 18, 1910.
I should, however, not have trespassed upon your courtesy and the
attention of the public in order merely to give the above information.
But, in my humble opinion, it is due to the public to know something
of the trials of those Indians and Chinese who, although lawful residents
of the Transvaal, and some of them born in South Africa, were deported
to India and returned per S. S. Sultan about the end of last month.
The tragedy has culminated in the death of a most inoffensive and
law-abiding Indian named Narayansamy. When he left this province
for India as a deportee, he possessed a healthy constitution, but over
six weeks on the decks of different steamers exposed to all sorts of weather
evidently proved too severe for his constitution. Mr. Ritch has pointed
out that he and his fellow-deportees were not allowed to see friends or
legal advisers almost for a week while their steamer was in Table Bay,
and ultimately he had to obtain an order from the Supreme Court before
he could see them. He has stated in a letter to the Cape papers that
he found these men bootless and hatless and in some cases even without
sufficient protection for the body, shivering on the open deck of that
steamer. They were refused landing first at Durban, then at Port Eliza-
beth, then at the Cape, and again at Durban, the last time in defiance
of an order of the Supreme Court restraining the Immigration Officer
from removing them from the jurisdiction of the Provincial Division of
Natal. The Officer, acting under instructions from the Minister of the
Interior, and in his over-zeal to please his chief, gave a meaning to the
order of the Court which no common sense man would give, and in
indecent haste sent these men to Delagoa Bay with the result that, as
above stated, Narayansamy is no more.
I have not hesitated to call the death of the late Nagappan legalized
murder, and I fear that the death of Narayansamy must be classed in the
same category. I have the warrant of our own Court for stating that
deportation such as Narayansamy's under an administrative order, des-
cribed by Mr. Laughton, K.C., as "Star Chamber procedure", is illegal.
Narayansamy and his fellows, very properly, as I think every lover of
justice and fair play would say, disregard such deportation, attempt to
return to the country of their birth or adoption and, in the attempt,
are driven from pillar to post. Inconceivable difficulties are placed in
their way. Is such treatment necessary? Passive resisters are told that
they must not complain if they find their lot to be hard whilst they are
defying the laws of the land. Passive resisters appreciate the advice.
They have no desire to avoid the ordinary consequences of the breach
they deliberately commit of laws which they consider to be repugnant to
their conscience. But I make bold to say that the public will never
endorse the infliction of what amounts to a sentence of death as in the
cases to which I have just drawn attention. I doubt not that the people
of South Africa wish to see general rejoicing and goodwill among all
the communities residing under the Union, on the approaching visit
of a representative of the King, and on the eve of the opening of the
first Parliament of the Union. Is the Indian community in any part
of South Africa to be expected to share the rejoicings that will take
place at the end of the month, and to partake of the goodwill that
should permeate all classes?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 18-10-1910
