38. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN TO DELHI,
April 14, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
You have done something really excellent. Act in the
same manner in future also. And now the answers to your
questions 2 .
1. It has not been my experience that in daily life it is
untruth and dishonesty that always triumph. We of course come
across instances of these sometimes winning, but if we look deep
into the matter we shall see that the real triumph goes to truth.
If, however, the victory of truth was always self-evident, what
would be its value, and what would be the merit of adhering to
it? Is not this the reason why the Ishopanishad, which is regar-
ded as authoritative as the Vedas has this mantra, that the face of
truth is covered with a golden lid? We are dazzled by the splen-
dour of that lid.
2. Now the second question. It may not be our lot always
to suffer, but that doesn't mean that we shouldn't advise other
people to follow the seemingly strait and narrow path of truth.
Even if the old man had been able to hide himself and reach
Madras, what would it have availed? Where was the guarantee
that he would not have got caught somewhere? And why should we
assume that he had to suffer because finally he had to get down?
We don't always know what is for our good. We should, there-
fore, proceed blindly on the assumption that the path of truth
cannot but lead to our good.
3. It was certainly within the right of the ticket-examiner
to let that man go. If, however, he did not think he had such a
right, he could not have neglected his duty out of false pity.
But even in that case he could have issued the man a ticket and
paid for it from his own pocket or could have collected the
money from other passengers.
4. Supposing the examiner did not let the man travel,
nor issued him a ticket with his own money, and the old man
had therefore to miss the train or go to jail, why should he have
minded that? If he was a lover of truth, he should have faced that
cheerfully. And we are thinking here about the duty of a lover
of truth. Even though you are not maintaining yourself with
money earned by yourself, on an occasion like this, which arises
only once in a while, you could have paid something yourself
and collected the balance from the other passengers. If the
latter had paid anything, so far so good; but even if they hadn't,
you would have done your duty.
But I didn't feel, either, that
even the little you did was not enough.
5. Had the examiner let the man travel to Madras, he
could have informed the ticket collector there that he had used
his discretion in letting him go. But supposing he had refused
to do that, it would not have been right for the old man to get
out of the station with the help of a platform ticket. However,
the way out of that situation would have been easy.
You yourself
could have explained his condition to the ticket collector and if
the latter had not been convinced he could have kept the man
in custody. These days, however, they don't follow that prac-
tice since it puts the railway company to a loss; the ticket
collector merely shouts angrily at such persons and lets them
go.
If you have any doubts even after reading these answers to
your questions, ask me again.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7334. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
