239. LETTER TO J. J. DOKE
[JOHANNESBURG]
DEAR MR. DOKE,
The questions you have asked me are very pertinent and very
seasonable. If only the public can be induced to take sufficient interest
in the Asiatic question to understand what it is that we want, half the
difficulty will be over.
Speaking from a British Indian standpoint, British Indians have
long since accepted the position that Asiatic immigration should be
severely restricted; but, if the Colonists demand that even the most
highly educated Indians shall not enter the Colony, they require not
only the severe restriction of immigration, but total prohibition. What
British Indians have offered is, in effect, equivalent to total prohibition,
and yet it is not quite that. Underlying the total prohibition is the
desire, I understand, that trade competition on the part of British Indians
should be confined only to those who are domiciled in the Colony. If
that be so, the desire is entirely met by confining the entry of educated
Asiatics only to those possessing education of a very high order; in other
words, in practice it may be limited to professional men. I need hardly
point out that a free and healthy Asiatic community in the Transvaal
would be impossible without, say, a few lawyers, a few doctors, a few
teachers, and, it may be, a few preachers amongst them who are their
own kith and kin. These should not come to the country on sufferance,
but as a matter of right. These can never enter into competition with
the Europeans; but, assuming that they would be men of the right
stamp, they can promote the progressive growth of the Indian community
in the Transvaal, and can only be of very great assistance to it, and,
indeed, to the Colonists. The only reasonable way in which this can
be done is by leaving the immigration law as it is, without making
the principle of the Asiatic Act applicable to such cases, for the simple
reason that no identification can be necessary for men of education.
To ask us to consent to an alteration of the law so as to bring about
absolute exclusion of educated Indians is not only an additional objection,
but, in my opinion, an insuperable one. Of course, the Parliament
of the Colony can at any time bring forward prohibitory legislation
independent of our consent. I should personally strain every nerve
to oppose absolute prohibition, and should ask my countrymen to offer
passive resistance to such law. Whether I would be able to carry
them with me or not in such a case, it is difficult for me to judge at
present, and passive resistance in connection with any such legislation
can only mean that Indians would far rather leave the country than live
in it deprived of the natural assistance of educated men such as I have
described above. Passive resistance, in my opinion, means self-imposed
suffering of an acute type, intended to prove the justice of the cause,
and thus to bring conviction home to the minds of the Colonists. I
hope that I have made the position clear.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 25-7-1908
