494. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 6, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter was received at the expected time.
Do you remember the frail little wife of Dahyabhai—
Yashoda. She died on Sunday. It was a deliverance for her.
She had fits and had almost lost her memory. This means addi-
tional burden for Vallabhbhai. For she has left behind her a
bright boy about five years. But he has broad shoulders.
My weight oscillates between 104 and 106. I am, there-
fore, not making any change. I am trying to replace almond
paste with ground-nut paste. If it agrees as well as almond, it
will be good. The others are also keeping well.
Magan wheel was received yesterday. I am going to try it.
It will enable me to give complete rest to the left elbow. And
Prabhudas will be delighted when he learns that I am actually
trying his invention. Of course my recent drawing [of] the thread
with the right hand will come in very useful.
I am glad you have begun to use the left hand in place of
the right. It must be done not merely for writing. Try to eat
also with the left hand. No special effort, save a little thought,
seems to be necessary.
I am glad you had a few days with Sarojini and that you
were able to serve her.
What I have said about my being a hindrance is perfectly
true. I may help to start the thing, but, not being able to live
up to it must hinder further progress. The ideal of voluntary
poverty is most attractive. We have made some progress, but
my utter inability to realize it fully in my own life has made it
difficult at the Ashram for the others to do much. They have the
will but no finished object-lesson. We have two delightful kittens.
They learn their lessons from the mute conduct of their mother,
who never has them out of her sight. Practice is the thing. And
just now I fail so hopelessly in so many things. But it is no use
mourning over the inevitable.
I have just had a card from Narandas saying that Gangadevi
is no more. She died cheerfully with Ramanama on her lips.
She and Totaramji were worthy of the Ashram.
Perhaps we shall meet soon.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
I spun 24 rounds on Magan wheel. Narandas asks whether
you will be able to see me on 18th. So far as I am concerned,
of course you can.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6219. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9685
