774. LETTER TO DAHYALAL H. JANI
October 28, 1945
BHAI DAHYALAL,
Don't be angry with me but have a hearty laugh. I don't
know who told me or where I read it or what happened but
somehow I had the illusion that you had died. Later one day
when I saw Kishorelal revising your translation of the Gita, I came
to know that you were alive and I was happy about it. But I
forgot about this and thought you were dead. Meanwhile yesterday
your letter came and now this won't leave my mind. So now you
have to live long. But I know that you may live beyond me, that
is, you may live for more than 125 years, and yet will remain
what you are now. Isn't that as good as being dead even when
alive? This is the impression I have got after reading your letter.
There is nothing new in what you have said about the five
things. Of course, there is some truth in it but according to me
it is so full of ignorance that I have not found anyone of them
useful. Your last sentence is : "If there is any service that I can
do, do order me." How incorrect this sentence is! I did order
you to do a lot of service and what did I get from it? What
could the country achieve or what benefit did you get? Think
over the other four things in the same way. There is no need for
a reply and this should not be published on any account. I
have written this just to humour you in the hope that it may
open your eyes one day. If any time you are able to understand
or approach to town by throwing litter or by displaying advertisements in
wrong places or cutting trees and plucking wild flowers or in any other
way. Nor should they disturb the peace of nature which others are en-
joying by shouting, loud singing or playing gramophone records or by
tuning wireless sets."
the hidden meaning behind it I would think it is better than
getting your reply and would consider your living meaningful.
SHRI DAHYABHAI H. JANI
939 WILSON GARDENS
BANGALORE CITY
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
