268. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
March 21, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Whenever I decide to write only with the left hand, my
writing work is automatically restricted.
This is because the
habit of writing with the right hand has still not lost its force.
The paper and other articles which I have brought from England
are to be used up.
If that is likely to confuse our minds [in
regard to the vow of swadeshi], they may be put away in a safe
place. We will use them later. I have forgotten the circumstances
relating to the article with the locket. Nothing has come with
me which had no historical value. Just now, therefore, every-
thing should be kept in a safe place. Those articles which you
think can be utilized may be used.
Abhiman in the sense of firm determination is necessary in
regard to yajna, but abhiman in the sense of pride—that pride
which makes you think how strong you are and feel confident that
you will never miss your yajna—such abhiman should be shunned.
I would have to answer your question about Meghji only if I
claimed that I could not be bound by human attachments. We
may try to free ourselves from their bondage, but should not give
up tenderness of heart or our desire to serve human beings. The
thought of what will happen after someone's death springs from
foolishness, not from human attachment. Everyone is to die sooner
or later. Knowing this, why should we worry over death?
Moreover, having surrendered ourselves as puppets in the hands
of the Master, how can we bargain with Him?
He may make
us dance as He wills. After all, what matters is that we should be
able to dance. If a person can always dance, what else can he
ask for?
It is very good indeed that you are making progress in your
music. If it is necessary to get your tonsils removed, do so.
The matter about visitors from outside the Ashram has not
been settled. I have included Sushila's name [in the list of visi-
tors].
In asking me to discuss your defects, do you want me to
praise you? I do not at all wish to tell you your defects.
Haven't I pointed them out more than once? Let me know how
many of them you have overcome; we shall talk about others
afterwards.
Devotees of God and such other people can cultivate equal-
mindedness only in a certain measure. He in whom it becomes
perfect must be God. But, then, there is only one God. Hence,
even the most perfect human being will have equal-mindedness
in an imperfect measure. That is why we see differences in peo-
ple's beliefs and conflicts among them. We need not be unhappy
about this. The world is the effect of discord. Our duty lies in
cultivating a greater degree of equal-mindedness every day. If
we try to do this, the presence of discord in the world will cease
to hurt us and become bearable, may even seem beautiful.
We need not believe that everything in India is better than
elsewhere. Moreover, rise and fall is the law of the world. On
the whole, there is much good in India. That is why it became
a conquered country, and not a conquering country.
At the
basis of this attitude is the belief that an oppressor is in a worse
state than his slave.
What books on astronomy and which of the works of Upton
Sinclair do we have?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10277. Also C.W. 6725. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
