3. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 21, 1947
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I got your long letter yesterday. Manu read it out to me
in the evening.
What you say about cultivation is absolutely correct. We
should grow as much grain as we can and give it to the people.
We did this once at Sabarmati. Were you there at that time?
We raised a bajra crop out of season and gave potfuls of it
to the poor people. We did, of course, charge them something.
Vrajlal used to spend the whole day in distributing the grain
to labourers. Something like that should be done at Sevagram
too, and that on a much larger scale. Money should be no
difficulty. You may show this to anybody you like.
I was indeed very happy to learn about Kanchan. May her
delivery pass off without difficulty. I cannot judge whether her
plan of going to Vyara is right or not. Sushilabehn is going
there and she might be able to guide you better. It is very
good that Kanchan's sister has arrived there. It is as well that
you are looking after the building work. That work also had
to be done by somebody. You are an expert at the job.
My fate lies entirely in God's hands. If I am able to
accomplish my mission here and leave Bengal, I will certainly
go there. But I do not know whether I shall succeed. If I
should die in my attempt here, I would welcome such a death.
Your running down here will serve no purpose. If you have
learnt anything from me, build further on it. If you happen to
come to this side and call on me incidentally, that would be
another matter. I had an excellent letter from Kanchan, but
have had no time to reply to it. Now lying in bed I dictate
letters to Manu and to others if the letters are in other
languages. I am thus able to give sufficient rest to the body
and cope with the correspondence to a certain extent. There
are some newspaper correspondents with us and they also help.
Their help partly makes up for Parasram's absence. I dictate
Urdu letters to Dev and Bengali letters to Nirmal Babu . Thus
my correspondence work seems to be well arranged now and I
am able to spare both my hands and eyes. That I do not write
to Kanchan should not mean that she need not write to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8628. Also C. W. 7210.
Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah
