158. LETTER TO A. A. PAUL
POST ANDHERI,
March 15, 1924
DEAR MR. PAUL,
I have your letter of the 8th inst. enclosing a copy of Mr. Ait-
ken's letter. I believe he and I know each other. If he is the
Mr. Aitken I know, he knows my views very well. However, I
shall jot them down here for what they are worth.
The Indian community of South Africa includes people from
all provinces and represents Hinduism, Islam, Christianity and
Zoroastrianism. There are many South Africa-born Indians who
are Christians and are highly educated and therefore naturally
very sensitive about self-respect. The restrictive legislation of
South Africa applies to them although South Africa is their home
and although the majority of them never expect to see India at
all. It is not known here that rightly or wrongly these young men
and women have adopted European customs, manners, dress, etc.,
but neither their Christianity nor their education nor their Euro-
peanization has saved them from the bar sinister. I mention this
fact not to show that they should have a special or separate treat-
ment (they would themselves object to any such distinction), but
to emphasize the fact that the restrictive legislation in South
Africa is predominantly racial in character. The economic aspect
occupies a subordinate position. The Indian claim is exceedingly
simple and reasonable. They have voluntarily accepted adminis-
trative restriction of Indian immigration and, as a matter of fact,
hardly any Indian who has not previously resided in South Africa
and practically made it his home is admitted. In exchange for
this voluntary self-denial, the domiciled community claims equa-
lity of treatment. This position has been always regarded by the
thoughtful Europeans of South Africa as eminently reasonable, and
in 1914, an agreement was arrived at between the South African
Government and the Indian community to which both the Impe-
rial and the Indian Governments were party, whereby it was
understood that no further restrictive legislation should be passed
and that the position of the domiciled Indians would be steadily
and progressively ameliorated. The local Indian community, there-
fore, has a double grievance in respect of the present anti-
Indian agitation in South Africa. The vast majority of Europeans
in South Africa are nominally Christian. I have the privilege
of claiming many of them, especially the missionaries, as my life-
long friends. What is wanted is for the real Christians to dare to
stand for truth and justice. There is unfortunately too much of
expedience even amongst some of the best of them. They think
that standing for truth in the face of prejudice will impair their
usefulness for service. I have always dissented from this view, and
my humble opinion based upon extensive experience is that such
an attitude is a concession, although totally unconscious, to Satan.
I need hardly assure you that Mr. Aitken's letter will be re-
garded as strictly confidential and, on that account, I shall make
no use of my letter to you either.
Yours truly,
A. A. PAUL, ESQ.
GENERAL SECRETARY
THE STUDENT CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION OF INDIA, BURMA & CEYLON
6, MILLER ROAD, KILPAUK
MADRAS
From photostats: S.N. 8500 and 9927
1 Vide Vol. XII, pp. 330
XXIII-17
