72. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
[February 13, 1927]
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,
I got your letter at Jalgaon. Please go through the tele-
gram from Manilal, which I got at Amalner, a copy of my letter
to him and my letter to Sushila and then pass them on to Chi.
Sushila.
Now that Chi. Shanti is not to be operated upon for the time
being, it would suit me if the marriage is solemnized at an early
date and then the eight days of Holi will not come in the way.
I am likely to reach Sabarmati on the 6th which will be Phagan
Sud 3. I would suggest we discontinue consulting an astrologer
for choosing a date. For an auspicious thing the sooner the
better. But in these matters I would not insist on my own views.
I can appreciate your wish to have Akola as the venue. All
my tour dates are fixed. Only this change could be made: Since
the Kathiawar [Political] Conference has been postponed I am
free from the 4th to the 8th; on the 4th I reach Bombay. From
Bombay I can straight away come up to Akola alongwith Mani-
lal. Thus we can have the marriage on the 6th when I reach
there and having spent there Monday the 7th, my silence day, I
can leave for Ahmedabad. I must reach Ahmedabad by the
10th at the latest. I would like to put you to the minimum in-
convenience. If you would have the date some time before the
6th that could be done if the marriage is performed wherever I
happen to be. The other alternative is that you should perform the
ceremony without my being present. You would all like me to
be there. I know Ba would desire it, so would Manilal. But I
do not consider my presence indispensable. If you agree to this
and if you can find out a date that suits you and falls before
March 11 you can have a day of your choice.
I do not regard marriage as always indispensable. When it
becomes indispensable it could only be a religious rite which
may be performed with or without the presence of elders. And it
could be done any time. This is why I do not insist on my be-
ing there. I importune you for an early date because Manilal's
work in Natal suffers, and I want to send him off at the earliest
opportunity.
Please consider all this and fix any day that suits you, and,
if possible, send me a wire.
Here is my tour programme:
13, 14, 15 Dhulia
16
Nasik
17
Ahmednagar
18
Kurduwadi
19, 20, 21 Sholapur
22
Gulbarga
23 Pandharpur
24 Satara
25 Belgaum
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1123. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
