237. LETTER TO NANALAL K. JASANI
March 27, 1933
BHAI NANALAL1,
I send herewith Maganlal's letter and telegram. You will
also find on the telegram form the reply I am sending to him.
It seems to me that now the only thing to do is to effect a
partition. That also will require the signatures of all. Hence in
my reply, I am asking Maganlal to come here. I believe that
Chhaganlal also will welcome the partition. And Champa seems
to be eager for it. If that is so, and if you do not think Magan-
lal's presence necessary at all, you should wire to him from there
asking him not to come. However if you think with me that the
presence of all the three brothers will be necessary you too should
send a wire to Maganlal asking him to come.
I feel worried about Champa's and Ratilal's attitude. Cha-
mpa will naturally follow her father's advice and Ratilal seems to
be under Champa's influence at present. I have no trust now in
Prabhashankar. His motives do not at all seem to be pure. That
day he showed no regard for truth or courtesy. I felt that for the
sake of money he was ready to harm the interests of his daughter
and son-in-law. I will not, therefore, be inclined in his favour, that
is, I will not approve of his being made the guardian. However,
I certainly do not think myself to be the only friend of the Doc-
tor. I regard you and Ratubhai to be equally his friends. You
may certainly, therefore, appoint Prabhashankar as the guardian
if you so wish. Sardar, to whom I have shown this letter, is of
my opinion. You may rest assured that I will not come in the
way of anything that may be decided. I have only explained my
own feeling. If it finds no echo in your heart, it should be ignor-
ed. I am writing this so that I may have a clear conscience in
the matter. I will have no objection to your showing this letter
to Prabhashankar. In fact I wish that you should do so. It seems
best that he should know what I feel. I do not wish to write all
this to Champa and Ratilal. It is not right that I should tell
them all this. But just as I feel unhappy at the thought of crea-
ting ill-will towards Prabhashankar in their minds, I would be
untrue to you if I did not tell you what I thought.
I am not happy that this business is getting complicated and
dragging on. Please try your best to settle it as early as possible.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9640
