141. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 21, 1908
DEAR MR. SMUTS,
I understand that you will be leaving for Cape Town on Saturday.
I hardly think that you realize the gravity of the situation so far as the
Indian community is concerned. Your decision not to register under
the compromise those Indians who have been entering the Colony on
bona-fide permits after the 9th of this month has created a turmoil amongst
the Indians. You have heard, I take it, that the Chairman of the
Association has been already assaulted. Many more may be assaulted
in the near future. I daily receive indignant letters saying that I have
entirely misled the people as to the compromise and that the law is not
going to be repealed at all. Can I not ask you, for the sake of those
who have helped the Government, to do a very simple thing—to announce
immediately that the Act will be repealed and that new arrivals may
be voluntarily registered?
The most violent member of the Pathan community, who has
remained behind the scenes but who has been an active agent in having
the assaults committed, has been arrested today on a charge of inspiring
to do harm. If it is at all possible, I certainly think that this man should
be deported. In my opinion he is more or less a maniac and many
dissatisfied Indians simply hang around him. The delay in making
the announcement about the repeal of the Act and the decision not
to accept voluntary registration have simply strengthened the hands
of these men. You will add to the peace of mind of well-behaved Indians
by giving the assurance about the Act, accepting voluntary registration
from those who now arrive, and by dealing with the fanatic I have
mentioned either by way of deportation or by treating him as a pro-
hibited immigrant under the Immigrants' Restriction Act. I believe he
possesses no documents.
This letter I have ventured to make very personal and absolutely
frank.
May I ask you to reciprocate the frankness? I have been
naturally talking to Mr. Cartwright, who has acted as the intermediary,
and Mr. Cartwright has been passing along messages, but the gravity
of the situation makes it imperative that I should make this very personal
appeal to you.
Yours etc.,
J. C. SMUTS, ESQ.
COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
From a photostat of the handwritten office copy: S. N. 4816
