266. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO CHURCHILL
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 27, 1906
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL
DEAR SIR,
In accordance with the desire expressed by Mr. Winston Churchill,
we beg to enclose herewith three statements1, on single sheets of paper,
showing the view of the British Indian community, first, on the Asiatic
Law Amendment Ordinance, secondly, on the Vrededorp Stands Ordi-
nance, and thirdly, on the general question.
We remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
3 enclosures
From the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4653
[ENCLOSURE]
OBJECTIONS TO THE VREDEDORP STANDS ORDINANCE
1. The Ordinance if sanctioned will be a precedent for the
inclusion of class-disqualifying clauses in leases in other townships in
Johannesburg or the Transvaal and would therefore go beyond the
Law 3 of 1885 in restricting British Indian rights.
2. British Indians with the knowledge of the Boer Government
occupied and built upon Stands in Vrededorp just as many other Euro-
peans did who were not the original burghers who received, from the
late President Kruger, squatters' rights on the Stands.
3. Vrededorp is contiguous to the Malay Location, which is
inhabited by a very large number of British Indians.
4. The Ordinance does not perpetuate the legal condition that
was in existence before the war but it gives permanent rights to the
original burghers with the power to sublet. Under this power, Europeans
who were not burghers would be able to retain the rights granted to
them by the burghers whereas British Indians will be dispossessed without
the slightest justification.
5. Premises built by British Indians are not shanties but substantial
structures as good as most other buildings.
6. If the Ordinance is sanctioned, it will be the first instance
of a recognition by an Imperial Government of the right of a municipality
to curtail the residential rights of British Indians in any part of the
Transvaal which, under a Supreme Court judgment, British Indians are
entitled to. It will indirectly create a system of Locations which other-
wise the Imperial Government, it is presumed, would never sanction.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4636
