176. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
June 12, 1944
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,
I wanted to write this letter immediately after Manu's depar-
ture but I could not. Manu disappointed me very much just
before she left. I thought she had understood everything and
would do as she had promised, but I was wrong. Before leaving,
she bought and sent a silver toy and a silver cup for Pyarelal's
brother's daughter. I was very much pained. I poured out all
my pain in my letter to her and returned the things. You must
have come to know about all this. Now you will have to be on
your guard. I had suggested that she should stay for a year at
Rajkot in the hope that that would develop all her fine qualities
and cure her weaknesses. But Manu was reluctant. On receipt
of an enthusiastic letter from the teacher at Karachi, she was
beside herself with joy, and I, therefore, sent her there.
I should like to tell you the thoughts which occurred to me
about you. You seem to have such a lot of money that you
have taught Manu to spend money as if she was more than
even a multi-millionaire. I very much appreciate your love
for your daughters. But the question is from where you got all
this money. You could not have saved it from khadi work.
Did you, then, save it from your job there? Is it possible to
save so much money in this way? If you have kept accounts,
I should certainly like to see them. How can I hide from you
the suspicion that has arisen in my mind? When I got angry,
Shantikumar was present. When I asked him, he told me that
you could not have saved so much from the Scindia job. He
had no reason to suspect you, as strict care was taken to see that
there was no scope for corruption among their employees. Now
let me have your reply.
Sushila must have written to you about Yukti. Take good
care of her. Manu's eyes are very weak. They can be saved only
with great care. Otherwise in a few years' time she might not
be able to read and write.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXIV
