176. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
DELHI,
Silence Day [November 7, 1921]
CHI. MAHADEV,
Dil means the self, because it means the heart. Tandurust
[healthy] is a hackneyed word. I wanted to write to you about
[the health of] your body, but how could I be content with wish-
ing you only physical health?
I always looked upon Parasram as a son though I saw his
faults. I have regarded you as a friend. I feel no hesitation in
welcoming Durga as a daughter at the very first meeting. J a m n a -
lal has been persistently claiming to be a son, but somehow I
cannot put myself in the position of a father to him.
About one bhajan of yours, I felt that I had read it. However,
why should not a similar one suggest itself to you? But I have al-
ready replied to you yesterday in this regard before your letter
reached me. Your thinking constantly about the atman during
your illness covered swaraj as well. It was not at all necessary to
think about swaraj separately.
We must perform the duties arising from the existence of the
body. Eating, bathing, going from place to place for begging, —
all these we do, thinking them to be legitimate activities, and show
aversion only to bread-labour; purification of the mind is achiev-
ed by mental yajna, that of the atman by yajna of the atman, and of
the body by yajna of the body [i.e., physical labour]. Man cannot
make a proper return for the food he gets for his body by doing
mental work. One does yajna [of the body] if one labours without
expecting food in return. At the present time and in this country,
yajna of the body can be performed only by working on the spin-
ning-wheel, for its absence has enfeebled the body of the country.
If the climate of India and our needs change, we can take up an-
other kind of yajna. If it comes about that for getting water in our
country we have always to dig wells, then digging of wells would
become a sacrifice to some extent. But then, as long as such a
state of things continues, bodily yajna is necessary just as brahma-
charya and other things are necessary. And because it is only a duty
attaching to the body, the latter can be free from the obligation
of performing this yajna when it does not consume food. But unlike
in the case of prayer which being an act of the mind or the heart,
a man like me believes or persuades himself that he is performing
it all the twenty-four hours and does not have a fixed time for it
every day, one cannot persuade oneself that one is performing
bodily yajna without actually doing so, since it is an act to be
performed by the body. One may not perform it with one's
whole heart behind it and so deceive people, that would be another
matter; but perform it, one must. This answers both your ques-
tions on the subject.
I misunderstood Sri Das's telegram. I also misunderstood
Chotani Mian's letter. There was no attempt deliberately to
create a false impression. Chotani Mian did not correct my impres-
sion even when I had a personal talk with him. It is true we did
not have a long talk. But one who fails to get the real meaning
is not being wholly truthful. I know, of course, if I can com-
pletely follow non-violence, truth and brahmacharya in action,
speech and thought, then we should certainly get swaraj this year;
we may also get it if someone else from among us can do these things,
or if the tapas of all of us taken together proves sufficient for the
purpose. In the first instance, however, I have not given up
this hope in regard to myself . . . spare no effort . . .2
From a photostat S.N. 11424
