257. LETTER TO VICEROY
DELHI,
April 29, 19181
SIR,
As you are aware, after careful consideration, I felt constrained
to convey to Your Excellency that I could not attend the Conference
for reasons stated in my letter of the 26th instant. But after the
interview you were good enough to grant me, I persuaded myself
to join it, —if for no other cause, then certainly out of my great
regard for yourself.
One of my reasons for abstention,—and perhaps the strongest,
—was that Mr. Tilak, Mrs. Besant, and the brothers Ali, whom I
regard as among the most powerful leaders of public opinion, were
not invited to the Conference. I still feel that it was a grave
blunder not to have asked them, and I respectfully suggest that the
blunder might be partially repaired if these leaders were invited
to assist the Government by giving it the benefit of their advice
at the Provincial Conferences which, I understand, are to follow.
I venture to submit that no Government can afford to disregard
leaders who represent large masses of the people, as these do, even
though they may hold views fundamentally different. At the same
time, it gives me pleasure to be able to say that the views of all
parties were permitted to be freely expressed at the Committees
of the Conference. For my own part, I purposely refrained from
stating my views, either at the Committee—on which I had the
honour of serving—or at the Conference itself. I felt that I could
best serve the objects of the Conference by simply tendering my
support to the resolutions submitted to it,—and this I have done
without any reservation. I hope to translate the spoken word into
action as early as the Government can see its way to accept my
offer, which I am submitting simultaneously herewith in a separate
letter. I recognize that, in the hour of its danger, we must give,
—as we have decided to give—ungrudging and unequivocal support
to the Empire, of which we aspire, in the near future, to be part-
ners in the same sense as the Dominions overseas. But it is the
simple truth that our response is due to the expectation that our
goal will be reached all the more speedily on that account—even
as the performance of a duty automatically confers a corresponding
right. The people are entitled to believe that the imminent reforms
alluded to in your speech will embody the main, general principles
of the Congress-League Scheme, and I am sure that it is this faith
which has enabled many members of the Conference to tender to
the Government their whole-hearted co-operation.
If I could make my countrymen retrace their steps, I would
make them withdraw all the Congress resolutions, and not whisper
"Home Rule" or "Responsible Government" during the pend-
ency of the war. I would make India offer all her able-bodied
sons as a sacrifice to the Empire at its critical moment; and I know
that India by this very act would become the most favoured partner
in the Empire and racial distinctions would become a thing of the
past. But practically the whole of educated India has decided
to take a less effective course, and it is no longer possible to
say that educated India does not exercise any influence on the
masses. I have been coming into most intimate touch with the
ryots ever since my return from South Africa to India, and I
wish to assure you that the desire for Home Rule has widely pene-
trated them. I was present at the sessions of the last Congress,
and I was party to the resolution that full Responsible Government
should be granted to British India within a period to be fixed
definitely by a Parliamentary Statute. I admit that it is a bold
step to take, but I feel sure that nothing less than a definite vision
of Home Rule—to be realized in the shortest possible time—will
satisfy the Indian people. I know that there are many in India
who consider no sacrifice too great in order to achieve the end;
and they are wakeful enough to realize that they must be equally
prepared to sacrifice themselves for the Empire in which they hope
and desire to reach their final status. It follows, then, that we can
but accelerate our journey towards the goal by silently and
simply devoting ourselves, heart and soul, to the work of delivering
the Empire from the threatening danger. It will be national
suicide not to recognize this elementary truth. We must perceive
that, if we serve to save the Empire, we have in that very act
secured Home Rule.
Whilst, therefore, it is clear to me that we should give to the
Empire every available man for its defence, I fear that I cannot
say the same thing about financial assistance. My intimate inter-
course with the ryots convinces me that India has already donated
to the Imperial Exchequer beyond her capacity. I know that, in
making this statement, I am voicing the opinion of the vast majority
of my countrymen.
The Conference means for me, and I believe for many of us,
a definite step in the consecration of our lives to the common
cause. But ours is a peculiar position. We are today outside the
partnership. Ours is a consecration based on the hope of a
better future. I should be untrue to you and to my country if
I did not clearly and unequivocally tell you what that hope is. I
do not bargain for its fulfilment. But you should know it. Dis-
appointment of the hope means disillusion.
There is one thing I may not omit. You have appealed to us
to sink domestic differences. If the appeal involves the toleration
of tyranny and wrongdoing on the part of officials, I am powerless
to respond. I shall resist organized tyranny to the uttermost. The
appeal must be to the officials that they do not ill-treat a single soul,
and that they consult and respect popular opinion as never be-
fore. In Champaran, by resisting an age-long tyranny, I have
shown the ultimate sovereignty of British justice. In Kaira, a
population that was cursing the Government now feels that it,
and not the Government, is the power when it is prepared to suffer
for the truth it represents. It is, therefore, losing its bitterness
and is saying to itself that the Government must be a Government
for the people, for it tolerates orderly and respectful disobedience
where injustice is felt. Thus, Champaran and Kaira affairs are
my direct, definite, and special contribution to the war. Ask me
to suspend my activities in that direction, and you ask me to sus-
pend my life. If I could popularize the use of soul-force, which is
but another name for love-force, in the place of brute force, I
know that I could present you with an India that could defy the
whole world to do its worst. In season and out of season, therefore,
I shall discipline myself to express in my life this eternal law of
suffering and present it for acceptance to those who care. And if
I take part in any other activity, the motive is to show the matchless
superiority of that law.
Lastly, I would like you to ask His Majesty's Ministers to give
definite assurances about Mahomedan States. I am sure you know
that every Mahomedan is deeply interested in them. As a Hindu,
I cannot be indifferent to their cause. Their sorrows must be our
sorrows. In the most scrupulous regard for the right of these
States, and for the Muslim sentiment as to places of worship, and
in your just and timely treatment of the Indian claim to Home
Rule, lies the safety of the Empire.
I write this, because I love the English Nation, and I wish to
evoke in every Indian the loyalty of the Englishman.
I remain,
Your Excellency's faithful servant,
M. K. GANDHI
N.A.I.: Home, War (Deposit): October 1918, No. 26
