204. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
July 2, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
Saraswati has just showed me your letter. One moment you
are angry and the next moment you are pleased. How can any-
body, therefore, feel happy when you are pleased or unhappy
when you are angry?
Have I ever considered your attachment to Saraswati wrong?
I felt unhappy because I did not see what I had expected of
you. But what does it matter? It would be best that you appear
to me exactly as you are.
Saraswati has been jubilant since the day before yesterday,
for she has concluded from your letter that she will be marrying
you in a few days. She was afraid that I would oppose the marriage.
She was in high spirits the whole of yesterday. She showed me
your today's letter to her. I feel afraid now that there will be some
hitch again. I strain myself on her account. I give her as much
time as I can and do my best to cheer her. But I see that whenever
her mind gets fixed upon something it is impossible to do that.
Otherwise I very much like her innocence, her simplicity
and her childlike nature. I will look after her as long as she stays
here. I will watch what effect your letter has on her.
She has
not yet talked to me. I did ask her of course.
You are right when you say that wherever my conclusions are
based on incomplete information, they are faulty. They must be so.
It may be called a virtue in a votary of truth, for his conclusions
ought to be strictly based on the facts in his possession. He should
not be led astray by any consideration of self-interest and should
preserve an objective attitude. I should be happy if my condition
is such as you have described it. That is what it should be.
I have received a letter from Nagpur saying that yesterday was
the last day for filling the posts. There were only nine posts for one
of which you were a candidate, and there were sixty applications
for those nine. What would you have done in such a crowd?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7339. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
150
