318. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
December 31, 1927
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got both your letters. I have now returned to the Ashram,
and shall know, therefore, what letters arrive. You gave at least
one particular in your letter, and that was good. I understand
what you say about Sastriji. You can boldly, but courteously,
tell him what you may wish to. You have given a good descrip-
tion of your conversation with him.
I certainly like the idea of closing the Durban Office.
Personally, I believe that, if the paper does not run on its own
merit, we should not be too eager to continue it. If it runs on its
own merit, it should without difficulty run even from Phoenix.
Do not run it by incurring debts or simply for the sake of running
it. In this matter, at any rate, please do accept my advice. If
you find it difficult to stay there on this condition, both of you
should return here. Do not wait till it is too late.
You have not replied to what I said about the money you
owe to the Ashram. This is to remind you again.
And now to Sushila:
Your letters are dull. Manilal is justified in saying that,
being very busy with work, he cannot write much, but you cer-
tainly ought to write. If you have interest in life, you will find
much to write about. Sons and daughters fill sheets and sheets when
writing to their parents about their happy and unhappy experiences,
but your letters contain no more than a few lines. Your physique
does not seem yet to have become stronger. If you wish, you may
consult some doctor there. Do anything, but get strong. If you
wish to return here, discuss the matter between you two. So
far as I am concerned, you have my permission. It will also be
for you to decide where you will live. You may live either here
or at Akola. Think of me not as a father-in-law but as a father.
In order that you may be able to do some service, it is also
your duty to take care of your body. Do not neglect that duty.
I saw Nilkanth yesterday. He has returned from Japan.
You must have got his letter. Balubhai, too, saw me.
Let me know:
The time when you get up and the hours of meals. How
often and what you eat. The day's time-table, the contacts you
have made there, the expenses, etc. I had the cable signed by
four of you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4732
