314. LETTER TO SHAPURJI SAKLATVALA
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE STATE),
May 10, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
Shrimati Anasuyabai has sent me your letter herself and your
joint letter to her, Gulzarilal and Desai. I have read them both
carefully. I had your own letter also. I could not reply to you
earlier for want of your address.
As soon as I heard from Anasuyabai, I put myself in com-
munication with Motilalji. I am daily expecting his reply. You
shall know it as soon as I receive it. I thank you for the confidence
you repose in me and it will be a joy to me if I can render any
personal service to you; but I am afraid my longing and ability to
render service have to stop there.
So far as our ideals are concerned, we stand apart. Whilst
Anasuyabai and Shankerlal Banker as also Gulzarilal and Desai
are absolutely free agents, they have exercised their choice of ac-
cepting my guidance in framing their labour policy and adminis-
tration. I must therefore shoulder my share of the responsibility
for what is happening about labour in Ahmedabad. I have cer-
tainly advised them to keep Ahmedabad labour aloof from the other
labour movements in India so long as Ahmedabad labour chooses
to remain under their guidance. My reason is exceedingly simple.
Labour in India is still extremely unorganized. The labourers
have no mind of their own, when it comes to matters of national
policy or even the general welfare of labour itself. Labourers in
various parts of India have no social contact and no other mutual
ties. It is provincial and even in the same city it is highly com-
munal. It is not everywhere wisely guided. In many places it is
under selfish and highly unscrupulous guidance. There is no abso-
lute cohesion amongst provincial labour leaders, and there is little
discipline among sub-leaders. The latter do not uniformly tender
obedience to their provincial chiefs. Leaders in different provinces
have no single policy to follow. In these circumstances, an all-
India union can only exist on paper. I hold it to be suicidal
therefore for Ahmedabad to think of belonging to it. My own
conviction is that Ahmedabad is rendering a service to labour all
over India by its abstention, or as I call it self-restraint. If it can
succeed in perfecting its own organization, it is bound to serve as
a model to the rest of India and its success is bound to prove
highly infectious. But I am free to confess that there is as yet no
assurance of success in the near future. The energy of the workers
is sorely tried in combating disruptive forces that ever continue
to crop up. There is the Hindu-Muslim tension; there is the ques-
tion of touchables and untouchables in Hinduism, etc. Add to this
extreme ignorance and selfishness among the labourers themselves.
It is a marvel to me that labour in Ahmedabad has made the pro-
gress it has during the last 12 years of its corporate existence. If
then Ahmedabad remains isolated it does so not selfishly, but for
the sake of labour as a whole.
One word as to the policy. It is not anti-capitalistic. The idea
is to take from capital labour's due share and no more, and this not
by paralysing capital, but by reform among labourers from within
and by their own self-consciousness; not again through the
cleverness and manoeuvring of non-labour leaders, but by edu-
cating labour to evolve its own leadership and its own self-reliant,
self-existing organization. Its direct aim is not in the least degree
political. Its direct aim is internal reform and evolution of inter-
nal strength. The indirect result of this evolution, when, if ever it
becomes complete, will naturally be tremendously political. I
have not therefore the remotest idea of exploiting labour or orga-
nizing it for any direct political end. It will be of itself a political
power of first-class importance when it becomes a self-existing unit.
Labour, in my opinion, must not become a pawn in the hands
of the politicians on the political chess-board. It must by its
sheer strength dominate the chess-board. And that can only hap-
pen if I can retain the intelligent and voluntary co-operation of
the workers in Ahmedabad and if our joint effort ultimately suc-
ceeds. This is my dream. I hug it because it gives me all the
consolation I need; and the policy I have outlined, you will recog-
nize, is a direct outcome of my implicit belief in and acceptance
of non-violence. It may be all a delusion; but it is as much a
reality with me as life itself so long as I do not see it as delusion
but see it as the only life-giving force. You will now see why I
cannot, even if I had the power, respond to your appeal for dividing
the funds collected by me in accordance with your suggestion.
But I may tell you that I have not even the power. The funds
have been collected purely for khadi work and it would be criminal
misappropriation on my part to divert them to any other use.
This letter may not please you. I shall be sorry if it does not.
But I regard you as a fellow-seeker after Truth and if my reading
of you is correct, there is no reason why my having told you the
whole truth and nothing but the truth should not please you immensely.
It is not given to all of us to agree with one another on all our
opinions; but it is given to everyone of us to tender the same respect
for the opinions and actions of our fellows as we expect for our own.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SAKLATVALA, ESQ.
From a photostat: S.N. 12491
