165. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 10, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have your letter. I shall certainly make use of the figures
you have given, and I have made a note of the corrections you
have sent me. It is good that you are constantly thinking of
khadi. That is as it should be. Swadeshi is one of our eleven
vows. And from the beginning khadi has been considered the
core of swadeshi. Even so, we have very few people giving cons-
tant thought to khadi. That is why the khadi activity is not as
widespread as it ought to be.
There is chaos in national education, too. There are many
who talk about it, few who understand it. Those who understand
it seldom put it into practice. But there is no doubt that true
national education is as I have described it. Therefore, just
as we cannot permit any adulteration of khadi whether it suc-
ceeds or not, so, too, we cannot permit adulteration of national
education. And if, without our adulterating it even one student
pursues it with love, I will say that national education is going
on, its future is bright.
But I would not say that national education was flourishing
merely because a number of children pursued what passed for
national education but which was not really national education.
This view of mine notwithstanding, you should go on doing
what you can to the best of your ability. Do not derive any
meaning from my words, other than that you will have my co-
operation when you are fed up with adulteration and seek to
introduce basic changes. You once asked me regarding Kanu's
clothing. I do not remember if I replied to you. If I have
not, all that I have to say is that you need not worry.
Getting used to as little clothing as possible helps towards a
healthy body. I do, therefore, take care of Kanu's clothing to
the extent of preserving his health. At the moment it would
seem his training, too, is proceeding fast though the credit may
not go to Mahadev. As neither Navin nor Kanti is here, I have
to take from Kanu alone the work the two of them would be
doing. So Kanu is getting his fill of training in the process. But
this is the impression I get. The impression that Kanu gets should be
the correct one. For the present I see very little of him and so
have not been able to ask him about it. He remains deeply
immersed in work and has no errands to run for Mahadev.
It seems Manju is progressing well. Is Kusum keeping fit?
Did she gain or did she lose from her recent travels?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8498. Court-
esy: Narandas Gandhi
