100. LETTER TO GENERAL TRAFFIC MANAGER,
G. I. P. RAILWAY
[AHMEDABAD,
June 28, 1915]
THE GENERAL TRAFFIC MANAGER
G. I. P. RAILWAY
BOMBAY
SIR,
I travelled on the 27th instant from Poona to Bombay on 3rd
class return ticket, taking the 16.45 train last Saturday from
Kirkee. As my ticket was only as far as Dadar and as I wished
to go as far as Victoria Terminus, I informed an official that I was
travelling beyond my destination. I attempted to give the infor-
mation at Dadar but succeeded in giving it only at Parel. The
official, who I subsequently learnt was a brakesman, told me to inform
the bada Guard. I could not do so as he was in a far-off com-
partment. At Masjid the authorities collected from me the fare
from Dadar and the usual penalty, notwithstanding my protest.
They ascertained too from the brakesman that I had duly informed
him. The authorities at Masjid said that in order to enable them
to exempt me from the penalty, I should produce a certificate from
the Guard or the Station Master. You will see that I could not
procure the certificate without the risk of missing the train. I asked
for the certificate from the only official whom I could safely ap-
proach. And he would not grant one. I bring this incident to
your notice as I have often observed that 3rd class passengers are
often punished without any fault of their own. I shall be obliged
if you will kindly inquire into this matter. In my opinion, either
Station Masters should be instructed not to charge penalties when
information has been given about over-travelling to any railway
official of the company or strict instructions should be given as to
prompt issue of certificates by the officials concerned. If it was
not competent for the brakesman to issue the certificate, was it
not his duty to immediately inform the Guard that a passenger
was over-travelling and that he had applied for the usual certi-
ficate?
I enclose herewith the receipt for this fare and the penalty.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 6200
