88. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 2, 1913
SIR,
With reference to the interview between us this morning, and
in accordance with your wishes, I reduce to writing the points
discussed between us:
1. With reference to Indians born in South Africa and their
right under the Cape Immigration Act to enter the Cape, in my
opinion, under Section 5 of the new Act, such men will not be able
to enter the Cape by reason of the Proviso of Section 5. If the
Government intend to recognize their right to enter the Cape on
proving their South African birth as heretofore, they can do so
without further legislation, by regulations that would exempt
them from the operation of Section 1 Clause (a) of the Act. It may
be observed that, if such Indians can pass the simple education
test of the Cape, they can enter that Province under Paragraph A
of sub-section 2 of Clause 5. As you are aware, most of the Colo-
nial-born Indians have passed through the Government Indian
schools and possess sufficient knowledge to undergo the Cape
examination. It is also a well-known fact that, throughout the time
that the Cape Act has been in force, hardly any South African-
born Indian not belonging to the Cape has endeavoured to migrate
to that Province; the reason is that there is no scope for them
there.
2. With reference to the indentured Indians who entered Natal
under the amending legislation of 1895, as I have already told
you, the Natal Courts have held that these indentured men, after
they have finished their indentures, are free to settle in Natal and
could not be treated as prohibited immigrants if they have not re-
indentured themselves, and that, after three years' residence with-
out indenture, these people acquire under the Natal Immigration
Act full rights of domicile in the same manner as other Indians;
such Indians now appear to be affected by the definition of the
term "domicile" in the present Act. I have already told you that
we have obtained best legal opinion in Natal, which is to the effect
that the definition does not cover such Indians and that their rights
will not be affected by the new Act. However, I do not wish to
take upon my shoulders the responsibility of advising my country-
men that they may be guided by that opinion alone. It is my sin-
cere desire that any points which I, at least, can foresee should not
be left open or not entirely understood. If the Government, how-
ever, give the same interpretation to the term "domicile" that our
Counsel does, an assurance to that effect settles this point. Let me
state it as clearly as I can. We are not seeking to gain any new
rights for indentured Indians, but we are anxious that their pre-
sent rights should be left intact, and these according to the belief
of the Indians are that, if an indentured Indian entering into a
contract of service after 1895, having become free at the end of
his contract, does not re-indenture, lives in the Province for three
years, then goes to India and returns, he has a right to re-enter
under the present Immigration Law of Natal by reason of his three
years' free residence.
3. As to the Free State, I have drawn your attention to
the letter from General Smuts to the effect that, in his opinion,
possibly the Free State declaration was not required. If that is the
legal position according to the opinion of the legal advisers of the
Government, a statement to the effect that such is the position will
meet the difficulty. I venture to suggest that the declaration that
will be required in terms of Section 19 of the new Act may have
all the disabilities printed at the back thereof, including Section 28
of the new Act. Then there need be no repetition of a declaration
when a British Indian is recognized as an immigrant for the Free
State.
4. As to the marriage question, in view of the Searle judg-
ment1, it is absolutely necessary to legalize Indian marriages cele-
brated or to be celebrated within the Union. This can be done
by amending the new Act by removing the words "outside the
Union" from the marriage clause of the Act, or by amending
the Marriage Laws of the different Provinces authorizing the Gov-
ernment to appoint Marriage Officers for different denominations
whose certificates as to the celebration of marriages according to
the rites of the respective religions of the parties would be recog-
nized as proper proof of marriage.
With reference to the marriage amendment in the new Act,
I understand that only monogamous marriages will be recognized,
and I appreciate that nothing more can be done in law at pre-
sent, but an assurance is necessary to the effect that the present
practice of admitting one wife of an Indian immigrant so long as
she is the only one in South Africa, irrespective of the number of
wives he might have in India, will be continued.
Then there will remain the question of polygamous marriages.
As I have told you, there are not many such cases, but it is neces-
sary to admit or re-admit plural wives of Indians who are already
resident in South Africa. No new polygamous unions need be
administratively recognized. A list can easily be prepared of those
who have more than one wife either in the Union or outside it.
My remarks are naturally applicable to the children of these
unions also. I may point out that, in the July of 1911, General
Smuts gave the assurance that special cases of polygamy would be
considered by the Government.
I think that I have now exhausted all the points we discussed.
If you think that there is anything omitted or that I should supple-
ment this letter, kindly let me know. It is clear to me that the solu-
tion of this difficulty is very easy because, with the exception of
the marriage difficulty, all the points can be settled without an
Act of Parliament.
If a settlement is arrived at, it will be necessary to discuss
the mode of admitting new entrants and the number for the various
Provinces. May I suggest that, if the solution suggested by me is
considered acceptable by General Smuts, you should telephone
to me, so that I can come over to Pretoria and a final letter set-
ting forth the terms of the settlement may be given to me. I make
the suggestion so that there may be no correspondence necessary
in order to elucidate any doubt that might arise as to the lang-
uage of any letter that might be given to me, and the question of
new entrants could also then be discussed. I have told you how
urgent the matter is, and may I rely upon your courtesy to let
me have an early reply?
I am sending this letter per Mr. Pragji Desai who will be at
your disposal to carry any communications you may wish to
send me, and, if you require me at the telephone, you have only
to ring up 1635, and I shall be at the telephone from wherever I
may be.
Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913
