349. LETTER TO "TRANSVAAL LEADER"
JOHANNESBURG,
May 21, 1906
TO
THE EDITOR
Transvaal Leader
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
May I say with reference to your leader on the tram-car case, brought
at the instance of the British Indian Association, that the magistrate's deci-
sion does not "throw open the trams to Coloured persons of every grade".
For instance, it does not throw open the cars to the Natives, and it leaves
untouched the regulation which enables conductors to reject passengers
who are drunken, ill-dressed or otherwise objectionable. So that when
you say that your "remarks are directed to the matter in its broadest
aspects", you give away the case for the Council. For nobody has ever
contended that the cars should be usable by all without distinction.
But, Sir, the Town Council, by a method which is the reverse of
honourable, has deprived the Indians of the fruits of their victory. For,
in the current number of the Government Gazette, there appears a by-law
which repeals the Traffic By-laws regarding tram-cars. This means that
the tram-cars are now to run without any regulations to control the traffic
on them. But it means too that now it will not be possible for a British
Indian to claim to ride in the municipal cars under the general by-laws.
And, I expect, the municipality will contend that the repeal revives the
smallpox regulations of the old Government which the magistrate held
to be not applicable in the face of the by-laws now repealed. Britishers
are rightly proud of the fact that they never hit below the belt. With
great deference, it appears to me, as it would, I hope, to every other
ratepayer, that the Town Council, in adopting the above procedure,
has departed from that proud tradition.
Consequent upon the Town Council's action then, for the time
1 This was published under the caption "Tram Case".
being, your fear as to the tram-cars being used by "Coloured persons of
every grade" are groundless, apart from the facts submitted by me. I,
however, ask you whether you approve of the means adopted by the
Town Council to achieve its purpose.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Transvaal Leader, 25-5-1906
