346. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 20, 1926
MY DEAR CHILD,
I have your letter. I did not misunderstand your remark
about typewriters. On the contrary, I liked it.
The literal meaning of an 'ashram' is an abode, but the
associations about the ashram are these: It should be simple. It
should not be merely a teaching institution. It should contain
predominantly those who are pledged to perpetual continence. It
should have associations of sannyasa, meaning detachment from the
world. It should, therefore, be a voluntarily poor organization.
There should, therefore, be rigid simplicity about it. Its object
must invariably be formation of character with a view to self-
realization. The idea of master and servant is wholly repugnant
to such an institution. All men and women in an ashram are
expected to do bodily labour and all enjoy an equal status. The
idea of superiority has no place in it. The head of an ashram
is in the place of a parent and he is expected to regard the rest
as his own children. I wonder if I have now given you fairly
the characteristics of an ashram.
It grieves me whenever I find that a medical man is weak or
ailing. It is a perpetual reminder to us that medicine is such an
incomplete, such an unreliable, and such an empirical science. If
we think about it with sufficient detachment, we would at once
realize its inherent weakness by understanding that there is no
such thing as an absolute cure. The most potent drugs admit of
innumerable exceptions. The most successful operation leaves
literally and in the spirit a scar behind. It would certainly be
a good thing, if you could hasten your departure for Denmark.
Change of climate will be the best cure.
What you say about fasting is quite true. It has no absolute
value and it certainly does not produce the slightest spiritual
effect if the motive behind it is not really spiritual. Fasting with a
mixed motive ends with purely material results. But fasting for
the sake of unfoldment of the spirit is a discipline I hold to be
absolutely necessary at some stage or other in the evolution of
an individual. I always considered Protestantism to be deficient
in this particular. Every other religion of any importance appre-
ciates the spiritual value of fasting. Crucifixion of the flesh is a
meaningless term unless one goes voluntarily through pangs of
hunger. For one thing, identification with the starving poor is a
meaningless term without the experience behind. But I quite
agree that even an eighty days' fast may fail to rid a person of
pride, selfishness, ambition and the like.
Fasting is merely
a prop. But as a prop to a tottering structure is of inestimable
value, so is the prop of fasting of inestimable value for a struggl-
ing soul.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat of the original in N.A.I.; also My Dear Child, pp. 84-
