163. LETTER TO N. V. THADANI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 19, 1927
MY DEAR THADANI,
I have your letter. You have entirely missed my point. I did
not even know that your college was national merely in name.
My complaint was not that Malkani went from a national college
to a Government college. My complaint would have had the
same force, if Malkani, instead of going from the Mahavidyalaya
to a Government college, had deserted the Mahavidyalaya for a
selfless expedition to the North Pole in search of knowledge, or
say, had gone to Kashi Vidyapith or Bihar Vidyapith both of
which are direct offspring of non-co-operation and with both of
which I am more or less connected. And I should have considered
the conduct of Sriprakash Babu and Rajendra Babu, respectively,
as ungentlemanly if they had seduced Malkani behind the back
of the authorities of the Mahavidyalaya as you have done. And
I have felt it so keenly in this case because of my high opinion
about Malkani. Many other professors deserted the Maha-
vidyalaya before Malkani. In their case, I felt nothing, because I
had staked nothing on them. I do not know whether I have yet
made my point clear. I know no distinction between Sind and
Gujarat or any other province. If Malkani had been posted in
Sind and was seduced by someone in Gujarat, I should have
said and felt the same thing, again because of the personal fac-
tor that it was Malkani who had allowed himself to be seduced.
I do not underrate your difficulties; I do not underrate your
cause; but what I feel is that you adopted a questionable method
for achieving your purpose. You will not build up the morals of
the Sindhi youth by undermining those of Malkani. Malkani stand-
ing at the helm of his sinking ship in Gujarat, himself starving,
his wife and mother-in-law looking daggers at him, and his friends
howling at him in indignation for his madness, would have been
an ideal professor for your boys and a noble lesson for India. I
wonder if I am still clear to you. Do not for one moment consi-
der that the fact that it is Gujarat Mahavidyalaya that will come
to grief that has weighed with me. My life has been a witness of
many such institutions arising and falling with some of which I
have myself been intimately connected. For me, their worth has
consisted in their having thrown up heroes and thus finished their
task. It may interest you to know that the Senate of the Vidya-
pith has been convulsed over Malkani's letter recalling his resig-
nation. Many professors who were always more or less against
Malkani offered strenuous opposition to Malkani's reinstatement.
The question was referred to me and I sent in my opinion that
Malkani could not be reinstated in the face of that opposition. It
will be awkward for him as also for the professors and bad for the
Mahavidyalaya. The question of the Mahavidyalaya therefore
is settled so far as Malkani is concerned. But the question of Mal-
kani himself still remains a running sore. I have already given
my opinion that he cannot undo one wrong by doing another,
and that therefore he may not now leave you in the lurch without
your being able to replace him. But if you would know my opi-
nion, it is decidedly this: that Malkani should not remain in your
institution a minute longer than is absolutely necessary, that you
should set about finding a substitute without the least delay, that
you should set a time-limit for your search, and that after the
expiry of the time-limit, whether you have found a substitute or
not, Malkani should leave you and either do what he likes, or let
me do with him what I like. I may inform you that I have not yet
got over the shock. Bardoli never disturbed my sleep; but Malkani
does. You will be entitled to say that I deserve no pity if I would
depart from the lesson of the Gita by which I swear and have such
unwarranted faith in men. I shall accept your judgment and plead
in justification that I cannot surmount my fundamental nature
all of a sudden. Please share this with Malkani.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. N. V. THADANI
HYDERABAD (SIND)
From a photostat: S.N. 12606
