418. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
December 25, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I started to write a long letter to you, and dictated a page
of this size. That was in Jabalpur. Then I could not pro-
ceed further with that letter. And now I am writing this one.
It is the night of silence day, in Sitanagaram.
The silence is
not yet over. I will break it at 9.30 p.m. It is 8.30 p.m. only.
It is not incorrect to say that I can write only on Mondays and
Tuesdays. I always get up at three in the morning and write
what I can between then and prayer-time. I may, of course, be
interrupted even during that period. When I am in a train,
sometimes, I cannot even get up at three.
I am having a wonderful experience during this tour. The
crowds are larger than they used to be in the past. But these
numbers may easily deceive us, for we have to reach crores of
people. Nor is it that all the people who come immediately
change their way of living. The only consolation is the thought
that this propaganda does not seem to displease all these hun-
dreds of thousands. We can therefore hope that sooner or later
the practice of untouchability will disappear completely.
You should make your study of the Gita thorough in every
respect. You should master both the grammatical construction
and the literal meaning of the verses. I am sure you can recite
the verses with correct pronunciation of the words. Again, the other
reading may be limited in extent but it should be deep. A person
who digests one book knows more than another who reads a
thousand without digesting any of them. Do you have a spinning-
wheel with you? Wardha seems to have agreed with Vimu and
Rama in every way. Rama's hand may become completely all
right. Dhiru seems to be happy in Bhavnagar, but we cannot still
feel that the problem about him is solved. He is still weak, but
his health is much better than it used to be. Dudhibehn does of
course look after him carefully. Kusum also is there. Nanabhai,
too, takes care of him. Balabhadra is very happy there.
Appa Patwardhan has come here to see me. He will leave
now. Kisan has joined me from Wardha. She is a friend of
Prema and is a very good young woman. She has, however, be-
come a little weak physically.
Chandrashankar is carrying the burden of two journals quite
well. This time Thakkar Bapa's place is taken by Malkani. The
work is going on well. Ramnarayan also is helping. Kishorelal
has been ill and suffering a good deal. He has been getting fever
and it does not leave him. Brijkrishna also was seriously ill. He
is improving now. His life was actually in danger. But, then, is
there anyone of whom that is not true?
However, people who
are not so ill that they have to remain in bed do not think that
their lives are in danger.
Ba is having a holiday in Yeravda, so to say. Dahibehn's
teeth are giving her trouble. Shanta and Lalita are quite well.
Dwarkanath seems to be managing the affair at Wardha fairly
efficiently. And there is also Lakshmibehn who, as you know, has
identified herself with the Ashram. Kaka and Surendra Mashru-
wala are in Gujarat.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5314
