377. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA MANDIR,
November 1, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,
I have your letter. I am glad. You are entitled to write as
you do. Your grief moves me. Your love for your mother is
commendable and becomes you. I enclose a letter to G. D. Birla.
Take it to him and see him. However, I must caution you.
I myself have drunk deep from the fountain of motherly love.
I was devoted to my parents; I worshipped them. And yet in
your love for your mother I see attachment. Your love should
be informed with knowledge. Your mother has died in the body.
Her spirit has not perished. The body had to perish one day.
Your love should now undergo a transformation. Our true
mother is the motherland. Your filial love should be transformed
into love of the motherland and to make it endure you should
dedicate yourself to the service of the motherland. You must not
distress yourself that an expert doctor was not called. Millions
of mothers get no medical assistance. And I cannot admit that
they are thereby necessarily the losers. Even the best of doctors
cannot confer immortality on anyone. Therefore, in my view you
and everyone else should give expression to your filial love by
dwelling on the virtues of the departed and emulating them and
you should devote all your energies for the cause of the mother-
land. Please discuss this with your father. If what I say appeals
to you show this to your father and seek his consent for dedica-
ting yourself to the work of service. Of course you had already
made such a dedication. But the death of your mother has
created a new situation and reconsideration may be the duty.
However, if my advice does not appeal to you, you may use
the letter to Ghanshyamdasji and earnestly try to earn a
livelihood. I shall not be distressed thereby. Consult Prabhavati
also. Keep writing to me and if at any time you need my help
let me know. If it is not beyond my power I will help you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
