364. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
SEGAON, WARDHA,
[Before September 17, 1936] 1
BAPA,
Kakalbhai brought your letter while I was still thinking of
writing to you. Of course, I have not seen Kakalbhai or Balwant-
rai. Just now I can't see anyone, nor am I in a hurry about it.
I am only slowly disposing of the arrears of work. The fever
came on swift as a horse but my strength is returning at an ant's
pace. This is not a complaint against God who alone knows
what He has in store. He is the giver of strength; why then may
He not withdraw it, too?
Why should I go to Almora to effect a reconciliation between
Kakalbhai and Amritlal ? Water cannot be parted by hitting at it
with a lathi. The two were reconciled but is Amritlal reconciled with
himself? I am not impatient to drag him back into public life; I
am impatient to see his mind purified. That is why I wrote to
him as soon as I heard of the matter. He will not remain in
Almora if he has regained purity. For my part I make no difference
between public life and private life. However accomplished a man,
if he is immoral the splashes from the mud of his immorality are
bound to stain public life. That we cannot see the evil splash-
ing does not mean that it is not doing so.
I am, therefore,
firmly of the opinion that those who wish Amritlal well, those
who wish public life to advance, ought to let Amritlal cleanse
himself. Only harm will be done to him and to public work
by luring him into a hasty come-back. That is my view.
I fear I have not been able to make you see my point about
Valunjkar. The question is only of giving to him the amount
which I have promised from among the funds standing in my
name. I believe that in doing so the Council's approval is not
necessary. Isn't that right? Please correct me if my memory
is failing me. I have of course no objection to the matter going
before the Council. But on what basis would the Council gen-
erally sanction such amounts?
Rukmini is mad of course. Every fault, the famous Lomb-
roso has said, is a symptom of madness. But when is a kubharya
properly so called? It is a different matter if we dismiss the word
altogether. My sympathy is with Malkani, and the pity I feel
for Rukmini is of a different kind.
Do you want Amtul Salaam to return? You should not hes-
itate to warn me if, in spite of her good intentions, she proves a
nuisance there. It was God's grace that Nilam survived. I shall
await the figures. I have made the letter long enough.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1170
