267. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAI
C/O DR. ANSARI,
DARYAGANJ,
November 12, 1924
DEAR LALAJI,
You will please forgive me for not replying to your letter
earlier. As you know I had to run away to Calcutta where I
had not a minute to spare for writing. I am yet regaining lost
strength.
What shall I do in Rawalpindi? I observe that Hindus have
even accepted terms from the Commissioner. I can bring them
no comfort. I cannot even get at the truth. I cannot add to their
creature comforts. That part is being attended to by various
bodies. The one thing I can usefully do I am rendered powerless
to do. If you still think I should go to Rawalpindi I would go.
But this can now be only after the Bombay meeting.
Then there is our meeting. Dr. Satyapal says that P. P.
Conference is to take place during the 1st week of December.
Will you be there till then? Shall we meet at that time or earlier?
I must leave here on Tuesday next. Are you going to Bombay?
Will your health permit? If you are not going to Bombay and
if you want me to meet before December please wire. I must
leave here for Bombay on the 18th instant, that is, Tuesday. Mon-
day is dies non. The only thing possible is for me to leave here
on Friday night, pass Saturday with you and leave on Saturday
night returning here on Sunday. If that is not done we can meet
only in the beginning of December, i.e., if we don't meet in Bom-
bay. You may now command me as you will.
I would like your views on the statement signed by Das,
Motilal and myself. The situation is as complex as it possibly
can be. And the worst of it is that though everybody looks to
me to find a solution I seem to fit in nowhere. My plan seems
to so many of my educated countrymen to be hopelessly impracti-
cable whereas to me it seems to be the only practicable plan before
the country.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
ps.
After I had written the foregoing, I received yours of the
11 th instant. If after you have read the foregoing you think that
I should proceed to Rawalpindi before going to Bombay, please
wire. I will start at once and if you join me at Lahore we can
talk on the way. All this will mean in my present state of health
a great strain but it won't be unbearable if I must go through it.
Please wire on receipt of this what you would have me do-whether
you want me to go to Pindi or to come to you for a day. If you
do send me to Pindi, I can be there only for a day. For I must
leave on Tuesday night for Bombay.
I have no idea whatsoever of settling the pact at Bombay. I
fully agree with you that it cannot be rushed. There must be a
thorough investigation before any conclusion is arrived at. Nor
is the conference going to function about swaraj. It may be
possible to have a small committee to draft a scheme for submis-
sion to a similar conference. In the main, however, the conference
will confine itself to the answer to repression and to the question
of all parties joining the Congress. The gentleman who came to
see me today told me you were better and that at the present
moment the Bombay climate might be better for you than the
rigorous climate of the Punjab. But you are the best judge as to
whether you can move out just now or not. I would not have
you to imperil your health for the sake of the conference.
M. K. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
