191. LETTER TO FULCHAND
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Thursday, Chaitra Sud 11 [March 25, 1926]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,
I have your letter. How quickly you despair. I am an in-
corrigible optimist and I cannot help it. Where you see no hope
at all, I see some. My faith is never disturbed. People from
Bhavnagar may hurl all sorts of taunts at us, but we must not
budge or be bullied. I am sure some khadi can always be sold
in cities; but our activities should no doubt cover mostly the
villages. I have no objection to your working on municipalities
and similar bodies. But one person must not take up several jobs.
I have found a field for myself. A political association must have
a far-flung activity; khadi work alone is such an activity, or work
among the Antyajas. Quite a few persons come forward to work
in the municipalities. It is a good thing if they do it and with
credit. But not many people are likely to take up the work of
khadi and Antyajas. We alone have to make it respectable. And if
we have the faith why should we be stopped by public criticism?
I am not convinced by your suggestion that we should stock cotton.
Shambhushankar seems to have done it at Gariyadhar. I do not
think there is anything wrong about it. People may be encouraged
to store cotton, and we may get it carded and spun for them. But
all this should be at their expense. Otherwise we fail to realize
the significance of the khadi movement. The basic motive of the
khadi movement is not boycott of foreign goods but providing
work for the unemployed and freeing them, as far as we can, from
hunger. Boycott may follow as a result of this. If we insist on mak-
ing it an end in itself we shall fail. If unemployment and starva-
tion in India were not linked together as cause and effect I would
take my hands off the wheel.
We must proceed with this in view. Therefore our job is to
make the poor produce khadi and sell it to the masses. Hence I
do not feel concerned about the piling of khadi in Amreli; I
should, if it were to be taken outside Kathiawar. But if it comes
to a standstill I may be prepared even to export it out of the
country, not to speak of Bombay and other places. I can there-
fore propose only one test. Whenever we produce khadi we should
see whether or not we get it spun only by those poor people who
do not have an alternative occupation, whether we offer them
the approved rates and whether the yarn is spun diligently or
reluctantly. If you are satisfied on these three counts you may
let the work continue there.
People were mistaken if they had set high hopes on my state-
ments regarding Gondal and Jamnagar. Let them by all means
stick to the mistake in spite of their disillusionment. And what shall
we do if they leave us? We can only try.
I am enclosing Dewansaheb's letter which you should keep
with you. You need not return it to me. I hear that Rana Saheb
has returned; so I shall send him a reminder today.
I hope to send within two months, i.e., in June, the five thou-
sand rupees that I have promised to get for the Antyaja Ashram.
I shall start from here in the beginning of April to return by the
end of May and shall soon thereafter arrange for the Rs. 5,000.
Will that be in time?
Read this letter to Devchandbhai. It is but right that the
meeting should not be convened at Porbunder before getting
Dewansaheb's reply. And now I think no part of your letter re-
mains unanswered.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19380
