18. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
September 3, 1932
PANDITJI,
You did well in writing to me regarding the temple. If you
have still something more to say, write to me. I surely don't in-
sist that my view in this matter should prevail. However, my
views on this subject are fixed. I have said regarding myself that
I am both an image-worshipper and an image-breaker. The
God conceived by a human being is bound to be a form, though
the image may be only in the mind. In that sense, I am an image-
worshipper. But I have never been willing to worship any form or
image as God. Towards a form or image, I always feel neti, neti.
Hence I regard myself as image-breaker. This being my attitude,
I have always felt that we should not have any temple in the
Ashram. And it was for this reason that we decided to have no
building even for prayers. We sit in the open, with the sky above
as the roof and the horizons on the four sides as the walls. If we
wish to maintain an attitude of equality towards all religions, this
is how we should live. These days, I am trying to read a little from
the Vedas and other sacred books. I see this same thing in
them all. There is no mention of image-worship anywhere. But
Hinduism has a place for it. We should not, therefore, oppose it.
However, image-worship is not obligatory. It is voluntary. I
feel, therefore, that it would be better if, as an institution, we
kept away from image-worship. If what I have always believed
to be a samadhi is really a temple, we should not make it a place of
public worship. When the owner of the land wished to demolish
the structure and carry away the bricks, I paid money to him
against the estimated value of the bricks and saved the structure.
But I do not wish to turn it into a temple. You may discuss this
with others who are likely to understand my attitude, and then
write to me again if you wish. Do not have the slightest hesi-
tation in expressing your view.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 233. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare
