123. LETTER TO J. B. KRIPALANI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 10, 1927
MY DEAR PROFESSOR,
I sent you a telegram yesterday in reply to your letter to
Mahadev. I have purposely refrained hitherto from writing to
you anything about Malkani. He wrote to me announcing
his resignation. It very nearly broke me to pieces. For, I regard-
ed Malkani to be one of my unbreakables. What would happen
to the Vidyapith did not affect me but that a man had fallen shook
me to the marrow. It is good that he has repented but you will
be entirely justified in not taking him back. For his part, it would
be another wrong if he left Thadani as unceremoniously as he left
us. His wanting to be taken back, therefore, after three months or
earlier if Thadani can spare him appears to me quite justified.
That if he is truly repentant he must not remain at the Sind
College permanently, I have no doubt. Nor must he feel hurt if he
cannot be accepted by you. You will, therefore, come to a decision
upon his letter solely from the point of view of the Mahavidya-
laya. And if you think that the other professors would rather not
have him I would not press for his reinstatement. It would em-
barrass him and it would put out the dissenting professors. If you
therefore decide to have him, there should be a whole-hearted
unanimity.
Yes. I have been getting some information about the new
Vinayamandir. I was delighted to find so good an attendance. I
did not expect that response. I hope that it would be a progressive
success and that those who are responsible for its creation would
never desert it, whether it continues to draw a large number
of students or whether it declines.
I wish you would have a radical operation for piles if Dr.
Dalal is now ready.
Kikibehn continues to favour me with a little letter from time
to time.
You are not to expect me there before October as far as I
can judge at present.
Yours sincerely,
ACHARYA KRIPALANI
GUJARAT VIDYAPITH
From a photostat: S.N. 12603
