428. LETTER TO PRITHVI SINGH
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
August 10, 1940
BHAI PRITHVI SINGH,
I have your letter. I see there is a divergence between your
views and mine. There is no harm in this. Every individual
should have freedom of thought. I perceive flaws in your views.
You do in mine. It is possible that I may be mistaken in my
views. I have confessed that I have no first-hand knowledge of
himsa. Therefore if you have really accepted ahimsa, I shall not
be surprised if yours is purer than mine. On the contrary I
shall only be pleased. I therefore thank you for so frankly
placing your views before me.
What you think about Guru ka Bagh is not correct because
those people came to me and I told them that what they had
done was wrong. They agreed with me. Your assumption about
Khudai Khidmatgars is also wrong. Neither Khan Saheb nor I can
say that they have really become non-violent. I do not feel Nathji
would agree with your assessment. I shall look into it. But even
if it should be so my views remain unaltered. The ideas which
have gripped me for now fifty years cannot be given up suddenly.
Your saying that I had asked you to run classes in Wardha
shows a slip of memory. I had said that you should start your
experiment initially in the Ashram and that if I was convinced,
you certainly had boys from Wardha to instruct.
Your last statement is significant. You say that the Govern-
ment notice has left you without an ideal. That falsifies your ideal
because no one can stop the preparation for satyagraha. Even
though I do not have the time I have written such a long letter
just to let you know some of the flaws in your views. Let the
three brothers getting training in Baroda, continue to do so. As
I have understood it is a three months' course. However if our
field of activity is going to be different, I am not responsible for
them. All the same I will pay for their 3 months' expenses up
to Rs. 180.
We shall further discuss things when you come.
It is good that you stayed on to nurse Nalini and that she
has recovered.
I have sent an important letter to Nanabhai. You will per-
haps get it when you go there.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5642. C.W. 2953. Courtesy: Prithvi
Singh
