326. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS, PRETORIA
[JOHANNESBURG,]
November 22, 1910
In reply to your letter herein of the 21st inst., my Association is
advised that strong complaint is made against the insulting attitude of
some of the warders who appear to regard Indian prisoners as suitable
butts upon whom to exercise their mistaken sense of humour, as for
example, calling them "Coolie", "Sammy", "Bananas", and so forth.
Complaints regarding this matter and other pinpricks have constantly
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was sent over the signature of
the Chairman, British Indian Association.
2 Replying on 21-11-1910, the Director of Prisons asked to be furnished "with
some information as to the 'improper treatment' of Indian passive resisters confined
in Diepkloof Prison, referred to in your letter".
3 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was sent over the signature of
the Chairman, British Indian Association.
been made to the chief warder who either ignores it, or replies in an
offensive manner. Complaint is also specially made against the con-
duct of head warder McLoud, who is in charge of the spans. This offi-
cer, my Association understands, systematically subjects prisoners to
every possible form of harassment, requiring them to perform impossible
tasks, and seizing every opportunity to report against them to secure
their punishment. Frequent complaint has been made to the Gover-
nor of this officer's conduct and my Association learns that he has been
more than once reported, and on at least two occasions his charges against
the Indian prisoners have fallen to the ground upon examination.
Apparently, the complaints have not resulted in any improvement
in Mr. McLoud's attitude towards the Indian prisoners, who have, it
now appears, been exasperated on account of the treatment that has
been meted out to them, both by him and the chief warder.
My Association is quite prepared to learn that these charges are
denied by the officers concerned, but, in anticipation of such denial,
which has not been infrequent in the past, I would like to point out that
no prisoner is likely to refuse to eat for a whole week, as has Mr. Medh,
who does not, in his opinion, labour under serious grievances.
My Association will, accordingly, be grateful if you will be so good
as to institute urgent inquiries into this matter.
Indian Opinion, 3-12-1910
