442. LETTER TO VICEROY
BOMBAY,
August 29, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
At the end of our conversation at Simla, I opened the question
of Dr. Ansari's delegation at the Round Table Conference and I
wanted to mention the delegation on behalf of the Federated
Chambers of Commerce. As to Dr. Ansari, as you know, Lord
Irwin believed that I should have carried the impression that his
delegation would be a certainty. As to the delegation on behalf
of the Federated Chambers I have the correspondence between
Lord Irwin's Private Secretary and the Chairman of the Fede-
ration. From this correspondence it is clear that there were to
be three representatives and the correspondence closed with the
names being finally submitted by the Federation. These were Sir
Purushottamdas Thakurdas, Seth Jamal Mohammed and Seth
Ghanshyam Das Birla. Of these, only Sir Purushottamdas receiv-
ed the invitation and as you are aware, the Federation would not
think of sending him without the other two also receiving the invi-
tations. Here I think the plighted word of an ex-Viceroy is con-
cerned and should, in my opinion, be respected. But this is not
the point that I wanted to urge. The point that I wish to urge is
that my usefulness would be largely curtailed if the interests re-
presented by these three gentlemen and the interests represented
by Dr. Ansari are not to be represented at the Round Table Con-
ference. The Federation is to a certain extent working in conjunc-
tion with the Congress and so is the Nationalist Muslim Party
of which Dr. Ansari is the head. If there were any negotiations
in connection with Hindu-Muslim question or in connection with
Indian Commerce I should be perfectly helpless without the as-
sistance and co-operation of these gentlemen and the very purpose
for which I am being sent to London is in danger of being defeat-
ed. I would therefore ask you, if you have authority, to consider
the advisability of these nominations from the standpoint I have
suggested. If you have not, I would like you to telegraph the pur-
port of this to the Prime Minister and if it is at all possible re-
pair what seems to me to be a glaring omission. I may add that
382
Pandit Malaviya and Mrs. Sarojini Naidu also are associating
themselves with the contents of this letter.
HIS EXCELLENCY LORD WILLINGDON
SIMLA
From a photostat: S.N. 17601
