223. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
21-24 COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
October 3, 1904
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
I have purposely refrained from writing to you from time to time
as I know how busy you are, but in view of the approaching session of
the Congress, I can no longer do so, and I beg to enclose herewith a copy
of the Blue book published in London on the situation. That deals with
the Transvaal only, and it is to the position in the Transvaal that all effort
has to be directed. Contrary to all expectations, Lord Milner, who, on
the eve of the war, was the champion of the oppressed including the British
Indians, has completely turned round and, as you will see from his dis-
patch, is quite prepared to deprive the Indians of even what little rights
they possessed in the Transvaal before war. I enclose the representation
of the British Indian Association in reply to the dispatches which would
shew how far the Indians are prepared to go. You will see that therein
the Indians are willing to concede almost all that the Europeans would
want, namely, restriction of Immigration and regulation of licences by
local authorities in exchange for the right to own landed property, but
the proposal has been rejected by the Government as unsatisfactory,
simply, I fear, because it wants to establish the principle of differential
legislation. The British Indian Association says the legislation, whatever
it may be, should be applicable to all; the Transvaal Government wants
to pass a measure which would be applicable only to Asiatics, whether
British subjects or not. Such legislation, as you are aware, has not been
sanctioned even for self-governing Colonies, as, for instance, the Cape and
Natal, although at both the places Government intended to pass such
legislation.
In Sir Mancherjee's representation in the Blue book (Statement A),
the registration fee of £3 is stated to be an annual payment. As a matter
of fact, it is a payment once for all.
As to the licences, the test case since brought puts the Indians on
the same footing as the Europeans.
The institution of photographic passes has been done away with.
In the Orange River Colony, the legislation is most drastic and nothing
has yet been done to remove it.
In Natal, the Dealers' Licenses Act, which gives arbitrary powers
to the local authorities without the right of appeal to the Supreme Court,
is causing a great deal of hardship.
I hope that you have been following Indian Opinion which gives
most accurate information.
The Times and other newspapers in London think that the effect
of the harsh treatment in the Transvaal will be very bad on the Indian
mind and that it will be a great strain on Indian loyalty. This shews
that there ought to be in India articulate and persistent agitation in favour
of justice being done to the British Indians in South Africa. The Con-
gress, therefore, should, I think, pay much more attention to the matter
than has been paid hitherto and public meetings, too, should be held all
over India protesting against a continuance of the ill-treatment.
I hope you are keeping good health. I shall very much appreciate
a line from you.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: C. W. 4103.
