410. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI M. THAKKAR
October 14, 1932
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,
The purpose behind bangles, the vermilion mark, and the
coloured sari might be adornment or conformity to custom, just as
one might eat for pleasure or only to give the body its hire. One
ought to give up eating for the sake of pleasure, but may give
the body anything it needs, even if it be something which one
enjoys eating. Milk and curds taken with dates give us no little
pleasure. But you eat them, since you have not adopted that diet
for the pleasure of the palate. In the same way, you should give up
bangles, the vermilion mark and coloured sari despite opposition from
society, if they arouse passion in you, but it is not blameworthy to
retain them if you do so merely in obedience to custom or to res-
pect the wishes of the elders. In other words, there is no absolute
duty not to retain them, as there is the absolute duty of not tell-
ing a lie. It was for such a reason that I said in my letter that the
error was in taking a vow not to wear bangles. It is not proper to
take a sudden vow for something which is not an absolute duty.
There is no great self-sacrifice in such a step. It would have been
right for you to take that vow if you had been pining for bangles,
travelling all over the world to get bangles of your choice, or were
in the habit of stealing them. I know women who want to have
bangles of various styles, fight with their husbands to get them
or steal them. It would be good for such women to take a vow
not to wear bangles, but they would fight with me if I so much as
made such a suggestion. A woman who thinks that all her beauty
lies in her hair would get red with anger at the mere suggestion
that she should cut off her hair. She might get it cut off, but it is
not wrong, for a woman, who dislikes long hair and thinks it to be
a burden, to keep her hair long to please her parents or to avoid
being cut off from society. Do you now understand this shastra of
bangle-wearing?
Now about the children. The problem is similar to that of
the bangles. Suppose the children do not feel at home in the
Ashram without you, and suppose that there is no other place
where they may be kept; then it will be your duty to stay for
some time with them in the Ashram. This cannot be descri-
bed as "living" in the Ashram. Just as it is not wrong for a
person who is very ill to take rest from work for a time, similarly
it is not wrong to spend a fortnight or a month in the Ashram for
the sake of the children, that might even be one's dharma. Such
matters require careful thinking. That is why the Gita says that it
is not easy to distinguish between what is right action, what is wrong
action and what is inaction. If, therefore, you are convinced that
it is difficult to keep the children at Calcutta and that it is your
duty to put them in the Ashram, you should spend, on my res-
ponsibility and above all for their sake, one month with them in
the Ashram after their arrival and accustom them to the life there.
Even during that period, if some urgent work requires you to leave
you may certainly go, and Narandas will look after the children
as best he can. Wouldn't he have to look after them if you were to
die and there was nobody at Calcutta? However, let the children
remain where they are if this arrangement does not suit you or
the children refuse to go or the elders are likely to feel very
much hurt.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Do ask me if you still have any doubts.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6823
