163. LETTER TO SARITA
Rentia Barash, October 5, 1934
CHI. SARITA,
I got your long letter.
I liked it very much indeed. It re-
veals to me perfectly your purity of heart. You are acting as befits
a true daughter, for such a daughter would not hide from her
parents even her thoughts. She would frankly tell them what she
thought and unburden her heart. This would enable the parents
to think what they should do. You should, therefore, always write
to me as you have done this time.
I would advise you to have patience. The result of work is
not in our hands.
What lies in our power is to do our duties.
The fruit is in God's hands. We, therefore, do not know whether
Sumitra will recover. We can arrange for her treatment as best
as we can. It is our dharma to do so.
We are poor people. We should not, therefore, mind suffer-
ing what other poor people do. Please put up with a little waiting
at the hospital. I do not know personally any eye-specialist there.
Sardar would know somebody, and he himself has selected Sardesai.
I am, therefore, getting this done through him. I am writing to
Swami also and asking him to send me the doctor's report.
Sardesai is reputed to be good among the Indian doctors.
There is a European doctor also who is considered to be good.
But I don't feel inclined to send Sumitra to him.
None of us
know him. We should not, therefore, leave Sardesai. If, however,
he finds himself helpless, we should certainly inquire from some
other doctor.
If you don't like going to the sea-coast, why don't you take a
walk on the terrace? That is what I always do. The terrace is fine.
What should I say about Nimu?
How can I help her if
she deceives me? If she would speak out frankly as you do,
I would be able to do something. If she goes on saying "I am
all right and don't worry", what can I do? I even told her
yesterday that if she did not want to tell me she could tell Am-
tussalaam. She has no reason to feel worried. I have not asked
her again to show me the accounts. But she should form the
habit of keeping accounts. It will do her nothing but good. Even
a millionaire would become bankrupt if he did not keep accounts.
135
If you are not satisfied with this explanation, write to me
again.
Keep an account of what you have to spend there. If you
desire, I would arrange that money should be sent to you from
here right now.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary.
Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
