468. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA, C.P.,
August 29, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I thank you for your letter of the 23rd instant; my remin-
der was proof of my anxiety that the letter should not miscarry.
My distress is going deeper. Recent events disconcert me.
My complaint about 'exactions' and inflated salaries is already
before you. I fear that free expression of public opinion will
presently be suppressed with a heavy hand. No discordant note
will be allowed. Perhaps wars cannot be carried on otherwise.
That is one of the many reasons for making them hateful.
If things go on as they are and if the Congress remains su-
pine, the Congress will die a slow death.
In the domain of politics your words alarm me. I must
confess I do not understand some of them.
The profound differences between Congressmen and me are
practically bridged. They nearly feel that it was wrong to have
decided in advance that a State could not be run without an
army. All hope for the world seemed to have been lost so far
as the Congress was concerned.
If you are interested in this
part of the inner history of the Congress you shall have it.
If I cannot help the British Government, I do not wish to
embarrass them. But this desire must not be carried to the
extent of committing hara-kiri.
Before I take any step, I would like to bare my heart and
mind to you and seek light if it is darkness that envelops me.
If, therefore, you think that it is worth while our meeting, you
will please wire appointment. I am seeking the interview in
anticipation of the 13th which is the date of the meeting of
the Working Committee.
If our meeting comes off before the 13th so as to enable me to
return to Wardha before that date, it will be helpful. If you will feel
embarrassed to meet me or would otherwise not meet me, there
need be no telegram sent me. I shall take your silence to mean that
you cannot see me on the issues raised by me. If you cannot, I
shall not misunderstand you. I hope you will find it possible to
pardon me for causing you trouble when your attention should not
be diverted from the task before you. My object in seeking an ap-
pointment is to leave no stone unturned, first to avoid all possibility
of an error of judgment and, secondly, to put before you my case
before taking any irretrievable step.
I am now able to send you a translation of the reply I had
asked from my Khurja correspondent.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
From a printed copy: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
