419. LETTER TO SIR GEORGE BARNES ON TRANSVAAL
ASIATIC LAW
BOMBAY,
July 26, 1919
DEAR SIR GEORGE BARNES,
I thank you for your full letter of the 18th instant regarding
the recently enacted Transvaal Asiatic Law.
In view of the last sentence of your letter, I am publish-
ing it together with my reply. I am deeply grateful that H.E. the
Viceroy and you have been moving in the matter. I am, however,
sorry to have to observe that the information placed at your dis-
posal as to the true nature of the Bill is incomplete, if not misleading,
and so is the information regarding the judgment of the Transvaal
Supreme Court referred to in your letter.
Here is the true position regarding the Supreme Court judg-
ment. Sections 130 and 131 of the Transvaal Precious and Base
Metals Act, 1908, merely refer to residential rights. They have no
reference to trade rights which another judgment of the same
Supreme Court has held to be inviolable so far as the existing Trans-
vaal laws are concerned. You will, therefore, see that the new
law deprives the Indian settler in the Transvaal of his existing
trading right. Sections 130 and 131 of the Law of 1908 attempted to
curtail residential rights; the new law superadds the curtailment
of trade rights and thus completes the virtual ruin of Indians law-
fully resident within the gold area of the Transvaal. How can the
Union Government with any cogency claim to have scrupulously
observed the compact of 1914? Let me add that the law of 1908 has
always been a bone of contention between the Transvaal Govern-
ment and the Indian community, and it was, I am thankful to say,
because of the strenuous fight that the Imperial Government put up
in our behalf that the provisions of Sections 130 and 131 remained
practically nugatory. You will perhaps now see what is meant by
the promise, in General Smuts' letter to me, "to see that they (the
existing laws) are administered in a just manner and with due regard
to vested rights". The vested rights regarding residence were the
rights which were exercised and enjoyed by the Indians even before
1908, viz., the right of holding fixed property under leases through-
out the Transvaal. Let me recall a bit of old history. Law 3 of
1885 itself had become a matter of protracted correspondence
between the South African Republic and His Majesty's Govern-
ment through the British Agent at Pretoria. The matter was then
referred to the arbitration to the then Chief Justice of the Orange
Free State. He declared all legislation apart from Law 3 of 1885 as
amended in 1886 to be contrary to the London Convention. All
laws, therefore, passed after the award in further restrictions of the
liberty of British Indian settlers of the Transvaal were contrary to it
and it was, I expect, for that reason, apart from the equity of the
case, that Mr. Harcourt declared on 27th June, 1911, from his
place in the House of Commons:
Complaints against that legislation (the Gold Law and Townships Amend-
ment Act) have been made and are now being investigated by the Govern-
ment of the Union of South Africa, who have lately stated that there is no
intention of interfering with any business or right to carry on business
acquired and exercised by Indians prior to the date of legislation.
Similarly, in 1912, Mr. De Villiers, the then Attorney-General of
the Transvaal said: "No right or privilege which a Coloured person
has at the present time is taken away by the new Act." Indians
had a right to rely upon Mr. Harcourt's assurance and Mr. De
Villiers' interpretation of the Act in question, and if the Trans-
vaal judgment has gone against us, it is the duty of the Union
Government, not merely in virtue of the compact of 1914, but
also of the assurance and the interpretation above referred to, now
to amend the law of 1908 and not to put a further restriction upon
Indian liberty as the new law does.
I know you are overworked. My only fear is that as you have
to act upon briefs prepared for you, and as a powerful Government
like the Union Government can far more easily gain your ear
than a handful of British Indians of South Africa, their case may
suffer simply from want of information. Do you know that the
Indians of South Africa raised an Ambulance Corps which served
under General Smuts in South Africa? Is the new law to be their
reward? I ought not to have to bring in the War services in order
to secure the protection of an elementary right which considera-
tions alike of honour and justice entitle them to. I commend to
your attention the Report of the Select Committee of the Union
House of Assembly. I will gladly lend you a copy, if you do not
have one yourself.
Regarding fixed property, I see you have not got full infor-
mation. I know you will share my sorrow that the Union Govern-
ment, unmindful of their trust and equally unmindful of the
written word, accepted an amendment
prohibiting the holding of mortgages by Asiatics on property, except as
security for a bona fide loan for investment and providing that any Asiatic
company which acquired fixed property after the 1st instant should dispose
of the same within two years or a further period as fixed by a competent
Court, with a rider that in the event of failure to do so, the property
might be sold by order of the court.
I am quoting from Reuter cable, dated the 23rd May, from Cape
Town. You will see that this completes legalized confiscation of
property rights throughout the Transvaal and virtually the trade
rights within the gold area of Indian settlers. There was no evasion
of Law 3 of 1885. The Indians did openly what the law permitted
them to do, and they should be left free to do so.
I do not wish to prolong this tale of agony. The Government
of India are bound to protect the rights of the 5,000 Indian settlers
of the Transvaal at any cost.
Here is my solution. Law 3 of 1885 authorizes the Govern-
ment to appoint wards and streets in which Indians can hold fixed
property. In virtue of this authority, they can declare streets and
wards of gold area township for Asiatic residence and ownership,
and they can instruct receivers of revenue to issue trade licences
in respect of such streets and wards to lawful Indian applicants.
This will be pending the Commission promised by the Acting
Prime Minister, Mr. Malan. The Government of India can see
(by sending a strong representative) that the Commission does not
prove as abortive as the Select Committee of the House of As-
sembly. The Dominions may have the right to regulate immigra-
tion. But as part of a professedly civilized Europe, they cannot res-
trict or take away the trading and property rights of lawfully
resident settlers. The proposed Commission should result in the
abolition of all racial restrictions upon such settlers.
Young India, 30-7-1919
