451. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
4.30 a.m. November 13/17, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
They sent me your packet at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, that
is, yesterday.
The devotee "renounces all undertakings". This means the
devotee will not draw up schemes of future expansion. For example,
if a merchant who deals in cloth now has any plans of selling fire-
wood as well in the future, or if he, having one shop only, thinks
of opening five more shops, that would be arambha (undertaking) on
his part, and the devotee will have none of it. This principle is
applicable to service of the nation as well. For instance, a worker
in the khadi department today will not take up cow-keeping to-
morrow, agriculture the day after and medical aid on the fourth
day. He will do his best in whatever has come to him. When I
am free from egoism, nothing remains for me to do.
'The Lord has bound me with a cotton thread; I am His,
no matter where He leads me. I have been stabbed with the
dagger of love.' A devotee's every activity is planned by God.
It comes to him as in the natural course of things. He therefore
rests content with, 'this, that or anything else' (lr<! ~<!RCf~ I) This is
the meaning of 'renouncing all undertakings'. The devotee does
not cease to work; indeed he is nothing if not a worker. He only
ceases to think needless thoughts about his work. It is these that
he has to renounce.
'This has been acquired by me today; that purpose I shall
gain tomorrow'1_ this is the opposite of 'renouncing undertakings'.
I think this answers your question fully. Ask me if anything is
left out. Keep this portion with the discussion which is proceed-
ing.
If, along with the new pair of sandals, you have not sent a
piece of leather for repairing the soles, and if you can get such a
piece and send it with someone who may be coming on a visit
here, please do send it, or send it by sample post provided it does
not cost much, so that I can use when necessary even the worn-out
sandals.
Write to Jamnalal and tell him that I wish him success in his
holy resolves. A time will come when he will not have to plan
undertakings in this fashion. God will load him with tasks of
service one after another. He will not have to plan for them
or seek them. Just now, his planning for them is all right.
From this he will come to taste the joy of bhakti. So long as
there are no rains, we have no choice but to exert ourselves and
draw water from wells, rivers, streams, etc. But, when the clouds
burst in the sky and we have the Ganga flowing at our doorstep,
what else need we do then? I think the work he could do in Nasik
would have been beyond the capacity of anyone else. All the same,
it would be good if others, too, tried. In my own case, I have
to content myself with a sincere effort, and I apply to others the
same yardstick as I do to me. I can say or write much more
about this, but all that can wait till we meet. As for what the
heart feels and wishes to convey, I have set it down above. This
for Jamnalal.
I have written to you about . . .2. It is but right that none of
us is satisfied with his confession. The evil in his heart is deep. I
have of course written strongly to him. I suppose all of you must
have expressed your dissatisfaction to him. So long as we are
not satisfied about his purity, we cannot ask him to do any public
service. He himself may do it on his own in the spirit of sacri-
fice. You may act in this matter as you think best. We need
1 Bhagavad Gita, XVI. 13
2 The name has been omitted.
not be angry with him. We should act as love may prompt us
to do. It is only the person on the spot who can realize what
love requires him to do in certain circumstances. From a distance
one can send no instructions about that.
4.45, November 15, 1930
Tell Manilal that the letter I received this time is the only
one I have had from him. I did not receive his earlier letters.
If he did write any, how did he send them, that is, with whom?
I will inquire if I get definite information. If he is eager to have
letters from me, I too wish to write to him. But I have a general
understanding with the officials that I would not write to prison-
ers, and I abide by it. I enjoy sufficiently good freedom in other
respects in the matter of writing letters and so I do not quarrel
with them unnecessarily for further concessions. When our atti-
tude is that we should be content in jail even if they do not permit
us to write any letter at all, we ought not to quarrel on such
grounds. Even so, we do send messages. Manilal, however,
should write as often as he is permitted to do. I have already
written to you about his studies and he must have got the message.
His present programme of reading is good enough. But the plan
which I have suggested seems to me methodical and complete. If,
therefore, he can take interest in those books, he should follow
that plan. Sushila wrote to me saying that he had lost 40 lb.
in weight. I suppose that was an error. Or did he really lose
as much as that at any time? Has he now been recovering it or
has the reduction come to stay? How about his strength? He is
right in his view about Phoenix. If the paper is running at a
loss, they should close it. Ask Manilal to write to that effect.
I, too, will write, when I am permitted to do so. I had a letter
from Pragji. The Headman has just gone out and will decide
what reply to give after he returns. Meanwhile you can write
to him and tell him that I think Pragji ought to get all the
powers which he asks for.
I am awaiting your reply regarding the letter which Devdas
wrote to me.
You will find something about spinning in the letter to Mira-
behn. I will write to her tomorrow. You will find something
more important still in the letter to Mahadev, which I want all
of you to understand. To spin by way of yajna and to take up
spinning as labour in order merely to add that much to one's
earning are two different things. In yajna, the actual work, though
extremely important, is of secondary value. In spinning undertaken
as labour, the actual work is all that matters. Irrespective of
whether it is anything more than that, even as work it bears
fruit. In doing anything as yajna one is not concerned with the
fruit of one's labour and, therefore, the fruit is immeasurable.
That is, yajna completely fulfils one's cherished desires. In per-
forming such a yajna, one must lose oneself in one's work. By
doing that one learns the science and art of working. Anyone,
therefore, who would work in the spirit of yajna should have such
qualities as purity of heart, etc., and should do his sacrificial work
with single-minded devotion. He would not even think about any-
thing else when working. A worker inspired with such spirit of
sacrifice should have mastered all that is known about the science
of spinning and should be daily adding to the existing knowledge.
If a person who has voluntarily embraced the path of sacrifice has
made mistakes through negligence or want of means or for any other
reason, he should have the strength to rectify them as and when
he detects them. I use the word 'spinning' here in a symbolical
sense. It stands for proficiency in all the processes relating to
cotton. You will think this a big task, which it is and is not.
It is not a big or difficult task for those who have recognized its
necessity, for they will be making some progress every day to-
wards mastery of these processes and will grow in purity of heart
day by day. A person who works in the spirit of sacrifice will
be a lover of truth and will, therefore, after he has realized the
necessity of working in this spirit, go on voluntarily increasing his
knowledge and proficiency without having to make a strenuous
effort. Even if he has to do so, he will look upon that as God's
grace and not a hardship. I feel, therefore, that all of us should
adopt the method which I have explained in a previous letter
and understand this deeper and truer meaning of yajna. I have
explained sufficiently clearly in my letter to Mahadev how much I
myself am to blame for our failure to understand this and put it
into practice.
5 o'clock, November 16, 1930
I forgot to tell you in my last letter about Kakasaheb's
suggestion to reduce exactly by half the time for completing once
the devotional reading of the Gita. You must have read about
it if you saw the letter to Vinoba. I forgot to tell you that
you should read that letter. His suggestion is that we shall be
conforming better to the tradition if we complete one reading in
a week. Anyone who wants to join in the middle of a week will
not then have to think how far the reading must have progressed.
Every week you will be reciting the same verses on a particular
day. If we complete the reading in a fortnight, the verses read on
a particular day of the week change from week to week. It is
true that completing it in a week means twice as much time
every day. If we read through the whole of the Gita at one time,
we would take an hour and a quarter or an hour and a half.
At the rate of an hour and a half for the whole Gita, it will re-
quire six and a half minutes per day to complete the reading in
fourteen days and 13 minutes per day to complete it in seven
days. Those who are interested in the reading will not grudge
the extra 6½ minutes. To those who are not interested, even the
6½ minutes being given to the reading at present are a burden.
This is Kakasaheb's argument in support of his suggestion. Both
the suggestion and the argument appeal to me. Think about
them independently and, if they appeal to you, put them before
the other members of the group and discuss them. Discuss them
with Mahadev if he is there. Those who join in the reading
voluntarily and with true understanding of its meaning should be
consulted first. If their view is against the suggestion, the matter
need not be pursued further. It should be put before the rest of
the group only if they welcome it. I have even prepared a time-
table for completing the reading in seven days. I do not give it
here just now. I will send it if the suggestion is favourably receiv-
ed. But no, there will be no need to write about it, for Kaka-
saheb will be there in two weeks' time and he will personally
explain the scheme. I will add this, however. I think it would
be right to permit those who are not even today interested in the
reading to leave the prayer-meeting when the reading begins. The
reading always comes last, so that everyone will be present during
the main part of the prayer, guests and visitors excepted of course.
In Wardha, and most probably in the Pratishthan too, they do the
reading of the Gita in the same manner as we do at Sabarmati.
We should, therefore, find out whether the suggestion suits them
too, and so I wrote last week to Vinoba and Hemprabhadevi. As
we understand better the importance of the devotional reading of
the Gita and come to look upon the work as the lighthouse which
guides our actions in life, we shall be less inclined to grudge the prac-
tice of completing the reading in one week. Much will depend, of
course, on the person who leads the reading. If he puts his whole
heart in it, he cannot but make it interesting. If we meditate
during the whole day on the chapter which was read at the
44-21
prayer-meeting, we shall discover new meanings in it and under-
stand better those which we know. A mahavakya lends itself to
ever new interpretations, and the Gita is a mahavakya.
Afternoon
I got the sandals today. However, send a strong piece of
leather for the soles when you find it, so that I can wear the old
pair for a few months more.
Monday morning, November 17, 1930
On Tuesdays the letters are posted, if at all, only if I
hand them over by 11 a.m. Hence I feel pressed for time for
writing the discourses on that day. If, therefore, I write out the
discourse on Monday morning, I can finish everything in time
and Kakasaheb will have sufficient time to read it slowly.
Blessings from
BAPU
Monday afternoon, November 17 2 , 1930
[PS.]
I have tried the sandals on for a day. They fit me very
well. Since Lady Vithaldas sends me cotton, I don't want you to
send any. If, therefore, she writes to you and asks you to send
some, do so.
Do observe the distinction between letters which may and
those which cannot be forwarded. It is a good rule that news
about public developments which cannot be given to newspapers
cannot be given to me either.
There are 60 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
