237. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
JOHANNESBURG,
October 31, 1904
TO
THE HONOURABLE DADABHAI NAOROJI
22, KENNINGTON ROAD
LONDON, S. E. ENGLAND
DEAR SIR,
I have your letter of the 19th September enclosing copy of letter
received by you from Mr. Lyttelton regarding my letter of the 4th April
last on the plague outbreak. His Excellency Lord Milner's reply is, in
the light of what I know, very painful reading. I am taking the liberty
of addressing a communication to His Excellency in the matter, but in
the meanwhile I may state that I have nothing to withdraw from my
letter of the 4th April last and I write this under a full sense of my res-
ponsibility and deliberation. I enclose a copy of Indian Opinion which
gives the whole of the correspondence between Dr. Porter and myself
and shews in my humble opinion conclusively how the plague broke out.
The expropriation by the Town Council took place in September 1903.
The plague was officially declared as having broken out on the 20th March
last — that is, six months after the Council took possession. The first
note of warning was given, as will be seen from the correspondence, on
the 11th of February. On the 15th February, definite suggestions were
made in order to ward off the calamity, and I venture to state as emphati-
cally as I can, though with the greatest respect, that nothing was done
after that date to set matters right. Indeed, even after the 18th of March
last, plague cases were being dumped down in the Location and the inti-
mation of same was given by me to the Town Council. The Town Clerk
informed me on the 19th March that he was unable to take charge of the
patients or incur any financial responsibility until after the 21st, beyond
giving the Government Entrepot to be used as a temporary hospital and
1 Dadabhai Naoroji quoted the bulk of this letter in a communication he addressed to
the Secretary of State for India on November 22, 1904. (C. O. 291, Volume 75, India Office).
2 This letter is not available, but it is very likely that Gandhiji sent Dadabhai Naoroji
a copy of his article "The Plague", 2-4-1904.
3 Vide the succeeding item.
4 The issue of 9-4-1904; Vide "Letter to Johannesburg Press", April 5, 1904.
5 Vide "Letter to Dr. Porter", February 11, 1904.
6 Vide "Letter to Dr. Porter", February 15, 1904.
providing one nurse. This was originally a Customs Depot. Thirty volun-
teers were put on to it. The place was thoroughly cleaned and voluntary
Indian nurses worked night and day, taking charge of all the patients
that were being received. Drs. Pakes and MacKenzie, when they visited
the hospital, now realised the gravity of the situation and they took most
effective steps on the 20th. Every bed, all the medical comforts, food,
and everything were in the interval supplied entirely by the Indians. It
is but fair to state that the Town Council has since paid the expenses in-
curred. All this, however, is beside the point, and if I have laid stress
upon the work done by the Indians, it is in order to shew that I am speaking
from bitter experience and not without feeling. If the facts set forth in
the correspondence herewith sent are correct, — and they have not been
challenged, although the conclusions I have drawn have been repudiated
— I would not be serving the truth if I said anything less than I have
done in my letter of the 4th April last, namely, that, "but for the criminal
neglect of the Johannesburg Municipality, the outbreak would never have
occurred". It and it alone must ever be held responsible for the awful
death-roll of March. All honour to it that, after the situation was realised,
it spent money like water in dealing with the calamity, but that work
could never undo the past. It is true that, as early as the year 1901, long
official reports were drawn up condemning the Location as insanitary,
and yet, in that state it was allowed to remain up to the 26th of September
1903, and that without any outbreak of plague. Strange as it may appear,
it was only after the Town Council came into full possession, got what it
wanted and, with it, an opportunity of keeping the Location in a thoroughly
sanitary condition, that the plague broke out. I am afraid that His Excel-
lency has been totally misinformed with reference to the genesis of the
plague. The thing is now finished. The Indians have suffered undeser-
vedly but the statements made by me could easily be verified. Dr. Pakes'
repudiation has, I suppose, reference to the following occurring in the
leader in Indian Opinion: "Evidently when Dr. Pakes said that the
measures which were being taken in the outlying districts were taken
more in order to eradicate the Indian than to prevent the plague, he spoke
truly". Whether Dr. Pakes actually said so or not, he was certainly
reported in the newspapers to have made such a statement and the remark
in question is based on the newspaper report.
I beg to draw your attention also to the fact that the contention that
the Town Council was responsible for the awful visitation is practically
borne out by Dr. Turner, the Health Officer for the Colony and member
of the Legislative Council.
You may make what use you think fit of this communication.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: G. N. 2263.
