101. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
Ashadh Sud 6 [July 5, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got your cable. You must have received my reply to it. You
must have got my letters even before my reply to the cable. But I
sent the cable as I thought that would make both of you happier,
especially Sushila. If Manilal alone were there, I would not have
spent money on a cable and would have rebuked him for wasting
money on one. But considering that Sushila was in a foreign
country, that she has never been abroad before now and that,
therefore, she would be happy to hear from me, I thought it
proper to send a cable. I am glad to know that both of you
would like to receive letters from me, but at the same time I should
like to make it clear that, if you do not receive one, you should
not suppose that my failure to write was due to indifference or
carelessness. It may be that I cannot find the time to write be-
cause of pressure of work, or that I miss writing because I do
not remember the date on which the mail leaves. If I am ill, you
will have somehow heard about it. But now I shall be more
careful about writing.
Sushila should forget her attachment to her parental home.
We ought always to remember our parents, but it is not possible
to live for ever with them. A son cannot do so. How, then, is it
possible for a daughter? Her home is with her husband. Sushila
should, therefore, understand that her home is where Manilal is
and learn to live like Savitri. She should protect herself and also
protect Manilal. In both of you maintaining simplicity, truthful-
ness, compassion and patriotism, despite the many temptations
surrounding you, in your observing self-restraint as befits you
and protecting each other's body and character lies the success
of your marriage.
Sushila's physical strength does not seem to have increased
in proportion to the increase in her weight. There is only one
way of increasing it: that she should eat nothing but wholesome
food, and only as much as can be digested, and take as much
physical exercise in the open air as she can without getting exhaus-
ted, and that both of you should refrain, as much as possible, from
sexual indulgence. I am a living example before you of how much
even mental indulgence tells on the body. I failed to wake up
for thirty years, and reap the fruits of that to this day. My body
is comparatively good. I have, it may be said, suffered from very
few illnesses. Still, I know that had I waked up earlier, my body
would have been as strong as adamant. My capacity to serve
would also have been far greater than it is. There was none to
awaken me or to keep me vigilant. I am there to awaken you
both and keep you on your guard. Learn from my experience.
I keep good health. As a khadi exhibition is on here these
days and as there is to be a meeting of the Charkha Sangh, Jamna-
lalji, Mithubehn, Jamnabehn, Maganlal, Keshu, Anasuyabehn,
Shankerlal and others have come here. In a day or two the nest
will be empty again.
You send your letters needlessly to Amreli. If you write the
word 'personal' on your letters, no one will read them, but why
do you wish that no one in the Ashram should read them? It would
be all right if you wish that no one should read those letters of
yours in which you consult me about your moral problems, but
what can be there in ordinary letters that no one should read?
We all saw your photograph which Jamnalalji has received.
The photograph which you have sent for me or Ba has not yet
reached us. It must be on the way. Our time is wasted in inquir-
ing about it without knowing to what address it was sent.
I hope you receive the translation of the Gita regularly.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4724
