29. LETTER TO J. B. ROBINSON
WEST STREET, DURBAN,
February 4, 1897
J. B. ROBINSON, ESQ.
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
We, as representing the Indian community in Natal, beg
respectfully to approach you, as a leader of the British commun-
ity in Johannesburg, on a matter which, we are confident, has
your entire sympathy and support.
The present famine in India beats all previous records, and
the alarming condition to which people have been reduced by
starvation and consequent evils is unparalleled in the annals of
Indian famines. The acute suffering is so widespread the autho-
rities as well as the public have called forth the utmost resources
of Indian charity. Relief Fund Committees have been formed in
all parts of India, but they are found to be entirely and absolutely
inadequate to stem the rising tide of distress. The popula-
tion is being rapidly decimated in spite of the efforts of those
that are working heart and soul for the poor, suffering masses
of humanity. The Government and the people of India cannot
cope with the horrors of the calamity in an effective way, and
no wonder the English public has stretched its ever-ready helping
hand.
The Press in England has taken up the matter in right earn-
est, and as you are aware, a Mansion House Fund has been
opened. It is stated that even foreign powers have promised help.
Probably, this is the first time in the history of Indian fam-
ines that the Colonies have been asked to open relief funds, and
we have no doubt every loyal British subject will gladly avail
himself of the opportunity of offering what material assistance
he can to lessen the horrible sufferings of his tens of millions of
starving fellow-subjects.
Realizing his responsibility and recognizing his duty, our
Mayor has already started a fund in response to the Calcutta
cablegram from the Chief Justice of Bengal on behalf of the
Central Committee there. Indians in all parts of the world
have been moving actively in the matter, and in Durban alone,
by yesterday, they subscribed about £700, two firms contributing
over £100 each and one £75 and there are good grounds for
the hope that the collections might amount to about £1,500.
We have taken the liberty to approach you, Sir, because we
are confident you will sympathize with our aims and objects; we,
therefore, venture to request you to start a relief fund. There
is no doubt, with your immense influence and energy, you are
in a position to help materially the public of India in their
endeavours to relieve the suffering millions from the terrible
consequences of the prevailing famine, and we feel sure that
Johannesburg, with its immense riches, can do much more in this
direction than all other parts of South Africa put together.
We may be permitted to state here that we have appealed
to the Indians in different parts of South Africa to do all they
can in this matter.
Hoping that this will receive your immediate attention and
with apologies for encroaching upon your precious time,
We remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servants
From the office copy: S.N. 1996
