12. LETTER TO FULCHAND SHAH
[NADIAD,]
August 9, 1918
I wanted your criticism. And you need not have taken so
long [to offer it]. Your comments are on the whole just. If I
had not started the Ashram such as it is, I would have been
able to achieve nothing at all. My hope has been that good
men will join it. The lapses in the Ashram prove that even
such men are not without their faults and are evidence of its
imperfect state. Without Maganlal5, the Ashram would never
have come to be founded.
His shortcomings bespeak mine.
When I said that I, too, was a novice, I meant it. The
activities of the Ashram are a recreation for me and my experi-
ments. There is bound to be some breaking of things in the course
of an experiment. Out of all this the real thing will emerge. But
only he who goes searching for it will secure it. If persons like you
continually function as oxygen, the carbonic acid gas can be eli-
minated. Such gas will always appear and oxygen will always
purify it. What is true of the body is true of the universe. Tell
Maganlal and the teachers what you have told me and the thing
will be on the rails. I should not like you to give way to despair.
Your criticism will be fruitful if it results in your taking a deter-
mined stand and urges you on to fight for purification. You ought
not to allow it to lead you to frustration.
We are not now going to build the library. The school build-
ing will take time yet. My intention is to stop after building the
hostels. We shall make additions to the loom-house sufficient to
accommodate us. It seems to me that we cannot escape having
to spend on the teachers. We shall, of course, not invite any
more, though I think one or two may be needed. Weaving
and agriculture were introduced because we wanted to do con-
structive work. I am not sorry that we bought all this land. I
am worried about the weaving programme. Its accounts must be
as clear as light. There should be proper supervision over the
work and that is why Maganlal has been asked to go round.
We shall certainly have to start weaving dhotis and saris as well.
They are needed. Those who wear them include the poor too.
We shall not succeed in making others forget beauty altogether.
Not that we are to forget khadi. Our desire, rather, is to seek out
every weaver of khadi. The effort may indeed cost us some money.
I have written to you a rambling letter. You stated one side.
I have given the other, the ideal. Both are true. One man of
character can tilt the balance on the side of virtue. I should like
you to acquire that strength of character and use it.
We must, to be sure, correct mistakes where we find them, and
wind up what we cannot manage. I did this in South Africa and
Champaran, and will do so here if necessary. Though I have
written all this, there is still need for a personal discussion.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
