48. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Chaitra Sud 12 [March 28, 1915]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I have your letter. About the diet, you will be able to speak
of your experience only after some time. With patience, you will
see the results. It happens that one needs glasses for the eyes,
whether to buy them or not, we shall consider by and by.
I too am surprised how the pillars came down all of a sudden.
If they were the ones which bore the invaluable inscriptions, the
thing is very much to be regretted. What you did was quite right.
You had them brought down after getting your doubts cleared, and
that was but proper. Show me this place.
We shall know more then. I don't think tamarind induces
weakness. An excessive quantity of food must have been taken.
Fiction means an imagined story. It is beyond doubt that
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata have less of history and more
of imagination. They are both sacred books; tens of millions of
people look upon them as more than history, and rightly. Maybe
there was no brother of Ram a exactly like Bharata, but there have
been such Bharatas at any rate in India and that is why Tulsidas
could conceive one. It is to the Bharata depicted in the Ramayana
that Bharatvarsha pays homage.
We need not make ourselves unhappy in the least if, because
of our offering satyagraha, Phoenix should turn desolate and go to
waste. In settled conditions, we should take to agriculture. When
conditions are unsettled, we may beg or labour, or starve. We
should have unshakable faith that nothing that is done is ever done
in vain. This is a law which has no exception. If circumstances
arise again, we may resume agriculture. If not, we need not worry.
Agriculture is not the end but only a means. The end is, from
the lower point of view, service of the people and, from the higher
point of view, moksha. One of the means for achieving both is
agriculture. When it hinders us from attaining the end, we should
abandon it.
The freedom that the Poet takes is wrong. We should, however,
bear with a man like him, in the hope that one day he will give
up indulgence of the senses. For him, our company is all to the
good. We should make things as easy for him as we can. We
need not apply to others the rule we apply to the Poet. That is,
we need not have the same rule for all in such matters. Even
the Poet may not cross the bounds, however.
It is because of the respected Gokhale that we keep using the
name "'Phoenix' Institution". He gave this name to our insti-
tution in order that everyone, himself included, may recognize the
meaning immediately. Most of the aims of Phoenix are the aims
of our institution here. He understood the aims of Phoenix and
so gave that name. We need not keep it for ever. We will look
for another name after we have settled down somewhere.
I shall preserve the dresses and hand them over to you. But
they will be useless when I have worn them out. You will have,
therefore, to make your selection right now. They were good ex-
periences I had in Rangoon.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C.W. 5684. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi
