474. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
February 19, 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABOO,
I have your letter of the 15th instant. The description you
give of smallpox in the bastis makes painful reading. I do not
know how far that faith in Sitala Devi is to be admired, and if
it is to be admired, why should we undermine it? It seems to
me that by patience and perseverance we have to undermine this
blind faith and show to the people that smallpox is like every other
disease caused by irregular living and that it is amenable like every
other disease to proper treatment.
I do not know how far you are justified in avoiding vaccina-
tion and perhaps encouraging co-workers to do likewise. Of
course I myself am a fanatic about some of these matters. But I
never like people to copy fanaticism. A fanatic has his own justi-
fication. He may never be copied. Fanaticism must be instinc-
tive. It may be almost compared to the blind faith of the people
whom you have described and who recklessly touch and mingle
with smallpox patients. But just as you and I cannot copy their
blind faith with any prospect of success, so also may nobody copy
anybody else's fanaticism; and since you have such ocular demon-
stration of the success of vaccination, unless you have your own
independent faith and conviction that vaccination is bad you
ought to be vaccinated and you should encourage your co-workers
to do likewise. Anyway, I have washed myself clean of any res-
ponsibility for your daring experiment, if it is an experiment,
and if it is a faith like mine, I have nothing to say. For it is
not merely vaccination, but the whole of the serum treatment
which to me appears as another species of superstition, not far
removed from that of basti Harijans.
You should send me from week to week, if there is any-
thing to be sent, a report of constructive work actually done in
connection with Harijans in your part of the world, whether by
you or others. If Suresh or anybody connected with him is doing
this work, please pass on this message to them also.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 20300
