373. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
AS AT WARDHA,
December 19, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,
I am starting to write this letter at six in the morning in
Masulipatam. I get up daily at three and try to write as many
letters as I can. The writing is interrupted at six, and at seven
generally travelling is resumed. On Mondays and Tuesdays there
is no travelling. Today is Tuesday, and so I have been able to
continue to write. (After I had written so far, Malkani and Bapi
Needu came up and took half an hour of my time.)
I had preserved your long letter. Your work seems to be go-
ing on very well. I hope it will continue in the same manner.
There are ebbs and tides in Mahadev's work. He loudly sings
"All days are not alike". (Another interruption, and I gave 20
more minutes to Venkatappayya.) Mahadev is now realizing the
truth of that line in his own experience. That is how all of us
learn and grow.
Anandi and others are fairly well settled. Proper arrange-
ments have been made for their study. Ramanama also is being
taught by Shankarbhai and a music teacher. I get letters from
Vanamala and Mohan. Mani has joined them. Bablo also is
there, and so are Qureshi's children. N. has run away. Her son
is in Sharda Mandir. Ba has been taken to Yeravda.
All the questions which you have asked regarding spinning
are relevant. But those problems cannot be solved at present. I
can't write about them now, either.
I have in my mind the
solutions of all the problems. Whether they will work or not
can be discovered only when they are tried. If I am alive, I will
explain them some day and, God willing, we will even try
them.
Kaka's health is fairly good.
He must have gone to
Ahmedabad now. He was happy to stay with Swami for a few
days. I have not heard from him recently.
Kishorelal is quite ill. He is confined to bed.
What experiences of the tour should I describe? The crowds
at the meetings are larger even than before and contribute gene-
rously to the fund.
Surendra and Durbari are at Wardha. They will probably
go to Karadi now. Both are fairly well. A large number of girls
have joined at Wardha and requests are still being received.
Vinoba continues to live in the hamlet. Balkrishna cannot be
described as enjoying normal health. The same is true about
Chhotelal.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9061
