197. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 24, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in yesterday. It is now 3.15 morning.
I am glad you are free from constipation. You won't feel
the heat at all if you will continuously keep the wet cloth on the
head. It cools the whole system. I do not know how they bring
your milk. If it is strained as soon as it is milked or if it is bottled
immediately and well corked and wrapped in a wet cloth, it should
keep for many hours and drunk cold and unfired. I have given
up fired milk altogether without any ill consequence. I get all
the vitamins and perhaps only one pound that I take gives me
more strength than more of boiled milk will. I am still on milk
and paupau and oranges and dates. Oranges I take only once.
This appears to be quite enough, perhaps more than enough. But
what I want to tell you is that if you can manage unfired milk you
will suffer less from the heat. The milk must be kept in as air-
tight a bottle as possible and the latter put in a wet cloth. The
wet cloth keeps it ice-cold. You may strain it through a cloth
before you. The cloth should be washed well immediately after
use and so should the bottle. If that is done, I should feel quite
at ease even though you may take your milk unfired. I think I
have made my instructions quite clear. If you do not like the
change and are otherwise feeling quite well, you need not make
the change.
My weight stands at 104 lb. I do wonder. Though I try to
live without attachment1, I have no doubt that there are things
that unconsciously affect me. You know my great regard for . . .2.
He has been my greatest brahmachari in the Ashram and the most
truthful boy. You have also known what might even be called my
partiality for . . .3. Well, both have been found making love to
one another and trading on my faith in them. They have even
been contemplating marriage. . . .'s letters have come into my
hands. I had hopes of making . . . a proper Harijan girl. But
now I do not know what will happen to . . . and . . . . I am
making an effort to patch up the broken vessels. But I do not
know how far I shall succeed or how far they will help. But all
this is the language not of detachment but of attachment. I know
the language of detachment, I am not practising the art. Hence
it would be untruthful to use the language. I cannot dismiss these
two lightly from my mind. I hope to do so in time. The imme-
diate work in front of me does not permit me to brood over their
sin. But because I have written to you, I see quite clearly how
I stand myself. You are not going to worry over this. I am
quite all right in spite of the tempest. God keeps me. I have
laid bare the struggle going on within. But it is momentary.
Truth will stand even if the Ashram is reduced to ashes and all my
idols are broken to pieces. . . .5 has been grand. And who
knows that this discovery will not lead to a greater cleansing all
round. Therefore you are not to grieve but to rejoice. Here at
4.15 the prayer began. This is after prayer and hot water and
honey 4.45. Princess Aristarchi continues to send her weekly
letters full of love for Harijan. She is fasting and praying and saving
for the cause. If you will like to have more of the cards she has
been sending, I would gladly send them. She sends you her love
and so does Madeleine Rolland. The Rishi seems to be keeping
fair in spite of the rigours of the winter and the collapse of order
and democracy in Germany. They of course send their love to
you. And for that matter all who write from Europe. But you
know how indifferent I am about sending you these messages.
Tell Ba I may not write to her every week.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 9672. Courtesy: Mirabehn
