346. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
SRIRAMPUR,
December 26, 1946
BAPA,
I have your letter. Two persons are certain to come on
behalf of the Sikhs. I am not going to send them back in
a hurry. I must admit that I cannot command the pace at
which you go. I don't have the time to find out why. Today
I am up since 2 o'clock. It does not harm me. Nowadays I
have made it a practice to get up at 3 o'clock. Yet, I can-
not say that I am able to finish the day's work. I don't want
you to come when Jawaharlal comes. It will be strenuous.
Considering that you have just recovered from fever you should
not strain yourself so much. If you go to Delhi fairly late, I hope
I shall be there when you are there. If this cannot be, I am
sure to be there during your absence. I wish we could meet
before you went to Delhi. I have had a good deal of talk with
Abha who has grown wings. She is now prepared to live in a
village and has, in consultation with Satis Babu, selected Chandi-
gram, which is five miles from here. Here, too, she has met a
number of Muslim families. She even took me to a place in
the hope of introducing me to the women who, however, never
came out. Abha had her object-lesson. I already knew that
the women would not come out but I agreed to go with her
because they had made a promise to Abha. Abha spoke to
me about the two girls whom you have selected to be sent to
the Mahila Ashram. Shantabai also has been consulted. The
younger one is to be sent to the Mahila Ashram and the old-
er one to the Balika Ashram. Both will thus have different expe-
riences. I see advantage in it.
Are you sure you are not being hasty in organizing the
people's programme in different places? But for this doubt I
have nothing to say on the matter.
Now, if you agree to my suggestion about Abha, I would
further suggest that you send her soon so that she takes up the
work, because [Chandigram] will be my first camp during the
tour. She would like to be there before that, and so would I. If
269
Malati has already arrived there, I have nothing to say. But
don't send for her if she does not come for the present.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
