181. LETTER TO ANDREW A. FREEMAN
VALMIKI MANDIR,
READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI
May 6, 1947
DEAR FREEMAN,
I had your letter of the 28th April. I hope there are no ill
effects left of the operation you had gone through. Is it not a mad
idea to start a spinning society in America? Mad or wise, why do you
want to connect my name with it. Hand-spinning has its own special
universal function.
If I were you I would not mix up my teachings with
hand-spinning.
1
From letter to the addressee; vide Vol. LXXXVII, p. 362.
2 In which the addressee had sought Gandhiji's permission to use his name
for the Gandhi Spinning Society of the United States and also for the spinning-
wheel which was to be known as the 'Gandhi Spinning-Wheel' to be manufactured
in the United States.
134
LETTER TO ANDREW A. FREEMAN
135
Your third object is to cultivate a friendly understanding
between Americans and Indians. I claim that understanding not only
with Indians but with the whole world is implied in voluntary spinning.
And, if America is really interested in the hand-spinning-wheel it can
beat all its previous records for inventive genius.
Therefore I would say do not belittle a great thing by mixing it
up with my name.
In your exposition you will have a perfect right to use my name
freely and say quite correctly that you owe your enthusiasm for
hand-spinning to mine in the same connection in India. And, of
course, I shall welcome all the hand- spun yarn that you can send to
India. Only let me present you with a joke that will lie behind your
sending a parcel of hand-spun yarn all the way to India for weaving.
The postal charges for sending hand-spun yarn from America would
be perhaps 50 times the value of the cotton used in hand-spinning.
But America being a mammon-worshipping country you can afford
such expensive jokes.
Yours sincerely,
M.K. GANDHI
ANDREW A. FREEMAN, ESQ.,
325 WEST 57TH STREET
NEW YORK 19, NEW YORK
From a copy: Pyarelal papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
