132. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
March 15, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
We arrived in Rangoon from Moulmein this morning. I
got the letters posted by you. It is surprising that you had not
got till Thursday the letters posted at Calcutta on the silence
day. Subbiah is very careful in this matter.
Yesterday I had time to write only a postcard to you. The
post will leave on Saturday. It is Thursday today.
I had to stop with the last sentence. I am now writing this
on Friday morning in Paungde. I experience no difficulty, and
those who accompany me also find the journey quite comfortable.
I have sent a wire to you about Chalala. Both of us believe
that there is no harm in buying that land so long as we can sell
it whenever we wish to. But only you can judge there what is
best.
I shall look into the balance-sheet. It is not likely, however,
that either of us will be able to examine it in detail. I do hope
to return there on the 29th.
It is advisable that you should produce khadi in Bahial and
wherever else you can. Mahavirprasad has told me that they will
buy all the khadi which we can send to Calcutta. There will be,
therefore, no problem of exporting it. Give as much help from
the Ashram as you can.
1 Gandhiji and Jamnalal Bajaj
I have accepted the offer of a donation of Rs. 10,000 as help
in manufacturing khadi in the area around Kathar. More about
this when we meet.
Your decision to spin for four hours on every Friday is a good
one. I am very happy that you intend to learn carding.
I like the suggestion of doing away with the distinction
between six and seven. It is desirable that, in managing our
affairs, our methods should, as far as possible, be smooth and
uniform. I like the resolution about supplying milk to the Vidya-
pith. Our aim now should be to see that it gets the milk every
day in time.
Radha-Rukhi must have recovered now. You did not write
and tell me what arrangement you made about the Bal Mandir
during Radha's illness. There should be provision for an alter-
native arrangement whenever someone falls ill.
After this, there will be only one more post from Burma — that
is, on Tuesday. On Thursday, we start from here.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5393
