248. LETTER TO AMBALAL SARABHAI
October 19, 1934
SUJNA BHAI,
I got both your letters. I understand your inability to be one
of the Trustees of the Harijan Ashram. I don't wish to press you
too hard. But may I assume that, in regard to the Harijan
work itself, you will meet the needs of the work in Gujarat from
time to time?
I accept your decision regarding the dairy. The loss during
the last year was very heavy indeed. I am looking into the
matter. I shall be satisfied if you meet the loss up to December.
I should, however, like to see you adhere to your original assurance.
I will not readily let the burden of even Rs. 4,000 fall on you.
If the loss was due to no negligence on our part, I will not hesitate
to stretch my hand before you. I don't wish to run the dairy at
a loss even for one year. Narandas is going through all the
accounts. In the budget for next year prepared three or four months
ago, the aim is indeed to balance the two sides. Meanwhile I
learnt about the loss of Rs. 4,000. Narandas will now go to
Sabarmati and guide me. My intention in writing all this is to
assure you that, having secured your support in this scheme . . .1,
I have not become indifferent to the losses. It would be against
my nature to go on burdening you with losses, however big they
may be. In all public activities under my charge throughout
my life, I have always tried to balance the two sides. I do not
hesitate to incur a loss when I think it necessary to do so, but
then I do it knowingly. When conducting research in tanning,
or when hoping for profit from Ramachandran lift2, I did foresee
the possibility of loss and had put an outer limit to it. I had
involved the late Revashankarbhai in the business of the Rama-
chandran lift and he had to make good Rs. 5,000. The scheme
was then withdrawn. In tanning, we may still have to continue
to put up with losses. It is an industry in which it is absolutely
necessary that we should take interest. Part of the loss in it will
be met by Ghanshyamdas. Into this modest venture in the service
of the cow, I have drawn you. It will mean loss of my reputation
if you now withdraw.
I have inflicted this long explanation,
which I have done after first accepting your decision, because I
do not wish to lose my reputation with you. You know very well
that I have the utmost admiration for your frankness. I don't mind
your decision at all. All my business ventures rest wholly on
my reputation. The paper of bank-notes, worthless in itself, is
backed by some gold at least. The paper of my notes is backed
by nothing but Ramanama. With whom, therefore, may I plead
if not with a man like you?
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
