383. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Silence Day, May 20, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I got the Ashram Samachar too. Some
more letters must still be on their way, redirected from place to
place.
The question of swadeshi is under discussion at present and,
as I am today writing a reply to a student for publication in
Navajivan, I feel like cautioning the inmates of the Mandir too.
We may leave aside the question of what people do in their
private affairs; but we must take care to use swadeshi articles
whenever we write anything in connection with Mandir work.
The string, the tape, etc., used by us should be made of hand-
spun yarn. Do you know that Maganlal had made even sewing-
thread from hand-spun yarn? The pencils, ink, nibs, etc., which
we use should be swadeshi. The ink in my pen is swadeshi. We
should thus take care about everything we use. It is necessary
that there should be no avoidable inconsistency in our lives. We
need not feel ashamed to accept any foreign article which is
essential, but its necessity must be demonstrated.
You may now remind me about Lady Ramanathan when I
arrive there. I will write something then. I shall write for the
next issue of Young India in Bombay on Monday, the 27th. I
don't know what I will do if I don't reach Bombay before that.
I would not like to dissuade Bhansali from buying land. Though
his ideals are different from ours, the direction is the same. They,
too, give the first place to self-control. But this is a controversial
subject. We shall discuss the matter.
I had thought that after my return I myself would tell the
people there about my experiment in eating uncooked grain, and
that no one would write about it from here. Yes, it is ten days
now since I gave up bread. I am fine. I weighed myself today.
The weight today is the same as it was there. If the scale is
accurate, it may even be a little more. That is, it is 95½. I am
proceeding with my experiment with great caution. I had started
it at the age of 20 and then gave it up. I started it again in
1893 and again gave it up. I enjoy making the same experiment
now at the age of 60, for I see big results for myself and my co-
workers from the success of my experiment. I cannot say as yet
how far the experiment is a success. In 1893 I had carried on the
experiment for 15 days before giving it up. I ate uncooked fruit
and nuts for many years. This experiment, however, stands in a
class by itself. More about it when we meet. No one there
should be frightened.
I have taken no vow. I will not go on
with the experiment at the cost of my health. In any case, I will
have my meals in the common kitchen.
Since Chimanlal and others have moved out of the houses
on the upper side, those houses will fall into disrepair if not used.
I think they may be occupied even by persons without families.
Let Balkrishna carry on with the Gita in the manner he
thinks best.
Panditji has been roped in all right. It did not occur to me
that he would have to shoulder the burden of looking after the
cash too. But this is real music. True music is produced only
when there is harmony in the different tunes of life. Among
those who have given the other music, there have been many
immoral men too.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5420
