431. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 23, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I wrote one letter or rather postcard at your new address.
I had made up my mind not to chide you even mentally if
you fell ill again. I said to myself when I heard of your ill-
ness from Kashi that it would not do to be finding fault with you
every time you got ill. No doubt we get ill through our faults. But
the difficulty lies in our inability always to know our errors before-
hand. The other is our inability always to guard against them even
when we know them. It is therefore enough to know these truths
that we ail through our own mistakes and then not always to be
chiding ourselves when we do get ill. Your latest lapse therefore
does not surprise me. It was inevitable in the circumstances related
by you. God be thanked that you are able to tide over these
illnesses without their leaving bad after-effects. The elimination
[of] disease germs through natural treatment often leaves the sys-
tem purer and stronger. The rest you are getting is providential.
And you are not going to bother if you get no permission to
receive visitors or even to write letters. Only 50 years ago priso-
ners could not receive visitors or write letters. Ordinary prison
life nowadays has lost all its terrors. It was a great movement
Howard set on foot. It is only in its beginning stages. The day
is not far distant when prisons will be rechristened and persons
will be merely detained so as to be unable to do harm whether
moral, social or political in accordance with the conception of the
respective States. But we have to rejoice whatever the conditions
of jail life, trying nevertheless to secure relief wherever possible.
Now about my food. Do you not remember that here
in Yeravda I could not get rid of constipation with milk and juicy
fruit and that I was able to do so only by dropping milk? This
time, too, I had dropped milk only because I could not keep
myself fit on milk and fruit. This time I began banana with milk.
There was slight improvement. But that was not enough. I have
therefore just for a few days dropped milk and am taking bajri
chapati instead of wheat and the effect has been marvellous.
During last incarceration it was bajri that removed my constipa-
tion. And I was able to pass the rest of the term on bread, vege-
tables and almond cream. I propose to go back to milk and see
whether with bajri I am able to avoid constipation. I am keeping
excellent health. And as you can see I am writing with the right
hand without coming to grief. For the better protection of the left
elbow, I have gone back to the Magan charkha and am this time
able to draw over 30 counts. I am satisfied with this. The output
per hour is still bad. It hardly reaches 100 rounds per hour.
Vallabhbhai is making very rapid progress with his Sanskrit.
Mahadev is doing both French and Urdu. So our time is being
very usefully spent. The weather has suddenly turned bright and
very hot here-unusual at this time of the year. I hope it is not
bad with you.
I hope you have the mosquito-net.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6234. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9700
