118. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
November 28, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
I have today astounding news that a co-worker of mine, Sjt.
Appasaheb Patwardhan, a civil disobedience prisoner in Ratnagiri
Jail, is semi-fasting because he and some other prisoners who were
permitted to do Bhangi work have been suddenly deprived of it
under your orders. My fear is that this order was a result of my
having said in the course of our conversations that your policy
was inconsistent in that you were allowing non-Bhangi prisoners
to do Bhangi work in the Ratnagiri Prison and you would not
allow it in this. It is difficult for me to understand why those
prisoners who volunteer to do such work should be prevented
from doing it. Surely you do not want forcibly to keep up un-
touchability in prisons when it is crumbling to pieces outside.
Appasaheb is an M.A. of the Bombay University, is a great social
reformer and a man of character whom any State would be
proud to have as a citizen. Service of untouchables is an article
of faith with him. He underwent a fast in 1930 for the above
reason in that very jail. I had even then to intervene on his behalf.
If I am misinformed about the present position you will let me
know what it really is. If I am correctly informed I would ask
you in view of the circumstances brought to your notice please to
telegraph instructions that my friend and his associates may be
allowed to resume Bhangi work under whatever written guarantee
as to its voluntary nature you may deem fit to take from them.
Though I am a prisoner, you will not expect me to see a
comrade dying by inches, not for any crime, not for any indulg-
ence he desires, but for deprivation of humanitarian service for the
prosecution of which Government have recognized the necessity
of giving me special facilities.
Here perhaps you would allow me to remind you that during
this incarceration and the two previous ones in my own humble
manner I have on several occasions helped the authorities to pre-
serve prison discipline. I mention this fact not in order that it
may be counted as a merit. I gave that assistance as a matter
of duty imposed upon me by the law of satyagraha. I mention
it here in order that you or the Government may know that in
seeking relief about prisoner friends I am not guilty of any offi-
cious interference with the administration.
I am sure that you will treat this as a matter of urgency
involving as it does the possibility of great damage being done
to a fellow-being under your custody.
Yours sincerely,
Home Department, Political, File No. 31/108-Poll., 1932, pp. 11-.
Courtesy: National Archives of India
