12. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
FINAL COPY
7, BUITENCINGLE [STREET,]
CAPE TOWN,
April 7, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
In accordance with the conversation between us, I reduce to
writing my suggestions for bringing the Asiatic struggle in the
Transvaal to a close.
A
The new clause tabled by General Smuts to follow clause 27
in the present Bill should be amended as follows:
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding in Act No. 36
of 1908 of the Transvaal and Chapter XXXIII of the Orange
Free State Constitution, a person who, by complying with the
conditions described in paragraph (a) of section four of this
Act, has been permitted to enter the Union shall not be
deemed to be subject to registration under the provisions of
the said Act of the Transvaal and to Clauses 1 to 6 of the
said Chapter XXXIII.
(The words underlined are the additions suggested by me.)
Subject to such amendment and subject to unequivocal pro-
tection of existing rights, especially of wives and children of law-
ful residents and immigrants, the bill will be acceptable to the
passive resisters. I offer no comment on the special objections that
the Cape and Natal Indians have naturally raised, and which
I think ought to receive careful and favourable consideration.
B
As an alternative solution, I suggest as follows:
(1) The present bill be dropped.
(2) A bill to amend Transvaal Act 15 of 1907 be introduced and
thereby
(a) The Transvaal Act 2 of 1907 be repealed "except so far
as it is applicable to the registration of minors lawfully
resident in the Transvaal". (The wording is taken from
the first schedule to the present bill. My reading of the
reservation is that minor children of registered Asiatics,
no matter where they may be, shall be free to enter the
Transvaal and be liable to and entitled to registration on
reaching the age of 16.)
(b) The education clause of Act 15 of 1907 may be replaced
by sub-clause (a) of clause 4 of the present bill in order,
if necessary, to make the test more severe.
(c) Sub-clause 4 of section 2 of Act 15 of 1907 be repealed.
(d) General Smuts' new clause 28 be added mutatis mutandis
to Act 15 of 1907, without of course the addition sug-
gested by me and which addition is necessary for the
present bill but not for the alternative solution.
In my opinion the alternative solution is the simplest; it raises
no question as to the Free State and its acceptance by General
Smuts will not only close passive resistance, but I feel sure will
meet with the entire approval of the Indian community.
This, however, does not mean that the community waives its
right to move for an amelioration of its position in many other
matters.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From Indian Opinion, 15-4-1911; also photostat of typewritten copy:
S. N. 5434
