258. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
December 14, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the weekly mail. I am writing this after reading
Anandi's letter.
The rule about eating three times only does not apply to
anybody who is ill or weak in health. Nor does it apply to
children. The rule which applies to all is this:
Everybody should eat in the same manner as he takes
medicine-in measured quantity and at fixed times. Somebody
may even have to be fed two teaspoonfuls of something every
hour. If so he should not be given that thing every half an hour.
Thus the habit of munching something in between meals is a
bad one and is violation of the vow of not indulging the palate. One
should not even eat a green tamarind. But a girl like Anandi may
need to eat more often than thrice. She ought not to do so just
to please herself, but she may eat what is necessary for the sake
of her health and as often as necessary. Children of the age
of Babla may eat four times. Of course nobody should swallow
in three meals the quantity that he would eat in four meals. It
may help if the quantity consumed in three meals is divided into
four meals, but it would be harmful to eat in three meals the
quantity that one might eat in four meals.
When one has got fever, one should not eat solid food, by
which I mean wheat, Jowar, bajri, rice, pulses and tubers, that is,
articles which contain starch and protein. If, however, one feels
hungry and passes normal stools, one may drink milk in small
quantities. Fruit juices may be taken in practically any con-
dition, though even these should not be taken if one has no
appetite.
Anybody who cannot digest Jowar and bajri must not eat them.
Anybody whose body-not palate-demands rice, may eat it. For
those who are ill, the water in which rice has been boiled some-
times proves the ideal food. Ordinarily, rice is not essential for
health and, sometimes, even does harm. Rice-eaters are generally
seen to be flabby. They have round bellies. This is a common
sight in Bihar and Madras. I hope I have now made myself
clear.
194
What shall I write concerning the Chharas? Our tapashcharya
is imperfect. Our faith in God is not strong enough. We do
not look upon the Chharas as our own brothers and sisters. We
are afraid of them. I deserve this charge more than anybody
else. My shortcomings have taken visible form as the camping of
Chharas in the neighbourhood of the Ashram. Endure them.
Please remember that I have not advised a letter of abject suppli-
cation to be written to the Collector. I had suggested the subs-
tance of the draft after careful thought. I am, therefore, certainly
eager to know what action Mavalankar has taken. I hope you
yourself had followed my meaning. I see in this situation a
severe test of our devotion to dharma. From here, I see our
dharma quite clearly. Any man or woman, old or young, who
has courage and faith in God, should go and live among them,
plead with them and, even if they beat him or her, show them
the right path. We should know how they live. If, however, we
do not have the necessary strength to do all this, we should
think and decide whether we are willing to defend ourselves by
fighting the Chharas. If we are willing to do that, we should
decide whether we should seek the Government's help and, if not,
whether we could engage paid watchmen and from which com-
munity or class we would select them. If, on the other hand, we
do not wish to engage such watchmen, we should decide whether
we would fight as best as we could, or whether we would prefer
not to abandon our path and, though we did not possess suffi-
cient strength to follow it well, we would be content with as
much as we could do in that direction. I think I have said
enough. I hope nobody will get scared. I have written all this
so that people there may think over the problem.
Prema's operation must be over.
BAPU
[PS.]
Please let me know what Mavalankar has done. I am
thinking what can be done in that direction.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8281. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
