481. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
Urgent
October 24, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
Your communication regarding my request for a definition
of Government policy about my interviewing friends and carrying
on correspondence in the matter of untouchability and another
matter was read to me by Major Bhandari this morning. I was
allowed to make a copy of it.
According to the communication, "Government are prepar-
ed to allow me a reasonable number of interviews (with persons
approved by them)", and to carry on correspondence, "provided
it is clearly understood that it is not reproduced in the Press".
It is clear to me that Government could not be aware that
my fast is only suspended and that it may have to be resumed if
the work of removal of untouchability is not thoroughly done.
Moreover, so far as a temple in the South is concerned, I might
be obliged to join Sjt. Kelappan in his fast, if by or before the
2nd of January next that temple is not opened to the so-called
untouchables. This the Government has known. Three weeks
have already passed without my being able to do much work,
apart from being permitted after long delay to send two telegrams.
Despatch and publicity are essential, if I am to overtake the work
of reform in due time. Every day counts. I therefore submit that
all restrictions on the choice of visitors and publication of corres-
pondence should be removed. I can have no objection to the
presence of an official or officials at the interviews and inspection
there and then of correspondence. If assistance is supplied to me,
the Government may have copies of all correspondence and short-
hand notes of interviews. Naturally these interviews and corres-
pondence should have no reference to civil disobedience and
must be strictly limited to the removal of untouchability.
Unless therefore these restrictions, as submitted above, are
removed, before the 1st November next, I shall be reluctantly obli-
ged to withdraw, subject to the limitations imposed by the law of
satyagraha, such co-operation as is possible for me to do. And as
a preliminary, I shall deny myself all the feeding facilities permit-
ted to me and restrict myself to such 'C' class diet as I can within
my vow consistently take and so long as my body can accommodate
itself to such food. I do hope the Government will not regard this
as a threat. The contemplated step is the natural consequence of
the Government attitude. I can have no interest in life if I cannot
prosecute, without let or hindrance, work for which the fast was
undertaken and suspended. I would have said nothing if this moral
and religious reform had anything to do with civil disobedience.
With reference to my personal letter to the Honourable Mr.
Hudson, the reply comes upon me as a painful surprise. If the
warning read out to me at the interview with Dr. Ambedkar was
by way of punishment for what I am alleged to have done re-
garding the telegram to Maulana Shaukat Ali, common justice
even to a prisoner demanded that the cause of the punishment
should have been conveyed to me at the time of the warning, and
before the punishment was pronounced explanation should have
been called for from me. I never knew that a prisoner could be con-
demned unheard. Nor had I the remotest idea that the letter to my
son which I had seen was intended to convey any warning to me.
Let me say that my son told me definitely in official presence
that Mr. Hudson had in a generous manner not only quickly
granted him permission to see me as often as he liked but that he
had permitted him to talk to me about anything and carry any
messages from me, so long as he gave no interviews to the Press
and published nothing. In view of this conversation I saw noth-
ing wrong in asking my son to tell Mr. Shaukat Ali that I had
seen his wire and that I had replied to it, and that he was likely
to receive the reply in the course of a day or two, the delay
being due to the fact that it had gone to the Government for
being passed. I had not then the remotest idea that the utterly
innocent telegram would not be passed. I did therefore give my son
also the purport of the reply. Let me however correct two mis-
statements in the paragraph of your communication regarding this
matter. I had no knowledge at the time of talking to my son
that the telegram had not been "passed for transmission". Nor is
it correct to say that the text of the reply has been published
in the Press. What I have seen is only the substance. I did
not give my son a copy of the reply. I add that my son out
of nobility of his nature wrote a gentlemanly letter to Mr.
Hudson regretting that Maulana Shaukat Ali had published his
conversation with him in spite of his caution. He had expected a
letter of thanks in reply for his frankness but unfortunately he re-
ceived a reprimand, and he remained quiet under it. I should be
sorry if after this very full explanation Mr. Hudson does not revise
his opinion and think that as man to man he has done me a grave
injustice.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Since it is obviously impossible for me to guarantee non-
publication by my correspondents, known and unknown, of letters
I may write to them, whilst the bar referred to lasts, I have to
suspend what correspondence on untouchability I have hitherto
carried on. I am entitled therefore to ask that a reply to this
matter be sent as early as possible before the 31st instant.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
(800) (40)(4), Pt. I, p. 227. Also G.N. 3864
