154. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
[JOHANNESBURG]
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
Though everyone knows that I write a great deal for the Gujarati
section of this journal, it is rarely that I do so under my signature.
Here is another occasion for me to write under my name.
When I saw Mr. Cartwright last Saturday, he showed me
Mr. Smuts' letter in which he has said that the proposed Bill was
intended only to legalize voluntary registration. The Bill will provide
for Indians who have taken out registers voluntarily to be exempted
from the penalties in the new law for breach of its provisions. For all
the other purposes, they too will be subject to that law. This is double-
crossing, pure and simple. Though not dead yet, we are as good as
dead. This need not be so, however, if our cause is just.
'The law, it was said, was sure to be annulled. What has happen-
ed to all that talk? What has come of Mr. Gandhi's words? What will
he have to say for himself now? How will he face the Indians?' I hear
those questions echoing in my ears.
Even now I say that the law will be repealed, provided the Indian
community carries through the satyagraha campaign. I stand by my
words. There is no reason for me to feel so ashamed that I cannot face
my brethren. I need be ashamed if I myself betray the cause. There
is nothing that can be gained through deception. Neither will
Mr. Smuts gain anything thereby. It is undoubtedly true, as I said ear-
lier, that there exists a written document. If Mr. Smuts chooses to
give a perverse reply about this letter, that does not prove that I was
to blame [for having agreed to the compromise in the first instance].
I remember the warning given by a large number of Indians and
whites. They told me not to trust General Smuts. I trusted him up to
a point. There is nothing else one could have done. That is how poli-
tical affairs always have been, and will be, conducted. When the two
parties to a settlement know their strength, foul play can avail little. I
believe the strength of the Indian community consists in its truth.
General Smuts' falsehood will prove unavailing in the face of that truth.
1 This was published under the title "From A Correspondent: Mr. Gandhi's
Letter".
2 For an earlier letter in the same strain, vide "A Brief Explanation", pp. 99-101.
3 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 40-.
To those who blame me, I have only this to say: 'If you were
sincere in your reproaches, you should join the satyagraha movement
again. It was because I put my trust [in General Smuts] that I
advised voluntary registration. We took a pledge to see to it that the
law would be repealed; you and I have fought together to fulfil that
pledge and let us now continue to do so. It will suffice if you do this. You
deserve to be congratulated in that your suspicions have been justified.
If, in the sequel, my trust turns out to have been ill-placed, I do not
hold myself responsible, for I had no alternative then. Even if you think
otherwise, the Indian community has lost nothing for having trusted
[General Smuts]. For we shall gain more now if we stand together.'
To those who were pleased with me on account of the settlement,
and who approved of it, I should say: 'If General Smuts is bent on
playing foul, it does not follow that the settlement itself deserves to be
condemned. It has been nothing if not beneficial. If our strength is
real, we will not retreat an inch. On the contrary, the more the other
side attempts foul play, the better to advantage will our truth be set off.
Diamonds shine the brighter for being strewn among stones. Learn
to think of truth in this way.' Whether or not those who have been
angry with me or those who approved of my action join the satya-
graha campaign, my pledge stands. I will never submit to the obnoxious
Act. I will fight it unto death, even if I should be the only one to do so.
I hope Khuda-Ishwar will inspire the same thought in every Indian.
I remain your satyagrahi,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 30-5-1908
