268. LETTER TO PYARELAL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
May 30, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
You will have received the letter I wrote you yesterday. It
seems I forgot to mention that I had not shown your letter to
Mahadev.
I would wish this to be my last letter concerning the
Sushila-Mahadev episode. So far as I am concerned, the con-
clusion I have come to from the facts that have come to me is
final.
Sushila's firmness has opened my eyes. I thrust my suspicion on
Mahadev. Only what Mahadev said to me on the 14th was correct.
Whatever he wrote and said since then has been done merely under
my influence. Hence, I must treat it as cancelled. In the process,
the innocence of both of them comes out clear before me. My
love was full of suspicion. That is why I saw pure gold as
brass. I attributed my morbid tendencies to both of them. It
is my cussedness which is the cause of Sushila's tortured state
of mind. I have now got to look into the source of this cussed-
ness. The fact that Sushila has abandoned me because she feels
that she is undeserving is due to her determination not to see
any cussedness in me. The result is of course good. I do not
consider myself worthy even to touch Sushila. But would I
thereby forget the anguish I have caused her? How can I
expiate for maligning Mahadev? Did I not do the same with
you in relation to Yoga? Your firm stand conquered me. I
shall handle Mahadev. He cannot abandon me at all. When
you could not abandon me, how can Mahadev do so?
You have been looking after Sushila. Bring her back into
line.
Once your affairs are settled there you have got to come
here. If you can give me a firm assurance about your coming,
I can patiently wait.
Now about me. If I have caused anguish to Sushila even
unknowingly, where do I have the right to serve women or be
served by them? I cannot expiate for it by fasting. I cannot
do it by suffering in any other way. My expiation can only
be in one form and that to avoid the touch of women altogether
and serve them from a distance in whatever way I can. In no
sense have I been a brahmachari of my definition. I must make
this known to my colleagues and do the necessary sadhana to
approximate to my definition.
I do not know if my cussedness has gone that far. I am
trying to carry on an impartial search in that direction. If it
results in something, I shall inform you.
Neither you nor Sushila need be disturbed on reading this.
I am certainly not perturbed. I am trying to understand myself
in the light of the Gita. I am not troubled by my cussedness.
I have not deliberately cultivated it. I was not aware of the
stench I was carrying. But when Sushila's fragrance entered my
nostrils I thought it was a stench. Such a feeling cannot develop
in a day. The root must be lying deep somewhere. Who can
unravel this tangle except God? He alone can pull us out of
trouble. He will show me the way.
If Sushila can benefit by reading this letter, let her read it.
Otherwise there is no need at all to show it to her.
I have already written to Mahadev something to this effect
in the morning. I have said the same thing to him in a clear
manner.
I do wish you would not feel upset.
Nothing is to be
gained by feeling upset at this time of trouble.
I am well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
