311. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
WARDHA,
June 30, 1935
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
Your letters with enclosures have duly arrived. I must not
write about it to Agatha. You will remember this sentence in her
letter: "For we look to Mahatmaji to be above the battle. Am I
right in thinking that the events of the past year are wearing him
down?" If you feel with me that the events are not wearing
me down and that I am above the battle then you must give her
the assurance on my behalf and tell her that I am not "hopeless
about the whole thing". Only I can't build hope on a foundation
of sand. It is truth on the rock of Faith which persists in the face
of appearances to the contrary. If I am not enthusiastic about any
Indian going to England, I have the soundest reasons. The best
of us have more than our share of work cut out for us here,
and I am quite clear in my mind that when we have discharged
our trust here, real friendship between England and India will
come. Those Indians who believe in non-violence must not go
unless they are able to testify that politically conscious India has no
hatred for Englishmen, but that it has nothing but goodwill
towards them, if not active love. Rajagopalachari cannot bear that
testimony today. And what is the use of his going to ask English-
men to do their duty even though Indians cannot surmount their
unregenerate nature and like the rest of mankind hate those
who they believe persecute them? Do you not see my argument
quite clearly? I am dictating so much on one sentence in Agatha's
letter, because I realize the distress of her mind and I want
to soothe her and those who feel like her.
About the Simla incident you will have to put up with it a
little longer. But what does it matter that bitter criticism is level-
led against you. You said the correct word and that is its own
satisfaction.
About the rest of your letter and the enclosures I expect
you do not want any reply. I hope Khambhatta is making steady
progress and that you had time to look into his charges against
Hospital management.
I must not forget one thing. You won't disturb your programme
owing to Agatha's letter. Let things take their course. You are
quite right in wanting the little bit of rest [sic] from the agonizing
toil that Agatha is going through. That of course can happen only
when you are there. But meanwhile you can soothe her while in-
sisting on her hastening slowly and on being careful for nothing.
Love to you all.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 989
