378. LETTER TO H. CLAYTON
NANDI HILLS,
May 25, 1927
DEAR MR. CLAYTON,
I am extremely grateful to you for your prompt and exhaus-
tive reply to my letter of the 13th instant. I have carefully gone
through the cutting from the Municipal Corporation Proceedings
of 1918; but I see nothing wrong there to warrant the sugges-
tion that I made any inquiry or that I made any report to the
late Dr. Turner. As I was interested in everything connected with
untouchability and as I was closely in touch with the Servants of
India Society, so far as I recollect, I went with Mr. Thakkar at
his instance to see the chawls and see the unfortunate people. On
hearing that I had gone, Dr. Turner sent me a message and I
gladly met him and told him what I had been doing in the
chawls. You will not call this an inquiry by me or a report. If
I had conducted an inquiry, it would have naturally taken a
proper shape, I would have taken the evidence of men in writing,
I would have seen the officials who were charged with corruption
and made a proper written report. As it was, I happened to
be in Bombay at the time in the course of my touring and Mr.
Thakkar took me to the chawls as other people took me to many
other places. I do not think that this visit of mine and my
conversation with Dr. Turner should for ever be used to damage
Mr. Thakkar's reputation as a careful investigator. However, I
want to turn this account to a useful purpose. I do not propose
at this stage to say anything in the papers. But I am in cor-
respondence with Mr. Thakkar. I am taking the liberty of sending
a copy of your letter to him making suggestions to him so that
this matter of alleged corruption might be once for all set at rest.
I quite agree with you that there should be no unfounded
accusations made against anything or person and no general accu-
sations made against the Corporation staff without adequate evi-
dence to support them. With your permission, after finishing
the correspondence with Mr. Thakkar, I hope to revert to the
subject-matter of my letter.
Thanking you for your enquiry about myself. I am making
fair progress and I shall certainly be delighted when I next pass
through Bombay to meet you to revive the pleasant recollections of
our meeting in Godhra.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 12911
