221. LETTER TO MADHAVJI V. THAKKAR
April 12, 1929
BHAISHRI MADHAVJI,
I got your letter of the 7th. I think it is beyond my power to
lay down the exact measure of food for you to take. In my opinion
even a professional physician cannot prescribe for a patient the
exact measure from a distance. I can, therefore, only make some
suggestions. You may follow only such of them as suit you. Pro-
vided no harm seems to result, you may try the following for a
week:
(1) 80 tolas of cow's milk in four instalments during the day.
It should be boiled only once. There will be no harm if you
drink the milk cold after it has been boiled once; drink it,
that is, in the right quantity.
(2) If you feel the desire, after every instalment of milk suck
black currants, exactly twenty in number, after washing them.
(3) If you feel no heaviness eat with the milk one tola exactly
weighed of toasted brown bread, taking care to chew it properly.
(4) Crush one tola of uncooked tandalja, adding, if you like, a
little rock salt and take it along with the toast. For the first
week take it only once and not with every meal.
If you feel thirsty between meals, boil some water once and
let it cool; dissolve in one glass of it 20 grams of soda bicarb; in
another glass of water press juice from one sour lemon; pour the
juice in the mixture in the glass and drink it. Drink this only once.
After brushing the teeth in the morning, take a glass of hot
water. You will note that I have not included honey in all this.
You will get the honey from the black grapes. The vitamins you
will get from uncooked vegetable and some from the lemon.
If you bring out sputum in the cough, note the fact; but there
is no need to be scared by it. You should be satisfied if you get
no attack of asthma. Sputum in the cough will decrease as you
gain strength.
If you feel the slightest heaviness with this regimen, omit the
toast.
If the heaviness persists in spite of discontinuing the toasts
you should diminish the quantity of milk and the bread too.
Soda [bicarb] will prove helpful. All this, again, you should regard
as a general directive. There is no harm in keeping yourself busy.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6777
