96. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 9, 1926
DEAR MIRABAI,
I enclose herewith a copy of cable received from Johannes-
burg. I telegraphed the substance to Sorabji but I thought you
should have the full text. I have replied 'Await decision Commit-
tee, Delhi'. This reply I have sent in continuation of my assurance
to Sorabji that I shall not give any advice to the settlers in South
Africa contrary to what the Committee that seems to have been
formed there may say or do.
My own opinion however remains unchanged that we are
being ourselves in the wrong by absolutely refusing to give evidence
even on the principle of the Bill. I have heard the objection
namely that our people will not be able to stand the fire of cross-
examination and that there is no Indian of sufficient calibre and
experience in South Africa who can give evidence. The obvious
answer is that no Indian need give evidence. As you will see the
Select Committee has asked for a written representation which can
be prepared and the Solicitor who may be engaged on our behalf
may submit himself for cross examination. I know the difficulty
of selecting such a Solicitor or Counsel, but it is not an impossible
task. Adam Alexander would not make a bad representative. He
is a fairly conscientious man and his sympathies are with us. It is
possible to think of others who can also give evidence without
compromising or selling the community. What I want to say is
that though nothing may come out of the Select Committee, we
should not leave it open to them to say that although we were
given the opportunity we did not even lead evidence. Let it not
be said that in 1914 I boycotted the Solomon Commission. I did so
for the simple reason that the community had taken the solemn
resolution that if the Government did not widen the terms of the
Commission and appoint a representative on behalf of the com-
munity on the Commission it would be boycotted. Hence the
adherence to the resolution. Even so it could be recalled that
before even the Commission sat, I had come to an understanding
with General Smuts that the Asiatic Act would be repealed and
that General Smuts would require from the Commission a finding
that would enable him to offer us an honourable settlement. This
is a matter of partly of record [sic].
I hope you are keeping well and I wish you every success in
the delicate tasks which are just now engaging your attention.
Yours sincerely,
Encl. 1
MRS. SAROJINI NAIDU
C/O V. J. PATEL
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 11946
