252. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
November 1, 1907
TO
THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour to forward, by parcel post, the petition of the
British Indians throughout the Transvaal, in connection with the Asiatic
Registration Act, and herewith a copy of the instructions issued to the
canvassers.
When the forms were distributed through the Colony, the letter
addressed to the Government on behalf of certain Indians asking for
a modification of the regulations framed under the Act, was still un-
answered and the letter not withdrawn. But though since then Messrs
Stegmann, Esselen, and Roos' clients have not received a reply to their
satisfaction, and although they have therefore withdrawn the letter, the
committee of my Association desires me to forward the petition, as it
embodies the sentiments of those who have signed it. In the humble
opinion of my Association, the petition forms a complete vindication of
the attitude adopted by it, and shows that it is representative of the vast
majority of Indians in the Colony. The petition has been ready for some
time, but my Association delayed its presentation, in order to test the
action of the community during the period that the Registration Office
remained open in Johannesburg.
There are 4,522 signatories to the petition, and they are drawn
from 29 towns, villages, and districts in the Transvaal. The following
is the analysis according to the centres: Johannesburg, 2,085; Newclare,
108; Roodepoort, 136; Krugersdorp, 179; Germiston, 300; Boksburg,
129; Benoni, 91; Modderfontein, 51; Pretoria, 577; Pietersburg and
Spelonken, 90; Vereeniging, 73; Heidelberg, 66; Balfour, 14; Stander-
ton, 123; Volksrust, 36; Wakkerstroom, 12; Piet Retief, 3; Bethal, 18;
Middelburg, 29; Belfast, Machadodorp, and Waterval, 2 1; Barberton, 68;
Potchefstroom, 114; Ventersdorp, 12; Klerksdorp, 41; Christiana, 24;
Lichtenburg, 7; Zeerust, 59; Rustenburg, 54; Ermilo, 2.
There are in the Transvaal Hindus, Mahomedans, Christians, and
Parsees from India, and the Mahomedans are divided into three sections,
i.e., Surtis, Konkanis, and Memons; the Hindus into Gujarati, Madrassi,
1 A summary of the letter appeared in Indian Opinion, 2-11-1907.
2 Vide "Monster Petition", pp. 234-.
and Northerners, commonly called Calcutta people. In order to avoid
a separate classification for the Sikhs and the Pathans, they have been
included among the Northerners, if Hindus, and among the Surtis, if
Mahomedans. The Christians have not been separately classified as they
are nearly all Madrassis, and are not more than 200 in all. The following,
then, is the religious and provincial classification: Surtis, 1,476;
Konkanis, 141; Memons, 140; Gujarati Hindus, 1,600; Madrassis, 991;
Northerners, 157; Parsees, 17.
I may mention that, with the exception of the Memons, there are
hardly any abstentions, but the task of reaching every Indian in the
isolated parts of the Transvaal—as, for instance, farms, etc. —has been
beyond my Association during the time that was allotted for the can-
vassing of signatures. Canvassers, who were in all cases responsible and
representative men, have reported that a large number of Indians have
already left the Transvaal, owing to the struggle that the community
is passing through. It is common knowledge that nearly 13,000 permits
have been issued to British Indians under the Peace Preservation Ordi-
nance, and approximately that number of Indians were resident in the
Transvaal when unfortunately the struggle commenced in September of
last year. To-day the British Indian population of the Transvaal, accord-
ing to the information at the disposal of my Association, does not at the
outside exceed 8,000, but it is probably nearer 7,000 than 8,000. My
Association is aware that, owing to pressure having been exerted by
wholesale merchants or other similar causes, a few of the Memons and
others, not exceeding 30 signatories, have recanted, and applied for
registration under the Act. Moreover, according to the information
received by my Association, no more than 350 Indians have applied for
registration throughout the Transvaal during the period that the registra-
tion has been proceeding, namely, July 1 to October 31, and that 95 per
cent. of these applicants are drawn from the Memon section.
In conclusion, my Association begs to draw the attention of the
Government to the intensity of the feeling of the community represented
by my Association against the Asiatic Law Amendment Act. In taking
up the attitude the community has felt called upon to adopt, there has
been no intention of defying either the Government or the laws of the
country, but a sense of the wrong done to the community by the Act and
all it implies has compelled British Indians to prepare for undergoing
a course of suffering which passive resistance, as understood by British
Indians, involves.
[I have, etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION]
The Transvaal Leader, 2-11-1907
7‒21
