135. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 30/December 1, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I hope you read the slips to Radha and Kusum which I sent
in today's mail. Call both of them and ask them everything,
and then literally follow the advice of the doctor whom you
have consulted. Both you and I can then stop worrying. We are
not masters of life or death, nor are doctors, but we can try.
We may try as our reason guides us and then be unconcerned.
It is nothing but God's kindness that . . left. You had
actually sanctioned him leave, and it was pure chance that you
detained him afterwards for some days. It was as though God
had willed that he should be tested. Such things have often
happened in the history of the Ashram. Evil got exposed of itself.
I indeed wish to write at great length about food, but I don't
think I shall be able to do that. I shall have to be brief. It is
not right to serve rotlas of bajri every day. If rotlas of bajri and
jowar and rotlis of wheat are served by turn, the inmates would
get the benefit of all the three cereals. Every time the grain
taken out for consumption should be weighed and the rotlas also
should be of uniform weight. What the weight of each rotla should
be, you will be able to decide only through experience. If you
follow this practice, everyone will be able to know how much he
should eat. Here the smallest rotla weighs six ounces. If people
wish to derive the full benefit from the morning gruel, they
should eat nothing else with it. The quantity of flour in the
gruel should be measured. If the quantity of water also is
measured, it will be easy to know how much flour each helping
contained. If a person is not satisfied with one helping, he may
by all means have another, but nobody should exceed the limit
that he has fixed for himself. He may eat less sometimes if he
has not enough appetite. But he should not exceed the fixed
limit even if he feels more hungry than usual. This will do him
no harm.
If the grain is properly cleaned before being ground, the
flour of every cereal should be used without sifting. I approve of
Dr. Talwalkar's suggestion for increasing the quantity of milk and
ghee, but not at all of his suggestion for including chutney. Even
those who eat chutney suffer from constipation. If you wish, you
may make this experiment. You may prepare chutney for those
who suffer from rather severe constipation. Let them try it. If
the effect on them is undoubtedly beneficial, you may try it, if
you wish, for others. In preparing the chutney, you should use
black pepper instead of chillies. Read the letter which I shall
write to Dr. Talwalkar about this. My own experience of chutney
is not encouraging. Before I went to England, I may say that
I used to eat pepper and chillies in fairly good quantities. At that
time good food was my chief interest in life. In England, we get
extract of chillies. I must have eaten it for about a month. I
had to suffer for that. Afterwards, that is, in about a month
or so, the pattern of my life changed and I left off eating spices,
never to eat them again. Since then I have experimented on
hundreds of persons, but I do not remember any case in which
spices were used as a medicine with beneficial effect. Personally
I am convinced that constipation is a sign of indigestion. Food
which is digested does not cause constipation. All food leaves
some residue and, if it is properly digested, the bowels throw
them out. However, I don't press you to follow my advice. It
is well known that spices are inimical to physical celibacy. For
that reason, too, we should think a hundred times before including
spices in our food. We may certainly serve any spices purely as
medicine for a limited period. It is possible that, so long as they
act as medicine, they may not endanger celibacy. For instance,
if a person feels extremely cold, pure brandy will make him warm
but will not intoxicate him, for the power of the brandy will have
been used up in overcoming the cold. I think I have dwelt long
enough on chutney. Dr. Talwalkar's suggestion about including
ground-nut should not be acted upon in any circumstances. I
have experimented with ground-nut more than anybody else is
likely to have done. It has been tried for a long time even in
the Ashram. On the whole the result was discouraging. In the
current experiment, you seem to have excluded dal altogether.
It is all right if the effect has been good. For checking the
effect, you should get everybody weighed, and should know from
each person how he or she feels. It is for you to judge whether
you can cope with all this work. If you do not get the fullest
co-operation of most of the inmates for this experiment, you would
do better to abandon it. If all of them co-operate, probably you
will not feel it as a burden.
I should be happy if you can solve the problem of Ramji.
About other things, I will write in the weekly letter on
Monday. Every inmate of the Ashram should understand one
thing, namely, that he should eat or munch nothing between
the three meals which are served. If anybody does so, even cuts
a green tamarind or plucks any bhaji from the beds to eat, he
will have violated the vow of non-stealing and jeopardized the
success of the experiment.
December 1, 1932
Give Dr. Talwalkar's letter to him after reading it and
only if you approve of it.
I send with this a cutting about the primus stove. Ask every-
body to read it. Isn't Keshu keeping good health?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8271. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
