62. LETTER TO HAKIM AJMAL KHAN
YERAVDA JAIL,
April 14, 1922
DEAR HAKIMJI,
Prisoners are allowed one visit every three months and to
write and receive one letter during the same period. I have had a
visit from Devdas and Rajagopalachari. And I am now writ-
ing the permitted letter.
You will remember that Mr. Banker and I were convicted
on the 18th March on a Saturday. On Monday night about
10 p.m. we received notice that we were to be removed to an
unknown destination. At 11.30 p.m. the Superintendent of Police
took us to the special that was awaiting us at Sabarmati. We were
given a basket of fruit for the journey and we were well looked
after during the whole journey. The doctor of the Sabarmati
Jail had allowed me, for health and religious reasons, the food to
which I am used, and to Mr. Banker bread and milk and fruit for
medical reasons. Cow's milk for Mr. Banker and goat's for me
were, therefore, ordered on the way by the Deputy Superintendent
who was escorting us.
We were taken off at Khirki where a prison van was waiting
to take us to the jail from where I am writing this.
I had heard bad accounts of this Jail from ex-prisoners and
was therefore prepared to face difficulties in my path. I had told
Mr. Banker that if my hand-spinning was stopped, I would have
to refuse food as I had taken a vow on the Hindu New Year's
Day to spin every day at least for half an hour except when I
was ill or travelling. He should not, therefore, I told him, be
shocked if I had to refuse food and that he should on no account
join me out of false sympathy. He had seen my view-point.
We were not, therefore, surprised when, on reaching the Jail
about 5.30 p.m., I was told by the Superintendent that he could
not allow the spinning-wheel which was with us nor could we be
allowed to take the fruit that was with us. I pointed out that hand-
spinning was a matter of vow with me and that, as a matter of
fact, both of us were permitted to do it everyday at the Sabar-
mati Jail. Thereupon we were told, Yeroda was not Sabarmati.
I told the Superintendent too that both of us were permitted
at the Sabarmati jail for health reasons to sleep outside, but that
was not to be expected at this Jail.
Thus the first impression was rather unhappy. I felt how-
ever totally undisturbed. The semi-fast of Tuesday following that
of Monday did me no harm. I know that Mr. Banker felt it. He
has night terrors and requires someone near him.
And this was
his first rough experience in life perhaps. I am a seasoned jail-bird.
The Superintendent came the next morning to question us. I
saw that the first impression did not do justice to the Superin-
tendent. The previous evening he was evidently in a hurry. We
were received after the regular time and he was totally unprepar-
ed for what was undoubtedly to him a strange request. He dis-
covered, however, that my request for the spinning-wheel was not
a matter of cussedness, but rightly or wrongly a real religious neces-
sity. He saw too that it was no question of hunger-striking. He
gave orders that the spinning-wheels should be restored to both of
us. He realized too that both of us would need the diet we had
mentioned.
And so far as I have been able to observe, the animal comforts
are well looked after in this Jail. Both the Superintendent and the
Jailor appear to me to be tactful and have pleasant manners. The
first day's experience I count as of no consequence. The relations
between the Superintendent and the Jailor and myself are as cor-
dial as they can be between a prisoner and his keepers.
But it is evident to me that the human element is largely, if
not entirely, absent in the jail system. The Superintendent informs
me that all prisoners are treated as I am treated If that is so,
as animals prisoners could hardly be better cared for. But, for the
human sentiment, there is no accommodation in the Jail Regula-
tions.
This is what the Jail Committee consisting of the Collector, a
clergyman and some others did the next morning. This Com-
mittee met quite by coincidence the very next day after our
admission. The members came to find our needs. I mentioned
that Mr. Banker suffered from nervousness and that he should be
kept with me and that his cell should be kept open. I cannot
describe to you the contemptuous and callous indifference with
which the request was treated. As the members turned their
backs upon us, one of them remarked, 'nonsensical'. They knew
nothing of Mr. Banker's past or his position in life or of his up-
bringing. It was none of their business to find all this out and to
discover the cause for what appeared to me to be the most natural
request. It was certainly of greater importance for him than his
food that he should be able to have undisturbed rest at night.
Within one hour after the interview, a warder came ordering
Mr. Banker to be removed to another quarter. I felt like a mother
suddenly deprived of her only child. It was by a stroke of good
fortune that Mr. Banker was arrested with me and that we were
tried together. At Sabarmati I had written to the District Magis-
trate that I would deem it a courtesy if the authorities did not
separate Mr. Banker from me and had told him that we could
be mutually helpful if he was kept with me. I was reading the
Gita with him and he was nursing my weak body. Mr. Banker
lost his mother only a few months ago. When I met her a few
days before her death, she said she would die in peace as her
son should be quite safe under my care. Little did the noble lady
know how utterly powerless I would prove to protect her son in
the hour of his need. As Mr. Banker left me, I entrusted him to
God's care and assured him that God would take care of him and
protect him.
He has been since permitted to come to me for about half an
hour to teach me carding, which he knows. This he does in the
presence of a warder in order to see that we do not talk about
anything else than the purpose for which he is brought to me.
I am trying to coax the Inspector-General and the Superin-
tendent to let me read the Gita with Mr. Banker during the few
minutes he is allowed to come. This request is under considera-
tion.
In fairness to the authorities, I must mention that Mr. Banker's
animal comforts are well looked after and that he is looking not
bad at all. He is gradually losing his nervousness.
It has required the use of all my tact to retain possession of
seven books, five of which are purely religious and the other two
are an old dictionary I prize and an Urdu manual presented to me
by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Strict orders given to the Superin-
tendent were that prisoners were not to be allowed any books
save the Jail library books. I was given the option of presenting
the said seven books to the Jail library and then using them.
Whilst I was prepared to do so with my other books, I gently told
the Superintendent that to ask me to present religious books which
I was using or gifts with a history was like asking me to give up
my right arm. I do not know how much tact the Superintendent
had to use in persuading his superiors to let me retain those books.
I am now told that I could import at my own expense perio-
dicals. I had said a newspaper was a periodical. He seemed to
agree, but he had his doubts about a newspaper being allowed. I
had not the courage to mention the Chronicle weekly. But I men-
tioned The Times of India weekly. That seemed to the Superin-
tendent to be too political. I could name the Police News, Tit-bits
or Blackwoods. This matter is, however, quite beyond the Superin-
tendent's province. What is to be considered a periodical will
probably be finally decided by His Excellency the Governor-in-
Council.
Then, there was the question of the use of a knife. If I was to
toast my bread (I could not digest it without), I must cut it up in
slices and, if I was to squeeze my lemons, I must cut them also.
But a knife was a 'lethal weapon' and most dangerous in the hands
of a prisoner. I gave the Superintendent the option of withdrawing
bread and lemons or giving me the use of a knife. At last the use
of my own pen-knife has been restored to me. It has to remain in
the custody of my convict warder to be given to me whenever I
may require it. It goes back to the Jailor every evening and
comes back every morning to the convict warder.
You may not know the species. Convict warders are those
long-term prisoners who by their good behaviour may be given a
warder's dress and may be, under supervision, entrusted with light
responsibilities. One such warder who has been convicted for a
murder is in charge of me during the day and another reminding
me of Shaukat Ali's size is added for night duty. This addition
was made when the Inspector-General at last decided to leave my
cell open. Both the warders are quite inoffensive. They never
interfere with me. And I never engage in any conversation with
them. I have to speak to the day warder for some of my wants.
But beyond that I have no intercourse with them.
I am in a triangular block. One side (the longest) of the
triangle which falls west has eleven cells. I have as my companion
in the yard an Arabian State prisoner (I suppose). He does not
speak Hindustani. I unfortunately do not know Arabic; there-
fore, our intercourse is restricted to morning greetings. The base
of this triangle is a solid wall and the shortest side is a barbed-wire
fence with a gate opening on to a spacious open ground. The
triangle is divided by a lime line beyond which I was not to go.
Thus I had about seventy feet length for exercise. As an illustra-
tion of the want of human touch, I mentioned the white line to
Mr. Khambata, the Cantonment Magistrate, who is one of the visit-
ing Magistrates. He did not like the restriction and reported like-
wise. The whole length of the triangle is now open for exercise to
me giving me probably 140 feet length. My eyes are set upon the
open space just mentioned. But that is perhaps too human to be
permissible. Anyway, seeing that the white line is gone, the
barbed-wire fence may, I have suggested, be disregarded so far as
my exercise is concerned. It is rather a ticklish problem for the
Superintendent and he is taking time to consider it.
The fact is I am an isolation prisoner. I must not talk with
anybody. Some of the Dharwar prisoners are in this jail, so is
the great Gangadharrao of Belgaum. Verumal Begraj, the
reformer of Sukker, is also in this jail and so is Lalit, one of the
Bombay editors. I cannot see any of them. What harm I can
do to them if I live in their midst, I do not know. They can
certainly do me no harm. We cannot plot our escape. It will be
just the thing the authorities would relish if we did plot. If it is
a question of infecting with my views, they are all inoculated. Here
in the Jail I could only make them more enthusiastic about the
spinning-wheel.
But if I have mentioned my isolation to you, it is not by way
of complaint. I am happy in it. By nature I like solitude.
Silence pleases me. And I am able to indulge in studies which
I prize, but which I was bound to neglect outside.
But not all prisoners can enjoy isolation. It is so unnecessary
and unhuman. The fault lies in the false classification. All prisoners
are practically grouped together and no Superintendent, however
humane he may be, can possibly do justice to the variety of men
and women that come under his custody and care, unless he has
a free hand. Therefore, the only thing he does is to study their
bodies to the entire neglect of the man within.
Add to this the fact that the jails are being prostituted for
political ends so that political persecution follows a political pri-
soner even inside the prison wall.
I must finish the picture of my jail life by giving you the routine.
The cell itself is nice-quite clean and airy. The permission to
sleep outside is a blessing to me, being used to sleeping in the open.
I rise at 4 a.m. for prayers. The Ashram people will be interested
to know that I recite the morning verses unfailingly and sing some
of those hymns I have by heart. At 6.30 a.m., I commence my
studies. No light is allowed. As soon therefore as one can read, I
commence work. It stops at 7 p.m., after which it is impossible
to read or write without artificial light. I retire at 8 p.m. after the
usual Ashram prayer. My studies include reading the Koran,
Ramayana by Tulsidas, books on Christianity given by Mr. Standing,
study of Urdu. These literary studies receive six hours. Four
hours are given to hand-spinning and carding. At first, I gave only
30 minutes to spinning when I had only a limited supply of slivers.
The authorities have kindly given me some cotton. It is excep-
tionally dirty. It is perhaps good training for a beginner in carding.
I give one hour to carding and three to spinning. Anasuyabai
and now, Maganlal Gandhi, have sent slivers. I would like them
to stop sending slivers, but one of them may send good clean cotton,
not more than two pounds at a time. I am anxious to make my
own slivers. I think that every spinner should learn carding. I
was able to card after one lesson. It is harder to practise but
much easier to learn than spinning.
This spinning is growing on me. I seem daily to be coming nearer
to the poorest of the poor and to that extent to God. I regard the
four hours to be the most profitable part of the day. The fruit of
my labour is visible before me. Not an impure thought enters my
mind during the four hours. The mind wanders whilst I read the
Gita, the Koran, the Ramayana. But the mind is fixed whilst I am
turning the wheel, or working the bow. I know that it may not
and cannot mean all this to everyone. I have so identified the
spinning-wheel with the economic salvation of pauper India that it
has for me a fascination all its own. There is a serious competition
going on in my mind between spinning and carding on the one
hand and literary pursuits on the other. And I should not be
surprised if, in my next letter, I report to you an increase in the
hours of spinning and carding.
Please tell Maulana Abdul Bari Saheb that I expect him to
compete with me in spinning which, he informed me, he had just
taken up. His example will lead many to take up this great
occupation as a duty.
The Ashram people may be informed that I have finished the
primer I promised to, which I presume that I shall be permitted to
send to them. I hope to be able to overtake the religious pri-
mer I promised to write, as also the history of the struggle in
South Africa.
Instead of three, for the sake of convenience, I am taking two
meals only here. But I am taking quite enough. The Superin-
tendent is offering every convenience in the shape of food. For
the last three days he has procured for me goat's milk, butter,
and I expect in a day or two to be baking my own chapatis.
I am allowed two perfectly new warm, heavy blankets, a coir
mat and two sheets. A pillow has been added since. It was
hardly necessary. I used books or my extra clothing as a pillow.
The latter has been added as a result of the conversation with
Rajagopalachari. There is privacy for bathing which is allowed
daily. A separate cell is allowed as a work-room whilst it is not
otherwise required. Sanitary arrangements have been made perfect.
Friends, therefore, need not worry about me in any way
whatsoever. I am as happy as a bird. Nor do I think I am
doing less useful service here than outside. To be here is good
discipline for me, and separation from co-workers was just the thing
required to know whether we were an organic whole or whether
our activity was one man's show—a nine days' wonder. I have
no misgivings. I have, therefore, no curiosity to know what is
happening outside. And if my prayers are true and from a humble
heart, they, I know, are infinitely more efficacious than any amount
of meddlesome activity.
I am anxious about Das's health. I shall always have cause
for complaint against his good partner that she did not keep me
informed of his health. Motilalji's asthma, I hope, has left him.
Do please persuade Mrs. Gandhi not to think of visiting me.
Devdas created a scene when he visited me. He could not brook
the idea of my standing in the Superintendent's office when he
was brought in. The proud and sensitive boy burst out weeping
aloud and it was with difficulty I could restrain him. He should
have realized that I was a prisoner and as such I had no right to
sit in the presence of the Superintendent. Seats might and should
have been offered to Rajagopalachari and Devdas. But I am sure
there was no discourtesy intended. I do not suppose it is usual
for the Superintendent to supervise such interviews. But in my
case evidently he wanted to run no risks. I would not like the
scene to be repeated by Mrs. Gandhi, nor do I want a special
favour to be done in my case by a seat being offered. Dignity, I
am sure, consists in my standing. And we must yet wait for a
while before the British people naturally and heartily extend the
delicate courtesies to us in every walk of life. I am not at all
anxious to have visitors and I would like friends and relations to
restrain themselves. Business visits may always be paid under
circumstances adverse or otherwise.
I hope Chhotani Mian has distributed the spinning-wheels
donated by him among poor Mussalman women in Panchmahals,
East Khandesh and Agra. I forget the name of the missionary
lady who wrote to me from Agra. Kristodas may remember.
I shall soon finish the Urdu manual. I would prize a good
Urdu dictionary (and) any book you or Dr. Ansari may choose.
Please tell Shuaib I am at ease about him.
I do hope you are keeping well. To hope that you are not
overworking yourself is to hope for the impossible. I can, there-
fore, only pray that God will keep you in health in spite of the
strain.
With love to everyone of the workers,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
HAKIMJI AJMAL KHAN
DELHI
From a handwritten copy: S.N. 8011; also Young India, 28-2-1924
