317. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 3, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter of the 1st. I hope you are not getting
frightened at the crowding in the hostel. If the girls are well behav-
ed, there will be no difficulty. There will be none, either if we
have perfectly learnt the lesson of non-attachment. Others can
suggest mostly external remedies for your health. About inter-
nal remedies, you alone can judge. I do not have much faith in
psychologists. How much can even the best trained psychologist
know about the human mind? Hence, you yourself should try and
know what connection your ill-health has with your mind and
adopt the proper remedies. In this very letter, however, you say
that heavy or light work and proper sleep or its absence do have
an effect on health. Thus the truth is that both internal and exter-
nal factors have a bearing on one's health. No one has been
able to maintain good health with the help of mind alone, neglect-
325
ing external measures. You should, therefore, listen to Naran-
das's advice in regard to sleep, rest and work, and examine the
mental causes yourself. Take any measures you think necessary
but make your body as strong as steel. I should have told you
at the very beginning that you should not take Kuhne-bath in
warm water during the period of your monthly course.
The inner voice is something which cannot be described in
words. But sometimes we have a positive feeling that something
in us prompts us to do a certain thing. The time when I learnt
to recognize this voice was, I may say, the time when I started
praying regularly. That is, it was about 1906. I searched my
memory and tell you this because you asked the question. In
fact, however, there was no moment when I suddenly felt that I
had some new experience. I think my spiritual life has grown
without my being conscious of the fact in the same way as hair
grows on our body.
This is how repetition of God's name wipes out one's sins.
Anyone who sincerely follows that practice is bound to have
faith. He starts with the conviction that such repetition will wipe
out his sins. Wiping out of sins means self-purification. One who
repeats God's name daily with faith will never grow tired of doing
so, and, therefore, the name which he repeats with his lips to start
with sinks ultimately into his heart, and that purifies him. This
is a universal experience. Psychologists also believe that man be-
comes what he thinks. Ramanama follows this law. I have un-
shakable faith in the virtue of repeating God's name. I am con-
vinced that the person who discovered it had first-hand expe-
rience [of spiritual life] and that his discovery is of the utmost
value. The door of purification should open even for the illite-
rate. Repetition of God's name opens it for them. (See Gita IX. 22,
X. 10.) Telling beads and similar practices help one to concentrate
and to count the number of times the name has been repeated.
Studies should be undertaken only with the aim of equip-
ping oneself for service. Since, however, service of others gives one
the highest joy, one may say that studies are for joy. I have not
heard of anyone, however, who found unbroken joy in life
through literary pursuits alone without devoting himself to service.
Art cannot be the monopoly of any country or individual.
That which requires secrecy is no art.
It is the right and the duty of every country to protect its
industries.
It is the duty of a person who follows the path of non-vio-
lence to give shelter to the homeless. Who should be treated as
homeless can be decided only by reference to the circumstances
of each case.
What seems bad in its outward appearance is not always so
in its substance. The unattractive appearance of Urdu books
indicates their publishers' lack of means. But cannot their con-
tents be excellent? In fact the contents of some of them are so.
In making the list, however, how does the question of the work
being or not being interesting arise? Since the list has to be made,
the work must be interesting because there is interest in doing
one's duty. If you take the trouble some time of learning a little
Urdu, you will find the study interesting in itself.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10297. Also C.W. 5748. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
