261. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Pausa Sud 14 [January 17, 1927]
DEAR SISTERS,
I have your letter.
I always write to you on Mondays; but as I keep moving
from town to town, the day on which you receive my letters may
vary. Till now I was to the south of the Ganga. Yesterday I came
over to the north, crossing the river. From Patna we crossed
over to the other side by means of a boat. A car awaited us
there and took us to Sonepur. Soil here is not sticky like mud; it
has a mixture of sand in it. It, therefore, feels soft to the feet
like velvet. Ba and I walked for about a mile. We were not wear-
ing sandals. We liked to walk on the sand very much indeed.
Mother Ganga prepares new soil every year in this part of the coun-
try. For hundreds of miles she carries mud and silt with her
and, depositing them here, she runs along to the sea as though
she wanted to avoid feeling embarrassed by being told by any-
one of the great good she was doing to the land.
Today we are in Rajendra Babu's village. Rajbansi Devi is
here. Chandramukhi and Vidyavati are at present in Chhapra,
the town where he (i.e., Rajendra Babu) lives. We met them in
Chhapra. Both are in relatively good health—Chandramukhi
slightly worse than she was in the Ashram and Vidyavati slightly
better.
In a women's meeting yesterday I started educating them on
a new subject. The women here wear heavy silver ornaments; they
keep their children dirty and do not comb their hair. I, there-
fore, criticized their habit of wearing ornaments. The result was that
some of them gave away their anklets, necklaces and so on to me,
and promised that they would neither buy nor wear others in
future. While doing this, I thought of all of you. Ba is giving me
great help in this work, but that is because she agrees with me in
this. You can do work of this kind better than I. But that re-
quires self-sacrifice, enthusiasm, and opportunities. All this you can
have there. Do we not sing atmavatsarvabhuteshu1? We should re-
gard all as ourselves. Then, on finding somebody's children dirty,
we would feel as if our own children were dirty and so would feel
ashamed; on finding someone else suffer would ourselves suffer and
seek a remedy for the suffering.
But I have exceeded my limit. Much as I like to exceed, I
feel nervous when I look at the pile of correspondence lying before
me.
Find out from a map where Patna, Sonepur, and Chhapra
are situated. This is the land where King Janaka lived.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
With whose permission did Gangabehn Zaveri let her foot be
sprained? Well, God's will be done! Hone is negligent, one de-
serves punishment.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3635
