346. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
November 9, 1934
MY DEAR GANESAN,
With reference to the bill you sent to Thakkar Bapa
for Rs. 84-12-0, I have discussed the matter with him and I
have suggested that the bill should remain in abeyance. At the
present moment we have a bill left. When the time comes for
our reviewing the situation, if the life of the Harijan has to be
prolonged and if the discharge of the Rs. 84-12- bill is of
any material help to us in keeping that alive, we can take
the amount of the bill from them. Otherwise the money should
be written off as if the printing of the Supplement was done in
the usual course. I know that I held a different view at one
time; but I am overborne by the consideration that so long as
we can make the two ends meet, even including this bill, we should
not fall back upon the central fund. After all we are drawing upon
that fund for a part of Sastri's emolument.
You have asked for a return of Thakkar Bapa's letters to
you. Here they are.
I was incidentally discussing your general affairs with
him and I can give you this assurance that he has no irrita-
tion against you. What he feels is that you overrate your ability
to do things and that you are generous at the expense of your
trust. As for instance, he related to me the story of outdoor
boys whom you are training and for whom you are providing after-
noon refreshments although it is no part of your job to do so
and although the boys who come are not so poor as not to afford
one or two pice for refreshments. This story was told him by one
who is in sympathy with you and your work and who appreciates
your self-sacrifice. Thakkar Bapa did not mention this with any
sense of injustice; but he simply gave an instance of your gene-
rous nature. Generosity is a virtue when we exercise it at our
own expense; it is a vice when we exercise it at the expense of
the trust that might have been given to us. A trustee has to take
the role of a miser in regard to his trust.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
314
