62. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 18/22, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet yesterday. So many letters cannot be carried
safely in an envelope of ordinary paper. It was quite torn when
it arrived. You should either use envelopes lined with cloth or
even though the cover is treated as a letter for purposes of postage,
you should secure it strongly with a string on all sides so that
the letters cannot slip out unless the string is broken.
I got the cotton as late as on the 16th. But I was put to no
difficulty. Prabhudas and Munnalal speak in their letters about
the prayers being dull. Does not Balkrishna lead bhajans? Would
not you or somebody else speak something about the Gita or on
some other subject? Balkrishna can do so if he decides. If we
cannot do anything besides reciting Sanskrit verses, we may be
content with that, but if we can we must introduce something more.
Or start reading something in Gujarati. Discuss the matter with
Prabhudas and Munnalal, then have a talk with Balkrishna and
do what you think proper. I know that you cannot spare time
38
even to think about a matter like this. Even then I make the sug-
gestion. Do what is possible.
We should make an attempt to mix with the Bharwads and
make them feel one with us.
July 19, 1930
Much of what I write in these letters is meant for the whole
of our group there and so I don't mention those things in the
letters to others. One such thing is Kakasaheb's blessings. Let
everyone know that the letter to him or her carries them. Kaka-
saheb receives greetings from all the persons there, for he reads
all the letters which they write and his name is mentioned in every
one of them. Both of us are glad to know this and to realize that the
members of our group have humility.
Thinking about the diary, I feel that it is of priceless value to
me. For a person who has dedicated himself to the pursuit of
truth, it serves as a means of keeping watch over himself, for such
a person is determined to write in it nothing but the truth. If he
has idled away his time or has done less work than usual, he must
mention that. Thus a diary helps in many ways. It is, therefore,
necessary that everyone there should realize its value. Once we
start keeping a diary regularly, we know automatically what to
write and how to write it. Yes, there is one condition, namely, that
we should aim at being truthful. If that is not so, a diary will be
like a false coin. If it contains nothing but the truth, it is of
greater value than a gold mohur.
Letter No. 60 is for Mrs. Zaulinger; read that. Try to find
out from her what her difficulty is.
I see that it is a hardship for you to have to make a list of
the letters. If that takes too much of your time, you may stop do-
ing it. It will suffice if you merely give the total number. You
may make a list if you can do so without inconvenience.
I must now write off visits. You will know the reason from
my letter to Mirabehn. I don't write about it again in this letter.
What would I do if I could not even write? I should give up doing
that, too, if I cannot preserve my self-respect while writing. The
path of bhakti is a difficult one. But we have no other before us.
Do not worry if the number of letters goes on increasing. Let
anyone who wants to write do so freely. It will be enough if they
observe the restrictions imposed by jail rules. Political questions
should not be discussed, nor can I write anything about them.
There is, and should be, no objection to giving news about every-
one.
Tell Dr. Haribhai that I often remember him. Has Dr.
Kanuga completely recovered now?
After morning prayers, July 22, 1930
There is a suggestion in Vishvanath's letter that every week
I should write and send a discourse to be read out at prayer
time. I thought about the request and felt that it deserved to be
complied with. Treat these discourses as my contribution to
the attempt to make the prayers more alive. I am considering
with Kakasaheb if we can send anything for the other six days
as well. Here is something for this week.
I deal first with truth, as the Satyagraha Ashram owes its
very existence to the pursuit and the attempted practice of truth.
The word 'satya' is derived from sat, which means that which
is. Satya means a state of being. Nothing is or exists in reality ex-
cept Truth. That is why sat or satya is the right name for God. In
fact it is more correct to say that Truth is God than to say that
God is Truth. But as we cannot do without a ruler or general, the
name God is and will remain more current. On deeper thinking,
however, it will be realized that sat or satya is the only correct and
fully significant name for God.
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge which is
true. Where there is no Truth, there can be no true knowledge.
That is why the word chit or knowledge is associated with the name
of God. And where there is true knowledge, there is always
ananda, bliss. There sorrow has no place. And even as Truth is
eternal, so is the bliss derived from it. Hence we know God as
Sat-chit-ananda, one who combines in Himself Truth, knowledge
and bliss.
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification for our existence.
All our activities should be centred in truth. Truth should be
the very breath of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's
progress is reached, all other rules of correct living will come with-
out effort and obedience to them will be instinctive. But without
Truth it is impossible to observe any principles or rules in life.
Generally speaking, [observance of the law of] Truth is
understood merely to mean that we must speak the truth. But we
in the Ashram should understand the word satya or Truth in a
much wider sense. There should be Truth in thought, Truth in
speech and Truth in action. To the man who has realized this
Truth in its fullness, nothing else remains to be known, because,
as we have seen above, all knowledge is necessarily included in it.
What is not included in it is not Truth, and so not true knowledge;
and there can be no real bliss without true knowledge. If we
once learn how to apply this never-failing test of Truth, we will
at once be able to find out what is worth doing, what is worth
seeing, what is worth reading.
But how is one to realize this Truth, which may be likened
to the philosopher's stone or the cow of plenty? By abhyasa,
single-minded devotion, and vairagya, indifference to all other
interests in life—replies the Bhagavad Gita. Even so, what may
appear as truth to one person will often appear as untruth to
another person. But that need not worry the seeker. Where there
is honest effort, it will be realized that what appear to be diffe-
rent truths are like the countless and apparently different leaves
of the same tree. Does not God Himself appear to different indi-
viduals in different aspects? Yet we know that He is one. But
Truth is the right designation of God. Hence there is nothing
wrong in every man following Truth according to his lights. Indeed
it is his duty to do so. Then if there is a mistake on the part of
anyone so following Truth, it will be automatically set right. For the
quest of Truth involves tapascharya, self-suffering, sometimes even
unto death. There can be no place in it for even a trace of self-
interest. In such selfless search for Truth, nobody can lose his
bearings for long. Directly he takes to the wrong path he stumbles,
and is thus redirected to the right path. Therefore the pursuit
of Truth is true bhakti, devotion. Such bhakti is "a bargain in
which one risks one's very life". It is the path that leads to God.
There is no place in it for cowardice, no place for defeat. It
is the talisman by which death itself becomes the portal to life
eternal.
But now we have come to the border-line beyond which lies
ahimsa. We shall discuss it next week.
In this connection, it would be well to ponder over the lives
and examples of Harishchandra, Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam
Hasan and Imam Husain, the Christian saints, etc. How beauti-
ful it would be if all of us, young and old, men and women, medi-
tated, till next week, on these thoughts at all hours of the day, whe-
ther working, eating, drinking or playing, and were rewarded with
innocent sleep?
God as Truth has been for me, at any rate, a treasure beyond
price. May He be so to everyone of us.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 66 letters. If you do not read all the letters before
handing them over to the persons concerned, do so henceforth.
Some of the accompanying letters contain suggestions to those to
whom they are addressed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
