615. LETTER TO MANILAL B. DESAI
February 18, 1947
CHI. MANILAL,
Your letter of November 14, 1946 reached me only three
or four days ago. Such is the confusion here. You have, of
course, relieved me of my worries and so I feel completely at
ease.
I think almost all the questions in your letter have been
answered in my last letter to you. Jehangirji and Dr. Dinshaw
must be among the trustees, for they are completely loyal and
were members of the original Trust. It might be objected that
they did not fully agree with my views. But I think that can-
not be helped. I am sure they will not do or order anything
there against my wishes. The other trustees to be selected will
be persons who will have to be there. I approve of Gulbai's
name. About Maganbhai also I have written to you. If you
can be sure that the well can be sunk for anything up to four
or five thousand rupees, the expense is worth incurring. But let
me know first if anybody is prepared to give such assurance.
I would approve of a partner-cultivator, but not of loaning
him money for buying bullocks and other requirements. We are
not property-owners, but trustees. A trustee can be appointed
only for a specific purpose. Our object is Nature Cure. We
cannot incur such expenditure in pursuit of that object. We
may do what is possible with our own labour. In either case,
however, we will need water. If, therefore, you can obtain an
assurance that the scheme will succeed, we will incur the expen-
diture. About crops, we may grow only what we can with our
own labour. We can raise the vegetables and fruits we need.
We cannot grow foodgrains. We do need milk, and therefore the
provision of cows is essential. We have got to incur the expense
necessary for that purpose. If and when a building is ready, we
shall have to spend some money for buying mattresses, etc. If
Datar himself undertakes to look after the construction of the
building, I shall take it that the problem has been solved. There
has, of course, been some misunderstanding in regard to the
woman whom Appasaheb has sent, but if she is otherwise good
and ready for hard work, we have no option but to overlook
474
her not wearing khadi. You may gradually persuade her to
change over to khadi. If you want, I am prepared to write to
Appasaheb. But think over the matter carefully and let me
know. I will wait till I hear from you.
I understand about Paramanand.
Parasram has left me. At present he is working for Harijan.
Sushila (Dr.) has gone to Sevagram to look into the affairs of the
hospital there. Sushila Pai, Amtussalaam, Abha, Kanu and
Pyarelal have been working in different villages and I am camping
at some distance from them. Therefore, we are unable to meet
one another often. A map of my tour has been published in the
newspapers there too. I suppose you consult it from time to time.
Manu sleeps with me. She is as a granddaughter to me, for her
grandfather is the son of my father's elder brother. She is, there-
fore, really a granddaughter to me. She came to stay with me
at Sevagram when she was just a little girl. I have written about
this matter to Balkoba. He knows her. If you have any com-
ments to make after reading that letter, you may write to me.
I want you to write frankly and say what you feel.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 2731. Courtesy: Manilal B. Desai
