333. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 2/7, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your mail today. If Narmada is saved, we shall think
that we have rescued a cow from the slaughter-house. Help
Liladhar in every way you can. If you show him love, he
may recover his balance of mind. Never let him feel that he
lives outside the Ashram. And still he should be free and so
also we. He must assume at least some responsibility for the girls.
That is for his own good. Read my letter to him.
Do what you think proper about Jaisukhlal's daughters. If
the elder one does not stay there willingly, it would be difficult
to watch her all the time. You must have read Indu's letter.
Read my reply to him. What is the doctor's opinion about
Mani? If Kusum's lungs have become all right, take care and
see that she does not weaken them again by over-exertion. She
at least should find this weather good for her health. On two con-
ditions, however-that she does not exert herself too much and that
she consumes enough milk and ghee. As far as possible, help every-
body who has come from the Vidyapith. I, too, had heard about
Devdas, and also about Dr. Mehta. There is every possibility
that the latter's illness may prove fatal this time. I don't know
what kind of a will he has made. You must have judged from his
letters that Chhaganlal and Lilavati have caused him much
grief. What are Ratubhai's circumstances at present? You are
likely to know whether his work leaves him any time. It would
be excellent if he goes there as soon as he can and see that
Chhaganlal and Lilavati play no mischief. I am sure Ratilal also
would like to go. If he wishes to go, I think it will be useless
to try to dissuade him. However, you will be a better judge of
that. Where is Nanalal at present? I am not at all surprised
by what I read about Harilal. I am afraid his whole life will
pass thus. Read my letter to Ramji. It is our duty to bear with
him in as many things as we can. That will be our atonement
for our treatment of the Antyajas. We are not likely to get better
men from among them than he or Dudabhai.
August 4, 1932
If you show to the Municipal Engineer, Mr. Malik, the spot
on the prayer-ground which was threatened by the flood, he will
help you. I think you know him. He used to visit the Ashram
formerly. If you ask Bhai Mavalankar, he will request Shri Malik
to come and see you. The danger from floods was known from
the beginning. That is why the weaving shed and "Hridaykunj"
were built as farther back as possible. Probably this work cannot
be done during the rainy season, but it would be best to follow
an engineer's advice. Such things happen in Bengal every year.
The rivers there are notorious for their power of causing erosions.
August 7, 1932
I got without delay your wire and letter about Doctor. I
had been regularly getting cables from Rangoon. On the day on
which I got your wire, I wrote to you and to Ratilal and Champa.
I hope you got the letters immediately. You must have got my
wire1, too. The fact that there has been no cable from Rangoon
after the one giving the news of Doctor's death makes me think.
Whether or not any cable is received, I think it would be best for
Ratilal and Champa not to go. They should trust to their fate.
I gave similar advice about Maganlal too.
I have made a little change in my diet since eight days ago.
Eating rotlis twice seemed to be causing slight constipation. Hence,
for one meal I eat four bananas. In the evening, I don't eat
bananas, but eat some vegetables as I did previously. Just now
the vegetable is generally guvar or patkalu . I mix the vegetable
with milk and eat it. There is also a mosambi or an orange. I
eat one in the morning too. This has relieved constipation to some
extent. I am still watching. In the experiment which I am
making now, most probably milk will remain one of the items.
This time the weight came to 105 pounds. My health must be
described as good in all respects.
There are 37 letters in all. Nine of them are bound with
a string.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U/I. Also C.W. 8242. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
