259. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Silence Day [January 17, 1927]
CHI. MANI,
I got your letter. There is nothing in your letter which you
need keep back from others. However, no one else except Maha-
dev has read it.
Surely, I will never force you to marry, nor will Father. If I
could have my way I would rather force girls to remain unmarried.
It is the girls themselves who compel me to force them to marry.
You are, therefore, safe so far as I am concerned. I was being
harassed by people who did not understand you and so I wrote
to you to ascertain your desire and that too because I had observ-
ed your restlessness. I do know of young women (girls) whose rest-
lessness is due to their desire to get married, though they them-
selves are not aware of this. I am sure that it cannot be so in your
case. Still it was my duty to draw your attention to the pro-
blem, and I also wished to suggest that there was no harm in
thinking of getting married even after having expressed one's in-
tention not to do so. Of course it would be different if you had
taken a vow. In that case, the heavens may fall but the vow must
not be violated. Since, however, you have not taken a vow, even
a person like me may ask you what you desire. Others may even
urge you to get married. This does not mean that I want you to
take a vow. That you may do when you feel that it is absolute-
ly necessary. I shall never feel compelled again to mention the
subject of marriage to you; not only that, but I shall even pre-
vent others from doing so. You should, however, get over your
restlessness and so live always that your unmarried state may win
people's respect. Brahmacharya should be understood in a spiritual
sense, and in order that it may bring you spiritual benefit, you
should observe it in the manner recently complained by me in
my autobiography in Navajivan. You should, therefore, maintain
a calm and cheerful temper, be industrious in your habits and
cultivate a tolerant outlook.
Read Margopadeshika several times over till you have master-
ed it. Understand the meaning of every word in the Gita with
the help of the rules explained in that book.
I have sent a wire to you asking you to master ginning and
carding. I have sent a wire to Narayandas too at Karachi. But
have not received a reply from him; whether or not I hear
from him, I have received similar requests from others too. I
intend to send you to various places from time to time for teaching
spinning. I have asked for a salary of Rs. 50 and travelling expen-
ses. This will give you good experience too. We shall think after-
wards what to do then. You should not take up any work there
for the present. You should, however, continue drawing Rs. 30/-.
You may save what you can from it. I will ask for an account
later on.
Blessings from
BAPU
CHI. MANIBEHN PATEL
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
SABARMATI
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 47-51
