184. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
July 22, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have nothing very startling to report. Mr. Ameer Ali who saw
Sir Richard, came over yesterday to the hotel and he seemed rather
hopeful. Sir William Lee-Warner and Mr. Morison were also at the
hotel, but they merely wanted to understand the true position.
I enclose herewith the copy of a letter from Lord Ampthill, which
speaks for itself. I have applied for a private interview with the Colonial
Secretary, as also with the Secretary of State for India. There appears
in today's Morning Post a statement to the effect that the control of
differential Asiatic legislation will be in the hands of the Governor-General
and Council and not in the hands of the Provincial Councils. I do not
know what this means; it may mean much or it may mean little.
Mr. Merriman, to whose letter Lord Ampthill has made reference,
states that, beyond expressing the wish that there should be no legislation
repellent to the Liberal principles which the South African statesmen
pretended to profess, he would not be able to do anything. We have
seen Stead who too has promised to see General Smuts. I need not
worry you with the names of others whom we have seen. By the time
this letter reaches you, the result of the private negotiations will have
been known; I therefore do not want to forecast it.
I am certain that you will cable your arrival in India. It is a pity
I do not know the name of the steamer by which you were to go to
India. However, I am sending a cable to Daphtary with a view to
his making some arrangements in advance.
Millie will be here the day after to-morrow. Mater has already
engaged apartments—two bedrooms and one sitting room for £1 per
week. They will be fixed up there but will take their meals with Mater.
This appears to me to be a very serviceable arrangement, and will give
Millie complete rest. The weather just now is very fine and it ought
to prove very suitable for the children.
I think I forgot to mention to you the name of Professor Bhandarkar.
He is, as you know, one of the greatest Sanskrit scholars of the age. I
am sure you will go to Poona; you should then make it a point to see
him; you may even draw him out of his seclusion on this question, but,
in any case, it would be better for you to come in contact with him.
You should also see Mr. Nazar's son. His address is Girgaum.
I am sending you a copy of the list of those who took part in the
banquet to the Ottoman Parliament delegates. The function was brilliant
but I came away from it much saddened. The banqueting hall was
crowded; the dinner took nearly three hours. The fumes from the
wine-glasses and the smoke from the cigars or cigarettes, smoked by
nearly three hundred guests, had a most depressing effect on the mind.
I then involuntarily called it "refined savagery", and it reminded me
of the scene described by poets at banquets held by Rakshasas.
The statement of the case that was sent you last week has not yet
been published. The summary has been revised; I enclose copy herewith,
as also copy of my letter to Professor Gokhale.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4956
