269. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
September 30, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,
It was on 21st instant that I sent you my letter requesting that
I should be permitted to establish touch with the civil resistance
prisoners in this jail. I made the request about seeing my secretary
and co-worker Pyarelal even earlier. I must now press for an early
answer. I know the Government's preoccupations and, as a
prisoner, I should like to spare them all the trouble I can on my
behalf. But the request I have made is a peremptory call of my
fundamental being. I can no longer restrain myself now. The
deprivation of touch with these fellow-prisoners is unbearable for
me. Unless, therefore, I get satisfaction by Saturday noon next,
I must begin to withdraw my co-operation as to the upkeep of my
body. To what extent I shall carry the non-co-operation, I am
unable to say at present. It will be determined, as the days proceed,
by the inner urge and my courage and strength. The commence-
ment will be made with my refusing all food except the ordinary
convict diet, i.e., such of it as I can religiously take. I can take only
five natural ingredients in addition to salt. Therefore so far as I
can see, I can take only kanji and bajari and juwari chapati. I may
not take dal or vegetables as they contain more than five ingre-
dients. The kanji and chapati I shall take on the responsibility of
and at the desire of the authorities. I am not sure that after
years of abstention from them, my system can cope with either.
I have arrived at this compromise to start with, because I am
anxious to cause as little embarrassment as I can. I would like
the Government not to regard this letter as a threat but consider
it as an act of courtesy and consideration. My desire is not to take
the Government unawares in any serious steps I may take in order
to vindicate what is to me a human right.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3853; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(5)/A,
p. 207
184
