328. LETTER TO U. GOPALA MENON
December 21, 1932
MY DEAR GOPALA MENON,
Since dictating my letter yesterday, I have read a notice or
manifesto by Sjt. M. K. Acharya of which he has sent me a copy.
I send you both the leaflet and Sjt. Acharya's notice. If the notice
correctly sets forth the purport of the leaflet, it is disturbing, and
the comments made by Sjt. Acharya are quite justified. The people
of Ponnani Taluk are being asked not whether they would save
my life or let me die, but whether they, being themselves believers
in temples as an integral part of Hinduism, are prepared to have
the temple doors opened for the admission of Harijans. According
to the English notice, you have befogged the issue, and that
is just the charge brought by sanatanists against us and especially
me, as you know they say that the contemplated fast, instead of
making the people decide on the rights and wrongs of temple-
entry, will take their minds away from temple-entry and lead
them against their wishes to give their votes any way so as to
save me. If such were the result of my fast, it would be a tragedy.
I should expect co-workers, therefore, to tell the people not to be
affected by the fast, but to vote for or against temple-entry ac-
cording to their hearts. You will now please write to me fully,
first, as to the notice, and secondly, as to what has been gene-
rally done, and if you discover that people have been misled, do
not hesitate to tell me so. I will have no compunction in own-
ing the mistake, retracing my steps and postponing the fast. It would
be farcical to take a referendum again if the people have been
already misled by an altogether false issue having been presented to
them. Whereas if Sjt. Acharya's charge cannot be sustained, you
will please give me chapter and verse in support of your state-
ment and it will give me new strength and new hope.
You will confer with Madhavan and Kelappan. I do not
know whether Rajaji would be there, or Sadashiv Rao, at the
time you receive this letter . You will please telegraph to me
the substance of the reply you would make.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 18765
