131. LETTER TO E.F.C. LANE
JOHANNESBURG,
May 14, 1908
DEAR MR. LANE,
I have your letter of the 13th instant, for which I beg to tender
my thanks to Mr. Smuts. The letter, in my opinion, raises a tremendous
question, and gives rise to a very great misunderstanding. When the
negotiations were going on, I could never have dreamed of accepting
a compromise which would mean a differential treatment of Asiatics
entering after the period of three months. Had such been the under-
standing, steps would certainly have been then taken to inform Indians
even in India and that could only have been done by cablegrams, in
order to enable the people to return to the Transvaal within three
months, and even then I do not know that it would have been at all a
just thing to expect Indians from India within that period in order to
exchange their documents. The limitation only applied to those who were
then resident in the Transvaal. General Smuts will, on a perusal of the
letter signed by me and my fellow-prisoners, see that the sentence "Such
mode of registration should apply to those also who, being out of the
Colony, may return and otherwise possess the right of re-entry" was
added by me to the letter brought by Mr. Cartwright, as were certain
other words. It was never contemplated that to such Asiatics the
tentative period of three months should apply. Nor was the alternative
course of keeping voluntary registration open for an indefinite period
ever thought of by me, and I do not suggest any such course now. But
the essence of the compromise is that, the undertaking of the Indian
community being fulfilled, as I claim it has been, the Act should be
repealed. Voluntary registration should go on in connection with those
who may arrive until the Act is repealed. As will be noticed from the
Draft submitted by me, provision is made for the identification of those
who may arrive after the passing of the Draft Bill. So that there is no
question of keeping voluntary registration open for an indefinite period.
Of course, if it is desired by General Smuts that no registration
should take place now, but that it should await the passing of the new
legislation, I do not mind; but to require Indians who may enter now to
come under the Act will only accentuate the suspicion that is still lurk-
ing in the minds of some of my countrymen. In order to make good
my word, as also to assist the Government, it is within the General's
knowledge that I very nearly lost my life, and this arose because, in
the opinion of some of my countrymen, I had sold them, by reason of
having agreed to the principle of ten finger-prints. Were the proposed
registration under the Act of new arrivals persisted in, not only will
suspicion be accentuated, but it will be justified, and I cannot help
saying that those who may feel irritated against me will be entitled to
my life. I should consider myself totally unworthy of the trust reposed
in me by my countrymen, and to hold the position that they have
allowed me to hold for such a long time, were I ever to consent to the
Act being applied to new-comers. If the Act was bad, as I respectfully
contend it was, it was so for all, except for those who, owing to their
fraud or obstinacy, would not voluntarily provide facility to the Govern-
ment for their identification. I am, therefore, sure that General Smuts
will reconsider the matter, and not only not ask me to use whatever
influence I may possess with my countrymen in the direction desired
by him, but that he will assist me to make good my word to them, by
either accepting voluntary registration of new arrivals or informing
them that they need not be identified until after the passing of the new
legislation, especially as the purpose of identification is equally well
served under the compromise.
As the matter is exceedingly urgent, may I ask that a telegraphic
reply be sent to me?
Yours truly,
India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08; also a photostat of the
typewritten office copy: S. N. 4813
