88. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
August 14, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
With reference to the conversation yesterday between His
Excellency and myself, I would like to submit the following:
I must confess that behind the special division regulations I
have always read not a sincere recognition of the necessity of some
such provision, but a reluctant and, therefore, a mere paper con-
cession to some public pressure. But for H.E.'s kind invitation to
say anything I might have in my mind, I would not have taken
advantage of yesterday's visit of kindly inquiry to raise or discuss
any contentious matter. But when I mentioned the question of the
special division, I was totally unprepared for what H.E. said. I
want, if possible, to disabuse my mind of the suspicion I have of
the Government's motive, the more so after knowing that H.E.
is himself responsible for drawing up the regulations.
Notwithstanding the confidence with which H.E. spoke yester-
day, I feel that there is no legal bar to the inclusion of selected
rigorous-imprisonment prisoners in the special division. If there is
a statutory bar, I should like to see the provision.
I would also like respectfully to point out that H.E. was sorely
labouring under some mistake that sentences could be altered
only by courts of law. Even during my short experience of this
jail, I have noticed so many prisoners having been prematurely
discharged under administrative orders. The point I raised was
merely that of reducing rigorous imprisonment to simple, if there
was any technical and legal difficulty about specially classifying
rigorous-imprisonment prisoners as such.
In referring to these points, I do not want to be understood
to complain of the rigorous imprisonment of any of the prisoners
or to desire the inclusion of any rigorous-imprisonment prisoners
for their own sakes in the special division.
What, however, I do respectfully desire is (1) to be enlighten-
ed on the points I have raised so as to rid myself of the suspicion
I have referred to and (2) either, logically, the inclusion in the
special division of also the rigorous-imprisonment prisoners who
are brought up to habits of life, for meeting which the special divi-
sion regulations have been framed, or to have my name and the
names of my two colleagues removed from the special division.
I trust that H.E. will appreciate our anxiety not to be favour-
ed to the exclusion of those whom we consider to be just as much
entitled to extra conveniences as ourselves. In this connection, I
would request H.E. to send for and read my letter of 1st May
last on the same subject.
I need hardly say that this letter is in no way written in my
capacity as a prisoner, but is in continuation of the friendly, kindly
conversation in which His Excellency was pleased to engage me
yesterday.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 8034
