284. LETTER TO "THE STATESMAN"
148, RUSSA ROAD,
July 31, 1925
You will perhaps extend me the courtesy of finding room for
a reply to your article headed "Civil Resistance" in today's States-
man. You see an inconsistency between my desire to prepare an
atmosphere for civil resistance and my statement to the European
Association that I was dying for co-operation. My speech before
the European Association was delivered on July 24. I write for
Young India on Saturday for the issue of Thursday following. The
reference to civil resistance which you have quoted appears in
Young India of July 23. I give you the dates in order to show
that the idea of preparation for civil resistance was not conceived
after the statement to the European Association.
I see no inconsistency between the desire for civil resistance
and for co-operation. You will remember that my statement to
the European Association was a recalling of an old story. When,
in the heyday of non-co-operation, an Englishman twitted me with
the remark that, although I professed non-co-operation I was
dying to co-operate, I said to him emphatically that I was doing
so. And I say that that is my position also today. Civil resistance to
wrong is not a new doctrine or practice with me. It is a life-long
belief and a life-long practice. To prepare the country for civil
resistance is to prepare it for non-violence. To prepare the country
for non-violence is to organize it for constructive work which, to
me, is synonymous with the spinning-wheel. You evidently seem
to think that I have repented of my non-co-operation or civil
resistance. I have never done so. I remain a confirmed non-co-
operator. If I could carry educated India with me, I would
declare non-co-operation in its entirety today. Being a practical
man, I recognize the facts that stare me in the face. I have failed
to convince some of my most esteemed colleagues that the parti-
cular form of non-co-operation which we embarked upon in 1920
can do good to the country at the present moment. It, therefore,
remains under suspension. But I cannot hide from you the fact
that, if I could reconvert my colleagues, I would certainly ask the
Congress to renew the battle.
Personally, I have no desire to co-operate voluntarily with the
Government in my weakness; that would be the co-operation of
a slave. I admit my weakness, and, therefore, I remain satisfied
with the mere desire for co-operation and I seek to fulfil that
desire by developing strength. If I believed in violence, I would
make no secret of it and would take the consequences. But I
would let the country know publicly, and know in unequivocal
terms, that there is no freedom for her and no room for honour-
able co-operation with the Government, unless she is prepared
to match the British bayonet with the Indian. As it is, I do
not believe in the creed of the bayonet. I further believe that,
fortunately or unfortunately, it will never succeed in India.
A substitute for it is, however, necessary and that is civil
resistance.
In your opinion It is as dangerous as violence, and if such is
also the opinion of the Government, it has to suppress me, for after
my discharge from prison, I have not allowed a moment to pass
when I have not endeavoured to fit myself or the country for civil
resistance. Let me inform you in all humility that, if I could
but secure the absolute co-operation of my revolutionary friends
by the entire cessation of their activity, and if I could produce
an atmosphere of general non-violence, I would declare mass civil
resistance today and thus prepare the ground for honourable co-
operation. I admit that I failed to do so in 1921, and when I
found that Chauri Chaura betrayed me, I had no hesitation
within twenty-four hours of the declaration of civil resistance to
suspend it, and to take the consequences of a general depression in
the country that followed.
And if I insist ad nauseam on Hindu-Muslim unity, and the
spinning-wheel and khaddar, it is in order to ensure a state of
non-violence necessary for civil resistance.
I have, I confess,
despaired of achieving Hindu-Muslim unity in the very near
future. Untouchability is surely but slowly going, the spinning-
wheel is surely but slowly making its way. Meanwhile, the ruth-
less exploitation of the country is proceeding apace. I am, there-
fore, thinking out plans of some form of effective individual civil
resistance which, if it brings no relief to this poor country, will at
least bring some solace to those whose creed is non-violence, to
know that they have left no stone unturned to help the deliverance
of the country from a bondage which is enervating a whole
nation.
I confess, again that I have no ready-made plan, for if I had,
I would not keep it from you or the country. But I am giving
you the whole of the working of my mind. I have no desire to
obtain or retain the goodwill of Englishmen under false pretences.
Even as the Government abates no precaution or preparation for
ensuring its existence and stability, when it may be offering terms
to Indian politicians, even so do I want my country to abate
no effort to arm itself with a weapon on which she may rely when
the Government fails to respond to its wishes.
You may know (for the communication is published) that
Deshbandhu did not sign Dr. Besant's manifesto on her Bill, one
of the grounds for which was that there was no sanction stipulated
for in the event of rejection. That sanction was to be civil resistance.
Will you have the country's manhood absolutely paralysed and
rendered utterly ineffective for any resistance, violent or non-
violent, before the British Government can possibly think of offer-
ing any terms or considering proposals that might be made by the
Swaraj Party or any other? If so, I assure you, no self-respect-
ing Indian will voluntarily be party to a condition so degrading.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Statesman, 1-8-1925
