74. LETTER TO MAHOMED ALI
THE ASHRAM,
November 18, 1918
MY DEAR FRIEND,
It was a perfect delight to receive a letter from you after ages
as it were. The letters from you all are evidence of your great affec-
tion for me for which I am deeply grateful and if, as some return
for it, I could strain the letter of my vow and do what you sug-
gest I should gladly do so. But there is no getting out of the self-
imposed restraint. I should be false to God and man and to my-
self if I disregarded the vow taken after the fullest deliberation
and in anticipation of all the consequences that have followed it.
All my usefulness will be entirely gone if yielding to so many
friends' advice I reconsider my position. I regard this sickness as
a time of trial and temptation for me, and what I need is the pra-
yerful support and encouragement of friends. I assure you that
within the four corners of the restriction I take every precaution
possible in order to preserve the body. Just now a medical friend
has appeared on the scene who has undertaken to give me physical
strength by massage, ice application and deep breathing. He
thinks that in two months' time I shall have put on sufficient
flesh and weight to be able to move out and undertake ordinary
mental strain. His treatment is rational and natural. What is
more, I have confidence in it and with proper dietetic changes I
do hope that the friend's prophecy will be fulfilled. I have had the
charges against you read to me. I have never read a weaker or
flimsier indictment and think that your reply will be decisive,
straight and dignified. It is evident to me that the Committee has
been appointed to furnish the Government with an escape. Anyway
we can now contemplate the findings of the Committee with com-
plete indifference. Your defence is so overwhelmingly strong that
if the Committee's finding is hostile an agitation can be raised
which will make India resound with indignation over the monstrous
injustice under which you have laboured so long and so patiently.
I wish I was with you in Chhindwara to assist in drawing up your
reply, but that was not to be.
Please give my respects to Amma Saheb. I am pining to meet
you all and to meet the children and to come in closer touch with
you. As I said at the Lucknow meeting, my interest in your
release is quite selfish. We have a common goal and I want to
utilize your services to the uttermost, in order to reach that goal.
In the proper solution of the Mahomedan question lies the rea-
lization of swaraj. However, of this when we meet, as I hope we
shall soon do.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai; also N.A.I.: Home: Political (Deposit): December, 1918: No. 3
