382. LETTER TO NORMAN LEYS
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
September 3, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your latest letter. You may certainly share
all my letters with any friend you like subject to the proviso that
they do not find their way to the Press. Not that I mind it,
1 Swami Raghavananda in his letter of July 24 (S.N. 10782) had stated
that he was familiar with Gandhiji's ideas on 'self-conquest' and 'conquest
of the sense of taste and sex desire', but that he wanted to know Gandhi-
ji's views on 'conquest of sleep', having heard that he was a 'spare sleeper' and
one who could, on waking at will, attend to worship or to writing.
2 Vide Appendix II.
but it can do no good whatsoever and may possibly do harm to
the cause both you and I are trying to serve.
I do not share your fear that the Mussalmans will fight any
just solution. It will, however, very largely depend upon Hindu
prudence, Hindu moderation and absolute fairplay. Why do you
say that Islam and democracy are incompatible? On the con-
trary, were not the early Califs among the most democratic sove-
reigns the world has ever seen? But a clash of arms will not
move me. Any real movement for freedom is like new birth
and all its attendant travail. If we have to go through a purga-
tory, we must face it for the priceless boon. As a matter of fact,
that clash is now taking place on a miniature scale and it may
be found to be sufficient for teaching wisdom to both the
parties. Already innocent blood has been spilt by the gallon.
By preference in education, I mean every backward section
should be specially encouraged by special grants of scholarships.
It would be the inevitable duty of the state, if it is to represent
all classes, to begin with the weakest. To spend freely upon the
real education of the backward classes will be ultimately to pro-
vide the safest cure for discontent. I know that the present dis-
content on the part of either side comes from consciousness of
weakness. Hindus feel their weakness in physical strength and
endurance. Mussalmans feel their weakness in education and
earthly possessions. So, I look upon the present feud between the
two as a healthy sign in a way. It is really unconsciously a
battle for freedom. It was possible for them to have avoided this
if they could have assimilated the programme of 1920. But the
energy and the national consciousness that were called into being
in 1920 could not possibly remain dormant and, as they could not
find their way in a healthy channel, they have taken the unhealthy
course of internecine bloody feud. I have not a shadow of doubt
that, at the end of it, we shall feel stronger and purer because
there are people who do not want this feud, who believe in non-
violence as the final rock and who have not lost their heads
during the turmoil.
The fear expressed by you in your final paragraph is certainly
not groundless. But is it any wonder our administrative limb
has atrophied? Many mount the clerical posts-they are nothing
more-through flattery and the like. It would be therefore no
wonder to me if, in the beginning stages of the experiment, we
choose wrong men to represent us. In that case, history would
be merely repeating itself. But even that should not frighten a re-
former. You cannot wrap yourself in cotton wool and fight free-
dom's battle. Nor need the spectre of the I.C.S. men refusing
to work frighten one. But, in spite of my strong indictment of
the I.C.S. men, I have sufficient faith in their good nature as men
having the upper hand when the demoralizing artificial prestige
and protection these estimable men enjoy have been removed.
Always at your service,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. NORMAN LEYS
BRAILSFORD
NEAR DERBY
From a photostat: S.N. 12171
