196. LETTER TO E. C. GIBSON
ANANDKUNJ, RAJKOT,
April 20, 1939
DEAR MR. GIBSON,
This is the offer which you admitted as sporting, and which
I made at our interview. I must confess that it was born of des-
pair. I am tired of fighting unseen forces in Rajkot—a situation
I have never been obliged to face throughout my life. The offer is
that Parishad should withdraw from the proposed Committee alto-
gether and that the Thakore Saheb should nominate his own
Committee in terms of the Notification, that this Committee
should be formed at once and should present its report to the
Thakore Saheb within one month and four days from its formation.
If the Constitution that will be framed by the Committee
is not in terms of the Notification, the Rajkot Rajya Praja Pari-
shad, represented by the seven nominees, should have the right
to dissent from it and the Committee's report, and the dissenting
report should be submitted to the Chief Justice of India as
if the Parishad was represented on the Committee in terms of
the Award.
I had expected to send the note at once but as I told you
my offer might create consternation among the Parishad people
and so it did. The method I have adopted is a novel method.
As I said in my letter of yesterday, the Parishad was entitled to
have the terms of the Chief Justice's Award enforced by the
Paramount Power. The suffocating atmosphere made me suddenly
think of the drastic remedy I suggested to you. The offer I made
to you carried no reservation but I did not want to do vio-
lence to my colleagues and therefore I gave time for discussion,
telling them that it was open to them to repudiate my offer,
for I had no such absolute powers as I arrogated to myself during
our talk. I could have said, though I felt like it when making
the offer I did, I should consult my colleagues before I gave my
final word. I did not feel like taking that precaution. Such was
the strength of my conviction as to the correctness of the position
I took up. There seemed to me no way out of the hopeless
unreality of the situation. I am happy to be able to say that
my colleagues, though they are filled with grave doubts, recognize
the correctness of the position.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 10182. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
