205. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
WARDHA,
December 6, 1928
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I see nothing suspicious in the fact that
Chi. Santok retained those bills with her against the price of the
wheat. I can understand how Chi. Narandas may have seen
this in a different light.
The capacity for self-sacrifice of Chi. Santok and her children
cannot be compared with yours or of anybody else. In such mat-
ters we can make no comparisons. The sacrifice by one person of
all he possessed may seem insignificant in comparison with a small
sacrifice by another person. It makes me unhappy that I do not
get from Santok and hers as much as I had expected. This last
episode, too, is painful. But in this case I do not wish to go
further than Chi. Narandas would like and so I have loosened the
reins. If, now, Radha works for payment, let her do so.
You, on your part, should always tell me what you think
right and, in all matters in which you may exercise your freedom,
you should do so. If you act thus, you will feel that your bur-
den of responsibility has become much lighter. After having taken
certain steps, never enter into a discussion about them with any-
one. It is another matter if you explain the matter to me, when
that is necessary. Instead of comparing yourself with anyone,
consult your antaratman1; when that is pleased, when your actions
or words are not prompted by partiality or aversion, have no fear
at all.
About Shanabhai your decision should be accepted as final.
I have written to Shankerlal to see you in connection with the
weaving section and decide everything in consultation with you.
It is three days since I wrote to him. I agree with your view of
the matter. All that remains to consider is how to solve the diffi-
culties that may arise in doing what you suggest. Since the pro-
blem has come up, I will solve it once for all.
The news that Kusumbehn still gets fever worries me. I think
the fact that I have not brought her with me is also a contributory
cause of the fever. Mental agitation aggravates every disease. I
have observed that its effect is more pronounced in malaria and
similar diseases. She has remained behind, though she was ex-
tremely eager this time to accompany me. I do believe that from
her own and from every other point of view it was desirable that
she should remain there. That is why I insisted that she should
stay behind.
Here Chhotalal has once again been confined to bed. In his
case, too, the mind has had an important share. He has made
other mistakes too. The bakery here is ready, but the first lot of
bread turned out was not good. How is bread-making progres-
sing there?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 20-
