261. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[JOHANNESBURG,
November 6, 1907]
[ SIR,]
You publish in today's issue of your paper what purports to be an
authorised explanation given to your Pretoria correspondent of the
present position of the Government in regard to the administration of
the Asiatic Law Amendment Act. My Association regrets to find,
however, that that report is so strangely full of misapprehensions and
misstatements, that a doubt must arise as to whether your representative
has not failed to grasp the details of the apologia that has been issued
from the Colonial Secretary's Office. With your permission, I will, on
behalf of my Association, proceed to examine certain facts alleged therein.
In the first place, it is stated that representations have been addressed
to the Colonial Secretary on behalf of the Indian community with a
view to obtaining certain modifications of the regulations. My Associa-
tion denies the statement absolutely. The facts are these : On the 30th
August, a petition was addressed by Messrs Stegmann, Esselen & Roos,
on behalf of "some leading Indian people of Pretoria, Standerton,
Pietersburg, and Middelburg", to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary
to secure some modification of the regulations. The intention of Messrs
Stegmann, Esselen & Roos' clients was to show that they spoke for quite
a number of representative Indians, and immediately these facts became
known to my Association, my Association addressed a letter to the Pretoria
solicitors, repudiating the right of these people to speak on behalf of
the Indian community and, therefore, of my Association. The wording
of the letter which I have quoted above suffices to show that the re-
presentations made to the Government were made on behalf of certain
1 This was addressed to The Transvaal Leader and The Star.
individuals acting in their private capacity, and most of whom are now
registered. In reply to these representations, the Honourable the
Colonial Secretary informed his petitioners that he was unable to comply
with their requests but made some trifling modifications of practically
no value. The persons on whose behalf the Pretoria solicitors acted
were so dissatisfied with this reply, that they returned, through
Messrs Stegmann, Esselen & Roos, an answer to the effect that they
desired to withdraw their request as set forth in their letter of the 30th
August, leaving the Honourable the Colonial Secretary at liberty to
withdraw such concessions as he might have been able to make. It will
thus be seen that the Indian community made no representations to
the Honourable the Colonial Secretary in the matter of the regulations,
but that whatever representations were made came from certain indi-
viduals, who have since withdrawn their request, the letter of withdrawal
being dated the 12th ultimo.
May I be allowed to say here, on behalf of my Association, that it
is utterly false to allege that it is only now that the British Indian
community has taken up a position which it did not venture to take up
during the earlier stages of the agitation? The Colonial Secretary's
Department must be singularly ill-informed, if it is unaware of the fact
that passive resistance to the law has existed since September, 1906.
The oath of passive resistance was taken at the Mass Meeting held in
Johannesburg in that month, at which the Registrar of Asiatics himself
was present. My Association has consistently declined to enter at all
into the question of regulations framed under the Act. Having from
the first declined to recognise the validity of the Act itself, it would
have been undignified in the extreme had my Association entered into
minor details. My Association, having ignored the existence of these
regulations, cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to have
repudiated the modifications alleged to have been made in favour of
British Indians by the Honourable the Colonial Secretary at the alleged
request of the community. It is a mistake altogether to suppose that
the passive resistance movement entered into by my Association and
by the Indian community commenced in July last when registration was
announced. The total repeal of the Act has been demanded from the
very commencement of the struggle last year.
A side issue has been raised in connection with the petition recently
forwarded by my Association to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary.
This petition sets forth, amongst other things, that the signatories thereto
dissociate themselves entirely from the letter addressed to the Honour-
able the Colonial Secretary by Messrs Stegmann, Esselen & Roos on
behalf of their clients; and the signatories respectfully submitted that
nothing short of a total repeal of the Act could meet the difficult situation
that had been created. There was nothing new in this. The official
informant of your correspondent would make it appear that, consequent
upon the Honourable the Colonial Secretary's slight modifications of
the regulations which were contained in a letter forwarded about the
end of September last, the Indian community took advantage of an
alleged act of leniency to circulate the petition in order to take further
advantage of what will doubtless have been considered to be an act
of grace. In point of fact, immediately that it was known to my Associa-
tion that Messrs Stegmann, Esselen & Roos' letter of the 30th August
had been dispatched to the Colonial Secretary, my Association issued
forms of the petition in five different languages and circulated these all
over the Colony. This was at the beginning of September. By the end
of September, when the Honourable the Colonial Secretary's reply was
received by the Pretoria solicitors, practically all these forms had been
returned to my Association duly completed. As, however, Johannesburg
was to be the last place where registrations were to be effected and
October was to be [the] last month for effecting them, my Association
decided to hold over the petition until the end of last month, in order
to demonstrate to the Government the solidity of the British Indian
community in its opposition to the Asiatic Law Amendment Act, and
this notwithstanding the withdrawal of their letter of Messrs Stegmann,
Esselen & Roos' clients on the 12th ultimo.
I will now pass briefly to the question of the extension of the period
of registration to the end of November. My Association asserts empha-
tically that this decision has taken place at the last moment, and the
statements made by no less than three Cabinet Ministers support my
Association's contention. If any further confirmation be needed, it
will be found in a circular issued to Resident Magistrates throughout
the Colony from the Colonial Secretary's Office on the 16th ultimo and
signed by the Registrar of Asiatics, stating that Resident Magistrates
should inform Asiatics that "it has been decided that the period for
applications for registration, which expires on the 31st instant, cannot
be extended", and that all Asiatics resident in the different districts should
be instructed to apply for registration on or before that day at the Old
Dutch Church, Von Brandis Square, Johannesburg. There is no
questioning the definiteness of these instructions, and it is quite obvious
that the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, finding that the number of applica-
tions made at Johannesburg from the whole [of the] Transvaal did not
exceed 25, decided, at the last moment, to extend the time for another
month. It will thus be seen that Government Notice No. 1907 published
in the Gazette of the 4th ultimo made no provision whatever for an
extension of time during which Asiatics who had not previously registered
could make application under the new law.
One last matter to which my Association desires to draw attention
is that, so far from each town having the time marked out for Asiatics
resident therein alone to make application, it was advertised that all
Asiatics in towns previously visited by the Registration Officers could
make application at the town newly advertised, if they had not previously
done so, and, whilst Johannesburg was the last place advertised where
Asiatics from all over the Transvaal should register and nowhere else,
my Association charges the officials of the Registrar's Office with receiving
clandestine applications at Pretoria from a few cowards who furnished
affidavits fraudulently and falsely representing that they had been
prevented from making application before owing to intimidation on
the part of certain unnamed persons. My Association desires to make
it known once more that, in this struggle, British Indians are fighting
with open hands. There is no need for them to resort to subterfuge
or mendacity. It has been urged against British Indians that they, like
all other Eastern peoples, suffer from a duplicity that has been termed
"oriental". It is difficult indeed to characterise the strange distortion of
facts contained in your correspondent's telegram.
[I am, etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION]
Indian Opinion, 9-11-1907
