499. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
October 27, 1932
CHI. VASUMATI,
I got your letter.
It is a mark of intellectual laziness to believe that whoever can
give an account of every moment of his life can become a mahatma.
There are in the West many hard-working men and women who
can give an account of every moment of their lives, but they are not
fortunate enough to have become mahatmas. Under the pretext that
only a mahatma can do it, you cannot escape your duty to give an
account of every moment. Everyone of us should form the habit
of keeping such an account. And no great credit should be given
for it either.
The phrase, 'one's duty however defective' should not be
interpreted to mean a duty which violates morality. 'Defective'
here means what seems to be inferior. According to the Gita, all
duties have equal value, for Mother Gita attaches importance only
to people's hearts and, therefore, her standards are bound to be
51-20
faultless. For example, if a grain-dealer who feels that his occupa-
tion is inferior to a clerk's, gives up his trade and tries to become
a clerk, wouldn't he be a loser both ways? In the same way, if Titus,
who looks after the dairy, leaves the cows in order to serve Antyajas
because Antyaja service has become fashionable just now, he will
be said to have given up his duty and acted contrary to the teach-
ing of the Gita. Similarly, if you women who have bound your-
selves by vows to do certain work, leave it and take up some
other work of service, you will be guilty of forsaking your duty.
Is this quite clear?
I see nothing wrong in a person going out of the Ashram to
improve his health and returning to it after it has improved. Don't
I myself ask many to do so? But anybody who vows not to return
to the Ashram and keeps the vow, as Gangadevi did, deserves all
honour. Only a rare person can do that, and only if he has accepted
the idea with his whole heart. Such a person, even if he or she has
to be looked after by others, does great service by setting an exam-
ple of immense patience and non-attachment to life. Moreover,
our aspiration is to live as simply as poor people do. The latter,
even when they suffer extreme pain through some disease, cannot
leave either their home or their village. They remain satisfied with
whatever their friends and relations can do for them, and some do
not get even that much service. We should bow in reverence to a
a person who, being a man of knowledge, voluntarily suffers with
similar patience. He serves the people even by setting an example
of such patience. That is why I had suggested to Punjabhai that
it would be good both for him and for the Ashram if he died in it,
nursed by the inmates. And for the same reason, I told Kishorelal
that he should not mind having to be looked after by other people
in the Ashram, for a man like him served the Ashram by his mere
presence. I have only stated a principle in my letter to Narandas.
You need not think much about it. If anybody is inspired by that
highest sense of dharma, let him take such a step. You should do
only what you can.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9335. Also C.W. 581. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit
