466. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
Sunday, May 12, 1907
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I had intended to write to you a very long letter, but was unable
to do so owing to a very severe headache during the train journey. The
condition continued yesterday, and today it is no better. My health
seems to have been seriously affected by my exertions in Durban this time.
However, I feel confident of regaining my health through sufficient rest,
earth treatment, etc.
I have sent some matter today. I expect to write or dictate more to-
night. When I heard about the balance-sheet, it immediately occurred
to me that it was desirable—indeed it was our duty—to give Thakkar
an increment without his asking for it. I believe he is very useful to us.
Despite some of his bad habits, he is strong on two points: his deter-
mined patriotism and his celibacy. His work is on the whole satisfactory.
I would therefore specially advise you to give him an increment imme-
diately. When I discussed this with Maganlal, I had thought of giving
him one pound, but now I think it would be enough if you gave him half
a pound for the present. Maganlal had suggested to me that Miss West
should also be paid something. I much appreciate that idea also and
feel it better that the rest of you should think of doing so before the idea
occurs to Mr. West. I would advise immediate action in regard to both
these things. Do please read Ruskin's book. Always think about your
teaching method while giving lessons to Anandlal and Harilal and
make constant improvements in it. Please give Dada Sheth the boards
that he has asked for. I hope you have sent the additional copies I wrote
to you about yesterday. Chi. Hemchand will probably leave by the end
of June at the latest. He is thinking of passing through Delagoa Bay.
Please send me the name and address of the person who is working for
us in Delagoa Bay. The list of Hindi and Tamil books has not yet been
received. I hope you have sent 25 copies to Omar Sheth. Send three
copies to Jagmohandas after marking them. Ask Omar Sheth if he
wants more copies. Please write to him a courteous letter saying that the
25 copies are a present from the Press. Do always send a complimentary
1 Unto This Last
2 This letter is not available.
3 Father of Kalyandas. The copies were presumably of the Indian Opinion issue
copy to the Volksrust Public Reading-Room. I am writing to
Chi. Jayashanker asking him to have our name included in the Indian
Directory.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 4743
