90. LETTER TO BOYD TUCKER
BORSAD,
May 5, 1931
MY DEAR BOYD,
I was delighted to have your letter and to find that you
were having a little respite from the heat of India's plains. Of
course there is no truth in the rumoured visit to America. But
as soon as the rumour went abroad, I got a peremptory cablegram
signed by Mr. Page, Dr. Sherwood Eddy, Rev. Holmes, Dr. Ward
and others warning me against going to America. They say
emphatically that I would be exploited if I went there and that
I would serve the cause better from a distance than by appearing in
the midst of the people of America. All this, mind you, in the
cablegram. And by this mail I have received a letter from an
unknown American friend who, whilst appreciating my work and
message, pleads with me not to go to America. I do feel exactly
like these friends. Therefore even if I went to London and could
spare a few weeks I should not care to go in the teeth of these
warnings from friends whose opinion I respect. Would not yours
coincide with theirs after further reflection?
Now about London. There is no probability of my going
there so long as the Hindu-Muslim problem remains unsolved.
Even if I went there, whilst I should value your society, I do not
know of the use I could make of your services. Andrews is al-
ready there and as you know he will take possession of me body
and soul. I have a letter from him in which he takes my Lon-
don visit for granted, has appointed himself as my chaprasi, tells
me where I should stay. There is again Henry Polak who was in
my office in South Africa for years. Then there is Muriel Lester.
Therefore if you went with me to London you would not go as
Secretary. Then I must not forget Mira. She will of course be
with me. But of course everything is premature. I felt that you
should know all about the appointments should the visit come
forth. I was glad you were with me in Karachi. I was only
sorry that I was not able to have long chats with you. That
you continually lost your things was certainly bad but that would
be no disqualification for taking you with me. I could have much
better use for you than to make you keeper of my belongings.
BOYD TUCKER, ESQ.
C/O POSTMASTER
SRINAGAR (KASHMIR)
From a photostat: S.N. 17031
