555. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 2, 1940
CHI. PYARELAL,
You are caught up in your own verbiage. This is no time
to bathe me in your tears. And what do your tears avail,
save that at the time of my need you will be of no use to me.
Is that a sign of your desire to be moulded by me? All your
ideas are true, but where is your acuity? Why could you not
understand that if I entrusted the matter to A. S. and to Mun-
nalal there must have been some purpose behind it?
If you
wanted to make a copy you should at least have told me. The
copy that you made was useless. You made a better one only
when you took it up as a challenge. What you could do as
a challenge, you were not prepared to do for my sake. You
refused point blank. I thought you would act as I directed.
You first agreed and then wriggled out of it. Is that what you
call faith? You have read that faith gains in strength. But you
did not let your faith advance even one step. And now I have
absolutely no idea what you intend to do.
Now I come to what you write about Sushila. Your de-
fence has no basis. Why do you not understand that the reason
that Sushila has for staying with me is that she is a doctor.
But
her medical knowledge could be my undoing, because, if I
acknowledged it I would pass from God's hands into Sushila's.
As for her affection, what shall I say? She would probably
work on my conditions for 359 days, but if on one day her own
conditions are not met, she would not serve me, she would not
work for me. What does she care how much I have to involve
myself with the patients while she is away? But what is the
use of bemoaning my lot before my own sons and daughters? I
shall endure what comes. I see that she even resents my guid-
ing her. I wish you would yourself guide her. She has in-
finite faith in you. Her good lies in being guided by you be-
cause, should you stray in guiding her, her faith will correct you.
355
My guidance, even if it is a hundred per cent sound, will not
benefit her.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
