119. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS G. KAPADIA
August 4, 1945
CHI. MADHAVDAS,
Dr. Krishnavarma has sent all the reports about you.
Kunvarji has also written a postcard. Dr. Krishnavarma has
no interest in keeping you. He has kept you only for my
sake. He kept Sailen also in the same way. Your good lies
in remaining under Dr. Krishnavarma's treatment and following
his instructions. I think I know Dr. Krishnavarma's virtues and
failings. For his failings he will be answerable to God. I see
and cling to his virtues. Many allegations are made against him.
Who is immune to them? I do not care for such allegations. I
have seen with my own eyes how he looked after Ba. I think
he had seen Ba's virtues and became a great admirer of hers.
The knowledge that you are Ba's brother prompts him to keep
you and look after you. You need not worry about how much
you will have to pay him. The doctor has told me that he
does not want a single pie, but I have decided that, if you agree,
I shall pay him what I think proper from out of your own posses-
sions. I have discussed this with Manilal too. But if you are not
willing to pay a single pie, well, a lot of money has already
been spent over you and this will be some more. It will be to
the good if you get well and can live a normal life. However,
Ba's last words to me about you were : "You have done what you
could for Madhavdas, I did what I could as his sister, and made
you do what you could for him. Now you need not do anything
for him." This is what she said about you and Harilal. I know
that these words proceeded from her anger, but also from her
love. I have not, therefore, obeyed those words literally. Now
do what you wish, with God, whom you believe you worship
every day, as witness. Of one thing you may be sure, that I will
not be able to keep you in the Ashram, nor can I cure you.
And remember also that no relation will be able to accommodate
you. Society is so constituted that even though a person may
wish to do something he is not able to do it, cannot do it.
Ultimately, everyone has to turn to God, and only what He does
or permits is possible. If you can think, then after reading this
letter stay where you are. If you cannot think, then also, do not
do anything in a hurry but stay there. May God bless you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2727
