80. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
Silence Day [February 14, 1927]
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,
I have your telegram. I am glad that the 6th suits you. Please
get either Gopalrao from Wardha or Sahasrabuddhe there for the
marriage ceremony; or shall we ask Panditji to come over from
the Ashram?
Or if there is some particular person in your view,
that makes no difference for me. Nothing suits me better than
if Nath himself performs the rites. If you would have Panditji,
let me know by wire.
We shall have no ceremony other than the strictly religious.
You must not incur expenditure by putting up pandals and other
things. Please have no sweets in the meals. Our new relationship is
not going to make you my in-laws nor is Sushila going to be my
daughter-in-law; she will still be a daughter to me, and you will
all be my cousins as always.
You must not give away with the bride so much as a grain
of gold. Indeed, she must not wear any jewellery on the occasion.
1 From the discussion about Manilal's wedding and Gandhiji's tour pro-
gramme
If afterwards she has a liking for them I shall be helpless. Be-
cause she has as much freedom as you and I.
On my part I am not bringing her anything besides a garland
of my hand-spun yarn. Of course I am going to present her a
takli, the Gita and a copy of the Bhajanavali, if available.
In South Africa Manilal wears foreign dress; he had asked
my permission for it, but Sushila would not need it. In her
khaddar sari she will be as resplendent as the celebrated Sita.
Please do not gather a crowd, nevertheless do not hesitate to
invite those whom you ought to. I shall leave Bombay along with
Manilal by the Nagpur Mail and reach Akola on the 6th morning.
The 7th being a Monday, I shall stay on there. On the 7th if
there is a convenient train in the evening I shall straight away
leave for Ahmedabad.
Ramdas and Devdas may arrive there either with me or direct.
I will not stop anyone else who wants to go there.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My Tour Programme:
15 Dhulia
16 Nasik
17 Ahmednagar
18 Kurduwadi
19, 20, 21 Sholapur
22 Gulbarga
23 Pandharpur
24 Satara
25 Belgaum
26 Vengurla
27, 28, 1, 2, 3 Ratnagiri
and adjoining areas
4 Bombay
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1120. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
