47. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
TO
THE EDITOR
[RAND DAILY MAIL]
SIR,
JOHANNESBURG,
July 1, 1907
It may appear ungrateful to have to criticize your moderate and
well-meant leaderette on the so-called "passive resistance" to the Asiatic
Registration Act. I call the passive resistance to be offered by the Indian
community "so-called", because, in my opinion, it is really not resis-
tance but a policy of communal suffering. Even after reading the Regu-
lations, you consider it to be a matter of sentiment.
Is it sentiment, if I, as a father, would prefer to be shot down before
I see my eight-year-old boy being subjected to the tyrannical process
of having to give his digit-impressions, separately and then simultane-
ously, before an officer whom he may never have seen in his life-time,
and for no crime of his own? Is it sentiment, when I decline to give the
name of my mother and such particulars as the price of a precarious
residence in this country?
Lord Elgin may certainly, sitting in his cushioned chair, see no
distinction between making a mark with the thumb instead of with a
pen, but I know that he belongs to that nation which would rise in
rebellion from end to end to resent an attack on personal liberty, and
that he would be the first person to cry out against even a forcible tracing
of his signature. It is the compulsion that stings, not the digit-impression.
That in the mind of the Government there is no desire to degrade
is true only on the assumption that my countrymen are already suffi-
ciently degraded to feel any further degradation in this land of freedom
for people other than Asiatics. But this is not a time for argument. The
brave rulers who know the value of action rather than of speech can
only respond to bravery and practical action.
If, as you say, Pretoria is weak, and the Government, "with the
wisdom of the serpent", with which you credit it, has chosen the weakest
spot in order to break any opposition to it, and if I shall be the only
one to have cried out against the Act, and possibly a few of my co-
workers, even then we shall be able to say we had no part in the accep-
tance of degradation. But I do not share your opinion about Pretoria.
I had the honour to be one of the speakers who, yesterday, addressed
a large mass meeting of British Indians on the premises of the local
Secretary, Mr. Haji Habib, and I assure you that, if the sentiments
expressed by my countrymen proceeded from the bottom of their hearts,
as I believe they did, Indians in Pretoria will refuse to submit to com-
pulsory re-registration to a man, irrespective of consequences.
You accuse the South Africa British Indian Committee, in blunt
language, of gross exaggeration, if not falsehood, when it states that "the
local Government lends colour to the suspicion that it is anxious to im-
pose the most extreme measures, and thus to degrade and humiliate
British Indians". Even at the risk of being guilty of gross exaggeration
or falsehood, whichever it may be, I must repeat the statement and, in
support, give you the latest illustration of studied humiliation that came
to light at the Pretoria meeting. One of the religious preachers created
a painful sensation when he produced a document from the Central
South African Railways saying that the concession to religious preachers
as to railway travelling was confined to Christian and Jewish preachers.
Is this new distinction also a necessary precaution against an influx of
Asiatics?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 2-7-1907
