371. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 26, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your letters. Pray do not worry about the possibility
of my straining myself to write to you. When I write I do so
because I must, and what I must do always gives me pleasure in
the doing. When I become an instrument so pure and sensitive
that it would react and respond to every circumstance around it,
I shall cease to write or speak and yet my thoughts will work
their way to the hearts of those who need my guidance or assis-
tance. But till that time is reached, I must make use of the less
reliable and imperfect instrument of the pen and the tongue.
I still feel that you have unnecessarily excited yourself over the
segregation. Why do you call it compulsory? For you it would
be an act of purest love on your part. You know 14 Romans.
There Paul, himself not a vegetarian, says to his congregation,
"If meat offend thy brother abstain from it." I am quoting from
memory, therefore the words may not be the same, but the sub-
stance is the same. You will segregate yourself not because you feel
yourself impure in any sense of the term, but you will do so for
the sake of your neighbours and for the sake of those women who
believe in segregation from a right motive. I do not know that
I have made my meaning sufficiently clear. The whole point is
this. There are certain things not in themselves immoral which we
do for the sake of others and there are certain other things which
being in themselves immoral we will not and must not do for the
sake of the whole world. If self-imposed segregation appears to
you as immoral, you must not do it even to please me. If however
there is nothing immoral in it, then you will do it for the sake
of your neighbours whom you will rightly consider to be igno-
rant to that extent. In the theory of it I am wholly at one with
you. For a virgin, there should be no segregation whatsoever.
Monthly sickness is no sickness for her. And while it comes, she
takes note of it and changes her occupation but not her mental-
ity. And even for married women after the necessity for precau-
tion is understood by them, ceremonial segregation should have
no meaning. I think I told you that so far as I am concerned, I
never respected the rule even with reference to Ba herself. And
when I began to see things clearer, I never felt the call to have
the rule observed. Radha and Rukhi certainly and all the other
girls so far as I am aware do not observe it. Amina does not.
Gomatibehn does and everybody respects her wishes even to the
extent that when the women who do not observe it for themselves
have the monthly sickness, they do not go near Gomatibehn. If
then self-segregation appears to you to be a task, you need not
observe it. But if you do not, you should observe it as a plea-
surable duty for the sake of others and in any case, it is not now
a matter of any practical value so far as you are concerned; for,
your next sickness probably does not come in Wardha at all. Or
if it does, it is a question only of once whilst you are there. At
Sabarmati nobody will want you to observe it. Amina does not
observe it for anybody including Gomatibehn, nor is she expect-
ed to, much less will you be expected to observe it, even for
Gomatibehn when she is there. So far as I know she has herself
never asked anybody to observe it for her and in her presence. She
is satisfied with the observance of it for herself. If the matter is
still not clear you must continue to write and meanwhile to act
as may seem proper to you.
Now about grammar and arithmetic. I understand and appre-
ciate all you say. But, for the work in hand, a knowledge of
figures and grammar as a science and as an aid to a knowledge
of languages are necessary. You will therefore do both to the
extent that you can tackle without feeling giddy. If you find that
it is impossible for you to take kindly to simple arithmetic and
comparative grammar, we must do without it.
Andrews is coming here tomorrow. You must have known
he arrived last week. If you have not already written to him, do
please write now. Here is the further programme. But you will
send your letters Care Sjt. S. Srinivasa Iyengar, Amjad Bagh,
Luz, Mylapore, Madras, till I ask you to do otherwise.
I was weighed on Tuesday and my weight was lbs. 113½.
This is really very good. Up to now I have fared quite all right.
It remains to be seen now how I shall take the Madras climate.
It is almost like Bombay, a trifle hotter, but just as moist.
With love,
BAPU
XXXIV-26
[Encl.]
TAMIL NADU TOUR PROGRAMME
August
Stay in Bangalore up to
29th
30th Leave for Vellore in
the morning
September
1st Gudiyatham
2nd Ami
3-9th Madras
(Sjt.
S.
Srinivasa Iyengar, Luz,
Mylapore)
10-12th Cuddalore
13th Chidambaram
14th Mayavaram
15th Mannargudi
16th Tanjore
17th to 20th Trichinopoly
21st Pudukkottah
22-27th Karaikudi and Chetti-
nad
28-30th
Madura
including
Tirumangalam on 30th
From the original: C.W. 5264. Courtesy: Mirabehn
