222. LETTER TO EDMUND CANDLER
2, MOZANG ROAD,
LAHORE,
December 15, 1919
DEAR MR. CANDLER,
I thank you for your letter of the 12th instant. I appreciate
the friendliness underlying it and I entirely accept your assu-
rance that no offence whatsoever was intended by you.
My attention was drawn to the article in question and I did
consider that it was unwisely worded. I felt too that both Hindus
and Mahomedans were likely to be offended by the manner in
which I was caricatured. But your letter must silence all hostile
criticism. Modern journalism certainly permits attacks on the sup-
posed weak points of those whose policy is criticised and I grant
that you intended to do no more. I thank you too for putting me
the questions you have. They enable me to explain my position
more fully than perhaps it has been by my writings and speeches.
As to your first question I do not wish and have never wished
to embarrass Government and I have never worked up an anti-
British campaign for any cause whatsoever. My personal religion
would forbid me to do either the one or the other. But some-
times one's right conduct does embarrass those who do not for the
moment appreciate it and in that sense I admit that my conduct
like that of any reformer has embarrassed people. But I cannot
be accused of partiality. Relentless pursuit of truth and conduct
flowing from it have embarrassed the dearest ones not excluding
my wife and children. But I was no more anti- the dear ones
than I am anti-British. I have the privilege of the friendship or
the goodwill of hundreds of Englishmen and Englishwomen.
I would be unworthy of their friendship or goodwill if I harbour-
ed anti-British feelings. My stubborn opposition to some acts of
the British Government must not be mistaken for unfriendliness.
Such peculiar notions are entertained about friendliness and loyal-
ty in India that any strong expression of displeasure in regard to
acts of Government passes for disloyalty. You will agree with me
that real loyalty that dares to utter unpalatable truths must in
such an atmosphere be a rare virtue.
As to your second question, I confess that my regard for the
claims of the Turk is derived totally from my regard for my fellow-
countrymen, the Mahomedans. I should forfeit the right to call
them fellow-countrymen if I did not feel for them in everything
vitally affecting them provided that their cause was just. The
peace of my country is likely to be placed in jeopardy, not by my
earnest effort to guide the Mahomedan feeling in the right chan-
nel, but it certainly will be by any thoughtless or ignorant action
of British Ministers. I venture to claim that I have rendered a ser-
vice of the highest order by advising the Mahomedans of India
to express their sentiments in a restrained manner and by advis-
ing the Hindus to make common cause with them.
You are right, however, in questioning the wisdom of going
against the opinions of men like Gladstone, Morley and Bryce,
for whom I certainly entertain high regard, but the necessity for
the question really arises from your not knowing the Mahomedan
claim for Turkey. I invite you to study their view-point. They
ask for nothing that has not been granted to the other Powers or
that was not vouchsafed to them by the British Ministers them-
selves. Their claim, as you may be aware, has been backed by the
majority of the ex-Governors and other distinguished Anglo-
Indians. What has the treatment or ill-treatment by Turks of sub-
ject races to do with the Khilafat question, i.e., the integrity of
Turkey or the Turk's custody of the holy places of Islam? Must
Constantinople be wrenched from the Turks in order to safe-
guard the rights of subject races? If you as a journalist and an
Englishman would preserve the peace of India and would have
India to celebrate peace in a true manner, you would ask English-
men living in India to make common cause with the Mahomedans
and thus let the British Ministers know the real feeling of India
so that justice might be done whilst there is yet time.
As you have permitted me to publish your letter, I am send-
ing it and my reply to the Press.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
GANDHI
The Tribune, 18-12-1919
