62. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 2, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You have surpassed yourself Your diary - I do not call it a letter-
is heart-stirring. I prize it so much that I propose to bind it. I have
taken the liberty of letting Medh and Desai read it. It has done their
souls good. I can only pray that you will end as you have commenced,
your important pilgrimage. I cannot help thinking that the rigorous
discipline under which you placed yourself on board will make you a
much greater power for good to the members of your family there
than you would otherwise have been. I am sure that your life will be
to them an eloquent sermon. Your words would have been a mere
waste of energy. I am naturally looking forward to your next diary.
I hope that the letters I have written to you already have given
you all the information you wanted. I could have said more, but I have
not the time. And after all I have certainly given you long enough letters.
I shall certainly try not to miss a single week.
You will be grieved to hear that Call suffers from complete loss
of memory. He is at the asylum in Pretoria. I wrote to the
Superintendent of the asylum. He says that it would not be advisable
to remove Call. I am therefore not bringing him to the Farm-anyhow
not just now. I propose to send Isaac to see. Call face to face. Sundays
are the days for visitors. But I think they will let Isaac visit Call during
week days too. Douglas, I do not think, has played the game. He told
me he was going to see Call personally. Now he sends me the message
that he cannot go and that I must do what I think proper.
The Lapins have written a nice letter in reply to my note. I enclose
it for your perusal. I shall not now weary you with Heymann's letter.
I talked to him through the phone yesterday. He was quite good. Of
course I had written to him too.
I hope to be ready with the monthly statement between now and
Monday. In that event you shall have a copy.
The second hole is making steady progress. But I cannot say when
we shall get water. Logan said on Thursday that he had gone beyond
200 feet. He has not worked today (Saturday), having worked overtime
during the week days.
Fencing has made some progress during the week. Medh and Pragji
will also help Albrecht and the native boy from Tuesday next.
The boys are now clearing the peach trees. Since Thursday last
I have been going with them. They have been playing too much.
Mrs. Gandhi is a Trojan. Since Mrs. Naidoo's withdrawal, she with
the assistance (not very great) of Mrs. Sodha, has been managing the
whole household. And we are 14 all told. She gets up before 6 a.m.
and does not retire before 10 p.m.
It shows what people will do when put upon their mettle. She
occupies Mrs. Naidoo's room and she with Devdas sleeps outside on
the verandah. Ramdas and Coopoo also sleep there.
The boys are still saltless except on Sundays. Medh and Desai are
entirely saltless. Desai assures me that he has given up smoking entirely.
The first birth has taken place on the Farm today. The native John's
daughter has given birth to a child. I have been medically consulted
as to the after-birth.
Albrecht is, I think, making steady progress.
Mrs. Goldstone is penniless and friendless. I have invited her to
live on the Farm for the time being. You know her I think. She will
come tomorrow with Ritch. She said she would pass a few days on
the Farm. I have prepared your room for her.
Smuts sent a message that he wanted to see me. I went yesterday.
We had a very sweet chat. He wants me to frame my suggestions
for the next year. We talked mostly about the two civilizations - ancient
and modem, not Eastern and Western. I think that he was sincere
in what he said.
The school is still flourishing. My heart is still on it. And I still
refuse to allow anything else to interfere with it. The two Parsee boys
are well-behaved fellows and they are jolly. Ramdas may become in
time the best pupil in the class 1 .
The right hand fingers won't work now. They are having a fairly
rough time of it at present. I have to write all my letters and they
are many.
I have still not met Kennedy. I hope that he or Miss F. has been
writing to you regularly and giving you all the news regarding the office.
Miss Schlesin comes back on the 1st of October.
I am sorry I am still unable to give you extracts from the book
I referred to. No time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
