128. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 7, 1936
CHI. MRIDU,
I am pleasantly surprised to see that you are able to
find time to write such long letters. You are taking upon
yourself so much work that even a person like me shudders.
May God grant you the strength to attend to all your tasks.
I do not know what you would be able to do in the
Women's Conference to be held at Ahmedabad. I have no clear
idea of that organization and what little I know is only
through Rajkumari I have not formed the impression that
it can do anything for village women. Rajkumari herself is
very keen to serve in the villages. It remains to be seen
how far she can carry her other friends with her.
You are greatly mistaken if you think that there are no
Hindu-Muslim distinctions among women.
There certainly are.
They have not found extreme expression because women do not
come out in public very much. When they come out like men
and they are awakened, they too will be found making these
distinctions to a considerable extent. They will become conscious
in a few years. But the possibility of Hindus and Muslims
uniting in the mean time is remote. Nevertheless it is your
duty as well as mine to carry on the work on the assump-
tion that those distinctions do not exist among women. Among
the avoidable things I have enumerated the measures you
suggest are of course included. But at that place I had to
stress one point only. Other things were irrelevant there.
Now about giving recognition to the Jyoti Sangh. Your
arguments are interesting.
I would only say that for the
moment you do everything you are doing, but give up any
talk about recognition.
Citing the instance of tailors, etc.,
is not proper because the Sangh does not recognize them.
It provides them work. Till now they had even been given
by the mills the work of dyeing and washing.
I stopped
it only recently.
Your arguments befit those who are in-
different to khadi. But you are a khadi volunteer. You believe
in the power of khadi.
How can you bend in the face of
difficulties? But you say that you are ready to come if it is
necessary.
If you are not convinced by all this from me,
come over at your earliest. At least we can meet under that
pretext.
I hope Mummy is well. The letter for Suhrid is enclosed.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11201. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
