559. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
May 20, 1932
If you saw with your own eyes the interest I am taking in
your spinning-wheel, you would feel so happy that you would
add a pound or two to your weight in a few days. I had resolved
to try it even before the [left] arm had started paining, but now
I am obliged to make a virtue out of necessity. Either I must give up
spinning altogether or must spin on the Magan spinning-wheel.
Necessity being the mother of invention, I will go on trying to
discover ways and means of increasing the speed of spinning which
I have attained on this spinning-wheel. Meanwhile, come and
see me when you are released, if I see visitors at that time, and
teach me some new trick.
• :rcq\: [devoted to Me] means liIcljq,:: [devoted to Truth].
In the line "Fix my mind on Thy lotus-like feet", the poet,
a lover of God, personified Truth by using the phrase "Thy
lotus-like feet" —which means the lotus-like feet of the God of
Truth. Truth has no body. Everybody, therefore, imagines it in
the form which appeals to him. Once we realize that the form
which we worship is a creation of our imagination, each one of us
may have his own form and there may be countless such forms
as there are countless human beings. All these will be true so long
as the imagination which believes in them is a living reality, for
they meet the spiritual needs of the devotees. In truth, the
various names like Vishnu, Maheshvar, Brahma, Bhagavan,
Ishvar, etc., have no meaning or have a meaning which is im-
perfect. 'Truth' is the only term which is perfect as a description
of God. If somebody tells us that he is ready to lay down his life
for God, he will not be able to explain what he means, and most
of us would not understand his meaning. On the contrary, a person
who says that he would die for truth knows what he means and
most of us also would understand it. You ask me what the name
Rama means. My explaining the meaning of that name and then
your doing the Japa will be practically fruitless. The Japa of Rama-
nama will be a kamadhenu for you only if you do it with the
thought that Rama signifies that which you wish to worship. If
you do the japa with this thought, you may do it even parrot-
like. There will be a conscious decision of the will behind
your japa, but none behind a parrot's repetition of the name. This
is a big difference, so much so that you can win deliverance with
this japa because of that decision of the will. Because there is no
such decision of the will behind the parrot's repetition, it will soon
get tired of it and give it up. If it is repeating the name to
please its master, it will stop as soon as it has got its reward
in the form of the daily feed. Thus, you do not need any
symbol with a definite meaning. It is to emphasize this that
Tulsidas held the name Rama to possess greater power than Rama
the man. In other words, he implied that the name need not
have any meaning. The meaning will be created subsequently
by the devotee according to the nature and quality of his bhakti.
That is the beauty of the practice of such japa. If this were not
so, one could not say that japa would produce spiritual awakening
even in the dullest of men, for it is a statement which cannot be
proved with logical arguments. There is only one condition
[for the practice of japa to bear fruit]. Japa should not be done
for the sake of show or to deceive people. It should be done in
the manner I have explained, with conscious purpose and with
faith. Personally, I have no doubt at all that such japa would
fulfil the highest aspiration of the devotee who keeps it up
without losing faith. Anybody who has the needful patience may
try and see whether this is true. In the beginning for days
or even for years the mind will wander and will become restless
in the course of the japa, or one will feel sleepy. Even more painful
consequences may follow. If, despite all this, one keeps up the
practice, it is beyond a shadow of doubt that it will bear fruit
in due course. We acquire control over even a physical thing like
the spinning-wheel after our patience has been sufficiently tried.
Some other things are still more difficult, and we succeed in ac-
quiring proficiency in them only after much harder labour.
What, then, shall we say of a man who aspires to win the high-
est thing in the world but does not go on taking for a long time
the medicine recommended to him and yields to despair all too
soon? I think what I have said above answers all your ques-
tions, for, after reading it, you can have nothing more to ask. If
you can have faith, go on with the japa at all times, whether you
are working or eating or resting. You must not yield to des-
pair, even if you have to do this for the whole of your life. Try
this, and doubt not that you will daily enjoy more and more
peace of mind.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 164-
