219. LETTER TO MOHAMMED ISMAIL KHAN
AS AT SABARMATI,
May 21, 1931
DEAR NAWAB SAHEB,
I thank you for your letter of 19th instant. I have not seen the
report you refer to in your letter. But I may state my position thus:
So far as I am concerned I should endorse without hesitation
any solution that Mussalman friends as a whole may present but
that by itself would not solve our difficulties. Our difficulties
could only be solved by either Hindus and Mussalmans settling
with the Sikhs or Hindus settling both with Mussalmans and Sikhs.
But so far as I am personally concerned I should endorse any
solution presented by Sikh friends as a whole as I would the
Mussalman claim. But if there is a conflict between the Sikh
and the Mussalman claim, then my endorsement of the claim of
each would be of little value. I have therefore assumed that
whatever Mussalman friends or Sikh friends present as a final
claim would take note of the other party. If you find any flaw
in this, you will not hesitate to let me know. All I want is an
honourable settlement wholly satisfactory to the Mussalmans, to the
Sikhs as also to all other communities who may wish a communal
solution.
As to your other question supposing that I survive the
future constitution and am allowed to have any hand in its work-
ing I would have no solution on any but strictly national lines and
I would so work the constitution that I should disarm all suspicion.
So far as the Europeans are concerned, the question is not
what privileges they should get by reason of their being in a
minority but what privileges they will surrender so as to be on
a par with us. Am I clear?
I would ask you to believe me to be the same man whom
you were good enough to have as your guest in Meerut in those
days when for the moment we had begun to think that we were
but children of the same mother having the same aspirations and
having full trust in one another.
Yours sincerely,
NAWAB MOHAMMED ISMAIL KHAN SAHEB
MUSTAPHA CASTLE, MEERUT
From a photostat: S.N. 17107
192
