74. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
DERA ISMAIL KHAN,
October 28, 1938
CHI. MANI,
You have been forced to write to me after many years.
The letter is full of news indeed. Continue to write in the same
way. Assuming the report about the Nasik Police School to be
true, I have written a note on it. Also talk to Kher or Munshi
if you happen to meet them.
If the officials there do not work sincerely for enforcing prohi-
bition, the Ministers should protest to the Governor in strong
language. But they must be convinced that the officials do not
have the heart in the work.
About lands, I had written even before I received Vallabh-
bhai's letter. Send me a report of the debate on the subject
in the Assembly.
I have not said that no steps can be taken against porno-
graphic literature. I did give my opinion. Of course, I am
afraid that people have come to like obscene literature and it
cannot, therefore, be easily stopped. It will stop only when
learned men themselves are disgusted with such literature. I
do believe that pornographic writings should be stopped by law
if it can be done. But please remember that there is a great
difference between forcing students to read such things and the
publication of obscene writing in newspapers.
What is happening in Rajkot is wonderful. If the tempo
is kept up, there is no doubt that the people will get what they
want. Father has done the correct thing in regard to Travancore.
There was no harm in his having called Ramachandran. Before
Father's letter arrived, however, I had already issued my state-
ment. I feel that it was necessary to issue one. Now there is
no immediate need to go to Travancore.
The constant flow of mucus from the nose into the throat
is not at all good. It must be stopped.
I understand about Baroda. Let me know what happens
in Bhadran.
I hope to reach Wardha about the 15th. The tour here
will be over by the 9th.
What is happening regarding Subhas Babu is not out of my
mind. That is why I discussed it in the Working Committee.
But Father was of the view that we should wait till Jawaharlal's
arrival, so I kept silent. There is bound to be some difficulty
this time in electing the President. Let Father think over the
suggestion I have made in Harijan. I am of the view that letting
the present state of affairs continue will be harmful.
I have now replied to both your letters. Show this to
Father when he has some free time.
I keep really excellent health. Father should visit this Pro-
vince, in Maulana's company.
Blessings from
BAPU
MANIBEHN PATEL
PURUSHOTTAM BUILDING
OPP. OPERA HOUSE, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 119-21
