143. LETTER TO JAMES DUBOULAY
NADIAD,
April 9, 1918
DEAR SIR JAMES DUBOULAY,
I thank you for your kind letter. I know that we can have
honest difference of opinion without questioning one another's
motives. I promise not to misunderstand you in anything you say.
When I entered on the Kaira struggle I had no notion that
I was attacking the whole revenue system. I felt that I was
attacking what in my opinion was a grave injustice to the people.
At the same time I confess that I would not have hesitated to
enter upon the struggle even if it had meant an attack on the
whole revenue system. War had ever been present before me
and I know that as a law-abiding citizen and still more as a
lover of the British Constitution I should at least hesitate to em-
barrass the Government if I cannot actively co-operate in the
prosecution of War. I have tried to do the latter so far as as I
could. But should anybody allow the War to cover injustice?
Should not the Government refrain from defying honest public
opinion ? I do not say the people's verdict be accepted in the
Kaira matter But I do say that where there is a sharp difference
of opinion, arbitration should be resorted to. It is no pleasure to
me to use adjectives for Talatis or for that matter anybody, but I
know that it would be prudery in private matters, and a shirking
of a painful duty in public matters, to shun adjectives where they
describe material facts. I wish you really knew them as I have
come to know them. You will then probably use stronger language
than I have done. Give me the committee I have asked for and
I will show you what their estimates are worth and incidentally
show you also what they are. But here the fault is not theirs;
the system under which they are working makes them so. This
however is much too large a question for me to discuss in the
course of a letter.
The choice before me is quite clear. I must either see dis-
content going deeper but being kept secret out of fear, or assist
in making it publicly known in a disciplined manner and without
fear of consequences.
146
No government, I agree, can afford to concede to popular
clamour, nor can any government afford to ignore a strong
public opinion even though the matter may be unreasonable so
long as it is not immoral or destructive of the government itself.
In this case you may ignore New India but you may not ignore
the opinion of the Kaira ryot in a matter concerning itself. A
government that will not yield to such public opinion deserves to
be destroyed. Indeed it courts destruction. I am endeavouring
to show both the Government and the people that all force is
utterly useless before the force of the public opinion which dis-
dains to use violence, and is based only on truth as it is appre-
hended by the people who are prepared to suffer to the uttermost.
The people of Kaira are receiving the richest education of their
lives. They are being taught not to strike for the right but to
suffer for it with quiet but steadfast resignation, and whatever the
consequences, they will have gained to the extent of their adher-
ence to the principle I have ventured to enunciate.
I hope to run down to Bombay on Saturday. Will you
kindly let me know, either by letter or by wire, whether I could
wait on you that day, and if so at what hour?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10670. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
