148. LETTER TO LALCHAND
May 2, 1920
MY DEAR LALCHAND3,
I have read all your notes in the Young India of the 28th
April. The first is quite good, the second is not bad, but it is
weak and halting. The matter of the third is good, but the man-
ner of dealing with it is bad, the fourth is bad both in manner
and matter—in matter because the Congress Deputation, you must
know, is not going, and if you did not know you should have
made certain. It is bad in manner because the style is not that
of Young India. The fifth note is very good in matter, but you
have hardly done justice to a case so important as that of the ill-
treatment of a lady. My criticism is not meant to frighten you.
It is meant only to warn you to be more careful in future in your
selection of subjects and manner of dealing with them. Young
India will not look faulty for want of a variety of subjects. But it
will certainly look paltry, if the subjects chosen do not show ori-
ginality, accuracy of information, and strength in dealing with
them. To be accurate, original and strong you must become a
deep student. Then only will you acquire enlightened confidence
in yourself. Never mind therefore the range of your subjects but
go in for the depth, walk round your subject, walk into it, walk
through it, and you will make the pages of Young India live. (Re-
reading my own articles in the current issue I miss my usual strength
in some parts of them. The Khaddar article is the best, but the
English of the last paragraph show[s] that I was half asleep or
indifferent when I wrote it. Look at 'even if one is disinclined to
use it', followed immediately by 'even if one is not inclined to use
it'. The word 'use' occurs four times in four lines. I would never
pass such a tenth-rate sentence in a good article. But you have.
I do not mind your having done it, because until I have confi-
dence in your style I must pay the penalty of my illness, sleepi-
ness or indifference.
Take again "Non-co-operation". It is all solid stuff, but not
at all solidly put. I know under what extreme difficulty I wrote
that article, but I cannot on that account expect the readers to
excuse indifferently written articles. My first article is fairly read-
able, but had I written it in Sinhgadh, it would have been written
differently. The manifesto is the thing I like. It is nice in style,
terse in expression, brings out all my points gracefully and con-
cisely. I could have written it better but it can pass muster.
And now I have given you enough food for thought. You
have come to me to get the best out of me. Give the best of
yourself to the country, and do better than your best from week
to week and if you would do this you must study swadeshi, read
up Dutt, Radhakamal Mukerji, Barrow, and all the writers on
Indian industries; you must read up blue-books, statistical abstracts
and deluge the readers with facts and figures from week to week.
You will not tell me you have no library. You must go to
Ahmedabad and search all the libraries and find out what you can
get. Similarly on Hindi and the vernaculars, study the history
of the French craze during the Norman period, how the English
nation was saved by some lovers of English, how the energy of a
single professor in Russia revolutionized Russian teaching, and how
practically from that period commenced the Russian national
revival. Then take the linguistic distribution. You will find
among my papers some material already collected, but you can
collect it yourself. On H[indu]-M[uslim] unity you have to specia-
lize on the Khilafat question. You must get Mr. Banker to give
you his English weeklies, the New Age and the Nation; study the
history of Turkey, answer like a student all the calumnies against
it. Add to this your knowledge of finance and you have enough
to deal with every week.
I would like you not to destroy this letter, but read it carefully
more than once and keep it as a reminder of what I expect of
you. Of course you will share it with Patwardhan but I do not
want you to share the responsibility with him, for the simple reason
that I have not yet burdened him with the responsibility of edit-
ing Young India. He has shouldered it and done it bravely too,
but I have not yet located him. Till then his work in Young India
is a gift for which I am thankful but which I will not criticize as
I must criticize everything coming from your pen.
Do not please confuse two different thoughts. It is not the
payment you accept which distinguishes your work from Pat-
wardhan. You have come to me reserved for Young India. Patwar-
dhan has come in as the handy man, as a stopgap. Maganlal takes
no payment but I criticize him mercilessly in the departments which
are his and Patwardhan will come in for similar treatment when
he is installed as chief of any department.
Yours sincerely,
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
