363. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
February 11, 1933
DEAR SIR,
On the 8th instant Major Bhandari communicated to me
the information that Government had decided to withhold a letter
addressed to me by Appasaheb Patwardhan. The next morning I
saw in The Times of India a paragraph to the effect that Appasaheb
had put himself on reduced rations. Thereupon the same day I
wrote to Col. Doyle inquiring about the news and asking to know
the orders of the Government of India about conservancy work in
the prisons by volunteer prisoners. Not having any reply I sent
yesterday a reminder. Since then I have a copy of the orders of
the Government of India, but no reply to my inquiry about
Appasaheb. For me the matter is of the gravest importance
involving my honour. As a result of the protracted correspondence
between the authorities and me there was a settlement about the
subject-matter thereof and at the instance of Col. Doyle I sent
the following wire to Appasaheb Patwardhan on the 6th Decem-
ber last.
It clearly foreshadows resumption of fast by him in the event
of an unfavourable decision.
The Government will observe that any decision in this matter
that affects Appasaheb affects me equally. As I read the whole
of the transactions between December 1st and now in this matter,
the Government have recognized the correctness of my action.
I hope that they do not now intend to revise their attitude and
cut me off from Appasaheb. For the moment therefore I ask
whether Appasaheb is or very recently had been on a partial fast
and whether he and his comrades have been now permitted to
do conservancy work.
Owing to the increasing tension caused by the report of Appa-
saheb's partial fast, I am requesting Major Bhandari, if he has
authority, or to request Col. Doyle, if he has not, to telegraph
or telephone to the Government the contents of the substance of
this letter and hope that the Government will end the tension by
favouring me with an early reply.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800 (40) (6), p. 329
