374. LETTER TO JIVANJI D. DESAI
NEW DELHI,
September 12, 1946
BHAI JIVANJI,
I glanced through Harijanbandhu and Harijan Sevak today. I
was a little unhappy to see that, while Harijanbandhu has sixteen
columns, Harijan Sevak has only eight. I don't understand the
reason behind this. Maybe you were not able to cope with
the Hindustani articles. If I go a little deeper into this, I can
find out whether or not this guess is correct. But I don't pro-
pose to do so. I will say only this: that as I have already in-
formed you, you should print only as much Hindustani matter
as I send from here and whatever translations you require for
Harijanbandhu should be made from Hindustani, never from
English. Though you have capable translators there to translate
from English into Gujarati, I do receive complaints from time
to time. Hence the best course would be that I should send
from here Hindustani and Gujarati translations from English.
Or I shall send Hindustani from here and Gujarati you can do
there. It should be child's play to translate from Hindustani
into Gujarati. If, however, there are any complications even
in this, let me know. We should receive no complaints about
translation. If we follow this policy there will be no difference
in size between Harijan Sevak and Harijanbandhu. Our ideal
should be to have the same size for all the three. It will take
us some time to reach this ideal, for many things have to be
put across to foreign readers and that can be done only through
English.
I have already written to you about the dictionary and,
therefore, I don't repeat it here. It will be all right if you
give four pages every fortnight. One column contains nearly
forty words, which means 320 words for eight columns. I shall
be satisfied with that. I shall not keep you waiting for it till
the last. I hope to supply it in good time.
When I had dictated the above I looked again at Pyare-
lal's suggestion and found that the Urdu and Hindi editions
of Harijan Sevak are not identical word for word. I must of
course admit my negligence, namely, that I don't go through
306
all the issues. Certainly I don't compare them. I did so to-
day out of curiosity and discovered this. Pyarelal tried to put
up some defence for this difference but he has not so far been
able to justify it. Let us see if he can. He told me, how-
ever, that the Persian script occupies more space. This I knew
and, therefore, I started looking into the issues and inspected
the issues of September 1. On doing so, I found that the
Hindi edition had eight pages whereas Urdu had sixteen and
also that Urdu had nineteen articles and Hindi had thirteen.
I will be glad if you explain to me the reason for this differ-
ence. If I go further into it, I may discover something more.
I shall see what I myself can do. But I do expect it of you
that you will not attempt anything beyond your capacity. You
will then be able to do full justice to what you do.
You did very well in sending me the two complaints re-
garding the dictionary. If there are any other complaints, send
them too. If there are any mistakes, it won't be difficult to
rectify them. I will procure a copy of the dictionary which
you have mentioned. I have told Brijkrishna about it.
Not revised.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 9970. Also C. W. 6944. Cour-
tesy: Jivanji D. Desai
