116. LETTER TO M. P. FANCY
Tuesday, March 16, 1910
SHETH SHRI M. P. FANCY,
You have raised a question in connection with the interview which
Moulvi Saheb Ahmed Mukhtiar had with me and which he has pub-
lished. You tell me that it has been a matter of controversy among
some Indians and you therefore feel that I should make a statement
whether the 'interview' has been correctly reported or not.
I had not the least intention to do this. The community knows
me; and if it does not yet do so, it is not possible for me to introduce
myself to it now. An Indian can immediately know the truth of state-
ments attributed to me, whether they were made by me or not. How-
ever, in response to your request I make the following reply:
I am sorry to find that, in the 'interview' as published by the Moulvi
Saheb, the statements made by me have been twisted. At the end
of our meeting he expressed his satisfaction and told me that he had
received full explanation and would render every assistance to the
struggle. Yet the twist he has given to the interview is likely to harm
the struggle.
I explained to him the origin of the Satyagraha Fund. I told
him about the letter I had written from England to Prof. Gokhale
and the one to Mr. Polak. I informed the Moulvi Saheb that in these
letters I had written about the debt I had incurred in connection with
Indian Opinion on account of the struggle. I explained to him how
the funds came in response to those letters. I further told him that in
my letter to Prof. Gokhale I had intimated to him that the funds would
be spent to clear off the debt incurred on account of Indian Opinion,
to meet the expenditure on the office of the Association as well as the
office in England and to maintain the families of poor satyagrahis. I
1 Not available
2 Vide Vol. IX, pp. 308-.
3 Not available
4 Vide "Letter to G. K. Gokhale", pp. 96-.
also informed him of Prof. Gokhale's letter approving the expenditure
and told him that, though Prof. Gokhale as well as Mr. Petit had left
it to me to decide how the funds were disposed of, I had no intention
of spending the money solely according to my discretion. I informed
him that I consulted Mr. Cachalia and other satyagrahis in the manage-
ment of the funds, that a separate account had been opened for the
fund and that a statement of all the disbursements would be published
at the end of the struggle; and that even now Prof. Gokhale was kept
posted about how the money was spent. And the Moulvi Saheb ex-
pressed complete satisfaction.
About travelling third class, I told the Moulvi Saheb that I did not
for the present advise other Indians to travel third, but so far as I
myself was concerned I had decided to travel third for the following
reasons:
(1)
The Transvaal Railway Regulations had come into force.
(2) Money was being spent from the Satyagraha Fund.
(3)
I had become poor and so had other satyagrahis.
(4) My present state of mind favoured such travelling.
(5)
I shuddered to read the account of the hardships that the
Kaffirs had to suffer in the third-class carriages in the Cape
and I wanted to experience the same hardships myself.
(6) When I was arrested in Natal in connection with the Poll
Tax, I thought I could serve [the community] better if I
lived like a poor Indian.
In spite of this explanation of mine, the Moulvi Saheb thought
that it was a mistake on my part, similar to the one I had committed
in giving finger-prints, to have begun to travel third. Upon this, I told
him that I did not believe that I had committed a mistake in giving
finger-prints and that I had taken the right step in travelling third. I,
moreover, made it clear to him that I was not always going to travel
third. I also argued that it would be very expensive if the large number
of Indians who came forward to be arrested travelled first or second.
As regards Swami Shri Shankeranand's views, I told him that I
approved of what the Swami said at the Kathiawad Arya Mandal,
viz., that those who wanted to stay together as equals should be equally
strong. I also liked Swamiji's statement that if, of a group of four
comrades, three were armed, the fourth also must arm himself. But
while saying this I told him that to me 'arms' meant satyagraha. I
said to him that I considered the sword powerless before a satyagrahi.
I also said that I was opposed to any person who tried to set one com-
munity against another. The Moulvi Saheb expressed his satisfaction
at these views also and we parted.
When, therefore, I saw the 'interview' published by him, I felt
sorry for the community. What I have given above is a bare summary
of the 'interview'. I have given a reply to the Moulvi Saheb's questions
particularly in connection with the money spent on Indian Opinion, a
copy of which is enclosed herewith.
I am,
a servant of India,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-3-1910
