85. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
KAUSANI,
June 28, 1929
CHI. MAHADEV,
Yesterday I completed my work on the Gita and experienced
a profound delight. I hope I have carefully gone through every-
thing. I have put in as much as I could digest from Kaka's notes.
I have finished the preface.
I see from your letter that you will reach the Ashram about
the same time as I.
Padam Singh's [death] was a greater shock than Rasik's. It
was not the shock of death but of my own dimness. But I deli-
berately omitted to observe a fast. If death is something that
should be welcomed, why observe a fast on its account? On the
occasion of this terrible death also, having again reasoned in the
same way, I had my evening meal, although the time for it had
almost passed. I had eaten in the morning. After this the death
occurred. The day before his death Padam Singh had talked to me
about his death with a quiet mind, saying, "If I do not survive,
bless my son". I told him I would take him to the Ashram, and if
he wished it I would make arrangements for him at his own house.
He replied, "I do not ask for this, it is not necessary. What I need
is your blessing." I reassured him. After his death Mohan Joshi
enquired after his relatives. Govind Vallabh Pant had initiated
a collection. But the relatives refused to accept so much as a
cowrie. "We want the Mahatma's blessings, nothing more." There
is here as much heroism as grief. This whole family seems to be
brave; or maybe all the villagers in this province are like this. They
sell milk. Everyone has his own little piece of land. The people
are poor but not helpless; they are generous [though] penniless.
The hill people daily visit this forest which looks uninhabited, and
leave behind something [for us]. Now I am doing nothing with
the cheque except returning it to you. If the person who gave
it wishes to have it back give it to him and if he does not send it
to the Ashram, we shall utilize the amount for the Prem Vidyalaya
here. Please let me have the reply to this at the Ashram itself.
This will be posted tomorrow, you could get it on Tuesday when
I leave this place. On the 5th in Delhi the whole day will be taken
up by the Working Committee. On the 5th evening I start for the
Ashram.
It is most important that Vallabhbhai does not leave Simla
in a hurry. The article about Bardoli ought to be seen, although
it has been despatched. It is good that you have thought of a
pilgrimage to Kotdal. Reaching this spot is also a good thing. Tell
Stokes I often remember him. I wish the complaint of piles is
cured for good. How is it you never mention anything about
Vithalbhai's health?
I got the letter about Gregg's marriage only this week, though
I had the news earlier from Andrews's letter.
Panditji had suggested a medicine to Sir T. Vijayaraghava-
chari. I had asked it to be sent from the Ashram. Did he get it or
not? And did he get the letter I asked Pyarelal to write telling
how it is to be administered?
I shall go through what you have written about Dashkroi. I
shall write what I can. I had believed that the postal department
in Simla would be wide awake and took it for granted that the
Speaker's Quarters at any rate would be known to all the postal
employees.
While returning from Bageshwar I was drenched in the rain
for two hours; that again while sitting in a doli. I had no strength
to walk. With wet clothes we had to drive up to the next stop
and climb another three thousand feet. As a result I had fever
for two days. I was expecting a temperature today but it is normal.
Including what I had yesterday, I have so far taken six grains of
quinine. My experiment in diet continues. It has not failed
totally. I cannot say it has been successful. I have no more
doubt that such food can be digested. I have yet to see to what
extent it is superior to cooked food. You may not worry about
this. That I derive the deepest joy from this experiment should
be enough for all friends.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not read this again.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11454
