39. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Unrevised
April 14, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
L.H. says 'I AM COMING'. D.H. says 'I AM NOT SURE WE ARE GOING.'
SO you had better be careful in order to avoid disappointment. When
I seriously think of it my head turns. I certainly want to be with Mrs.
Gandhi and the children for some little time. The idea of another
deputation is absolutely repulsive. 3 I am not at all sure that it is my
duty to be present at the Conference. But I am sure that it is my
duty to be on the Farm and with Mrs. Gandhi and the children; it is
my duty to be with the boys on the Farm; it is my duty to be
1 E.F.C. Lane, Private Secretary to General Smuts
2 Vide Vol. XI, pp. 21-.
3 The British Indian Association decided on April 27, 1911 to withdraw the
proposal to send a deputation to England, consisting of Cachalia and Gandhiji; vide
Vol. XI, pp. 56-.
48
with the women on the Farm; it is my duty to send Polak away at
the earliest opportunity1; it is my duty to help Ritch to build up his
practice; and if passive resistance is still to go on, it is my duty to
seek imprisonment and if I cannot get that, at least to do what I can
for the dependents of passive resisters. All the above catalogue can
be gone through if I am in the Transvaal. Put all the above in one
scale and the proposed visit to the Conference in the other and find
out which weighs heavier. I am in a fog. I am therefore leaving the
things to shape themselves.
You can talk light-heartedly about going to Germany. But what about
the Farm, the fencing, the borehole, Mountain View, your office and
a host of such other things? They all require careful thinking out, before
you can stir from Johannesburg. It will be easier for you to go if I
remained behind. The problem becomes doubly difficult if we both
must go.
I hope Gordon is getting on. Pray remember me to him.
I understand that today is your fasting day. Wish you well in every
respect.
You say autumn has set in there. We are being boiled here. The
heat is very severe.
I had a day of manual labour yesterday. (I have marked the letter
14th but I am writing this at 9.30 p.m. 13th). I am staining and polishing
the floor of Dr. Gool's surgery. I love the work. I have to finish it
tomorrow, the 14th.
I have now to await developments here. May know something on
Saturday.
You make no mention of Kennedy.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1 Vide also Vol. X, p. 446. Polak left Johannesburg for London on May 1.
