298. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
You had written to me about Anand as well as your father's
ticket. I had not understood the significance. In the meantime there
is this letter from Mathuradas which I can somewhat understand. I
am pained even more than he would have been. I for one have not
been able to understand it. I do not like pujas at all. What then to
talk about arati? I do not even know that the Maharashtrian ladies
had done the arati. I only thought they were blessing me as a sister
would bless her brother on his birthday. But if the ladies had
gathered for doing the arati, it was sinful on their part. I did not
accept the arati with that view. But even the cocoanut irks me.
Anyone prostrating before me also irritates me. I do not wish any
obeisance done to me. This is the truth of my soul. But being close
to me, perhaps you asked them to do so? Do I have to explain all this
to you? If you have not understood that, I have to accept that it is
my innermost desire to get such adulation. In that case, how can
anyone be blamed if I find myself in the same situation as Caesar who
desired the crown and did not get it? I am writing all this because you
did not meet me yesterday. I received the letter only yesterday.
Mathuradas has not received the letter. And Durga has said that you
are going today and therefore I wish that you do not forget discussing
the matter with him. Now both of you should talk it over. Ask
Avantikabehn about what the Maharashtrian ladies had done. After
that inform me about whatever tangible or subtle thing you might
have observed, so that I would go deeper in examining myself.
I have still to discuss one thing with him. M. believes that you
should stay only with me. I have partially understood it. This should
also be fully understood that I do not have to write about it to you
again. I have not fully understood his purpose. Anandanand has also
LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
215
stressed it. He says that he has written to you at great length. He
is very hurt. I wish he is convinced. I did not know that he desired
your presence for the Navajivan to that extent. That is how I had
understood you. But if it is possible to interpret your letter in the
manner of Mathuradas, then you two should first discuss the matter
and analyse me and then express your view. This is the purpose of
my writing to you now.
This again is the third point. I do believe that then I too would
have the qualities of absolute truth, non-violence, brahmacharya,
etc. But surely I can take such an objective view at present? I had
no idea that the matter was already discussed between you and
Mathuradas. Why did you write that it was not a matter of question
or complaint but that you two should discuss it together?
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 11749
