268. LETTER TO B. W. TUCKER
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
September 1, 1928
MY DEAR BOYD,
Your letter has been on my file for some days.
I think you have stated my position fairly correctly except
that the way in which you have put it may cause a misunder-
standing. I did not say that I would not desire that others should
accept my viewpoint. But I did say that I would not desire that
others should accept my religion. Evidently you have used the
word viewpoint as synonymous with religion. I do not. Whilst I
would not press my religion upon others, I would press my view-
point upon others, as everyone of us must. Religion is a matter
of feeling or the heart and, therefore, not a matter for argument,
and I would hold everybody's feeling as dear as my own, because
I expect him to do so with reference to my feeling. Viewpoint is
a matter of reasoning, the mind, the intellect. It may shift from
time to time without touching the heart. Change of religion
is a change of status. Change of viewpoint is an accident often due
to external causes. My feeling about the existence of God cannot
be easily altered. My viewpoint regarding the connotation of the
term may vary from time to time and expand with the expan-
sion of my reason. Religion is beyond explanation and it seems
to me to be impertinent for anyone to touch another's religion.
A viewpoint must always be capable of explanation. I have
entered upon this distinction because it enables me to explain my
position about religion more dearly than by any other means. I
do not want you to become a Hindu. But I do want you to
become a better Christian by assimilating all that may be good
in Hinduism and that you may not find in same measure or at
all in the Christian teaching. I can't explain why I delight in
calling myself and remaining a Hindu, but my remaining does not
prevent me from assimilating all that is good and noble in Chris-
tianity, Islam and other faiths of the world.
I wonder if I have explained my position to your satisfac-
tion. If not please ask.
All you say about Bardoli is quite true.
Yours sincerely,
REV. B. W. TUCKER
PRINCIPAL, COLLINS HIGH SCHOOL
140 DHARMTALA, STREET, CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 13505
some further explanation from you. It is in regard to your statement that
people belonging to a certain religious group or holding certain religious
views, ought not to even remotely desire that others should accept their
viewpoint. I may not have quoted you correctly; as I remember it, your
statement may have been even stranger than that . . . . "
For a report of
Gandhiji's talk at the Council, vide Vol. XXXV, pp. 461-.
