426. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
BANARAS,
September 26, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
You know that Parsuram who has stayed in the Ashram in
the past, is at present working in the Banaras Hindu University.
He will come there in a few days. At present he has holidays for
a month and will spend the time there. Give him some work to
do. He will certainly do such labour as sanitary work. But, in addi-
tion, those who are making special efforts to learn Hindi may avail
themselves of his services.
There is also a student of Tilak Vidyalaya who is at present
studying in the Hindu Vishvavidyalaya; he too is filled with the
spirit of renunciation and now wishes to come and stay in the
Ashram. I have asked him to write to you. If he remains firm in
the decision which he announced to me today, he should be ad-
mitted. He seems to know Wamanrao Pataki quite well.
LUCKNOW,
September 27, 1929
I dictated the paragraph above in Kashi, and now I finish
the letter in Lucknow. We get today the post which reaches here
yesterday. Among others, I have your letter giving detailed infor-
mation. You have given a good description of your difficulties.
The fewer the women's classes conducted by Narandas that are
broken up, the better. We had better not give up making bread in
sheer helplessness. Those who fell ill did not become ill because
of this work. There is nothing in it which should cause illness.
There can be only one reason for their illness. Those engaged in
making bread may have eaten too many sample bits of bread.
Was not this the case with that graduate?
We should be able to satisfy Lakshmi's desire to learn Guja-
rati better. If Valji's time can be spared, he has the necessary
qualifications and he has satisfied others who learnt the subject
from him.
I understand from your letter that the house occupied by
Mahadev has not been made over to us. I am certainly ready to
write to Santok whenever you want me to do so.
lt was not my suggestion that Gangabehn should herself make
the bread. I felt, however, that it would do if she could super-
vise the mixing of materials. Hasmukhrai, Pataki or perhaps
Bhanushankar may be able to do the job.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5447; also Bapuna Patro-7: Shri
Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 143-
