319. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
Unrevised
August 7, 1934
DEAR AGATHA,
Your love-letters continue to pour in on me. And as you
have been hearing regularly from someone or other of the (now)
many companions, I do not write to you. This is to tell you I
entered upon the little fast at 6 a.m. today and to ask you not to
worry. But where is the meaning in asking you not to worry
when I know that this letter would reach you only after the fast
will have become a faint memory?
That the fast is a fitting finish to the Harijan tour I have
no doubt. It is a great spiritual instrument.
That Protestantism
has virtually discarded it is a distinct loss to it and the world
seeing what a power it is today in the world. However, I must
not argue about it. If it is a desideratum of the soul, there are too
many seekers after truth among Protestants not to feel the want
of it sooner or later.
During this month I shall be resting in Wardha and collect-
ing my thoughts. What is in store for me in September I do not
know.
But this I do know. To go to the Frontier Province or
to Bengal or to both alternately is a craving of the soul. Where
to go first I do not know. If the so-called Red Shirts are violent, I
must know them and disown them. If they are not, I must
defend them against the slur cast on them. Those who are not
given to lying and are well able to judge have testified to their
non-violence. These are Khurshed Naoroji, a much-travelled woman
of exquisite purity and honesty, Elwin whom you know and
Devdas whom too you know are the three eye-witnesses. And
yet the British official testimony is equally emphatic the other
way. It cannot be all manufacture. The mystery can only be
solved if I am permitted to go and live in their midst. This is
a fundamental necessity-greater perhaps than that of going to
Bengal from one point of view. I go to the Frontier to find the
truth and act accordingly. I go to Bengal not to find any truth
but to try to wean terrorists from terrorism. Detention of Abdul
Ghaffar Khan and Jawaharlal is a great disturbing factor and a
wholly unnecessary irritant. But this detention, while it worries
me, does not just now appeal to me as a cause of war. Now
you have an analysis of my mind as it is likely to be at the end
of the month. What occupies my mind at present is how to
achieve the purity of the Congress and to rid the Ashram here
of subtle untruth and breaches of brahmacharya. Perhaps you are
not sufficiently interested in such things. Here I was interrupted
by an army of doctors. They have overhauled the system and
say I must not do any writing even this first day of the fast. So
goodbye and much love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1478
