160. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Magsar Sud 1, [19]83 [December 20, 1926]
DEAR SISTERS,
I got Chi. Radha's letters written on behalf of all of you.
It is good that you have chosen Gangabehn as your leader. But
may I draw your attention to the necessity of your helping her
to discharge her duties well, now that you have made her your
leader? By appointing an illiterate sister of yours as your leader,
you have given due importance to character and sacrifice. This is
as it should be. Knowledge is useless without character. Have
no doubt whatever about this.
A leader means the most important servant. A king acquires
the right to issue orders only when he has risen above all others
in his ability to serve. His orders would then be, not for
serving his self-interest, but for the good of the community.
These days irreligion parades as religion. Kings, therefore, run
after pleasures instead of living as men of self-sacrifice, and
exercise authority only to that end. But you have appointed
Gangabehn as your leader with a religious aim. This means
that you have decided Gangabehn to be the chief servant among
you all who are trying to become servants.
Please remember that all of you are tied to Mother India
with a cord of hand-spun yarn. If you give up spinning, you
give up service too. Do not, therefore, neglect the spinning-wheel.
Today Rama dwells in the spinning-wheel. The fire of starvation
is raging all around. I do not see any other help against it ex-
cept through the spinning-wheel. God always reveals Himself
to us in some concrete shape. That is why we sing of Draupadi
that for her God took the form of garments. Anyone who desires
to see God today may see Him in the form of the spinning-wheel.
I have exceeded my limits. I did not wish to write more
than two sheets. I cannot cope with my work if I become too
greedy to write to you.
I send to Chi. Maganlal all the letters of Mirabehn. I want
all you sisters to listen to them carefully, try to understand them
and reflect over them. In my view she is at present the ideal
woman worker among us.
1 Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi
By asking me to write to you on good paper with a margin,
Radha has laid on me a fairly heavy burden. I shall bear it as
far as I can.
I say nothing regarding my health, since it is very good.
Jamnalalji and Janakibehn are sheltering me and giving me plenty
of quiet. It seems I have gained four pounds. I am able to eat
well. At every meal I eat a little of what Ba prepares for me.
I have still some of it left.
I shall leave this place tomorrow. Mithubehn1, Jamnabehn
and Perinbehn are coming here from Bombay for khadi work.
I shall meet them at Gondia. You should find out from the map
where Gondia is.
Dakshabehn and the German lady left yesterday, the former
for Bardoli and the latter for Banaras.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3630
