142. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
[September 19, 1932]
CHI. GANGABEHN,
Nowadays you have been writing fairly regularly. Do not
at all be alarmed or upset by the yajna I have in mind. I am
going to have you all undertake similar sacrifices. I will leave
this body-if I have to-with the faith that you will be able to
do it. This is the only way to atone for the sins accumulated
through generations.
Such a vow is not to be imitated. It can be fulfilled only
if there is a spontaneous urge. If the urge is felt while the mind
is not yet pure, the fast is likely to be demoniacal. Hence such
a yajna should be undertaken only if there has been a prior cleans-
ing of the heart. The Ashram has come into existence to help
people attain such purity.
But you say that one hears much criticism of the Ashram.
You should bear with the criticism. The cause for it, if found
to be just, should be examined and corrected. We should be
indifferent to what is not true. People have a right to say what
they feel. And some may find fault simply out of spite. Is not
such criticism beneath consideration?
There is some truth in what we have been hearing about
. . .1. And whatever little there is deserves to be overlooked. My
little experience of . . .2 is very good. He is a simple man. . . .3
has not been enjoying herself there. . . .4 needed a change of
climate. Since it could be easily had she availed herself of it.
. . .5 's relations [with her] are absolutely pure. . . . 6 has not
been living there in an unbecoming way. Her letter has given
me the impression that she has continued to make such efforts
as she can to purify her atman. But now . . .7 has fallen. I have
therefore suggested to him to lead Ashram life.
Now about your loss of peace. There are two reasons for
it. First, you are not satisfied with your own performance. You
aspire to do much more than you can. Your desire would be
commendable if it were within limits. When it crosses the limits
the result is grief. A greater reason for the loss of your peace is
your intolerance. You are irked when others fail to work as
much as you can or do not agree with you. The remedy for it is
simple. You should rest content with whatever work you can do
after applying your body and mind to it and continue to make
such progress as you can. You should realize that one who does
scavenging has as much right to go to heaven as one who learns
the Vedas. But if a scholar of the Vedas is a mere reciter of
the text or a hypocrite he will go to hell however learned he
may be and a scavenger who daily cleans latrines in a spirit of
service and dedicating his services unto God would certainly rise
high although he may not know the word Brahman. This con-
tentment is one remedy. The other is a liberal attitude. We
should not take it amiss if others do not work as much as we
ourselves do or want them to do. Only in this way can we
maintain peace in the community in spite of living close to one
another. Read this letter over and over again and think over it
with the help of Nath. Please accommodate . . .1 behn. What
more can I wish than that you will shine out if it is God's will?
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro -6: G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 73-. Also Mahadevbhaini Diary,
Vol. II, pp. 50-
