292. LETTER TO NARENDRA DEVA
BENARES,
August 2, 1934
DEAR NARENDRA DEVA,
I was thankful for the two hearty meetings with the socialist
friends during the all too few days I have been with you and en-
joyed your hospitality.
I promised to study your draft programme and let you have
my criticism on it. I cannot say I have studied it as carefully
as I would have liked to. The following therefore is meant as a
cursory criticism by no means exhaustive.
I think that it is wrong to call the party 'Congress Socialist
Party' unless you apply for permission to make it part of the
Congress organization. But it would be quite proper to call it
'All-India Socialist Party of Congressmen'. I am sure you realize
the significance of the distinction.
I miss in your draft constitution acceptance of the Congress
objective of attainment of puma swaraj by legitimate and peaceful
means.
If it is an intentional omission I can understand it. For your
object seems to be far different from that of the Congress. You
perhaps claim that it is far ahead of the object of the Congress.
Even so you cannot then call yourself a Congress party.
The object of the Congress is to form an independent State.
What that State will be we can but dimly guess. Some of its
features we have already determined. Experience teaches us daily
new things to add. But your enunciation of the socialist object
frightens me. The implications of all the three principles are too
vast for my comprehension. They make an intoxicating programme.
I fear all intoxicants.
I now take by way of illustration what appear to me to be
objectionable items in your programme. Items 7 and 8 are con-
trary to the present policy of the Congress. Though I have all my
life identified myself with the masses and renounced possession of
private property, I do not contemplate the elimination of the
princes and the landlords nor do I contemplate redistribution of land
to peasants. I aim at reformation of the princes and the landlords.
It is possible, without a violent redistribution of land, to secure for
tenants rights which virtually amount to ownership. I like item
11, which 7 and 8 and some others seem to me to contradict.
To everyone "according to his needs" should be, in my opinion,
a perfect formula if you can find place for "just" before "needs".
That alone sums up all you can wish for for the most helpless
and forlorn among the millions of our . . . 1. Your fifth method,
as I conceive it, is a negation of non-violence. I fail to find any
justification for refusal to enter at any stage into negotiations on
the constitutional issue with the British Government. The Con-
gress did not adopt that policy even in the heyday of non-co-
operation. I am sure this is a hasty interpolation.
Your "general strikes of workers and peasants" without any
qualification is too dangerous for a sober, non-violent programme.
Your immediate demands are attractive with the exception of
a few items. But I find nothing in your methods to show that you
have any hope of immediate attainment.
I draw your attention to glaring omissions :
Removal of untouchability.
Communal unity.
Khaddar as symbol of identity with the masses and immediate
occupation till a better is found for the millions who are unem-
ployed for six or four months in the year.
Total prohibition of intoxicating drugs and drinks.
I plead for a drastic revision of the whole constitution. We
are both labouring under a heavy handicap in that Jawaharlal, who
has given us the mantra of socialism, is not in our midst, and I
consider him to be the natural wearer of the Congress crown of
thorns when I and other elderly men and women have been per-
mitted to take well-deserved rest. I feel sure that if he was in our
midst, he would have hastened slowly. I suggest your presenting
the country with practical socialism in keeping with Indian con-
ditions instead of scientific socialism as your programme has been
called. I am glad that the programme you have given me is but
draft though prepared by an influential committee appointed for the
purpose. It would be wise, if when you settle your programme
finally, you will associate with you men who have socialist lean-
ings and have experience of actual conditions.
Yours sincerely,
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. III, between pp. 344 and 345
