48. LETTER TO J. W. PETAVEL
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 23, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I hope you duly received my previous letter. You sent me
your book at an opportune moment. Whilst I am convalescing,
I have nothing to do but read what little I can and dictate a few
letters and a few articles. I therefore took up your book with a
view to learn the central fact of your programme, policy or teach-
ing whatever it might be described as. I have just finished it and
I am now dictating this letter. I am sorry to say that the book
has not made any appeal to me. What is true in it, I began do-
ing in 1909-10 when for the satyagrahis of the Transvaal a friend
gave me the use of 1,100 acres of land which he and I called
Tolstoy Farm. There we were doing exactly what you have sug-
gested. Boys and their relatives everyone was expected to work,
and boys had some tuition, plenty of work and plenty of play. If
they were examined today some of them might perhaps say they
would have preferred all play and no work, and the more
modest ones might say they would have preferred more play and
less work. But I was unable to advance any claim on behalf of
that colony which you advance on behalf of yours. I wish that
your claim could be sustained.
I very carefully studied the association's appeal to busy people.
The picture suggested by your diagram No. 1 of the future, I fear,
for a long time to come will remain a mere picture. c.d. may in
course of time be magnified into C.D. But it will be absorbed
as it is being absorbed now by A.B.
You have headed three chapters, "A Lesson from Switzer-
land", "Belgium" and "America". On going through the chap-
ters, I find nothing of what these three countries are doing except
a bare mention. I am not wiser about the Swiss method, no wiser
about the Belgian or the American method. And your advice
to copy the rapid locomotion of America, makes me giddy even
to read it. I suppose, if you succeed (say) in converting Calcutta
into a second New York with moving platforms and fourfold rail-
ways, etc., etc., and take me there to witness the marvellous perfor-
mance, I should fall dead at the very sight of the thing. I have
numerous, I was going to say innumerable, American friends. But
they have all assured me that there is beneath the untold wealth
of America, degradation, superstition and vice incarnate and the
inequalities between A.B. and B.C. are enormous and that B.C.
is being successfully exploited by A.B., in many cases B.C. not even
knowing how. As I think of your chapter on America, I recall
what Stead wrote many years ago, "If Christ Came to Chicago".
And if my present informants have not misled me, what Stead
wrote now nearly 40 years ago is truer today than when he
wrote that biting article.
Of the Belgian and the Swiss examples I can say nothing; for,
I know nothing. And you have given neither facts nor figures. Your
book reminds me of what Ruskin wrote somewhere and which may
be thus paraphrased: If men become machines and if bone and
muscle could be removed from these machines, they could be
flattened into bricks of a required size and these human bricks
could then be consolidated into a majestic pyramid and made
to do anything that the controller of these bricks desired. But un-
fortunately or fortunately you have to deal not with machines
but with bony, intelligent muscle each having its own individuality
and each pulling its own way. I wonder if your lineal cities, co-
operative schemes, garden suburbs and transformed educational
methods all drawn up with exactness and printed in beautiful
type will change society in the manner you expect without devising
some means of appealing to the soul within. I conclude with what
I have said before to you: show some concrete example on a fairly
large scale of successful policy so that a practical man like me may
learn something.
Yours sincerely,
CAPTAIN J. W. PETAVEL, ESQ.
BAGH BAZAAR
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 14171
