73. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
November 19, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You will be pleased to hear that Call is now at the Farm. I went
over to Pretoria to fetch him. He is looking fit and well. He was
overjoyed to be discharged from the asylum which he did not like at
all. He has been discharged only provisionally. I have signed a paper
undertaking to look after him and to produce a medical certificate at
a later date as to his sanity. His memory is certainly weak but he
is not insane in any shape or form. I am giving him your felt mat
and your blankets. He is using bed-sheets. I propose to keep him with
me during all the Farm week. We sawed wood together this morning.
Gordon has come to see Call. I feel somewhat angry with myself I
should have gone to Pretoria earlier. In that case probably Call would
have come to the Farm earlier. As it is, he wrote to the Lapins who
telephoned to me. Hence his discharge.
Stewarts & Lloyds' man comes tomorrow (Monday) to erect the
windmill. John has now got 4 oxen. I have to pay £ 32 for them and
a plough.
1 The Indian Bazaar organized by Mrs. Vogl, who sympathized with the Indian
cause and took a keen interest in Indian women. The Bazaar had been held by her
in 1910, and in 1911 was inaugurated on November 15 by William Hosken.
I am surprised to learn that you did not receive any letter during
the week you wrote your last letter. I have never failed and hope not
to in future so long as you are away.
I am glad to have the news about your niece. Nevertheless my
remarks of last week are not without their use.
The fence is all but complete. I am not satisfied with the way
in which the gate has been fixed. I do not know the thing and Albrecht
in my opinion has made a mess of it. Poor man, he worked at it 3
days. He will work again at it. Only 500 yards are now left.
The Bazaar went off very nicely. The Mayor and the Town Clerk
were present. Nearly £100 profits were made; no raffle was permitted.
I fear that we shall not have much fruit this time in our garden.
This is due to want of rain. And I was not able to water the trees.
Lapin felt disappointed over not hearing from you at all after you
left Madeira.
I hope that you have been writing to your brother here.
I think that your letter to Mrs. Ritch was very good.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
