58. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
October 22, 1941
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have kept by me your letter of 15th July. I did not know
what to say nor do I know now. I understand your earnestness
and grief. But I do not know how to console you. However detach-
ed you may try to be, you cannot but be influenced by your
surroundings. It is equally true of me, not to talk of others. Add to
this the difficulty of answering in the middle of October a letter
written in the middle of July. And this when every day means
new history. I have therefore the greatest reluctance even to write
to you in spite of the pleasure it gives me to write to you. But I
must try.
Distrust of the Rulers is growing and spreading. The distance is
increasing. We here perceive no difference between Hitlerism and
British Imperialism. Hitlerism is a superfine copy of Imperialism
and Imperialism is trying to overtake Hitlerism as fast as it can.
Democracy is nowhere. In this unholy duel, so far as I can see,
non-violence is working its way in a silent but sure manner. My
faith in it is daily growing stronger. Whether as Polak says, and as
you almost hint, I think, in your most gentle manner, it can stand
the strain if bombs were dropping near my feet and I was witnessing
dear ones being crushed to death, I cannot say. I rehearse such
situations, I pray that the faith might not break under such strain.
I flatter myself with the belief that I can feel these things from
afar. I did shed a silent tear when I read about the damage done
to the Houses of Parliament, the Westminster Abbey and St. Paul's.
Nevertheless this is all speculation. If I fail in the examination, if
it ever came to me, I shall have the courage to admit my weakness
but I will not deny my faith in non-violence.
Of communal unity there is no immediate hope, though I
believe that it will come sooner than we expect. But that will bring
no settlement with the British Government. In their declarations
there are many impossible conditions. One is that we must get the
Princes also to agree. Now the Princes mean the British Govern-
ment, for the former are the latter's creation and they cannot even
talk openly with anybody but by the latter's consent.
The Rulers feel a sense of security in the existing situation.
The Princes obedient, the Muslim League showing its harmless
teeth, and the Congress led by me following its equally harmless
Civil Disobedience. They find no difficulty in squeezing the last
pice and getting as many recruits as they want.
Can you now have a glimpse of why you find endless diffi-
culties in the pursuit of your thankless task? But you must . . .2 It
is never wasted if it is sown in cultivable soil.
My own and hence the Congress method is incredibly simple.
Its token Civil Disobedience must continue. It will blaze forth
when the question of embarrassment disappears. The Congress is
ready for any honourable compromise with any party including the
Rulers, consistently with its fundamentals. Nothing short of Com-
plete Independence can be acceptable to the Congress. The Con-
gress cannot be party to the war efforts and therefore cannot take
office. But Civil Disobedience can be stopped if free speech consis-
tently with non-violence is recognized and all political prisoners are
unconditionally discharged. This excludes those who have been
tried and found guilty of actual violence unless they repent. It in-
cludes all untried men. So far as I can see, the Congress will not
change its policy so long as I am alive and well enough to think
clearly and advise. There is no one who has any sympathy with
Nazism or Fascism but there is no one who has any sympathy for
Imperialism [either], not even the recruits who hire themselves
out for the sake of bread. Some join because they want military
training at any cost.
Now you have a picture as true as I can draw of India to date.
My advice is don't worry, don't fret. You need not write, need
not speak, unless you feel an irresistible impulse. Let prayer of the
heart be our sole and sure refuge. It is enough to realize that not
a blade moves but by His will. He allows this slaughter. We do not
know why. But if we keep our hands, head and heart stainless let
us believe that in His own good time, He will use us to stop this
apparently senseless mutual slaughter.
Amrit is not with me for the moment. She is in Simla resting.
Indira is resting in Mussoorie and keeping fairly well. Padmaja
is in Hyderabad. She is chronically ill.
I have in mind Andrews constantly. I will not rest till I have
finished the Memorial work. Please send my love to his sisters.
I had the joint cable of good wishes from you three.
Thank you.
Love.
BAPU
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1522
