374. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[Before March 9, 1907] 1
[MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,]
I have your two letters. I entirely agree with you. I am glad you
have got thirteen pages this time. I am writing to Mr. West to persuade
him. I anticipated your objection about the splitting up of letters
in Gujarati words. I noticed the defect at Volksrust, where I was
yesterday, and then and there wrote to Anandlal. I sent some Gujarati
matter and a lot of English from Volksrust. I hope you received both.
I enclose herewith an order for 1,000 handbills to be printed in
Dutch and English. The paper may be any size not less than octavo.
The English and Dutch should be as written on the enclosed. You
should send 1,000 copies of this to Mr. A. E. M. Cachalia, Box 97,
Volksrust. Please, also, put him down as a subscriber for Volksrust.
You may already have the name for Pretoria also. I have agreed to
charge £1 for 1,000 handbills. Of course, the railage will be extra.
When the order is ready, you may send him your bill for £1 and sub-
scription.
He has promised to send you an advertisement also
within a week or so. If he does not send it, you may remind me.
I fear you will have to make some alterations in the Hamidia rules.
Mr. Fancy properly drew my attention to the fact that the English
rules were more numerous than the Gujarati. You will, therefore, see
the changes made by me. I have struck off from 49 to 53 inclusive;
48 has been replaced by another to read the same as the Gujarati, so,
also has No. 22. You will see it more fully in the body of the rules
which I am sending. Mr. Fancy has made some necessary corrections
in the Gujarati matter also, which, too, you should note. You need
not then send any further proof, but simply proceed with the printing.
I have not gone through the English word for word, but I take it that
there are no mistakes of spelling, etc. The [word,] Press, in Gujarati
is printed in inverted type. This, of course, should be corrected. With
reference to the closet arrangement for Harilal and Dhoribhai, I certainly
think that we should dig the trench if we have been doing so for the
barrack people. I do not think that we should ask the employees to dig
1 It is clear from the reference, towards the end of the letter, to Coovadia's
advertisement, which appeared regularly in Indian Opinion till March 2, 1907 but was
then discontinued, that this letter was written before March 9, 1907.
2 This letter is not available.
their trenches, unless they would do so of their own accord. I felt exactly
the same thing as you have. I then argued it out for myself and gave
the decision. At the same time if the barrack people have been digging
their own trenches, it simply means that you have to get the structure
erected and leave Harilal and Dhoribhai to dig the trench. The thing
is that, somehow or other, it has got to be done.
I am writing to Mr. Lachiram. I have not heard from Tongaat
regarding Gokaldas. I note what you say about the desk for Harilal.
The enclosed household account is correct. . .1 strike A. Coovadia's
name off the list of subscribers and his advertisement, as he is broken.
I return the letter.
M. K. Desai's letter with regard to Enavil's business is not to be
printed. As a matter of fact, a copy of the same letter was shown by
him to me and I told him that the letter could not go in.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[Enclosures]
C. K. GANDHI ESQ.
[PHOENIX]
From a photostat of the typewritten original: S. N. 4912
