423. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
May 18/21, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
The letter I wrote to you last Monday seems to have been
posted as late as Friday. That is what a jail is, after all.
See that my letters are not published.
Write to Thakkar Bapa and inquire whether the work on
wells for Antyajas is proceeding. If he is short of funds, give him
some money from what is lying with us, that is, from the money
which we have handed over to Jamnalalji.
My hours are divided as follows:
Brushing the teeth, lavatory, bath
2 hours
Prayers, twice
1 hour
Nap during day-time
1½ hours
Meals and preparation for them
3 hours
Repairing the spinning-wheel, blowing and
spraying the yarn, etc.
3½ hours
Spinning on the takli
2½ hours
Walking in the yard
1½ hours
Reading, meeting the Jailor
2 hours
From 4 a.m. to 9 p.m.
17 hours
I discovered from experience that oranges were not neces-
sary. I have, therefore, given them up for the present. This
means that my diet consists of dates, raisins, milk and curds, and
sour lime and soda bicarb. If I find it necessary to do so, I will
include oranges. I found today that by adding a fairly good
quantity of curd to unboiled milk, we get well-formed curd.
Yesterday I had mixed curd in unboiled milk. I still take unboiled
43-27
milk. I keep good health. I was weighed again and I found that
I had lost no weight.
I am at present reading Edwin Arnold's The Light of Asia. I do
get a newspaper. It is the Times. I shall now be supplied the
Chronicle too. I have been permitted to get Young India, Navajivan,
The Modern Review and Indian Social Reformer. If I want, I can get
some others too.
I think I wrote to you that I had started bathing in hot
water.
You need not worry about me at all. This time going to jail is
enjoying oneself.
I was very glad to read Kumarappa's name in Young India.
He is certainly a worthy man.
You can write a letter giving general information and send
with it as many others of the same type as you like.
I cannot give any political message. You can give informa-
tion about everyone.
Does Rukhi write to you? How is she? Do you hear from
Umiya? Tell Kusum junior that she has not replied to my special
letter. She is a cunning girl. Navin and Dhiru must be doing fine.
Boys, girls, all of them can write to me.
How is Dr. Kanuga, the person for whom vegetables are sent
from the Ashram?
You must have made arrangements for Amina's confinement.
Where is Imam Saheb? How is he?
Who were the four boys who were let off as being too young?
Where are they? Which are the places the women have spread
themselves over?
How is the work going on in the dairy, the tannery and on the
farm? How many looms are working?
The well near the office was to be cleaned. If it has not been
cleaned and if it can be, get it cleaned. Is Keshu contented? How
is his health?
Tell Radha to write to me. I do not write separately to her.
I feel like writing to many others, but how can I do that?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I do not regard the experiment of making curds from unboiled
milk to have succeeded completely. On the first day, I thought
it was all right. I do not know whether the quantity of curd mixed
in the milk was not correct, but the next sample was not well
formed. The experiment is continuing.
BAPU
[PPS.]
Prabhavati's address: A.I.C.C. Office, Allahabad.
From Gujarati: C.W. 8111. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
