227. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
KUNDAPUR,
February 26, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your message through Lakshmidas. The description is
good, the whole of it. You seem to have done very good reading.
My mental condition at present is such that I don't feel
happy when somebody asks me for my decision on any matter
and I hesitate even to offer advice. Since, obeying my nature,
I regard myself as released only for Harijan work, I feel very
reluctant to offer advice to or guide anybody.
Moreover, in
individual civil disobedience where is the need for advising any-
body? My attitude, therefore, is that you should follow your
own inclination. Don't think what would please me. You may
assume that your wish will be mine.
Having said this, I will now say what I think. I think it
would be better not to remove Dhiru from Bhavnagar. You may
go and see him. I think it would be advisable to let Rama stay
in Wardha. You should, therefore, go and see her too. If you
are very eager to see me, you can do so in Belgaum on the 5th
and the 6th. How can they let you come to Belgaum without
permitting you to cross into British territory once? If they do
permit you and if you very much wish, don't have the slightest
hesitation in coming. You need not go anywhere to attend a
wedding. It may perhaps be your duty to satisfy your wish
to see your brother. I have said all this without taking into
account your feelings or those of Rama, Dhiru and Kalyanrai.
Not only are you free but it is your moral duty to make what-
ever changes may be dictated by those feelings. Reflect over
verses 6 and 7 in Chapter III [of the Gita]. "What then will
constraint avail?" applies in circumstances like these. We can
control our feelings only up to a certain point. If we repress them
beyond that limit, they poison the system and erupt like raw
mercury. Everybody, therefore, should fix his or her own limit.
Pyarelal has been released. He is in Wardha. Chandra-
shankar has gone somewhere there for 15 days.
I therefore
wonder if they will meet at some place. I don't write anything
about myself, as I wish to save time. If I had sufficient time, I
would fill pages.
I have just received a wire informing me that Lakshmidas has
been having enteric fever for the last eight days. The mercury
shoots up very high. Swami is with him. He is in Patna.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5516
