175. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
July 12, 1936
CHI. GANGABEHN,
Cooking and washing clothes are no small service. There
is an idea abroad these days that only the educated can do pub-
lic service and the value of cooking and similar work has gone
down very much. But did you not see that at Sabarmati the
responsibility of the kitchen was entrusted only to a mature
and experienced Ashram worker? When the Ashram was first
established at Kochrab, I had in the beginning assumed the
responsibility myself. Subsequently it was passed on to Vinoba,
Kaka and others, and a worker like Vrajlal lost his life while
attending to the washing of clothes. Even when he joined, he
had asked to be allowed to do all the clothes-washing, though
he could do accounting and possessed a handwriting beautiful
as a string of pearls. At a time of difficulty once, the charge
of the store had to be entrusted to him. Without such workers
we can never hope to win swaraj.
What I have said above doesn't mean, however, that you
may not increase your knowledge of letters when you get the
opportunity to do so or that you should not encourage others
in their desire to learn. All that I mean is that anybody who
hankers after education, neglecting the dharma that has fallen
to his lot unsought, is committing an error.
Do come to Wardha before going to Bochasan. Gomati
will try to drag you to her place. Besides, there are Maganwadi
and Mahila Ashram also. Janakibehn is there, too, and, if you
wish, you can come to me at Segaon and even stay with me,
though we have only one room here for all of us. Only lately
Tukdoji Maharaj has come and has been assigned one corner.
The room is large enough, 29 x 14, with a 7' verandah running
all round. In one corner of the verandah is a small kitchen and
in another a bathroom for me. The walls are made of mud.
The entire building is constructed with purely local materials.
All around in this season our eyes rest on green fields.
Mirabehn lives by herself in a hut smaller than this room,
about a mile and a half from here.
It is very essential that Bachubhai does not ignore any of
the restrictions regarding food or exertion.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-6: G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 91-. Also C.W. 8832. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya
