434. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 16, 1911
MY DEAR POLAK,
I pass on the cutting received from Ritch. I hope that the report
of the Ritch presentation will go in in full at an early date. Just at
this time it is very seasonable. I send you the enclosed from the All-
India Moslem League. I do not like the advertising idea underlying it,
but I fear that we have to publish it. Naidoo has sent me for correction
a petition drafted either by himself or by Aiyar regarding the £3 tax.
In spite of your remarks in one of your letters, I still very much distrust
Aiyar's good faith. He is a man of the moment. He will write one thing
today, and just the opposite tomorrow. He is thoroughly unscrupulous,
and I am nervous about his handling any matters of public importance,
and I am much more so when he is disposed to patronise me. I like him
best when he swears at me and publicly goes for me. I know that then
he would not ask me to assist in any of his public activities. I fear that
he is now hoodwinking P. K. Naidoo on the strength of his being a
Brahmin, and possessing a better knowledge of the English language
than Naidoo. Now you will more fully understand my advice [to]
P.K. Naidoo. I send you copy of my letter to him. I feel for him, because
I consider him to be infinitely superior to Aiyar in character. All the
children and most of the passive resisters on the Farm are in Johannes-
burg today. I brought them out by special car. The Traffic Manager
quoted specially favourable terms. For 26 men and children the return
journey costs £1/12/. I propose to go back with them on Saturday by
the one o'clock train, unless you or Ritch retain me in Johannesburg.
Of course, I return to the Farm every evening. I was glad to notice
through the telephone today that your voice was much stronger and bet-
ter. I hope there is no trace of cold now left. I enclose herewith copy
of my letter to the Pretoria News. I am writing the letter because I pro-
mised I would, but, on re-reading the interview, I see that I need not
have written the letter. Stent has sufficiently explained my view about
Natal and the Cape. The little inaccuracy about the figures and the
concluding paragraph as to my satisfaction do not matter. However,
my letter I hope you will consider sufficient.
Sincerely yours,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5302
