96. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 1, 1926
DEAR SATIS BABU,
It is now morning of New Year's day. I reached here yester-
day noon.
Bharucha told me that you were sad and moody. [He] could
not make out the reason nor could I. I asked Jamnalalji. He
told me the moodiness was probably due to something in con-
nection with the examination of the spinning competition. What-
ever the cause, you dare not be moody or morose. You must learn
to rough it and get on under all circumstances. You and I and
several others have embarked upon a work of service the equal of
which I do not know in the whole world. The greater the service
the greater the restraint, the greater the toleration the greater the
suffering required. Nothing therefore can be allowed to ruffle our
spirits. We must be able to get on with all temperaments. Please
then let me have a line that you are yourself again. Do you know
the song 'Cheer, boys, cheer, no more of idle sorrow'? You
must read again and again the Song Celestial by Edwin Arnold.
I had a good mind to talk to you. Then I thought of taking
you with me. To talk I had no time. I did not wish to take
you with me from your work. I intended too to bring Dr. Suresh
in touch with you again. His work appeals to me. His method
has a place. But I wanted to discuss the whole thing with you.
It could not be. Now you must come here whenever you can.
You should write what you like without the slightest hesita-
tion. I am now fixed up here for one year.
Now about Hemprabha Devi. I had fairly long chats with her.
But I could see she did not open out her mind to me. She should
come at the earliest possible time. If she needs separate cooking
accommodation, I shall find it for her. A Bengali teacher is
available. But if you can give her a good scholar for the boys, you
may do so. Let her come whilst the weather is fairly cold. It has
been an exceptionally mild winter here—nothing compared to
Cawnpore.
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
Your advertisement pamphlet I have read from cover to
cover. It is very good. What is your sale of the travelling charkha ?
From a photostat: G.N. 1557
