456. LETTER TO SUBHADRA, SARALA AND JAYADEVI
April 13, 1933
CHI. SUBHADRA, SARALA AND JAYADEVI,
How can I say to you, you will reap as you sow? The
sanatanists say: 'The Harijans reap as they sow. How can we
commit the sin of helping them to improve their condition in
disregard of that law?' If I were to apply the sanatanists' logic
to you, I would have to demolish the little nest I have built
for the Harijans. Since I can't do that, you are safe. Accord-
ing to the sanatanists' idea of justice, since you wrote your letter
with a lead pencil, I should reply with a pencil made of stone,
shouldn't I? But our aim is to win over even the sanatanists.
397
But you have shown that you deserve Nandubehn's descrip-
tion of you. As soon as you were out, you showed your nature.
You started straight away drinking leaf-water. And dry leaves
at that! I must say Chinese bullocks are better than Kathiawari
bullocks. They also drink leaf-water but the leaves are green. If
you again run away to the cattle-pen in a huff, Sardar is generous
and will forgive your getting angry and so you need not be afraid.
In one sense the description given by Nandubehn seems to
be perfectly apt. Has anybody ever heard of cows, bullocks,
horses and other animals worrying? If animals had knowledge,
they would be no less than yogis. It is said that yoga is extreme-
ly difficult for men to practise, but that it is part of women's
nature. If a woman gives up ignorant attachment, she could
easily be a yogini. But all of you are only learned animals!!!
Remember that if you squander away the health cultivated in the
yoga school by eating all kinds of sweets, you will deserve to be
punished for that.
In your next letter describe some other doings of yours, na-
mely, what you read, etc.
I am helpless about Manibehn. I write to her, but she does
not get my letters. After all there must be some indications that
one is a prisoner.
Kevalrambhai and my elder brother were of the same age.
Both were liberal and extravagant. They both loved luxuries and
comforts. In their old age, both of them lost interest in worldly
pleasures and pursuits. They wrote to me, independently of each
other, that they wished to join me in South Africa and spend the
rest of their life there and hand over their children to my care.
I gladly welcomed their desire and made preparations to receive
them. But fate was unkind to me. They left me. I never got
my elder brother's children under my care, though I tried hard
to get them. But I got all of you without trying. Shall we
attribute this to fate ruling human relations, or to the ripening
of the fruit of our deeds in past lives? Now that you have come,
do not leave me. Everybody who wishes may have a share in
what I have to give. Secure as much of it as you can and wish
good name for yourself in life. Where has that Chandrahasa
hidden himself?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Where is Nirmala? How is she?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4087. Also C.W. 52. Courtesy:
Mangalabehn B. Desai
