304. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
May 30, 1919
MY DEAR HENRY,
I know you nowadays only through your work in the columns
of India. I had a sweet letter from Millie which I cannot separately
reply to for the present. Through the weakness of the heart, my
hands shake. I have just enough energy to go through the strug-
gle. I hope you are making the two ends meet and that you
are all keeping well. Do please tell Pater, Mater, Maud and
Sally that I often think of them and their many kindnesses. The
Ashram is making steady progress and so is the Rashtriya School.
Now for business :
Herewith my letter to the Viceroy and notes on the Satyagraha
Conference. None of these is meant for publication.
Mrs. Naidu is coming there shortly for her health. She is a
wonderful woman. Do come close to her.
I see that Mr. Montagu has made a speech approving of the
Rowlatt legislation, and defending it. Well, he may defend it as
much as he pleases. It has got to go. The study of the present
struggle is a wonderful repetition of that of South Africa. There
are some who will die in the attempt to secure its repeal. The
Government want to show that they can afford to disregard public
opinion. We must show that they cannot do so. In soul-force
v. brute force, there can only be one result. Only soul's forces
are all so scattered and faithless. The brute is well organized
and disciplined. Though therefore the issue is certain, the battle
is naturally being prolonged.
It is likely that Mr. Montagu will tell the army of delegates that
is going there to choose between Reforms and the repeal of the
Rowlatt legislation. I hope, you will tell them what their choice
should be. Repeal is Reform. No reform is worth anything so
long as the bureaucracy remains unbending.
I hope, you have sought out Mr. Horniman if he has not sought
you out. Please keep him informed of all the doings here. Mahadev
writes to him and Mr. Shastriar every week. He is on the sick list.
And I am too exhausted to write any more letters just now.
With love,
Yours,
BHAI
From a photostat : S.N. 6627
