233. LETTER TO CHANDRASHANKAR PANDYA
April 26, 1919
I was very happy indeed to read your letter, as I was anxious
to know how you were keeping. What is this ailment of yours, from
which you have still not recovered? There is an institution in
Agra giving Kuhne baths. I have heard Pandit Hridayanath
Kunzru praise it very much. Since you are there, you may
perhaps benefit if you go in for a few of these baths.
I am returning your poem for being revised. I see from it
your deep affection for me, but I expect something better from you,
specially as you are ill. Substitute another word for "black" to des-
cribe the law; you may call it "harsh", if you like. "Black" is sug-
gestive of anger. One's language, too, must be worthy of satya-
graha. The sentiment expressed in "Trusting the British wholly"
is out of place in a description of satyagraha. We did nothing wrong
in trusting the British; our fault lay in having no faith in ourselves.
God helps those alone who help themselves, and so too the Bri-
tish. Can they be better than God? To bear invisible blows is the
satyagrahi's mantra, though he does so in order that his suffering
may end. In composing a poem on satyagraha, I would bring in
no comparison with the Liberals and others. I am sending you my
latest leaflet. Go through it and, if the Goddess Saraswati inspires
you with verses conveying the boundless power of truth and non-
violence, as also the difference between civil disobedience and
ignorant, arrogant disobedience, if you can compose such verses,
I should like you to do so.
Going again through your letter, I find that you had feared
there might be satyagraha against your poem too. The fear has
virtually come true. Don't mind, though. How can the poor
satyagrahi help? My hands do not give me full service, else I
would have written this letter myself. You need be in no hurry to
send me another poem. Write only when your health permits.
How much time did it take Keats to write the immortal line "A
thing of beauty is a joy for ever"?
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
