206. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE WAY TO MADRAS,
April 16 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
I am on my way to Madras. This eternal moving is now telling
on me and I am pining for rest - my post too cannot be received
as no one knows where I am. I shall get letters only at Madras now.
My experiences have been rich and varied. Some time or other I may
let you have a portion of them. This cannot be until I have settled
down somewhere. I have not yet stayed a fortnight at a stretch at
any place, not even at Rangoon.
I had hoped to meet the Viceroy at Delhi but he was not there.
I have not yet been able to hit upon any method of approaching him
about you. I fear that for the time being you will have to wait there.
I am sure that you ought not to think of going to California or any
other place. I only wish you could find some occupation to steady you.
For me there is no doubt that India has a great hold on me. Even
amid the most trying circumstances, I am able to perceive the inner
life. It may be all a delusion. But it is there.
At Hardwar, one of the holiest places in India, I felt the need to
take a further step and this is what I have done. In India I am not
to take for my sustenance more than five things during 24 hours and
not to eat after sunset. Things include condiments. Thus if I have taken
today, say, bananas, dates, ground-nuts, oranges and lemons, I may not
take cloves or tamarind. I still take two meals and I have to make
my choice of five things for the day. Both the vows are fairly stiff.
But they had to be taken. The spirit was there. The flesh will have
to yield. The vows were taken on the 10th instant. I have left the
boys at Hardwar to work as volunteer nurses to pilgrims. With me
are Mrs. Gandhi and Dr. Mehta's eldest brother. He accompanies me
to curb his temper. He is 65 years old. He has become a pure fruitarian
and avoids milk also. He is doing very well indeed.
Needless to say we have been travelling 3rd-class throughout. At
times it is most trying, involving long night journeys in crowded
compartments.
Will you please give the contents of this to Miss Winterbottom and
Sorabjee.
With love,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
