333. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
April 4, 1932
May God make Raihana healthy both in body and mind
and keep her so. Has the pupil gone to the teacher to learn cun-
ning? The teacher's cunning will not avail her. The bhajan you
have sent will seem good only when I can hear it sung, and that
can be when you come and sing it to me.
To do so it seems
you must turn yourself into a boy to enter the jail! I shall see
if Mahadev can sing. Now read the ghazal for the day:
If thou wouldst see Him, with each breath think of Him. Burn thy
pride and smear thy body with its ashes; take up the broom of love and
with it wipe out the distinctions of me and thee; reduce the notion of
reality to dust and sprinkle it on thy prayer carpet; leave the carpet,
break up the rosary, throw the sacred books in the river, seek the help
of angels and be their servant; do not fast nor keep Ramzan, do not go
to the mosque nor make obeisances; break to pieces the water jar for
prayer cleansing and drink the wine of the joy of union; eat and drink
but never be off thy guard; enjoy thy intoxication continuously; burn thy
271
egotism. Be neither Mulla nor Brahmin; leave duality and worship Him
alone. Shah Kalandar has proclaimed: Say, 'I am He.' Mad Mansur
says: My heart has known truth, that is the wine shop of the intoxicated,
make that the object of thy visit
I do feel ashamed of my Urdu handwriting, but [however
much I try] I cannot write better with my left hand. It took
me nearly three quarters of an hour to write this much. The
truth is that I should practise writing every day. But I am rather
ambitious and wishing to do all I can during this quiet interval,
I cannot give much time to Urdu. It was you who tempted me
to try writing Urdu, for you used to write a few Urdu sentences
and, trying to write in Urdu myself, I became your pupil!
What a pupil, and what a teacher! It is indeed a great pair
we make. Let us see now if we can justify the designation.
We are eagerly watching what is now in store for Father.
We remember you all very often. Uncle Sardar and Mahadev
proudly narrate many incidents about Father. They had the
benefit of staying with him. I never got that opportunity. I
will have my revenge one day.
I shall expect in your next letter the news of Hamida, Rohini
and others.
I got Pashabhai's letter just today. If I cannot send the
reply with this, I will write to him later.
I have written enough for the day.
Many, many blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9640
