359. LETTER TO KAMALA DAS GUPTA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 23, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. I know that many girls are now tending
towards simplicity. But what I felt was that the Ashram life
might be considered too simple. Let me however make my mean-
ing clear. I do not by any means consider simplicity as synony-
mous with shabbiness, shoddiness or slovenliness; nor need a devo-
tee of simplicity be devoid of a sense of taste or decency. What
I have found is that the simplest things are the neatest possible
and this neatness that comes from simplicity can be the common
heritage of all mankind instead of the manufactured taste which
has become the exclusive property of the monied few.
If you are sincere about your desire to go to the Ashram
and earnest and yet gentle in your effort, you will certainly
bear down the opposition of your parents. Until you can
secure the permission of your parents, you can mentally live the
Ashram life.
And why do you say that there is no way for Indian girls
for leading a simple and pure life? Just think of the millions of
the poor girls. They can't afford to look elegant even for getting
suitable matches; nor is it true that here in India all the girls
are bound to marry. But the fact is that the vast majority want
to marry, and in middle class society to which we belong, the
fashion is to think that girls are born only to marry. But I know
that there are many girls who are now trying to remain unmarried.
They have their parents' co-operation also. But it is a hard
struggle in which they are engaged.
What made you think that I was stopping the writing of the
autobiography? It is continuing.
I am in Bangalore up to the 29th instant. My address after
will be: Care of Sjt. S. Srinivasa Iyengar, Amjad Bagh, Luz,
Mylapore, Madras.
I would like you to see Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta and
his wife Srimati Hemprabhadevi of Khadi Pratishthan at Sodepur.
They both know the Ashram. They have lived there for some
time. They will tell you all about it. You must not be in a
hurry even though your parents may leave you free to go to
the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 12634-A
