283. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
March 13/14, 1934
BA,
You must have received my letter of last week. It was
dictated to Om. Today is Tuesday. I am writing this after
brushing my teeth. It is not yet four. I am in Patna. The
Relief Committee has rented a building. In the compound they
have put up tents. Some persons are staying in these tents, too.
Rajendrababu, his sister, Prabhavati and her husband, all of
them are here. Jamnalal also is here. Bal, Maganbhai, Swami,
Kripalani, Somanji and the others are here, too. Tomorrow I
shall be visiting the part which has been worst hit. Lakshmidas
is better now. He can even walk about a little. He is regaining
strength. Velanbehn is trying hard to come, but has not come so
far. I had letters from Manu, Bali and Rami this time. All of
them had fallen ill together, so that none of them could write.
Manu and Bali say that in their illness all of them forgot the
grief of Kusum's death. They are all better now. Rami must
have gone to Bombay or will go now.
Manu has been able to
make no progress in her study. She started eating pickles, etc.,
as a result of which she got fever and also sore throat. They all
send their pranams to you. In fact in every letter there are
pranams for you.
Kaka is happy in Hyderabad.
Chhaganlal
Joshi is in Dwarka and so Ramabehn also has gone there with
Vishnu. Vasumati is in Borivli. Gangabehn had gone to Kutch,
from where she has returned and gone to Ahmedabad. Krishna-
kumari is ill. Amtussalaam is still with Rajaji. Pyarelal is in
Bombay. Kusum Desai had come to meet me at Wardha Station.
The station was on the way when I came here. I came in
Hyderabad. Sarojinidevi had come there. She also is quite
happy. Thakkar Bapa has gone to Delhi and Mama has ac-
companied him for keeping accounts. We are, therefore, only
seven now. Before that we were sixteen. Ramdas met me. He
travelled with me for one or two stations. He is all right. And
now the discourse:
As I wrote in my last letter, I will narrate the story told
by Vishnu Digambar Shastri. It has been devised to explain
the meaning of bhakti. When Rama returned with Sita to
Ayodhya in the flying-chariot Pushpak, he was accompanied by
Hanuman and others. It was time now to bid them farewell, and
so a durbar was held. Rama embraced all and Sita blessed
them by putting her hands on their heads. The eyes of all were
moist with tears. Rewards were distributed to all. It was
Hanuman's turn to receive his. Sita took off the necklace of pre-
cious jewels which she was wearing, put it round Hanuman's neck
and embraced him. But what could Hanuman have to do with a
necklace of jewels? He snapped it into two and started opening
up each bead with his teeth and, not seeing Ramanama inside,
would throw it away. Everybody was stunned. The necklace
which Sita had given from off her neck to be thus treated! Sita
asked Hanuman why he was acting in that manner. Hanuman
replied: "Mother, what shall I do wearing a necklace consisting of
jewels which do not contain Ramanama?
I want to have no-
thing but that." The reply increased their amazement. Some-
body said: "If that is so, Ramanama cannot be seen in your
body either; what about it?" Hanuman burst out laughing and
said: "All right. Look." He then tore open his chest and there
flowed out a stream of blood in every drop of which they saw
Ramanama. They all shouted: "Enough, enough.
We have
seen it. Please forgive us." Hanuman closed the cut and the
court was filled with shouts of victory to him. Sita embraced him
and bathed him in tears of joy.
This is an invented story. It is not found even in the Rama-
yana. There was no need for Hanuman to tear open his chest in
order to show his bhakti. But we have to learn something from
this story. Hanuman did not care for a reward. To him his
service was its own reward. His bhakti was not for show. Nor
did it require expression in words. Service itself constituted bhakti
for him. Rama filled his whole being and accompanied every
breath of his. He thought of nothing but Rama whether working
or resting, eating or drinking, waking or asleep. He had put himself,
mind, speech and body, in the hands of Rama. His heroism was
dependent on his bhakti. It sprang from it. If we try, we can
attain to bhakti like Hanuman's. If Ramanama is on our lips all
the hours of the day, some day it will sink into our heart; and
once it has sunk into the heart it is bound to fill the whole being.
57-18
Prabhavati specially sends her pranams to you. She has inquired
after everybody. I started writing this letter yesterday and have
finished it today, Wednesday. It is still not four.
Blessings to you all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 17-
