221. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD CREWE
[LONDON,]
August 16, 1909
SIR,
I beg to invite the attention of the Earl of Crewe to the enclosed
extract translation of a letter received by me from a Mr. Mahomed
Khan, who was for some time my clerk in Johannesburg. I have given a
free rendering of the apposite portion of the letter. It is typical of many
that were received by me whilst I was in Johannesburg.
It is possible that there is unconscious exaggeration in some parts of
the letter, as for instance, as to the exact quantity of food stolen, or the
entire absence of bathing accommodation. In the main, however, the
statement appears to me to be accurate.
I am sending the translation to show what avoidable hardships
most British Indian political prisoners are undergoing in the Transvaal
prisons. I deliberately use the adjective "political". I am quite aware
of the fact that there is no legal division of prisoners in the Transvaal.
At the same time, there is no doubt that the Government recognise the
fact that there are prisoners who are hardened criminals, and there are
prisoners who have committed only technical breaches of the laws of the
Colony. Unfortunately, this natural division is not only not recog-
nized in favour of Indian passive resisters, but there seems to be a desire
to treat them somewhat more harshly because they are passive resisters.
The insufficiency and the unsuitability of food and the fact of Indian
prisoners being classed with native prisoners are two very serious diffi-
culties, causing a great deal of misery.
My colleague and I trust that His Lordship will be pleased to in-
quire into the matter and, if possible, secure some relief whilst some mem-
bers of the Transvaal Government are in the metropolis.
I have, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
[ENCLOSURE]
EXTRACT
TRANSLATION
FROM
A LETTER RECEIVED
BY MR. GANDHI
FROM MR. MAHOMED KHAN AT JOHANNESBURG, DATED 19TH JULY, 1909
I was discharged on the 12th July last. The only regret I had was
that I could not meet you in the gaol. The day I was admitted I
asked the chief warder to let me see you, but he did not grant the
permission.
I was kept in the 'reserve camp' which has been established only
lately. There was much suffering there. The water supply was not
sufficient. There was no bathing facility. I had hardly a bath during the
two months I was in the prison. I complained to the officer. He said:
"Are you blind? Do you not see that there is no bathroom here?" I
then said: "What are prisoners to do if there is no bathroom for a year?"
He then said: "They have to do without."
The food supply was also not enough. Moreover, on Saturdays,
when the prisoners have to wash their towels, socks, etc., there was only
one tank among 200. I received no ghee (clarified butter). They mixed
fat with rice, which I did not eat. I complained about it, but my com-
plaint went unheeded. I drew the attention of the chief warder to the
fact that you had complained about absence of ghee, and the chief
warder said that, as you were not able to eat enough because of the
want of ghee, you were told that other Indian prisoners also would be
supplied with ghee, in order to induce you to take your food. You know
the disposition of the Governor of the gaol and the chief warder.
When we have to complain, they do not tarry long enough to listen to
it. Later, I received food according to the new scale. The latter also is
not sufficient. Four ounces of bread were allowed, but I never felt that
I had more than two ounces. Gruel is only gruel in name because it is
all water, and, then, it is too little. From the bread, rice, vegetables
etc., supplied, the Native prisoners working in the yard steal a great
deal. The quantity of rice allowed was six ounces, but hardly three
ounces were received by me. I believe that about fifteen dishes full of
food are stolen by the Kaffirs and the warders say nothing. Moreover,
the warders are abusive. I put up with all this silently.
The work was not extra heavy. I was taken with a span consisting
of 32 men to Lord Selborne's bungalow. There we had to do grass-
cutting, roller-turning, digging, stone-breaking, cutting trees, clean-
ing ground, and also watering trees. Of this work, digging alone was
somewhat difficult, because it was all stony; the stone was, moreover,
very hard. The garden was situated on a rise. We were locked up with
the Kaffirs. There was not a single European officer who described
us as Indians. We were called "sammies" or "coolies". Most of the
warders were Dutch; some of them were youngsters, who had no
knowledge of the work.
At length came 74 Madras Indians. They were in very great dis-
tress; they are suffering much. Among them are five very old men,
over perhaps sixty. They could not walk well. These also are sent out to
work early in the morning in a shivering condition, and as the tramp is
long, they, poor fellows, get tired, and yet they utter not a word of
complaint. Therein lies their bravery.
The whole of the Pretoria Location is empty.
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten
office copy: S. N. 4949 and 5015
