284. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
PATNA,
March 14, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
You must have received the letter which I wrote from
Belgaum. It was posted only on Thursday.
I am writing this letter on Wednesday morning. It is not
yet four. Having finished a letter to Ba, I have taken up this.
I arrived in Patna on Sunday night. Today at 6 I am leaving
for Motihari. I spent the whole of yesterday in discussions with
co-workers. We are getting a good amount of money. But the
need is equally great. We shall have to see to it that every pie
is put to good use. Jamnalalji is here. Lakshmidas is recovering.
He can now walk about in the house. Rajendrababu's health may
be described as completely all right.
He has forgotten his com-
plaint under the load of the work which has fallen on him.
I
visited the city yesterday. Many Government buildings have been
rendered unserviceable. In Patna alone there has been an estimat-
ed loss of about a crore and a half. Eighty persons were killed
and 400 injured. But the destruction in Patna is nothing com-
pared to that in the other parts.
Committees administering the
Viceroy's fund and Rajendrababu's fund are separate. We have
to see now what we can do.
Miss Lester and her friend returned from Delhi yesterday.
Both of them will accompany me.
The friend will shortly have
to return to England. Miss Lester will remain in India. She
wants to study the whole situation. Agatha Harrison is arriv-
ing on the 16th. She also will come here.
Thakkar Bapa and party separated themselves at Hyderabad.
He will rejoin me later when I am able to take up the tour of
Orissa. I see that I shall have to remain here for about a
month. It will probably not be necessary to stay longer.
We passed through Allahabad on our way.
As we had to
wait there for three hours, I called at Anand Bhavan. Swaruprani
(Nehru) felt comforted. I was with her for a long time. I spent
some time with Kamala (Nehru) too. She is ill. The mother-
in-law and the daughter-in-law, both were confined to bed.
Kamala was waiting for Dr. Bidhan.
Shastri (of Harijan) had two fine boys, to both of whom he
and his wife were devoted. The younger boy was five years old.
He is dead. The parents are now disconsolate. The boys were
both extremely intelligent. They could follow Tamil, Hindi and
Bengali and could dance and sing. The parents had given them
the best kind of training.
I cannot write more today. My eyes are too tired.
It will
soon be time for prayer. I cannot go to sleep again.
There is no letter from you even this time. For my part,
I shall go on writing.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 85-
