281. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised
April 28/29, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
Your latest letter is still more cheerful. I hope this mood
will last. I very nearly sent you a card in Hindi today. But it was
too late. This [is] written after the receipt of the post, but also
after its departure which precedes the receipt.
I have made a slight change in the food here which is ap-
proved by a distinguished doctor who is living nearby. I am now
taking raw milk and adding now and then juice of a few neem
leaves and have omitted chapatis and vegetables for the time being.
I may revert to the latter two if it becomes necessary. There is
now noticed a decline in the blood-pressure for the first time
since the collapse. I am feeling altogether better.
The rest through Mahadev.
With love,
BAPU
29th Morning
You should certainly translate Rolland's book. But if you
are at peace with yourself now your permanent attainment of
internal peace is far more important than anything else. You like
the people there. You can therefore give them much and take also.
I would like you if you can to grow to your full height there before
you leave. My suggestion then is that you should set apart religious-
ly an hour daily for translation and make such progress as you
can. Meanwhile, God might open the way for me to stay there
for the necessary time and the facts may be revised in consul-
tation with Mahadev. Or when you feel that your work there is
finished you can come wherever I am if I do not come there
soon enough. But you shall decide what to do. I have told you
you are free to come here whenever you like. Only do not please
regard the translation work more important than what you are
doing there. If a man is to be judged by his deeds and not by
whatever the sanest man of the age may from a distant study of
him say of him then the lives of co-workers will be the best judg-
ment on me. You understand what I mean, do you not?
I fancy I have forgotten to answer a question you asked in
one of your letters. Undoubtedly the interpretation of your vow
is that your last meal should be finished before 7 p.m. or dusk
whichever the vow is. You are therefore right in your interpreta-
tion. The rule regarding vows is when in doubt interpret against
yourself, i.e., in favour of greater restriction.
BAPU
[PS.]
Please tell Lady Slade I am thankful for her concern about me.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5221. Courtesy: Mirabehn
