54. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
Wednesday, [After April 19, 1907]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I had asked you a question about
your health. I still await your answer. I am glad that you
are better now.
It is likely that the money from Gaurishankar will be
received here. As soon as it comes I shall send it on to you.
If there are any dues outstanding from him please let me know.
If you have come across any reactions to the article about
Hejaz please let me know what the reactions were like and
from whom.
The issue of Al Islam has been received. About Thakkar you
should do as you think best. If you do as I suggested, you will
be able gradually to bring him round. Keep me informed regu-
larly so that the matter does not slip from my mind.
Mr. Maclntyre has left. But we can carry on without him.
He is on the look-out for a job.
I have had some talk about Kalyandas. Please send him a
reply.
I have received last month's account of the household expenses.
Looking at it and the expenses of the current month I am
afraid that, do what we will, we shall not be able to meet all
the expenses. You should send me details as to how all this ex-
penditure was incurred so that I can understand.
Chhabildas told me as much about Chanchal as he knew.
I am awaiting a wire from Bombay. She seems to be a little
restless in Bombay. I have sent a telegram that Chanchi should
be sent here at once.
How was it that Lachchiram's name was omitted from the
advertisement page of Indian Opinion? His name used to be there.
Please write to him from there. I am also writing. Have you
received the payment in cash from Anglia or is the work being
done on credit? Have you received the balance due from
Ismail Gora? It will be good if the work about Ramayana could
be taken Up. Please see Anandlal and find a way of doing this.
Omar Sheth should have been sent five copies of the docu-
ment. But now you may send him four. I have received the
article about Madanjit. I have read the portion marked.
Now I think I have covered all the points in your letter.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 11160. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
1 Hejaz Railway; vide Vol. VI, pp. 471-.
2 Chhabildas B. Mehta
3 Wife of Harilal Gandhi
4 A selection from Tulsidas's Ramacharitamanas; vide Vol. VI, p. 368.
