486. LETTER TO HORACE C. ALEXANDER
January 5, 1933
MY DEAR HORACE,
I am overdue in acknowledging your and other love letters,
but the work before me has to take precedence over everything
else.
I am glad you were able to see Dr. Ansari and other friends,
and gladder still that you were able to have that long conversation
with Dr. Ambedkar. Of course he has still got that over-sensitive-
ness and terrible suspicion, but there is to me nothing un-
natural in it. As I used to say so often in London, he had every
excuse for the bitterness with which only he could speak whenever
he spoke about untouchability or of those touchable Hindus who
had anything to do with it. He has not only witnessed the inhuman
wrongs done to the social pariahs of Hinduism, but in spite of all
his culture, all the honours that he has received, he has, when he
is in India, still to suffer many insults to which untouchables are
exposed. The wonder is that he is so tolerant and forbearing as he
showed himself, for instance, at the time when the Yeravda Pact
was being hammered into shape. It was perfectly open to him to
withstand all pressure and remain defiant, but he allowed himself
to be moved by friendly pressure. He will soften if the terms
of the Yeravda Pact are carried out in full by the caste Hindus,
but though things are shaping well on the whole, I am experi-
encing newer difficulties from day to day. They do not dismay
me. I was prepared for them. I knew that that little fast was
not enough penance for moving to right action the great mass of
Hindu humanity. Many lives might have to be given before the
last remnant of untouchability is gone. But no sacrifice will be
too great to remove a wrong which lies like a dead weight, not
only on Hindu society, but on all who surround it. I get now
and then piteous letters from Christian Indians who, being born
of untouchable parents, are isolated from the rest of their fellows.
Such is the contagious nature of this dreadful disease.
With our love to you and Olive,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1418
365
