393. LETTER TO VICEROY
[May 4, 1930]
DEAR FRIEND,
God willing, It is my intention on . . . to set out for Dhara-
sana and reach there with my companions on . . . and demand
possession of the Salt Works. The public have been told that
Dharasana is private property. This is mere camouflage. It is
as effectively under Government control as the Viceroy's House.
Not a pinch of salt can be removed without the previous sanction
of the authorities.
It is possible for you to prevent this raid, as it has been play-
fully and mischievously called, in three ways:
1. by removing the salt tax;
2. by arresting me and my party unless the country can, as
I hope it will, replace everyone taken away;
3. by sheer goondaism unless every head broken is replaced,
as I hope it will.
It is not without hesitation that the step has been decided
upon. I had hoped that the Government would fight the civil
resisters in a civilized manner. I could have had nothing to say
if in dealing with the civil resisters the Government had satisfied
itself with applying the ordinary processes of law. Instead, whilst
the known leaders have been dealt with more or less according to
the legal formality, the rank and file has been often savagely and
in some cases even indecently assaulted. Had these been isolated
cases, they might have been overlooked. But accounts have come
to me from Bengal, Bihar, Utkal, U.P., Delhi and Bombay con-
firming the experiences of Gujarat of which I have ample evi-
dence at my disposal. In Karachi, Peshawar and Madras the firing
would appear to have been unprovoked and unnecessary. Bones
have been broken, private parts have been squeezed for the pur-
pose of making volunteers give up, to the Government valueless,
to the volunteers precious salt. At Mathura an Assistant Magis-
trate is said to have snatched the national flag from a ten-year-
old boy. The crowd that demanded restoration of the flag thus
illegally seized is reported to have been mercilessly beaten back.
That the flag was subsequently restored betrayed a guilty con-
science. In Bengal there seem to have been only a few prosecutions
and assaults about salt, but unthinkable cruelties are said to have
been practised in the act of snatching flags from volunteers. Paddy
fields are reported to have been burnt, eatables forcibly taken. A
vegetable market in Gujarat has been raided because the dealers
would not sell vegetables to officials. These acts have taken place
in front of crowds who, for the sake of Congress mandate have
submitted without retaliation. I ask you to believe the accounts
given by men pledged to truth. Repudiation even by high officials
has, as in the Bardoli case, often proved false. The officials, I regret
to have to say, have not hesitated to publish falsehoods to the
people even during the last five weeks. I take the following sam-
ples from Government notices issued from Collectors' offices in
Gujarat:
1. Adults use five pounds of salt per year, therefore pay three annas
per year as tax . . . . If Government removed the monopoly people will
have to pay higher prices and in addition make good to the Government
the loss sustained by the removal of the monopoly. . . . The salt you take
from the seashore is not eatable, therefore the Government destroys it.
2. Mr. Gandhi says that Government has destroyed hand-spinning
in this country, whereas everybody knows that this is not true, because
throughout the country, there is not a village where hand-spinning of
cotton is not going on. Moreover in every province cotton spinners are
shown superior methods and are provided with better instruments at less
price and are thus helped by Government.
3. Out of every five rupees of the debt that the Government has
incurred rupees four have been beneficially spent.
I have taken these three sets of statements from three differ-
ent leaflets. I venture to suggest that everyone of these statements
is demonstrably false. The daily consumption of salt by an adult
is three times the amount stated and therefore the poll tax that the
salt tax undoubtedly is is at least 9 annas per head per year. And
this tax is levied from man, woman, child and domestic cattle ir-
respective of age and health.
It is a wicked falsehood to say that every village has a spin-
ning-wheel, and that the spinning movement is in any shape or
form encouraged or supported by the Government. Financiers can
better dispose of the falsehood that four out of every five rupees
of the public debt is used for the benefit of the public. But those
falsehoods are mere samples of what people know is going on in
everyday contact with the Government. Only the other day a
Gujarati poet, a brave man, was convicted on perjured official
evidence in spite of his emphatic statement that at the time men-
tioned he was sleeping soundly in another place.
Now for instances of official inactivities. Liquor dealers have
assaulted pickets admitted by officials to have been peaceful and
sold liquor in contravention of regulations. The officials have
taken no notice either of the assaults or the illegal sales of liquor.
As to the assaults, though they are known to everybody, they may
take shelter under the plea that they have received no complaints.
And now you have sprung upon the country a Press Ordi-
nance surpassing any hitherto known in India. You have found
a short cut through the law's delay in the matter of the trial of
Bhagat Singh and others by doing away with the ordinary proce-
dure. Is it any wonder if I call all these official activities and in-
activities a veiled form of Martial Law? Yet this is only the fifth
week of the struggle!
Before, then, the reign of terrorism that has just begun over-
whelms India, I feel that I must take a bolder step, and if possible
divert your wrath in a cleaner if more drastic channel. You may
not know the things that I have described. You may not even now
believe in them. I can but invite your serious attention to them.
Anyway I feel that it would be cowardly on my part not to
invite you to disclose to the full the leonine paws of authority so
that the people who are suffering tortures and destruction of their
property may not feel that I, who had perhaps been the chief
party inspiring them to action that has brought to light the
Government in its true colours, had left any stone unturned to
work out the satyagraha programme as fully as it was possible
under given circumstances.
For, according to the science of satyagraha, the greater the
repression and lawlessness on the part of authority, the greater
should be the suffering courted by the victims. Success is the
certain result of suffering of the extremest character, voluntarily
undergone.
I know the dangers attendant upon the methods adopted by
me. But the country is not likely to mistake my meaning. I say
what I mean and think. And I have been saying for the last fifteen
years in India and outside for twenty years more and repeat now
that the only way to conquer violence is through non-violence pure
and undefiled. I have said also that every violent act, word and even
thought interferes with the progress of non-violent action. If in
spite of such repeated warnings people will resort to violence, I
must disown responsibility save such as inevitably attaches to every
human being for the acts of every other human being. But the
question of responsibility apart, I dare not postpone action on
any cause whatsoever, if non-violence is the force the seers of the
world have claimed it to be and if I am not to belie my own
extensive experience of its working.
But I would fain avoid the further step. I would there-
fore ask you to remove the tax which many of your illustrious coun-
trymen have condemned in unmeasured terms and which, as
you could not have failed to observe, has evoked universal protest
and resentment expressed in civil disobedience. You may con-
demn civil disobedience as much as you like. Will you prefer
violent revolt to civil disobedience? If you say, as you have said,
that the civil disobedience must end in violence, history will pro-
nounce the verdict that the British Government, not bearing be-
cause not understanding non-violence, goaded human nature to
violence which it could understand and deal with. But in spite of
the goading I shall hope that God will give the people of India
wisdom and strength to withstand every temptation and provoca-
tion to violence.
If, therefore, you cannot see your way to remove the salt tax,
and remove the prohibition on private salt-making, I must reluct-
antly commence the march adumbrated in the opening para-
graph of my letter.
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 8-5-1930
