270. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 25/30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I start with your letter. Last week I ran short of
time and had to be very brief about some points. Write and tell
me, if you know, all about the persons who live in Rajagopala-
chari's Ashram, where Subbiah and his wife are and so on.
Punjabhai must now endure his suffering and pass his days
in peace. If you can, have a further discussion with Mrs. Zau-
linger. She seems to be a wise and good lady, but she takes time
to understand our point of view in everything. I don't see any-
thing wrong in letting her join the night-watch, if she feels so in-
clined. Her argument is correct. Indian sisters may not be ready
to move as freely as she is ready to do; if, however, anyone wishes
to join her, she may. I have merely expressed a view from here
without knowing all the circumstances there. Do what you your-
self think proper.
What shall I say about Keshu and others? Read the letter
which I shall write to them this time and give it to them. Keshu
is an upright young man. He will probably understand his dharma
in the course of time, and so I don't feel like writing anything to
him. You, for your part, should be bold and tell him what you
think right. This time, of course, I will write to him.
My diet consists of three pounds of milk turned into curds
and taken at two meals, and milk once. Then nine tomatoes, small
or big as supplied, and the required quantity of boiled vegetables
such as cabbage, pumpkin, etc. I add salt afterwards if I require.
I gave up sweet potatoes four days ago.
Dr. Jivraj visited Kaka-
saheb and he thought that it would cause constipation. I had
again found it necessary to take enemas. I, therefore, decided to
see the effect of giving up sweet potatoes. I observe no change.
If I keep up my strength, I will not resume sweet potatoes. I didn't
think they were doing me any harm. It is the water of this place
which seems to cause constipation to a person of my constitution.
There is, however, no cause for worry at all. I shall be weighed
this evening and will mention the weight in this letter. Enemas
are nothing new to me, but I should certainly like to do without
185
them if possible. I wish to carry on without fresh fruit as long as
I can. If by eating vegetables I do not succeed in getting rid of
enemas and if I feel weak in the slightest degree, I will resume
dates and raisins. No one should worry on my account.
My spinning is improving. The speed seems to be increasing.
At any rate, I don't feel tired now. I will not be too eager for
the present to increase the output. I feel a little unhappy that I
have had to abandon the effort to memorize the Gita verses. But
I am waiting for an opportunity to resume it. In the beginning,
I used to try to memorize them while spinning. But I saw that
that interfered with the spinning. I realize every day the neces-
sity for ever more concentration for good spinning. I see that
there is a great difference between mere spinning and the art of
spinning. I wish to learn the art. Maybe I shall not succeed in
acquiring it during this life. I will be satisfied if I am not slack in
my effort. I realized that my eagerness to learn the Gita verses
by heart while spinning was a sign of my slackness. That was
against the teaching of the Gita. I wish to memorize the Gita verses
if I can do that and at the same time acquire proficiency in spin-
ning, but I would be false to the teaching of the Gita as I under-
stand it if I tried to learn its verses by heart at the cost of my
spinning. Plead with Amidas. I am writing to him. How can we
ask a person like him to leave the Ashram?
I shall not be able to send two discourses. Perhaps I will
continue the discourse on equality of religions. I feel inclined to
omit the subject of swadeshi. I feel that by writing on it I may
violate to some extent my resolution to make no reference to poli-
tical subjects. Even if I write about swadeshi from a spiritual
standpoint, I am bound to include in the discourse something which
would have an indirect connection with politics. If I feel that I
can write on the subject without touching on politics, I will try.
Let me see if I can do so.
There is no point in forcing Giriraj to stay there against his
wishes. If Balkrishna invites him to go to Wardha, what harm
do you see in his going? He is a good man, but he cannot think
clearly. Balkrishna's company is likely to benefit him. Since you
have written to Vinoba offering to send more persons, why not
Giriraj? If he feels happy, he will certainly work. It does not
seem right to me to abandon him. But, I again seem to be med-
dling with what I should leave alone. Don't, therefore, attach
much weight to what I have said. Treat this merely as a sugges-
tion intended to help you to come to a decision. It is possible that
I may have formed my opinion without knowing all the facts of
the case. I have so much confidence in your decisions that, when
my reason does not accept any of them, I feel that that must be
so because of my ignorance of some facts. And now I reply to
your questions:
1. There is no question of asking him to leave the Ashram,
but I would not ask him to stay on either if he decided to
leave.
2. He should not go to Wardha without the consent of the
Ashram authorities.
3. If he does anything against the wishes of the Ashram
authorities and forfeits their confidence, the Ashram
cannot support his children.
4. If the Ashram is not in a position to look after Katu and
Vimu, I cannot think where we can send them. If at
present Giriraj has no share in looking after them, the
Ashram may, if it can, look after them in case he goes to
some other place with the consent of the Ashram autho-
rities. If, however, the children have become unmanage-
able, Giriraj should be told so.
5. I think the Ashram should give Giriraj the necessary
financial help to enable him to make some other arrange-
ment. The amount of such help should be fixed by the
Ashram. I think I have now replied to all your questions.
Read my letter to Giriraj.
I do not have the necessary data to enable me to decide about
Manibehn. But from what I have understood I feel that she should
be permitted to go to her place if she is very keen on doing so.
It is a question not of what Bhagwanji wishes, but of what Mani-
behn wishes. If she wants to stay on, she should be welcome to do
so, on this condition, however, that she should forget Bhagwanji.
She should not wish or hope to see him. She should submit to the
Ashram rules as the other women do. If she is not willing to do
this, she should leave.
I understand what you say about Mirabehn and Kumarappa.
Your decision seems right. I am writing to Mirabehn.
Where is Jethalal at present? The names of the fruits which
you said would be on display in our exhibition gave me a plea-
sant surprise. I didn't even know that you had planted grapes.
You need not send my worn sandals. There was a new pair.
If Kanti does not know about it, that is the end of the matter. As I
told you in my letter, I have been able to manage for the present.
We shall see later what we should do if you do not succeed in
finding the new pair. Why shouldn't a pair from the stock of san-
dals in the Ashram do for me? A pair like the one you sent for
Kakasaheb will be all right for me. I would like the sandals better
without the dalia such as Kakasaheb's pair has. Do send the
money for Pyarelal's living expenses. You can adopt no other course
in his case. He ought to have drawn money even earlier, which
he did not do. The Ashram is all that he has in the world, call it
his friend or anything you will. What you have done about Goki-
behn is worthy of you. Of course, nothing could have been sent
to her from the Ashram. You could have approached Dr. Mehta,
but I liked it very much that you gave the sum from your own
resources. I am sure she needed it. I went through the figures of
spinning on Rentia Barash. They are very good indeed. I think
Khurshedbehn wants some more women. Find out exactly what
she wants and send someone if you can. If you cannot, give her
convincing reasons why you cannot. As far as I can see, no
mature woman worker is now left there who can go and join her.
September 26, 1930
I was weighed today. The weight is a little above 103,
which means that there has been some improvement. Kakasaheb
weighed a little below 115. That means that there has been no
improvement during the past week. It may not be unusual for him
to lose half a pound or a quarter of a pound occasionally.
You did the right thing in not sending me B. J.'s leaflet. You
cannot send it.
September 27, 1930
Lilavati has again become impatient to go and join Khurshed-
behn. If the latter knows her condition and still calls her, I think
it may be best to let her go. Rather than that she should remain
in the Ashram and feel restless, it is better that she should go and
return wiser from experience. Do what you think best. Satis Babu
had made a balance costing 3 annas for weighing slivers, etc.; if
you can find that or any other similar balance, send it with some-
one who may be coming here. Do you have any news about Anna
who was spreading Hindi in Madras?
September 28, 1930
Did you get the yarn which Kakasaheb had sent through Bal
for the Goseva Sangh? He had sent, through Shankar, 8,500 yards
for the Charkha Sangh. Will it be delivered to you there or will it
be delivered at Ahmedabad? Read what I have written about
Miss A. in my letter to Mirabehn.
Tuesday morning, September 30, 1930
As I told you in my letter last week, I have translated into
English the discourse on Equality of Religions and send the trans-
lation herewith. If Valjibhai has translated it and if his transla-
tion has already been printed, he should read the translation which
I am sending. Anybody else who wishes to read it may do so and
the last person should hand it over to Mirabehn. If Valjibhai's
translation has not been printed, he should carefully go through
my translation and then publish whichever he likes. Do you
intend to publish the discourses in Gujarati only or their English
translations also?
This subject is so important that I dwell a little further on it.
My meaning will perhaps become clearer if I describe here
some of my experiences. In Phoenix we had our daily prayers in
the same way as in Sabarmati, and Mussalmans as well as Chris-
tians attended them along with Hindus. The late Sheth Rustomji
and his children too attended the prayer meetings. Rustomji Sheth
very much liked the Gujarati bhajan. "Dear, dear to me is the name
of Rama." If my memory serves me right, Maganlal or Kashi
was once leading us in singing this hymn, when Rustomji Sheth
exclaimed joyously "Say the name of Hormazd instead of the
name of Rama". His suggestion was readily taken up, and after
that whenever the Sheth was present, and sometimes even when
he was not, we put in the name of Hormazd in place of Rama. The
late Husain, son of Daud Sheth, often stayed at the Phoenix Ashram,
and enthusiastically joined our prayers. To the accompaniment
of an organ, he used to sing in a very sweet voice the song "Hai
bahare bagh", "The garden of this world has only a momentary
bloom". He taught us all this song, which we also sang at prayers.
Its inclusion in our Bhajanavali is a tribute to truth-loving Husain's
memory. I have never met a young man who practised Truth
more devotedly than Husain. Joseph Royeppen often came to
Phoenix. He was a Christian, and his favourite hymn was "Vaish-
nava Jana". He loved music and once sang this hymn saying "Chris-
tian" in place of "vaishnava". The others accepted his reading with
alacrity, and I observed that this filled Joseph's heart with joy.
When I was turning over the pages of the sacred books of
different faiths for my own satisfaction, I became sufficiently
familiar for my purpose with Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism,
Judaism and Hinduism. In reading these texts, I can say that I
felt the same regard for all these faiths although, perhaps, I was
not then conscious of it. Reviving my memory of those days, I do
not find I ever had the slightest desire to criticize any of those
religions merely because they were not my own, but read each
sacred book in a spirit of reverence and found the same funda-
mental morality in each. Some things I did not understand then,
as I did not in Hindu scriptures. I do not understand those things
even now, but experience has taught me that it is a mistake hastily
to imagine that anything that we cannot understand is necessarily
wrong. Some things which I did not understand first have since
become as clear as daylight. Equimindedness helps us to solve
many difficulties and even when we criticize anything, we express
ourselves with a humility and courtesy which leave no sting be-
hind them.
One difficulty still remains. As I stated last time, the accep-
tance of the doctrine of Equality of Religions does not abolish the
distinction between religion and irreligion. We do not propose
to cultivate tolerance for irreligion. That being so, some people
might object that there would be no room left for equimindedness,
if everyone took his own decision as to what was religion and what
was irreligion. Such a question may be raised and one may even
make a mistake in deciding what is religion and what is irreli-
gion. If, however, we follow the law of love, we shall not bear
any hatred towards the irreligious brother. On the contrary, though
we see that he follows irreligion, we shall love him and, therefore,
either we shall bring him to see the error of his ways or he will
convince us of our error, or each will tolerate the other's difference
of opinion. If the other party does not observe the law of love, he
may be violent to us. If, however, we cherish real love for him, it
will overcome his bitterness in the end. All obstacles in our
path will vanish, if only we observe the golden rule that we must
not be impatient with those whom we may consider to be in error,
but must be prepared, if need be, to suffer in our own person.
As I have stated earlier in this letter, I think I will omit the
subject of swadeshi. I have yet to think on what subject I shall
write next.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 70 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
