31. LETTER TO SIR FREDERICK SYKES
January 23, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
The cordial conversations I had with you last year embold-
en me to write this to you. If you would rather that, being a
prisoner, I should not write to you, I shall cease to do so and
this may be thrown away. If however you don't resent this letter,
I may take the further liberty of writing again, should the occa-
sion arise.
Whilst in my opinion all the ordinances are a tragic blunder
and so utterly unnecessary, I can understand the Government
taking a different view and trying to crush the Congress. The
organization may be put out of action for a time. The spirit
will never be crushed. But this is another story.
What I want to draw your attention to is the excesses that
are being committed under the ordinances.
The breaking up of a peaceful meeting in Ahmedabad by
severe lathi charges and running horses through the meeting
appears to have been a barbarous procedure, several young men
were severely and some women were slightly hurt. One young
woman had her hair pulled. This information I glean from the
newspapers supplied to me. In Nadiad the treatment is said to
have been still more brutal and it is reported to have been the
worst in Surat. Boys in two boarding houses are said to have
been hurriedly dragged out of them and the houses taken over
by the authorities. Such procedure brutalizes those who are en-
gaged in carrying it out. It should be borne in mind that all
this treatment is being meted out to those who do not retaliate
and have not been known to have done any previous violence.
The authorities have taken possession of the National University
buildings in Ahmedabad. The University has a rich collection of
carefully selected books. There is a religious section to the library.
It is admitted to be a unique library built up by devoted scholars.
It contains some rare and valuable manuscripts. There is, too, a
little museum which has an art collection. The grounds have
valuable trees planted on them. The whole of this constructive
effort - a fruit of ten years patient labour-is likely to be ruined
without any just cause.
One of the most respectable Indians belonging to the cele-
brated Tyabji family, Mr. Abbas Tyabji who is 78-year-old and
who is an ex-Chief Judge of the Baroda High Court is said to
have been locked up in Nadiad along with other prisoners in
what can only be described as a cage.
I ask you to investigate these statements. Denials by the
parties charged can be regarded as no investigation. Often have
such denials been proved to be worthless.
I have picked out but a few of what have appeared to me to
be glaring instances of high-handedness. If past experience is
any guide, probably the worst cases have not even been allowed
to appear in the newspapers. Nor do I get all the newspapers.
I write this as a friend wishing well to the English. I am
anxious that on both sides every avoidable cause of bitterness should
be avoided. I would like the fight to be conducted honour-
ably on either side so that at the end of it either party may be
able to say of the other that there was no malice behind its
actions.
I am,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
SIR FREDERICK SYKES
BOMBAY
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(41), Pt. 1, pp. 15-6; also G.N. 3856
