661. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
March 30, 1933
CHI. MRIDU,
Your letter came after a lapse of many days. In fact,
instead of one, I received two letters, for, when you write to
Sardar, it is as good as all of us receiving the letter.
Your letters reflect your composure. May you always be
as calm.
Your experiences are good. Those who have an understand-
ing of life have been able to drink draughts of joy from it.
They have even been able to change their lives.
Everybody is entitled to plead for Ba. You have that right
all the more, for your love is such. You may take it that as a
result of your pleading I have written a very long letter to Ba.
But you will be pleased to know what Ba has conveyed through
Kusum. With reference to my letters to her Ba commented:
"Yes, Bapu is an absolute sadhu where I am concerned." I alone
know what a humbug I am as a sadhu. But what if it is my
partiality for Ba which makes me write briefly to her. Surely
you have heard the saying that a lover's love does not wait
upon civilities. But Ba is fully entitled to blame me. Her words
may condemn me, but her actions make her rise and since I am
holding on to her, shall I not rise too? So, you should go on
pleading for Ba.
It is only here that I realized that Mani has inherited her
dexterity from Sardar. Motilalji had been astonished by Mani's
dexterity. I gave her room in the Ashram to Motilalji. He com-
mented at once : "I have not seen such neatness even at Anand
Bhavan." You should at least learn this from her. She also has
an amazing capacity for devotion to the person whom she has
chosen for it. In fearlessness some of your girls can rival her.
So I shall not draw your attention to it. I would have very
much liked to have Mirabehn's company for a longer period,
but we must live as God makes us live.
I always have you before my mind's eye. You are of course shy
by nature. So I must draw your attention to it. It is true that
whatever we do should be done rightly. But rightly does not
mean perfectly. God alone is perfect. All beginning is imperfect.
That is why it should be considered enough if what we do is
done rightly. If we join our voices in Ramdhun, we may say we
sing rightly. But that does not mean that we have learnt music.
The same applies to bhajans. We can in a little time develop the
capacity. Cultivating music as an art is a different subject. You
may do it with pleasure when the time for it comes. But you
can do immediately the things mentioned above.
Bharati has forgotten me altogether.
Now there is no time to write more. I do intend writing to
Ambalalbhai.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11113. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation
