339. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
TOLSTOY FARM,
December 9, 1910
DEAR MR. NATESAN,
I owe you a long reply. But being obliged to move about and being
otherwise busy over the struggle, I have been unable to save a quiet
hour for writing to you.
Many thanks for the cable remitting £400. The help is most timely.
The unexpected difficulties about the landing of the returned deportees
have cost over £500 leaving nothing for current expenses. I was there-
fore obliged to cable to you for funds. A similar cable was sent to
Mr. Petit also. The same day that brought your cable brought also a
letter from Mr. Ratan Tata enclosing a cheque for Rs. 25,000. There
1 The Gujarati translation of Thomas Taylor's article "Fallacy of Speed", men-
tioned in the letter, was published in Indian Opinion, 10-12-1910; this letter was written
before the Friday of that week, which fell on 9-12-1910.
2 and 3 Not available
is therefore no anxiety now regarding money.
I enclose copy of
Mr. Tata's letter.
Everyone of the returned deportees speaks most highly of your
kindness. They tell me that you were most unremitting in your attention
to them. May I thank you for all you have done in their behalf?
You will have noticed that not a single Indian deportee has had
to go back to India—I mean of the 2nd batch. It was unfortunate that
the 19 Chinese had to go back. But partly it was the fault of the Chi-
nese Association. That body was not ready for the emergency that
faced it.
You will have noticed too that everyone of the returned men has
now already passed through the gaols of the Transvaal or is at present
serving his term. This does not include the five men who are still at
the Cape. But I expect them to cross the border shortly.
Your fear about the payment to the indigent families was natural
though groundless. It did very great credit to your heart. I had sus-
pended payment as I was, as you know, in cable communication with
the men. I was in hopes that the men would willingly cable consent
to their families going to the Farm, as most of them knew that nego-
tiations were going on for securing one and as they were told that the
families could only be supported on the Farm. But as soon as I saw that
the men would not consent, all the families who had not consented to go
to the Farm were paid up to the 7th of October. That was the last date
fixed because I had conferences with the men at Durban. Every fact
was placed before them and they were told that the families must either
go to the Farm or support themselves. I told them too that the funds
in hand would not allow of the families being indefinitely supported
outside the Farm. The men, however, elected to go to gaol. Some
families have come to the Farm but the vast majority are supporting
themselves in Johannesburg. The Farm serves a double purpose. It
enables us to support families at a much cheaper rate thus providing for
an indefinite prolongation of the struggle and it prevents fraud and
deception. For it must be confessed that the fighters—some of them—
are not above taking an undue advantage of one's ignorance. The
Farm puts a stop to this sort of thing. Those who cannot really support
themselves must perforce come to the Farm. Those who do not are
some way or other capable of supporting themselves. Moreover this
struggle is pre-eminently educative. It is intended therethrough to
raise men. This cannot be done unless we purge the community of
dross. On the Farm we are also able to give some kind of education to
the families.
1 Not available
In spite of every care taken to satisfy the men, no doubt there is
grumbling. It is inevitable, considering the material one has to work
with and work upon. The wonder is that there has been so little real
grumbling. The credit is all due to the men who are fighting so nobly,
so bravely and so uncomplainingly.
Our half-educated countrymen
certainly could not do what these good men have done. It now re-
mains to be seen how many will stand what might be the final test, should
the struggle be further prolonged.
But there is every indication that it may be closed during the
early part of the next year. This time it appears there will be no consul-
tation with the leaders of the community. Anyhow, the issue is clear
and the struggle can end only on our demands being granted.
Mr. Ritch, after a brief stay here, has returned to London.
Mr. Polak has gone to the Cape to look after the concluding stages
of the Cape appeal.
It was a most fortunate stroke for you to have secured donations
from Mysore, Bikaner and [the] Nizam.
Mrs. Sodha's case of which you must have learnt from
Indian Opinion has not yet been set down. It is just likely that the case
may never come off. If it does, she will certainly go to gaol and pro-
bably many of her sisters will follow her.
The matter of minor children is still hanging fire.
And now I think I shall cease to weary you with our tale.
As I write this, Messrs Thambi Naidoo and Gopal Naidoo are
sitting by me. They join me in sending you regards and in once more
thanking you for the noble help you rendered the poor deportees.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I must not omit to mention how thankful the passive resisters were
to receive the beautiful photographs you sent and the copies of
Harishchandra both of which were publicly presented, as you may be
aware, at Mr. Rustomjee's house. Many thanks too for your portrait
for me and the group photograph as also a copy of Harishchandra. What
an appropriate present the latter was!
M. K. G.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 2223
