447. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
[Before] September [5], 1934
DEAR VALLABHBHAI,
After much deliberation and discussions with friends who
have been to Wardha recently, I have come to the conclusion that
the best interests of the Congress and the nation will be served
by my completely severing all official or physical connection
with the Congress, including the original membership.
This does
not mean that I cease to take any interest in an organization
with which I have been intimately connected since 1920 and which
I have worshipped since my youth. In spite of all I have recently
said about the corruption that has crept into the organization,
it still remains, in my opinion, the most powerful and the most
representative national organization in the country. It has a
history of uninterrupted noble service and sacrifice from its
inception. Its progress has been unbroken and steady. It has
weathered storms as no other institution in the country has.
It has commanded the largest measure of sacrifice of which any
country would be proud. It has today the largest number of self-
sacrificing men and women of unimpeachable character.
It is not with a light heart that I leave this great organi-
zation. But I feel that my remaining in it any longer is likely
to do more harm than good. I miss at this juncture the association
and advice of Jawaharlal who is bound to be the rightful helmsman
of the organization in the near future. I have, therefore, kept
before me his great spirit. And I feel that whilst his great affec-
tion for me would want to keep me in the Congress, his reason
would endorse the step I have taken. And since a great organi-
zation cannot be governed by affections but by cold reason,
it is better for me to retire from a field where my presence results
in arresting full play of reason.
Hence in leaving the organiza-
tion I feel that I am in no sense deserting one who is much more
than a comrade and whom no amount of political differences will
ever separate from me.
Nor by retiring at this critical juncture am I less true to
Babu Rajendra Prasad who will in all probability be the President
of the forthcoming Congress, and who unlike Jawaharlal shares most
of my ideals and whose sacrifice for the nation, judged whether in
quality or quantity, is not to be excelled.
Then there is the Congress Parliamentary Board which would
perhaps not have come into being, unless I had encouraged its
formation with my whole heart.
It supplies a want that was felt
by many staunch and true Congressmen. It was necessary, therefore,
to bring it into being. Such services as I am capable of render-
ing will still be at its disposal as at any Congressman's. It must
command the full support of all Congressmen who have no insu-
perable objection to the entry of Congressmen into the existing
legislatures. I should be sorry if the Board lost a single vote
because of my withdrawal.
I fear none of the consequences dreaded by some friends, for
I know my ground. A tree is no more hurt by a ripe fruit
falling from it than would the Congress be by my going out of it.
Indeed the fruit will be dead weight, if it did not fall when it
was fully ripe. Mine is that condition. I feel that I am a dead
weight on the Congress now.
There is a growing and vital difference of outlook between many
Congressmen and myself.
My presence more and more estranges
the intelligentsia from the Congress.
I feel that my policies fail
to convince their reason, though strange as it may appear, I do
nothing that does not satisfy my own reason. But my reason
takes me in a direction just the opposite of what many of the
most intellectual Congressmen would gladly and enthusiastically
take, if they were not hampered by their unexampled loyalty to me.
No leader can expect greater loyalty and devotion than I have
received from intellectually-minded Congressmen even when they
have protested and signified their disapproval of the policies I have
laid before the Congress. I feel that for me any more to draw
upon this loyalty and devotion is to put an undue strain upon them.
I wish that those who strongly disapprove of my method would
outvote me and compel my retirement. I have tried to reach that
position but I have failed. They would cling to me till the end.
The only way I can requite such loyalty is by voluntary retirement.
I cannot work in opposition when there are some fundamental
differences between the Congress intelligentsia and me. Ever since
my entry into public life I have never acted in that manner. . . . 1
Then there is the growing group of socialists. Jawaharlal is their
undisputed leader. I know pretty well what he wants and stands
for. He claims to examine everything in a scientific spirit. He is
courage personified. He has many years of service in front of him.
He has an indomitable faith in his mission. The socialist group
represents his views more or less, though probably their mode of
execution is not exactly his. That group is bound to grow in in-
fluence and importance. I have welcomed the group. Many of
them are respected and self-sacrificing co-workers. With all this, I
have fundamental differences with them on the programme pub-
lished in their authorized pamphlets. But I would not, by reason of
the moral pressure I may be able to exert, suppress the spread of
the ideas propounded in their literature. My remaining in the
Congress would amount to the exercise of such pressure. I may
not interfere with free expression of those ideas, however distasteful
some of them may be to me. . . .2
For me to dominate the Congress in spite of these fundamen-
tal differences is almost a species of violence which I must refrain
from. Their reason must be set free at any cost. Having discovered
this undisputable fact, I would be disloyal to the Congress if, even
at the risk of losing all my reputation, I did not leave the Congress.
But there is no danger to my reputation or that of the Con-
gress, if I leave only to serve it better in thought, word and deed.
I do not leave in anger or in a huff, nor yet in disappointment.
I have no disappointment in me. I see before me a bright future
for the country. Everything will go well, if we are true to our-
selves. I have no other programme before me save the Congress
programme now before the country . . . . 1
In this and various other ways I would love to serve the Con-
gress in my own humble manner. Thus living in complete detach-
ment, I hope, I shall come closer to the Congress. Congressmen will
then accept my services without being embarrassed or oppressed.
One word to those who have given me their whole-hearted
devotion in thought, word and deed in the pursuit of the common
goal. My physical withdrawal from the Congress is not to be
understood to mean an invitation to them to withdraw. They will
remain in the Congress fold so long as the Congress needs them
and work out such common ideals as they have assimilated.
Yours,
BAPU
Mahatma, Vol. III, pp. 386-
