401. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,
May 29, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,
I have your very important letter. It crossed mine. I can-
not appropriate the credit you give me for gentle criticism of your
handwriting. What I wanted to say was that although I liked
handwritten letters, there was no occasion for you to revert to
writing your letters for my sake and that you should continue type-
writing as you believe in it, and as I know it does result in eco-
nomy of time. Nor do I consider your handwriting to be bad.
It might be clearer. But fortunately for my friends I have my
own writing as the criterion and that being so, I know very few
whose writing is worse than mine, and yet because of my dislike
of typewriters, if I could possibly write with my own hand, I
will inflict that illegible hand in preference to having my
letters typed or typing them myself. The reason underlying is
this. If I have any concern for my friends, I should endeavour
to write a better and more legible hand. Typewriter is a cover for
indifference and laziness. Moreover I believe in the dictum-
handwriting reveals the writer. Typewriting certainly results in
economy of time. But whilst I admit that time is money, I do
not admit that money is everything, and therefore I can conceive
innumerable occasions when economy of time would be misplaced.
And the inroads that the typewriter is making have all but destroyed
the magnificent art of calligraphy. I wonder if you have seen old
handwritten manuscripts when people used to pour forth their
very soul into their work. But I must not stray away from the
subject on which I want to write.
Your suggestions about selecting a few untouchable boys and
making them ideal farmers does great credit to your heart. But
it betrays your ignorance of the situation. Even if half-a-dozen
untouchables could be trained as you suggest, that will in no way
bring us nearer the solution of the problem of untouchability. To
petrify on this matter-Hindu mind will immediately say, we shall
touch every untouchable who qualified as these six men have.
You perhaps know that there have been many and many pariah
saints, but their sainthood has not saved this suppressed class.
The orthodox mind again argues the pariah saint becomes so be-
cause of his past karma and he naturally commands our respect.
When the others do likewise, they will also command the same
respect. It is this immoral deduction from the theory of karma
which has got to be combated at every step and the Hindu mind
has got to be educated by fierce penance and understanding that
the theory of karma is not intended to kill all reform and all
efforts, but that it is intended for mankind to work out all evil
karma and he who does not do so is not entitled to belong to
the human species. The Hindu mind has therefore to be educated
to regard intrinsically as equals the lowest, the fallen and the
downtrodden and to give them a helping hand so as to make
them level with the rest. And why, apart from the question of
untouchability, should not the most promising young men be
sent out to become accomplished farmers and try the experiment
suggested by you? Surely you do not wish to imply that the
touchables in their pride will not care to learn farming with a
view to utilizing human excreta as manure. If that is your argu-
ment, it would be wrong to expect untouchables to handle work
which others would consider as degrading. As you know at the
Ashram, we have untouchable boys. We do not even ask them
to do the sanitary work. The initiative is taken by the so-called
high-caste men; for, on such points the so-called untouchables
would be very touchy. I am having that experience everywhere.
Underlying your suggestion, therefore, is the question not of un-
touchability but of improved farming methods along simple lines.
But I have simply not handled this question energetically because
I believe in the doctrine of one thing at a time. There is much
scattered work here, so much laziness, so much blind imitation, so
little concentration that it is necessary to hammer away at one
very simple but fairly universal thing, and if that succeeds, the
rest can follow. And agriculture is an industry which can only
be improved when it receives state assistance. In an ill-governed
country, I think with Thoreau that the citizen who resists the
evil government must ignore property rights. And without as-
surance of settled ownership, it is impossible to do much in the
way of agriculture.
I do not want to elaborate this thing. I
have said sufficient to enable you to fill in the rest. Whilst your
suggestion does not seem to me to be feasible so far as the un-
touchables are concerned and difficult of accomplishment, even as a
general scheme the extract sent by you is valuable and I propose
as soon as I find space to reproduce it in Young India so that those
who are at all inclined in the direction might take the matter up.
I did not get the larger volume about vitamins. What I got
was Food and Health. But that book also gives enough information
about vitamins. Dr. Kellogg's writings I know. I have read
his book, and if it has not been lost as many of my books have
been, it must be in the Ashram library. However, you seem to
know him personally, and I shall look forward to what he has to
say. Have you put the whole case before him and asked whether
he can suggest an effective vegetarian substitute for milk in the
case of patients?
Yours sincerely,
R. B. GREGG, ESQ.
KOTGARH
SIMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 14132
