263. LETTER TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
BARDOLI,
December 30, 1941
DEAR MAULANA SAHIB,
In the course of discussion in the Working Committee, I disco-
vered that I had committed a grave error in the interpretation of the
Bombay Resolution. I had interpreted it to mean that the Congress
was to refuse participation in the present or all wars on the ground
principally of non-violence. I found to my astonishment that most
members differed from my interpretation and held that the opposi-
tion need not be on the ground of non-violence. On rereading the
Bombay Resolution I found that the differing members were right
and that I had read into it a meaning which its letter could not
bear. The discovery of the error makes it impossible for me to lead
the Congress in the struggle for resistance to war effort on grounds
in which non-violence was not indispensable. I could not, for
instance, identify myself with opposition to war effort on the
ground of ill will against Great Britain. The resolution contem-
plated material association with Britain in the war effort as a price
for guaranteed independence of India. If such was my view, and
I believed in the use of violence for gaining independence and yet
refused participation in the effort as the price of that independence,
I would consider myself guilty of unpatriotic conduct. It is my
certain belief that only non-violence can save India and the
world from self-extinction. Such being the case, I must continue
my mission whether I am alone or assisted by an organization
or individuals. You will, therefore, please relieve me of the
responsibility laid upon me by the Bombay Resolution. I must
continue civil disobedience for free speech against all war with such
Congressmen and others whom I select and who believe in the
non-violence I have contemplated and are willing to conform to
prescribed conditions.
I will not, at this critical period, select for civil disobedience
those whose services are required to steady and help the people in
their respective localities.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A.I.C.C. File No. 1375. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also C.W. 10904. Courtesy: C. R. Narasimhan
