462. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 23, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
It was bad to have got fever again. But I suppose it is no
use fretting over it. There is undoubtedly poison in your system.
It upsets it on the slightest pretext. Whenever possible trace the
cause and avoid it in future. If it is rest that is needed and if
you cannot take it at the Ashram take it where you think you
can get it. You may even go to Vijapur where Chhaganlal is or
some such quiet place. Even a week's change may set you up.
You will be pleased to hear that I have set the Bihar wheel
going. I followed your instructions and it went.
The holders
required attention. I opened out the holes. I am not working at
it because I am making experiments with the Gandiv which still
gives promise of possibilities. I am describing the changes in my
letter to Keshu. I would speak to you about the Bihar wheel.
The alteration you have made doesn't seem to me to have added
to the utility of the wheel. The original length of the platform is
the ideal length. The length in the "improved" machine is too
much for drawing the thread away from you and too little for
drawing it towards you. The original holders may admit of a
change. I am trying the coir holders in the Gandiv and they
have worked exceedingly well. In the coir holders the spindle
moves in the rough and smooth convex surface of the coir twine.
Hence it moves with the minimum of friction. In the Bihar
holders the spindle moves lazily on 1/8th inch flat surface. Hence
there is avoidable friction. The coir holders undoubtedly last long,
take no time to make and hold oil better. Coir twine is available
anywhere. It can be picked from waste. These hints are for you
to note and follow out where you have leisure. Another good
piece of news. For the last three days I have been trying one of
the taklis you left here. It is giving me more satisfaction than the
one I have made and on which I was working. The mouth of mine
is wretchedly made. Yours is much better. I read today the trans-
lation of my summary of the first chapter of the Gita. I can trace
your hand in it. The sense has been fairly preserved.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5421. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9655
