389. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 6, 1911
MY DEAR POLAK,
I have your two letters. I am glad that you rated our friends in
Durban so soundly, as I knew you would. They appreciate it, at least
from you.
A suspected person may, in my opinion, be challenged by an
immigration officer anywhere, even within the border of the Union.
That being so, why could an educated Indian not be challenged on
entering Natal from the Transvaal? If you say that he could not be
challenged, such an Indian then could not be prohibited from crossing
the Natal border from the Transvaal side, and the provincial check
would break down, in spite of Clause 7 of the Bill. Any such legislation
at present in existence does not prevent the entry of such persons into
Natal. Your argument about Joseph entering from Natal seems to be
sound. It seems difficult to believe that the omission of wives and minor
children is deliberate, and, if it is, we ought to be able to wreck the
Bill. I think that we are bound to protest strongly as from Natal and the
Cape against the education test, and we must in this connection raise the
question of inter-communication. If Smuts gives a public assurance that
the education test will be for purposes of inter-communication, assum-
ing that challenge within the border is possible, we may waive the objec-
tion. Otherwise, it should be persisted in. The question Anglia raises
about domicile is not a bad one. In law, I think that it is not possible
for a man to claim a double domicile. Hitherto, domicile certificates
produced by Transvaal residents have passed muster. I have, however,
always feared a legal difficulty in the matter, and it may well be that
those who are registered in the Transvaal may, in future, be taken to
have forfeited their Natal domicile. Production of a certificate of Natal
domicile is proof, at most, only of domicile to the day of leaving that
place but is not proof that domicile subsists at the time of re-entry.
I
would suggest that those of the Transvaal Indians who are registered, but
who are anxious to retain their Natal domicile, and who are in posses-
sion of certificates, should, for the time being, remain in Natal, or, not
being there, return to Natal rather than remain in the Transvaal, be-
cause in the Transvaal the question of domicile cannot be raised, and
a man who is found in Natal at the time of the taking effect of the new
Bill cannot be sued. The same remarks apply to the Indians at the
Cape.
I hope to send a leading article on the Bill tomorrow. It will be
sent to Phoenix, but a copy will be sent to you in Durban. For further
information I refer you to my letter to Ritch herewith.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5235
1 Royeppen; vide Vol. VIII, p. 276.
2 M. C. Anglia, Joint Honorary Secretary, Natal Indian Congress
3 But he did not. Vide "Letter to H. S. L. Polak", p. 459
4 Vide "Letter to L. W. Ritch", pp. 432-.
