59. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
January 3, 1935
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter of 21st ultimo. Your previous
letter was read by Mirabehn, Mahadev and later by Andrews.
All of them put, independently of me, the same construction
that I had. Of course, I unreservedly accept your correction. I
simply want to say that it was after carefully reading your letter
more than three times that I sent you the reply I did. Andrews
also read my reply to you, and he had nothing to suggest by
way of alteration.
Of course, you knew the existence of the repressive laws.
But you did not know, nor do you know now, what their conti-
nuance meant or means to us here. A strange confirmation of this
comes from Dr. Maude Royden who is reported to have said
at Karachi that the people in England knew nothing, through the
daily Press or otherwise, of the amazing things which she heard
during the two or three days she found herself amongst the very
sober women of India. Andrews will be able to give you first-
hand testimony of what he saw and learnt in Bengal.
You seem to regard the possibility of withdrawal of the forth-
coming Bill as a calamity. In my opinion, if the withdrawal
comes even at the last moment, it will be a blessing both for
England and India, for the simple reason that persistence in the
measure in the face of an almost unanimous Indian opposition
to it would mean an unbending attitude on the part of the
British Parliament and utter contempt for Indian public opinion.
I hope you have seen the bitter comment made by Rt. Hon.
Sastri, who was at one time a persona grata at the India Office
whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and the equally bitter
comment of Hon. C. Y. Chintamani, who has been regarded as
a moderate among moderates and who has, in season and out
of season, condemned the Congress attitude in unmeasured
language.
Now for the briefest summary of my own personal objec-
tions to the J. P. C. Report. I read that Report and the White
Paper as one document. Whatever new there is in the former is
not regarded at this end as an improvement, but quite the con-
trary, and it is the last straw which has broken the back of the
Liberals. They had cherished the fond hope that the Joint
Memorandum signed under the leadership of the Aga Khan
would receive the favourable consideration of the Joint Parliamen-
tary Committee and that some, if not all, of its recommenda-
tions would be accepted by it. The contemptuous dismissal of
that Memorandum, beyond a mere courteous reference to it, has
extorted the following remark from Sastri:
No, Sir, it is impossible for the Liberal Party to give an atom of co-
operation. Co-operation with friends that wish well of us will be worth
while, but co-operation with those who have displayed the utmost
distrust of us, who do not care for our views and demands, and who
enact a constitution in utter disregard of our wishes, what is co-operation
with them, I ask? I should call it a suicide.
SUMMARY
1. There is no suggestion in the J. P. C. Report that there
should be a clause the constitution providing for automatic
advance to complete independence or whatever the elected
representatives of India may decide to have.
2. The contemplated constitution saddles India with a
greater financial burden than she is bearing today without any
prospect of economic or political betterment.
3. At the centre, 80 per cent of the revenue is reserved out
of any popular control.
4. There is no popular control over the military, whether
as to policy or as to expenditure.
5. There is no popular control over the currency or the
exchange of the country.
6. Even the control over the 20 per cent proposed to be
left in the hands of the Finance Minister is subject to suspension
by the Governor-General.
7. The provincial autonomy adumbrated in the Report is
purely nominal, as the Governors of the provinces have such
wide powers that they can, whenever they choose, make an end
of responsibility. It would be utterly wrong for any Britisher to
infer from Colonial precedents that these powers will be rarely,
if ever, exercised. Indian past experience is quite the contrary.
8. Responsible Ministers have no right even to transfer any
member, either of the all-India service or of the provincial service.
9. The so-called autonomous legislatures will have no right
to amend the Police Acts or even Police Regulations.
10. British exploitation is made firmer than ever.
The overwhelming effect of all the foregoing objections consi-
dered together leaves an indelible impression upon the mind
that, bad as the existing constitution is, the threatened new one
will be infinitely worse. And what is more, if the threatened new
constitution is passed, it would be most difficult for years to
come to undo the mischief that will be done under it.
To clinch the whole of the objections, it is well to remember
that the constitution is sought to be imposed upon the people
who are already groaning under repression, such as, perhaps,
has not been equalled in British Indian history. I am making
this statement with the full sense of my responsibility. I have a
60-
vivid memory of Jallianwala Bagh. I have read Kaye and
Malleson's volumes on the Sepoy Revolt, as it has been called,
of 1857. Both make gruesome reading. Then, it was the naked
sword. The repression represents the gloved fist, but deadlier
on that account.
You may make whatever private use you wish of this letter.
Nobody else is responsible for the opinion I have expressed in
this. It has been shown to no friend beyond Mahadev, Mira
and the typist.
My writing may seem bitter; but I would like to warn you
against putting any such interpretation upon it. The language
represents the truth and nothing but the truth as I have seen
and felt it. It does not represent the whole truth. If I had the
time and the capacity to give you the whole truth, the version
would be even worse than it is.
In spite, however, of the black picture that I see in it, I
have no bitterness in me against a single Englishman. I believe
that the English Ministers are pursuing what they believe to be
an honest policy to be adopted in the interest of India. It is
their honest belief that British rule in India has been, on the
whole, for her good. They honestly believe that under it India
has advanced in economic progress and in political capacity,
and that if India received the constitution that the vast number
of the intelligentsia wish for, it would be a bad day for her. It
is difficult to combat an honest belief, however erroneous it may
be, as, in my opinion, it is in this case. But it would also be
wrong to be angry over an honest belief of any person. Whilst,
therefore, I hold the strong opinion that I have expressed in
the foregoing summary I would ask you to believe me implicitly
when I give you my assurance that, God helping, I shall take
no step in haste or in anger.
I have retired from the Congress because, among other
reasons, I want to impose silence upon myself, so far as it is
humanly possible, about the political measures of the Government.
I want, in my voluntary isolation, to explore the yet hidden
possibilities of non-violence. Every action I am taking, no matter
in what department of life, is being taken with that end in view.
The only axe that I have to grind on this earth is to try to
understand the ultimate truth of things which, at present, I
seem to see only dimly. And after a laborious search I have
come to the conclusion that if I am to see it in any fullness I
can only do so by non-violence in thought, word and deed.
What this search will lead me to, I really do not know myself,
nor have I the slightest desire to see it before its time. For me,
therefore, it is an incessant waiting upon God to show me the
next step, and I shall be grateful if any of you friends can, with
your full hearts, help me in that search.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
CARL HEATH, ESQ.
LONDON
From a photostat: G.N. 1028
