375. LETTER TO LORD LOTHIAN
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 24, 1937
DEAR LORD LOTHIAN,
My deepest thanks for your long letter. I appreciate the
patient effort you are making to convince me of the correctness
of your advice. With much of what you say I wholly agree. The
question of office-acceptance will now be finally decided at the
forthcoming meeting of the Working Committee of the Congress.
The Viceroy has just said the last word about the Government's
attitude. I admit that it is an improvement upon the first speech
on the situation by Lord Zetland.
Whatever the decision of the Working Committee may
be—and you will have known it before this reaches you—what
I would like to write upon is the fundamental difference between the
colonies and India. So far as I know, the colonists were armed
and knew the use of arms.
The vast majority of thirty millions
of voters here are unarmed, do not know the use of arms and
perhaps would not like to be armed even if they were left abso-
lutely free to do so—such is Indian culture. Though, therefore, I have
pinned my faith to working along constitutional lines, I have, as
every Indian has, either to think out a programme whereby every
adult can be trained in the use of arms or find a substitute. At
my instance, the Congress has for the last eighteen years attempted
to experiment with the substitute called non-violent non-co-
operation, civil resistance, etc. For myself I have rejected the idea
of achieving freedom by the use of arms in the last resort and I
have accepted as its final substitute the use of non-violence in
every shape and form. The use of arms is not an unexplored field,
that of non-violence has possibilities of infinite exploration. Hence
my eagerness to discover a formula whereby, consistently with the
Congress creed of complete independence, office-acceptance may
be possible. But I must confess that I have not the faith that you
have in the possibility of the existing Act to expand into an in-
strument of complete freedom. On the contrary, I believe in
common with the vast majority of educated Indians that it is inca-
pable of giving India what it wants and the sooner it is replaced
by something of Indian design the better.
Of course, the Act does contemplate militarization of India at
a snail's pace and therefore it is not so repugnant to those over-
whelming numbers of Indians who want India to develop military
power as it is to me who would if I could take India along a
wholly different route.
Now, if you think that my reasoning is erroneous and that
it is possible for India to attain her full height without the back-
ground of either military training or of non-violent training, you
should come to India during next autumn if only to teach me.
In any case, if the Congress decides upon office-acceptance it will
be the beginning of real difficulty in one way and your coming is
likely to be helpful. If the Congress decides otherwise, you will
perhaps yourself feel impelled to come here in order that you
might not leave a single stone unturned to avert a calamity which
it would be if the rule of the sword replaces the rule of the elec-
torate, that is, democracy, however, incipient it might be.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 6386 a. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9852
