414. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
August 27, 1938
CHI. DEVDAS,
I could not spare the time to reply to you.
I also have
formed the same impression about Khan Saheb that you say
you have. However, he is so suspicious that one cannot know
when he might do what. But being a man of God, he re-
mains unharmed by mistakes and perhaps he may live his whole
life in this way and remain blameless. He suffers from mental
lethargy and so does not know what to do in particular circum-
stances. And, moreover, he is simple-hearted. He would believe
everything that a man whom he has come to trust told him,
would not believe anything said by anyone against whom he is
prejudiced, and get angry with those that did. Even so, he
is a saintly person, and so one does not mind his faults.
Pyarelal has pulled through this time. Showing him what
you have written would have an adverse effect. He is not fit
enough just now to bear your jokes and it would not do show-
ing him the letter after it has been edited! If his temperature
is not normal today, it will be so in a day or two. He fol-
lows my advice on most things. He gives me no trouble, and so
you need not worry. My silence has benefited me so much that
if and when I have to give it up, I shall find it hard to do so.
Most certainly there is anger in me. The silence eats it all
up. After all, how much anger can I give vent to by writing?
We are going through a period of wet adversity. Water is
dripping everywhere. You will see evidence of it in this also.
I fully realize now the meaning of living in a village.
I am enclosing Ramdas's letter.
Ramachandran is likely to be arrested in a day or two. Raj-
kumari will return from Travancore tomorrow. Poor woman, she did
her very best. But after all we can only try, is not that so? We have
left, and should leave, credit or discredit to God. If we do not act thus,
we would come to grief. I may not give you any more time now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2011. Also the manuscript of
Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
288
