333. LETTER TO LORD SELBORNE
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before May 12, 1906]
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
the 30th ultimo, No. 15/4/1906. My Association ventures to think that
the complaint forwarded to His Excellency has not received that investi-
gation which the circumstances required. As to the dilatoriness, my
Association will watch the working of the new department. In the mean-
while, attention is respectfully drawn to the fact that applications have
been pending for months, and it is difficult for my Association to recon-
cile such a lapse of time with any regard for the convenience of the
applicants.
With reference to the case of Mr. Suliman Manga, my Association
has ascertained the full facts, and my Association thinks that the infor-
mation given to His Excellency is by no means complete. There was abso-
lutely no mis-statement of material facts in connection with the applica-
tion. The application was made through Mr. Gandhi, who, my Associa-
tion understands, was instructed by a friend of the Mangas'. The ground
for the application was not that Mr. Manga wanted to visit his uncle,
but that he wanted to pass through the Transvaal on his way to Delagoa
Bay. A reply was received on the 14th March rejecting the application
for a temporary permit. The variation as to the description of the rela-
tive only took place after rejection of the application. In reply to the
letter in question, Mr. Gandhi wrote to the Permit Officer expressing
his surprise and there described the uncle as father, which, as he explains,
was written without his having referred to the previous letter. In any case,
there was no question of misleading, as the variation in the description
of relationship was so palpable that it could only be accounted as a mis-
take. As a matter of fact, as it now transpires, Mr. Manga had neither
a father nor an uncle in Delagoa Bay, but he had a cousin, and for
that matter there was a further discrepancy that Mr. Manga was des-
cribed as a British Indian, whereas he happened to be a Portuguese
Indian. All this arose as instructions were given by a friend of the
Mangas' who did not know them intimately. But none of these facts had
any direct bearing on the application. In the second letter, informa-
tion was given to the effect that Mr. Manga was a student from England.
A later development of the case showed the painful fact that Mr. Manga,
1 This was published in Indian Opinion under the caption "British Indian Association's
Reply".
2 Vide pp. 273-.
considered as a British Indian, was unable to secure what he got for the
asking when it became known that he was a Portuguese subject. The
case of Mr. Suliman Manga is, in the humble opinion of my Associa-
tion, very important as showing the difficult position in which the British
Indian community is placed in the Transvaal. The reason, too, given
for the refusal was denied to my Association. My Association became
aware of it for the first time through your letter. The foregoing state-
ment of facts shows that the reason for refusal could not have been the
variation in the description of the relative in Delagoa Bay, because when
the decision was announced, the slip as to the uncle being described
as father had not occurred. My Association ventures to submit that
there should be sufficient latitude granted in connection with temporary
permits, or what may be termed visitors' passes, and that in any case
applicants should have reasons given to them as to why their applications
have been rejected. My Association has obtained copies of the corres-
pondence in the matter which I take the liberty to enclose herewith.
Regarding the age limit for the introduction of male Asiatic minors,
my Association respectfully submits that the reduction of the age limit
would hardly cure the abuses referred to in the letter under reply. Those
who intend to practise deception will continue to do so whether the age
limit is sixteen or twelve. Abuses under legislation restrictive of human
liberty are inevitable, but my Association respectfully submits that the
abuses have by no means been extensive, and they have always been
avoidable. May I further venture to state that the reduction of age
limit is a punishment awarded to the innocent for the crimes of the
guilty persons.
With reference to all persons irrespective of age or sex being re-
quired to obtain permits, my Association takes it that it only refers to
British Indians or Asiatics, for it is within the knowledge of my Associa-
tion that many European children and ladies have entered the country
without any permits at all. My Association ventures to submit that
the requiring of wives, and children five years of age, or, as it has been
said, infants-in-arms, to carry permits is hardly called for and is cal-
culated to create a great deal of irritation. My Association, therefore,
once more respectfully requests His Excellency's sympathetic intervention.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDUL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 12-5-1906
1 Not reproduced here
