236. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
JUBBALPORE,
March 21 [1921]
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I am today in Jubbalpore and shall presently entrain for
Calcutta on my way to Orissa. That will practically finish my
tour throughout India. The poorest province will be the last to
be visited. The present activity of the Government fills me with
unutterable distress. India is passing through a wave of purity.
The people want to do away with the drink and the opium traffic.
The Government is doing its best to thwart the purpose. People
want to be simple. A subtle attempt is being made to prevent it.
But I think the tide cannot be turned. It must go on. It almost
1 Extracted from Mahadev Desai's account of Gandhiji's tour
2 In this year, Gandhiji was in Jabalpur on March 21.
3 Gandhiji was in Orissa from March 24 to March 29.
seems however as if the determination is to anticipate Lord
Reading and create for him an atmosphere in which it will be
impossible for him to do any real service unless he brings with him
a stout heart and scales of gold to weigh justice.
Today is my sacred day and I cannot help sending you a line.
I saw a line in the Press somewhere that you were again down
with influenza. I hope you are better. Do send me a wire at
Cuttack to say how you are. I shall be in Orissa six days.
I am sorry to have to tell you that Lalchand appears to have
been a broken reed. Mahadev tells me-and I have little doubt
about the truth of his investigation-that Lalchand has misappro-
priated large sums of money. I have asked for his explanation. I
have heard nothing as yet from him. He behaved very badly to-
wards Mahadev. He will not part with your article on opium
saying it was meant for himself, not for the Editor of Young India.
I write this to warn you against trusting him. He is likely to
make money out of anything he gets from you or anyone else of
authority.
Such discoveries make me sad and despondent at times. We
cannot make much headway with this battle of non-co-opera-
tion if we do not have clean instruments. Lalchand I believed to
be absolutely straight and above suspicion.
I shall be in Bezwada on the 31 st or even 30th and be in the
Andhra province for about five days.
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 961
