16. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON, WARDHA,
November 7, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,
Your letter. I hope this will reach you in Simla.
It is joyous news that S[hummy] denied himself aspirin for
full one week and you were gracious enough to have only two
tabloids during the whole Simla season. Let us hope now you
won't need even two during your lifetime which extend to 100
years.
Your sales of khadi certainly went beyond even my expecta-
tions. All this due to the effort of a mere woman—frail in
body and idiot mentally ! ! ! No wonder poor khadi workers
in Simla are trembling over the prospect of your absence during
the next Simla season. But we need not worry about the future
which is in God's hands. You will give a good account of your-
self no matter where you are.
Nanavati is so well that he is leaving today to pass a few
days among the members of his family and friends whilst he is
gaining strength. He is a wonderful worker. Mira is chirpy.
Balwant Singh is weak. He must overwork himself and take
chapati even when he must not.
You were extravagant in buying the thermos, the magnif-
icent apples.
But you would not be a Rajkumari if you were
not extravagant. You are none the less so because you spend on
others. If you counted yourself a trustee, as you should, of all
you possess including your body, you would be balanced in using
them even for your trust. You may not philosophically smile
this simple truth away. Remember the value of a rupee in terms
of the poor. It means 64 solid meals which millions do not
have. Many in Segaon live on a rupee per month, i.e., only
two meals a day costing one pice each. But millions do not
get this much. How can you and I, knowing this as well as that
I am writing this, mis-spend a pice? Will you be wise for a
while? If you will become the—or a—woman of my imagination,
you will have to develop all your faculties, not excluding account-
keeping. And how about your Hindi?
Will you send me a good portable copy of Granth Sahib in
Hindi with translation? No hurry and not an expensive volume.
If getting a cheap copy is beneath your princess-like dignity or
your capacity, you must leave this commission alone.
I gave Ku[marappa]'s manuscript to Mira for criticism. She
read it carefully and has given me her notes. She thought it
was heavy, but terse enough, some parts not convincing. I am
glad you have revised it. I wanted to pass on M[ira]'s notes to
Ku[marappa]. But I had no time. If it is not given to the
printers, and I find the time, I shall go through the thing myself.
Enough for the day.
Love.
ROBBER
[PS.]
Andrews coming here soon.
Isn't this good paper?
From the original: C.W. 3598. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6407
