12. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 23, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
The right hand is sufficiently tired. I, therefore, wish to
preserve all my strength for writing articles for Harijan. I don't
think it will require complete rest.
I wrote one letter to you a few days ago. This letter, there-
fore, can be brief.
I will inquire about books for Parachure Shastri.
Maitri will give you trouble. If she is at all likely to im-
prove, she will do so only if we tolerate her and treat her
with love. She should not feel the absence of her mother. Women
may be exempted during their monthly periods from rules of
work as may be thought necessary. If some or most of them abuse
this freedom, the Ashram will not be responsible for that. If
somebody misuses the time set apart for sleep, we cannot reduce
that period on that account.
Do not lose your patience. You must always remember that
a reformer or servant of the people can do no useful work un-
less he or she is patient. Let this be written in bold letters on
your wall; inscribe it in an amulet and wear it on your arm.
If she receives permission from the Ashram, N. will come
there in a very few days. She has openly led an immoral life,
borrowed money and told lies. But now she has become al-
most a nun. I have not felt any insincerity in this. After she had
realized her errors, she has done whatever I advised her to do.
If she is likely to get an opportunity to adhere to her praise-
worthy resolution, it is only in the Ashram that she will do so.
Anywhere else, she will either wither away or relapse into her
old ways. She has great ability and wide knowledge. She has
read the Mahabharata. If she comes there, cultivate her ac-
quaintance and introduce her to other women. Don't ask her
anything about her past. She herself will be ready to talk about
it, but it would be undesirable to talk about it or make her talk
about it. It is harmful to recall memories of sinful pleasures.
If she takes interest in talking about her immoral past, you may
conclude that she is still not free from such desires. Regard her
as your younger sister and point out her faults to her with love.
You can ask me whatever you like about her past life. I have
written all this today because I may not get time to write much
later when she is asked to go there. Her son is a fine boy.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10338. Also C.W. 6778. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
