90. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
SABARMATI,
February 24, 1928
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I received your first letter today and the second letter three days earlier.
I have given them to Mahadev for everyone to read. You have done a good
job if you have seen in a short period all those institutions as closely as
possible.
Look after your health and for doing so, you have to use a mosquito-net.
Do not have the least hesitation in using it there. You might come across
people who would criticise it the first day, the next day the same people would
praise you for your well-maintained health, and on the third, they would follow
your example. Mosquito-net is just an example.
Do not hesitate to write to me. I have always liked your letters. Reading
your handwriting is never a problem.
I knew that you were hesitant to go to Orissa because of my health, but
it is your dharma to overcome that hesitation and to help you in that is my
dharma. I believe that my health is very good. The experiment with milkless
diet seems to be successful so far. I take 8 tolas of wheat, 3/ tola olive oil,
4 tolas almonds, one seer tandarjo 2 and 6 to 9 oranges. I still need to increase
1 From the reference to Ramdas having "become a family man", the letter appears
to have been written on the Wednesday following Ramdas's marriage on January 27,
1928 which was a Friday. The Wednesday following, fell on February 1.
2 Leafy vegetables
74
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
75
my diet. If I can do that gradually, I hope to regain part or entire weight I
have lost.
Chi. Ramdas and Nimu have gone to Rajkot. From there, they will go to
Amreli and will be back here in 15 days. Jamnadas is tempting Ramdas, so
he may stay on there. He may even stay there if he has to live permanently
in Amreli. He will make a final decision on coming here. These days he is
cheerful and free from worries.
Brian Gabriel is here for the last two days. He will leave on Sunday.
Govindji (Gregg) is coming for ten days. Others too, keep on coming and
going. Do not worry at all about my health.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 32907
