1. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Saturday Morning, December 13/16, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I got your packet at 12 noon on Wednesday. I got a
copy of the booklet Gitabodh. I take it that those who make notes
about the work they do as yajna do so in their diary. If you remind
people often enough about this, they will be careful. See that every-
one is soon able to use the instruments for weighing yarn and testing
its strength. I have replied to Mahadev's questions in my letter to
Durga, and to questions about my health in my letter to Kaka-
saheb. Therefore read both the letters.
Afternoon
There was a letter from Jayaprakash saying that Prabhavati
would go over there. She may have even arrived there before you
get this letter. If she comes, look after her very carefully. She gets
fainting fits and these should stop immediately in the Ashram.
You may buy any fruits which may be necessary for her. Consult
a doctor if necessary. You may write to me about her whenever
you wish to.
Night, December 15, 1930
I got Manilal's letter. I felt relieved. Let him observe as many
restrictions as he chooses, but not at the cost of his health. 110-
115 lb. is certainly low weight.
Manilal should maintain his
weight between 120 and 125; if, however, he has kept up his
strength, he will regain that level after he is released. He should
guard against any disease insidiously attacking him. The reading
which he has done is quite good, but in order to derive the full-
est benefit from his work he should carry out my suggestions as far
as possible. Really speaking, however, when he has the benefit of
the company of a person like Nanabhai and will now have the
benefit of Mahadev's company, there should hardly be any need
for me to guide him. The reading he is doing at present is good
indeed. There is little in it, however, to be remembered and digest-
ed. The reading which I have suggested will, while developing
his memory and power of thinking, also be interesting to him.
Jivanshodhan can be understood only if it is read carefully twice or
thrice. He is doing right in reading it once again. One reason why
my writings are easy to follow is that these days I write with the
sole aim of making myself easily understood by all the inmates of
the Ashram. Formerly too I wrote with the general public in view,
and not for men of learning. It is natural, therefore, that my writings
should be easy to understand. Let him write to me again. He
should write as often as he gets time and is permitted to do so.
I have had no reply to my inquiry about Devdas's letter. I
have even suggested that he should write again. If the Bombay
air suits Jamna, do not insist on her returning to the Ashram. Do
you still make bread there? If you do, of what quality are you
able to make it, and who actually makes it? If it is of good
quality and if anyone is coming on a visit here, send a sample. You
had described the process of making it, but it did not succeed here.
I have not been able to discover where the error lay.
I can say that, up to this evening, the bhakhari of jowar and
bajra seems to have done me no harm. I eat very little in bulk but
can keep up my strength all right. No one should worry on my
account. I will not be obstinate and cling to the experiment.
I did not find Hariyomalji's and Gijubhai's letters. I wonder
if Gijubhai was written in place of Haribhai. I did not find the
latter's name in Radha's note.
Blessings from
BAPU
Tuesday Morning, December 16, 1930
Pranayama (control of breath) and asanas (yogic postures) are
referred to appreciatively in this chapter, but we should remember
that at the same time the Lord has stressed the need for brahma-
charya, i.e., keeping the observances calculated to take us nearer
and nearer to God. It should be clearly understood that the mere
practice of asanas and the like can never take us to the goal of even-
mindedness. Asanas and pranayama may be of some slight help in
steadying the mind and making it single-purposed, provided
that they are practised to that end. Otherwise they are no better
than other methods of physical training. They are very useful
indeed as physical exercise and I believe that this type of exercise
is good for the soul, and may be performed from a bodily standpoint.
But I have observed that these practices do only harm when in-
dulged in for the acquisition of supernormal powers (siddhi) and
the performance of miracles. This chapter should be studied as a
summary of the teaching in the preceding three chapters. It cheers
us up in our spiritual struggle. We should never be down-hearted
and give up the endeavour to reach evenness of temper.
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 71 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
