530. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
HARDWAR,
October 15, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Jayanti should have reached here yesterday morning, but he
arrived in the evening. He had not been able to sleep the pre-
vious night, and so at Saharanpur, where he should have changed
he was asleep and woke up after the station had been left be-
hind. He travelled back to Saharanpur and lost time in that.
I had become impatient to hear more about Kaki's death.
I got out from Jayanti as much information as he could give.
Shankar must have recovered now.
Chhaganlal Gandhi's letter
was left out yesterday; I enclose it today. Wherever you find an
error in his figures, please do draw his attention to it, and also
let me know about it. I suppose the matter about Kathor will
now be attended to after Diwali.
We are nearing the Diwali. When we were children, we felt
right from the Dussehra day that the Diwali had arrived. We felt
sad on the new moon day, thinking that the Diwali was now over.
But we used to console ourselves with the thought that there was
still the Dev Diwali to be celebrated and neglected studies, etc.,
till then. But at present the problem which we have to tackle is
whether, after the Diwali, we should continue the common kitchen.
If there is anything about this which you think you should discuss
with me, do so. But you can even decide independently of me
if you wish to. The chief responsibility in this matter rests on the
women, and so they should think very carefully about the problem.
Let everyone among them think for herself whether she has found
advantage or disadvantage in the common kitchen. Do not hold
too many meetings or take too many days for coming to a decision.
Do not even spend too many hours. We gave the people freedom
to reconsider the matter after Diwali. That is why, though my
views are fixed, I have touched upon this matter so that all of
you may use without hesitation the freedom that was given. We
do not, however, wish to make it a subject for daily discussion.
Devdas requires an assistant in Jamia. He has come to
know that Ishvarlal wishes to go out of the Ashram in order to
learn English. He, therefore, suggested today that, if Ishvarlal
went to Jamia, he, Devdas, would get some help and would himself
teach the latter English. In Jamia Ishvarlal would not get the
kind of English atmosphere which he would in Rajaji's Ashram.
He would, however, get in Jamia the leisure which he would not at
the other place. Ask Ishvarlal. If he wishes, he may immediate-
ly go to Delhi. Devdas will not be able to return to the place
quite so soon, so that for the present Ishvarlal will act as a sub-
stitute for Devdas and teach the children spinning. By and by
Devdas will return there. I do not wish to press Ishvarlal on this
matter and ask him to go against his inclination. He may go only
if he wishes to. Devdas's request was for Kanti, but I have
assumed that you would not be able to spare him. I also feel
that, if Kanti were to remain away from the dairy for a long time,
he would lose interest in it and also the knowledge which he has
acquired. In the end, therefore, he would succeed in neither
task. If Ishvarlal is not ready for this but some others are, let
me have their names.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5459
