315. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
[After November 16, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
The enclosed notation is for Bande mataram . You may set the song
accordingly if you can.
To write about the Swami on the basis of what has appeared in
the [Natal] Advertiser, is like kicking a dead animal. The proper time
for writing was when his letter was published in the [Natal] Witness.
But that occasion has fortunately passed. We should certainly write
if by doing so we could do good either to him or to anyone else. But
I do not see any occasion for it now; it came, but slipped away. That
man will ruin himself with his own hand, if only people are patient.
His very ways and doings seem crooked. And why did we not write
against the Moulvi? There are many such examples. Please talk
patiently with those who find fault with you. Keep pursuing Ismail Gora
and, if even then, he does not pay, please let me know. I shall write to
him and, if he does not pay even after that, his advertisement must be
discontinued. I shall write to him after I hear from you. We know that
he is very unmethodical and far from dependable.
I send herewith an invaluable book, The Relation of the Sexes. To
one who is conversant with the Hindu scriptures not a single idea men-
tioned in it is new. Please read it immediately and explain it to Manilal.
Then give it to Mr. West.
It seems, from what Shelat says, that this time Harilal faced gaol
life exceedingly well. It was he who first started fasting; he was joined
by others later. [Supply of] ghee was secured and he was transferred
to another gaol. Shelat is loud in his praises and so is Pragji Desai.
He (Harilal) seems to have surpassed me. This is as it should be.
Coomaraswami's book is among Mr. Polak's books that are lying
at Rustomjee Sheth's. Please read it when you find the time. It is worth
reading. What the author has written about music and the harmonium
seems to be right. The other things, too, are worth perusal.
Purshottamdas also joined the strike. It was nice that he got into
a tussle during his very first imprisonment.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4943
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
