342. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
PHOENIX,
February 14, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
Dr. Gool just tells me that your umbrella was traced and that
Mr. Joshi whom you met in Cape Town kindly took it with him
when a few days ago he went to India. Your cap too has been
found.
Kotwal will hand it to you upon reaching India.
He
will be leaving shortly.
The newspaper criticism in India is now all before me. It
makes painful reading. But I was prepared for it especially after
our chats. I see that you are dealing with it in your own way.
That criticism has produced its reflex action here. Aiyer has been
writing violent articles in his paper. I am not sending you all the
cuttings but you might like to see the Advertiser article. The
Advertiser reproduced Aiyer's reproduction.
The Botha ministry has its own internal troubles owing to
General Hertzog's defection. The Star correspondent, you might
have noticed in Indian Opinion, paid you [a] compliment by stating
that General Hertzog quarrelled with his brother ministers because
General Botha said that, as the Indian question was an Imperial
one, you should be seen not by General Hertzog but General
Botha himself. These internal troubles of the Ministry have dis-
organized the parliament and it is highly likely that the promised
legislation will again be postponed. If that happens I shall be
in a quandary and may not be able to leave for India about the
middle of this year.
The ministers are certainly not carrying out their assurances.
The Immigration Acts are being administered with an ever-growing
severity. Wives of lawfully resident Indians are being put to great
trouble and expense. All the cases are collected in Indian Opinion.
I take it that you will form there a permanent committee and
on your going to London, reorganize the London body.
Mr. Petit has cabled £400 telling me that the sum includes
£80 given to him by you.
Mr. Kallenbach has now secured a copy of Just's book, Return
to Nature. It was posted to you yesterday. I hope you will find
time to read it.
Could the quack physician know the exact condition of his
patient and whether he is carrying out his directions which he
undertook to do!
I wonder if the Souvenirs were received in time for distri-
bution at the Congress.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Could you do anything for Mrs. Vogl's Bazaar? If some of
the ladies you know would send work, we shall feel thankful. The
Bazaar will be held in June.
From the original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 925. Courtesy: Servants of
India Society
