347. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
[NADIAD,]
July 18, 1918
You have pressed me for my opinion on the Reform Scheme
just published. As you know, I did not feel called upon to take
an active part in the framing of the Congress-League scheme. I
have not taken an all-absorbing interest in controversial politics.
I do not pretend that even now I have studied the reform proposals
as a keen politician would. I feel, therefore, very great hesitation in
expressing my opinion on it. But I recognize the weight of your
argument in favour of my expressing such opinion as I can form
on the scheme.
In my opinion, then, as an artistic production, the scheme now
published is superior to the Congress-League scheme. I further
consider that both Mr. Montagu and Lord Chelmsford have been
inspired by an honest desire for a due fulfilment of the declaration
of the 20th August and for the welfare of India. They have taken
great pains over their most difficult and delicate task and I cannot
but think that any hasty rejection of their effort will be a mis-
fortune for the country. In my humble opinion, the scheme deser-
ves a sympathetic handling rather than a summary rejection. But
it would need to be considerably improved before it is accepted
by the reformers. After all, our standard of measurement must be
the Congress-League scheme, crude though it is. I think that we
should with all the vehemence and skill that we can command
press for the incorporation into it of the essentials of our own.
I would, therefore, for instance, ask for the rejection of the
doctrine of compartments. I very much fear that the dual system
in provinces will be fatal to the success of the experiment, and as
it may be only success of the experiment that can take us to the
next—and I hope the final stage, we cannot be too insistent that
the idea of reservation should be dropped. One cannot help notic-
ing an unfortunate suspicion of our intentions regarding the purely
British, as distinguished from the purely Indian interest. Hence
there is to be seen in the scheme elaborate reservations on behalf
of these interests. I think that more than anything else it is neces-
sary to have an honest, frank and straightforward understanding
about these interests and for me, personally, this is of much greater
importance than any legislative feat that British talent alone or a
combination of British and Indian talent may be capable of per-
forming. I would certainly, in as courteous terms as possible but
equally emphatic, say that these interests will be held subservient
to those of India as a whole and that, therefore, they are certainly
in jeopardy in so far as they may be inconsistent with the general
advance of India. Thus, if I had my way, I would cut down the
military expenditure. I would protect local industries by heavily
taxing goods that compete against products of our industries, and I
would reduce to a minimum the British element in our services,
retaining only those that may be needed for our instruction and
guidance. I do not think that they had or have any claims upon
our attention save by right of conquest. That claim must clearly
go by the board as soon as we are awakened to a consciousness of
our national existence and possess the strength to vindicate our right
to the restoration of what we have lost. To their credit let it be
said that they do not themselves advance any claim by right of
conquest. One can readily join in the tribute of praise bestowed
upon the Indian Civil Service for their devotion to duty and great
organizing ability. So far as material reward is concerned, that
service has been more than handsomely paid and our gratitude
otherwise can be best expressed by assimilating their virtues our-
selves.
No scheme of reform can possibly benefit India that does not
recognize that the present administration is top heavy and ruin-
ously expensive and for me even law, order and good government
would be too dearly purchased if the price to be paid for it is to
be the grinding poverty of the masses. The watchword of our reform
councils will have to be, not increase of taxation for the growing
needs of a growing country, but a decrease of the financial burdens
that are sapping the foundation itself of the organic growth. If
this fundamental fact is recognized, there need be no suspicion of
our motives and, I think I am perfectly safe in asserting that in
every other respect British interests will be as secure in Indian
hands as they are in their own. It follows from what I have said
above that we must respectfully press for the Congress-League claim
for the immediate granting to Indians of 50 per cent of the higher
posts in the Civil Service. The above is but an indication of my
view on the scheme. It is a considered view so far as it goes, but
it does not embody all the improvements that I should suggest
for submission to His Majesty's Government. In due course, I
take it, we shall endeavour to issue a representative criticism of the
scheme. It is, therefore, hardly necessary for me to enter into
an exhaustive treatment even if I was capable of doing so.
I cannot, however, conclude my observations without stating
what I consider to be the best means of enforcing our opinion,
whatever shape it may finally take. I entirely endorse the con-
cluding remarks of the authors of the historic document that thou-
sands of Indian reformers are today studying with avidity. "If any-
thing could enter the sense of responsibility under which our re-
commendations are made, in a matter fraught with consequences
so immense, it would be the knowledge that, even as we are bring-
ing our report to an end, far greater issues still hang in the balance
upon the battle-field of France. It is there and not in Delhi or
Whitehall that the ultimate decision of India's future will be
taken." May God grant us, Home Rulers, the wisdom to see this
simple truth. The gateway to our freedom is situated on the
French soil. No victory worth the name has yet been won with-
out the shedding of blood. If we could but crowd the battle-fields
of France with an indomitable army of Home Rulers fighting for
victory for the cause of the Allies, it will also be a fight for our
own cause. We would then have made out an unanswerable case
for the granting of Home Rule not in any distant time or near
future but immediately. My advice, therefore, to the country
would be, fight unconditionally unto death with the Briton for the
victory and agitate simultaneously also unto death, if we must, for
the reforms that we deserve. This is the surest method of gaining
an honourable victory for ourselves over the strongest opposition
of bureaucratic forces and, at the end of it, there would be no ill
will left. It may not be impossible to gain our end by sheer
obstructive and destructive agitation. But it is easy enough to see
that we shall at the same time reap ill will between the British and
the Indian elements, not a particularly cohesive cement for binding
would-be partners.
The Leader, 24-7-1918
