120. LETTER TO KRISHNAVARMA
August 4, 1945
BHAI KRISHNAVARMA,
Please read the enclosed letter and then pass it on to Mama.
I read your whole letter yesterday, till then I was not able fully
to go through it. I agree with what you say. I have given
Mama some idea of you in my letter to him. I had observed
even when you were here that you had no control over your
tongue. You do not observe the rules of cleanliness-maybe, you
do not even know them. I had noticed that also when you were
here. I presume you are doing the same there. Kanti Mashru-
wala is an admirer of yours. Manilal had been there. He is
not an admirer of you but he is wise. He has seen something
of the world. He recognizes your qualities. He believes that
you are no doubt good at heart but he also believes that you
do not observe the rules of cleanliness nor make others do
so. I only know your goodness and therefore wish that your
shortcomings may disappear. I know that I have served my
own interest in sending Mama to you and I still want to keep
him there. He will be in a very bad plight if he goes away
from there. I cannot keep him in the Ashram, as it will be
against the spirit of the Ashram. I do not think he can stay
anywhere else. Whatever has to be done, you alone can do. As
you have started a hospital it certainly is your duty. Follow
nature-cure methods at the hospital. You must know the rules
of cleanliness and observe them meticulously. There are too
many mosquitoes there. Just because you are taking work from
the poor women you should not put up with their indifferent
performance. As a doctor and a householder it is your duty to
teach them cleanliness. It should be your job to eradicate mos-
quitoes from the neighbourhood. You should know how to do
that. How can you call yourself a nature-cure doctor if you do
not do all these things? I can write much along these lines
but I am sure you are one of those to whom a word is enough.
For this reason and also because I do not have the time I am
not prolonging the letter.
I understand about Sailen. Encash the cheque he has sent
to you. I won't think it is your fee by any means. I know you
72
did not keep Sailen for the sake of fee. But I thought he should
on his own put into the charity box whatever he could afford
and therefore asked him to send the cheque. Get the cheque
cashed and utilize the money for charity. I do not advise you
to come here. The main reason of course is that I do not have
the time. Otherwise I would be happy if I could keep you here
and give you training in cleanliness. But that is not possible at
the moment. I shall call you when such an occasion arises. How-
ever, if you want to come on your own, want to be reassured and
if you do come, it will be a different matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
