197. LETTER TO S. R. HIGNELL
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
July 22, 1919
DEAR MR. HIGNELL,
After a long and courteous interview with His Excellency the
Governor of Bombay to which he had invited me, I have decided
to suspend Civil Disobedience for the time being. The public
letter1, a copy of which I enclose herewith, will show that the
suspension is for me a further demonstration of Civil Resistance
being perfectly compatible with respectful obedience to and co-
operation with authority. But the letter will also show the deter-
mination to bring about by all lawful means including Civil
Resistance the withdrawal of Rowlatt Legislation and I hope
that the Government of India will not persist in flouting public
opinion.
I would like further to bring to His Excellency'S notice the
Lahore and Amritsar judgments. His Excellency . . .2 [th]at even
at the risk of . . . [m]isunderstood by my . . . 'publicly referring . . .
[M]artial law proceedings in the Pun[jab] . . . publicly dealing
with the [ca]ses in which on the face of the judgments the
injustice could not be proved. I am grateful for the substan-
tial though partial justice being done in the case of Babu Kali-
nath Roy. I fully expect that justice will be done in La[la]
Radhakrishna's case. But the Lahore and Amritsar cases5, I
know, stand on a different footing. They deal with leaders who
have taken an active part in the recent agitation. The verdict
rests partly upon documentary and partly upon oral evidence.
But there is enough in the two judgments to show an impar-
tial student that they are more in the nature of political pro-
nouncements than judicial, and that there is not a tittle of evi-
dence to show, with the exception of Dr. Bashir, that anyone of
the leaders either brought about or encouraged violence. I am glad
that the death penalty against Dr. Bashir has been commuted.
Though . . . evidence to prove encourage[ment] . . . it was stoutly
rebutted . . . of Dr. Bashir.
These sentences have cast a profound gloom all over India.
The Government may underrate the intensity of Indian feeling
regar[ding] them. But many of tho[se] who deplore the sen-
tences are unconnected with any political agitation. And theirs
is the severest condemnation of these trials and the sentences.
One such critic is Mr. Burjorji Padsha, the well-known man-
ager of Messrs. Tata and Sons. He has been writing in the co-
lumns of The Bombay Chronicle open letters whose main theme
is the Punjab affairs. I trust that they have been brought to
H.E.'s notice. They . . . what resentment is . . . over these trials
[sente]nces . . . It is a serious . . . leaders of open . . . over
lose confidence in . . . justice whether special or otherwise. These
cases are not such as to await the decision of the forthcoming
Committee of Inquiry. [I] would therefore respectfully urge that
[su]ch...action as has been taken in the case of Babu Kalinath
Roy may be promptly taken in the matter of these two judgments.
Yours sincerery,
From a photostat: S.N. 6769
