82. LETTER TO HORACE ALEXANDER
SEVAGRAM, via WARDHA (C.P.),
April 22, 1942
MY DEAR HORACE,
I have been wanting to write to you and Agatha all this
time but my preoccupations have come in the way. But more
than that, the reluctance to send you a cheerless letter has been
the cause. It is still there greater than ever. Nevertheless I
must write what I feel.
I hope you had my wire about Olive. How well I re-
member her radiant face in spite of her permanent disability.
God gave and He has taken her away.
I know it is well with
her, for she walked in His light.
Sir Stafford has come and gone. How nice it would have
been if he had not come with that dismal mission. He of all
people should never have without having at least ascertained
Jawaharlal's wishes. How could the British Government, at this
critical hour, have behaved as they did? Why should they have
sent proposals without discussing them with the principal parties?
Not one single party was satisfied. In trying to please all the
proposals pleased none.
I talked to him frankly but as a friend, if for nothing else,
for Andrews's sake. I told him that I was speaking to him with
Andrews's spirit as my witness. I made suggestions but all to no
avail. As usual they were not practical. I had not wanted to
go. I had nothing to say being anti-all-wars.
I went because
he was anxious to see me. All this I mention in order to give
you the background. I was not present throughout the negoti-
ations with the W. C. I had come away. You know the result.
It was inevitable. The whole thing has left a bad taste in the
mouth.
My firm opinion is that the British should leave India
now in an orderly manner and not run the risk that they did
in Singapore and Malaya and Burma.
That act would mean
courage of a high order, confession of human limitations and
right-doing by India. Britain cannot defend India, much less
herself on Indian soil with any strength. The best thing she can
do is to leave India to her fate. I feel somehow that India will
not do badly then.
I must not argue this point if it is not
obvious to you.
I am sending a copy of this to Agatha. Of course you are
at liberty to share this with anybody else.
Love.
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1434
