213. LETTER TO SIR IBRAHIM RAHIMTOOLLA
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 15, 1919
DEAR SIR IBRAHIM RAHIMTOOLLA,
Contrary to my wont, I write this letter to you in English, as
I would like you to submit it to His Excellency for perusal and consi-
deration. As you may know, I arrived in Ahmedabad, accom-
panied by Anasuya Behn on Sunday. There was a very largely at-
tended meeting yesterday at the Satyagraha Ashram, although it is
far away from the city. It is estimated that 10 to 15 thousand
people must have attended. There is once more perfect quiet in
Ahmedabad, and although I have to say it of myself, I do wish
to state that the sudden quiet is due largely, if not entirely, to
the soothing effect produced by the presence of Anasuya Behn and
myself. I enclose herewith copy of my speech in Gujarati and its
English translation prepared under my supervision. In response to
my invitation, money has begun to pour in, and thousands have
observed the fast. I have already written to the Collector, en-
quiring about the names and addresses of the families of Eng-
lishmen who have lost their lives or have been disabled during
mob-rule. Happily, I understand that these cases are not more
than 2 or 3. My main purpose, however, in writing this letter is to
suggest that no further punitive measures may be taken, and that
no prosecutions be undertaken in respect of the tragedy. Any
arrest and trials would simply cause another ferment. In my humble
opinion,
it would be most impolitic and unwise to select a
few individuals as scapegoats, when a whole mob has taken the
law in its own hands. I performed today the painful duty of
visiting the army of wounded men, including little children, in the
Civil Hospital. I understand that at least 22 have died of the
wounds, but probably the real number of those who died during
martial law will never be known, for I am told that some dead
bodies were actually cremated in the poles of Ahmedabad. I simply
wish to urge that sufficiently stern punishment has been already
dealt out to Ahmedabad.
I ask the Government to believe me when I say that the ebul-
lition was in no way due to satyagraha. It was due to causes which
came into being before the satyagraha movement was inaugu-
rated and to the grave blunder in arresting me whilst I was
on my way to Delhi, and on a most pacific mission. I do not know
within the whole of my public experience a single occasion where
my presence has had anything but a soothing effect on the elements
of disturbance. My arrest gave a handle to all discontented forces
to gather together and those who were sincerely mourning over my
arrest out of personal affection for me involuntarily found them-
selves drawn into the lawless proceedings. I wish also to state
that almost every known satyagrahi was simply assisting at the
peril of his life in taming the mad fury of the mob. It was due to
their work that probably the mob did not indulge in further exces-
ses, though what has happened is bad enough. I may be mistaken
in my last deduction, but there is no mistake about the fact, that
satyagrahis did their utmost best to prevent the tragedy. But we
are yet a handful. Time may show that neither India nor the
world can have anything better than satyagraha as a restraining
force and a force ranged on the side of law and order. Civil dis-
obedience alone can inspire sincere and manly obedience. My duty
as a satyagrahi at the present moment is to refrain from doing
anything that may add fuel to the fire. I have therefore restrained
myself from giving what I hold is a true analysis of the tragedy
enacted in Ahmedabad. I wish to say nothing of the events in the
other parts of India. The other causes referred to by me are three
in number. First and foremost is the profound dissatisfaction of the
Mahomedans over what they fear would be the settlement of Isla-
mic questions at the time of the Peace. I venture to speak of this
with some authority because I have taken great pains to ascertain
Mahomedan feelings. I have moved among Mahomedans high
and low practically throughout India, and I have deemed it my
duty as a Hindu to understand their position and to share their
sorrows. The second cause is the fear—vague, I know—that the
Reforms that are to come will be only in name. And the third
cause is bitter resentment over the passing of the Rowlatt legisla-
tion in violent defiance of unanimously expressed public opinion.
I admit that there has been often great exaggeration indulged
in by indifferent, ignorant and irresponsible speakers, but as an
experienced public man of over 25 years' standing, I know that
exaggerations will not cause ebullitions such as we have witnessed
in Ahmedabad, unless there is a substantial grievance behind them.
I felt that it was due to the Government that I should submit
for their consideration the state of things that has come to my know-
ledge. I cannot conclude this letter without expressing my gratitude
for the absolute absence of firing in Bombay on Friday last.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 6534
