337. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
April 13, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. When Mr. Buchman met me my incli-
nation was all towards not attending the Convention; but I left
it then an open question because of his insistence. Since then, I
have not made much advance. But a few friends with whom I
have discussed the thing favour the idea of my accepting the invi-
tation. The motive is mixed. Probably, the strongest reason with
them is that the voyage and the outing may benefit me physi-
cally. With me the only determining factor should be whether I
can render any service, in other words whether God wants me
to go. I have no clear light. I propose therefore to leave it to you
as a friend to decide. And in advising me or coming to a decision
on my behalf you will naturally bear in mind all I am about
to say.
You know my strange dress. It is not possible for me to alter
it materially. I can only make such alterations as would be
required by the weather conditions. I do not know how far this
consideration is likely to weigh with you but I felt that you
should know this.
If I am wanted for making speeches, I shall be useless. The
only way I might be of service would be by heart-to-heart con-
versations with the students. My real work consists in these
conversations. Speech making I regard as the least important of
my activities. I made this quite clear to Mr. Buchman.
My food is also a bother. I am not merely a vegetarian but
my dietary is restricted. The principal article of food is goat's
milk. And if you have to arrange for the passage and so on, this
very inconvenient detail has to be looked to.
If I am to go, there will be one companion, possibly two.
If you come to the conclusion that I should accept the invi-
tation, please let me know when one has to start, how long will
the Convention last, who is to arrange for the passports? Are
there to be any conditions attached to the passports?
I am here up to the 22nd instant. I leave for Mussoorie on
the 22nd. Please tell me who is this Central Committee that sends
the invitation. Who is the President and who is the Secretary?
Needless to say I shall make no statement to the Press about your
letter. As a matter of fact I was disturbed even when I saw the
first reference in the papers. I avoided the pressmen for some time.
And I made the guarded statement that I did when I saw no
escape from some statement.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 11342
