647. LETTER TO PYARELAL
January 26, 1941
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have your letter. I had been waiting for it. I purposely
abstained from writing. You know the reason. Your letter is
beautiful.
I knew only from your letter that you had been to the
hospital. Look after your health properly. I shall think about
whom to send. I would have liked to send A. S., but she had
to be sent to her mother who has been ill. I gather from
Sushila's letter that she [A. S.] will be going to Bombay with her
mother. I think she is not writing to me because she is angry
with me. The reason why she is angry is that I sent her to
her mother in spite of her asthma. I thought it was my duty
since there was an urgent telegram from her brother. Her
going has definitely done good. It has not harmed A. S.'s health
in any way. If she comes, I shall send her. I am arranging
for the books for you. You are studying well. I think your
speed of spinning on the takli and charkha is quite good. Do
not let your health deteriorate. There is remarkable improve-
ment in Shastriji's health. There are no sores anywhere. His
body is smooth like silk. The cause of all these changes is his fast.
Now it is his present diet and the massage. Everybody is
amazed. The letter will become too long if I give further
details of the treatment. I am writing this at bed time so that
I can get an early reply. Bablo is preparing for the Kovid exa-
mination. Your corner is meant just for you. It has been
entrusted to A. S. I allot it to special women visitors.
The news about Mother is good. Sushila's thesis has been
sent. She writes that it has reached late by three days. If the
thesis is accepted, the examination will be held on the 19th
April. She will be able to prepare for it. I have sent Tara-
behn Mashruwala to her. That is how I have been taking
service from her. Now there is no more time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
My health is fine.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru
Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
417
SV:III. 27
