552. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 19, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Though you are likely to visit me next week, I think it best
that I should reply to your letter. Moreover, an incident which
occurred yesterday shows that my receiving visitors should always
be treated as uncertain.
Vali has proved her worth very well indeed. I don't think
the Ashram can take credit for that. She seems to have joined it
with her character already formed.
Why girls brought up in the Ashram seem so weak is a pro-
blem which I have not been able to solve. I have my explana-
tions for that, but I think it useless to discuss them unless
I can give reasons in support of them. We should try our
best to discover the real reasons. It should also be borne in
mind that, after leaving the Ashram, these girls do not always
Improve.
454
To keep a watch over Narandas means that, when he seems
to have taken an excessive burden upon himself you should cau-
tion him and also inform me. I have discovered no ambiguity
in any of my statements. If they are ambiguous, they are so
unintentionally and because of my imperfect command over
language. My statements are short, and hence they leave many
things unsaid. But in this respect they are like propositions in
geometry.
Those girls who wish to learn English may certainly do so
if they have paid attention to Hindi and Sanskrit and acquired a
good command over Gujarati. Of course, this is subject to facili-
ties for teaching English being available. We ought to have
them, no doubt.
You do not seem to have understood my interpretation of
passive exercises. What a person does himself cannot be des-
cribed as passive. Passive exercises are for people who are ill.
If I am ill and wish to give exercise to my bowels, and if some-
one massages the abdomen or raises my legs several times to form
a right angle with the rest of the body and lowers them again,
and I am not required to raise or lower any limb, then that is
passive exercise. I don't think you have understood that this is
what the phrase means.
I had two aims in practising silent prayer. One was, of
course, to give rest to the mind. But it was also difficult to turn
the mind inward except through such prayer. Whenever we lay
aside one work and take up another, we should feel that we have
ample time on hand. We should not feel impatient or restless. It
is thus that we gradually learn detachment.
I think I do command concentration, but not well enough
to satisfy me. I try earnestly to cultivate such concentration, but
I am not impatient.
If the children take no interest in any of the prayers, a spe-
cial item can be included for them, as used to be done by Prabhu-
das. I should be happy if they sit through the prayers with faith
and in stillness.
I did not say it by way of praise that the same prayers have
continued for sixteen years. It was only a statement of fact. I
did not wish to suggest that all have been attending the prayers
for so many years. The Ashram has clung to these prayers in the
face of all troubles and criticisms and quite a few people have
derived peace of mind from them. All that I intended to say was
that these prayers ought not to be given up or altered without a
strong reason.
Women's prayers will not seem proper in the evening. More-
over, some people devote the evening to reading, etc.
What you write about yourself is correct. You should follow
your reason and your heart. I am not impatient. I may tell
you what seems proper to me, but cannot force you to accept my
suggestion against your reason. All I can do is to act as a friend.
I can, at the most, claim my experiences over many years in my
favour. If, however, they find no echo in your heart, even thou-
sands of them will have no value for you. I make, of course,
one claim for the Ashram. It helps new-corners to grow wings.
They may then fly where they will. If they continue in the
Ashram of their own free will, they are welcome to stay. Even if
they do not stay, the Ashram will have done its duty in one
matter. This can be proved to have happened to many persons,
especially women. At different times in the past, girls came and
joined the Ashram, who had no spirit in them at all. Today they
believe themselves independent and are in fact so.
Such were
Gulbadan, Umiya, Vidyavati, Rukhi, etc. Love for individual
persons is not wholly forbidden. Only, such love should not
be an obstacle to love for all beings and for God. My love
for Ba today flows from my love for God. When I was filled
with lust, it was an obstacle to love of God and was, therefore,
unworthy.
The loss in your weight need not worry you, if otherwise you
are all right. Sushila may come.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10286. Also C.W. 6734. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
