112. LETTER TO THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF
PORTUGUESE INDIA
August 2, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
It was kind of you to write to me in reply to what I had
written in Harijan about Goa affairs. I suppose you know
that I have visited Mozambique, Delagoa and Inhambane. I
did not notice there any Government for philanthropic pur-
poses. Indeed, I was astonished to see the distinction that the
Government made between Indians and the Portuguese and
between the Africans and themselves. Nor does the history of
the Portuguese Settlement in India prove the claim set forth by
you. Indeed, what I see and know of the condition of things
in Goa is hardly edifying. That the Indians in Goa have been
speechless is proof not of the innocence or the philanthropic
nature of the Portuguese Government but of the rule of terror.
You will forgive me for not subscribing to your statement that
there is full liberty in Goa and that the agitation is confined
only to a few malcontents.
Every account, received by me personally and seen in the
papers here in this part of India, confirms the contrary view.
I suppose the report of the sentence by your Court Martial of
eight years on Dr. Braganza and his contemplated exile to a
far off Portuguese Settlement is by itself a striking corrobora-
tion of the fact that civil liberty is a rare article in Goa. Why
should a law-abiding citizen like Dr. Braganza be considered
so dangerous as to be singled out for exile?
Though the politics of Dr. Lohia probably differ from mine,
he has commanded my admiration for his having gone to Goa
and put his finger on its black spot. Inhabitants of Goa can
afford to wait for Independence, until much greater India
has regained it. But no person or group can thus remain with-
out civil liberty without losing self-respect. He has lighted a
torch which the inhabitants of Goa cannot, except at their
peril, allow to be extinguished. Both you and the inhabitants
of Goa should feel thankful to the Doctor for lighting that torch.
Therefore, your description of him as "stranger" would excite
laughter if it was not so tragic. Surely the truth is that the Por-
tuguese coming from Portugal are strangers, whether they come
as philanthropists or as Governors exploiting the so-called weaker
races of the earth.
You have talked of the abolition of caste distinctions. What
I see has happened is that not only no caste distinction has been
abolished but at least one more caste, far more terrible than the
system "caste", has been added by the Portuguese rulers.
I, therefore, hope that you will revise your views on phi-
lanthropy, civil liberty and caste distinctions, withdraw all the
African police, declare yourself whole-heartedly for civil liberty
and if possible, even let the inhabitants of Goa frame their own
government, and invite from Greater India more experienced
Indians to assist the inhabitants and even you in framing such
Government.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Since your letter was sent to the Press, I am publishing
this in Harijan.
M. K. G.
Harijan, 11-8-1946
