434. LETTER TO DARBARI SADHU 2
August 23, 1932
It does not seem correct to me to say that it is part of man's
nature to spend some time in idle thoughts. If there is a single
exception to this, we cannot say that it is part of man's nature
to do so. Actually, we find many exceptions. It is true that vast
numbers of people are always busy thinking about all manner of
things which they will do or will not do, and thus may be said
to spend time in idle thoughts. If this were not so, it would not
be necessary to emphasize the importance of concentration.
What is important for us at present is this. We ourselves make all
kinds of plans and resolutions, most of which we do not even re-
member after some time. All such thoughts are mental inconti-
nence. Just as man dissipates his physical strength through ordi-
nary incontinence, so he dissipates his mental strength through
mental incontinence, and, as physical weakness affects the mind,
so mental weakness affects the body. That is why I have de-
fined brahmacharya in a wide sense and described even idle
thoughts as violation of it. By defining brahmacharya in a narrow
sense, we have made it more difficult to observe. If we accept
its wider definition and try to control all the eleven organs1, the
control of the one most important organ would be much easier.
You seem to believe in the heart of your hearts that physical acti-
vity prevents or hinders us from watching the progress of our in-
ward purification. My experience is the opposite of this. With-
out inward purification, work cannot be done in a spirit of non-
attachment. Hence the degree of inward purification can be judged
mainly by the purity of our work. Anybody who tries to cultivate
inward purity without doing work will more likely than not be
in danger of falling into a delusion. I have seen many such
instances. I will give an ordinary example. I have known
many co-workers making all kinds of good resolutions in jail, and
also seen their resolutions broken at the first blow after they were
released.
In jail they were quite sure that they would never
swerve from their resolutions, that they had achieved inward puri-
fication, that they had examined themselves in complete peace of
mind and that they had acquired concentration in prayer. But
I found that the moment they were outside the jail walls all this
evaporated into thin air.
The fifth verse of Chapter III of the
Gita states a profound truth.
Scientist after scientist has told
us that the principle enunciated in it is a universal law. It
simply means that no human being can cease from karma even
for a moment. Karma or motion is the universal law of all mate-
rial things and forms of life. Man's spiritual knowledge and his
excellence lie in obeying it in a spirit of non-attachment. There
are two verses in the Ishopanishad which state the same truth, and
they are equally profound. Who am I to criticize a great soul
like the Buddha? Besides, I love and revere him. But did he him-
self set up the organization [of monasteries] or did his followers
do so? Whoever did it, the monasteries which were established
became, in obedience to this universal law, stagnant and by and
by acquired reputation as dens of sloth. Even today we find
Buddhist monks in Ceylon, Burma and Tibet sunk in ignorance
and the veritable images of sloth. In India, too, the monks known
as sannyasis are not found to be shining specimens of humanity.
Personally I am convinced, therefore, that man can achieve real
and enduring purification of heart only through work. I again
feel tempted to quote the Gita. Verse 18 of Chapter IV means
that he who sees action in inaction and inaction in action is the
wise man, he is the true yogi and the true man of karma. I have,
however, explained here what I have found in my own experience.
I have quoted the Gita verses because I have found the truth of
their teaching in my experience. I never quote anything from
Shastras which I have not tested in experience. The experience
of others may be different from mine and they may even quote
verses from the Gita which tend in the opposite direction or they
may quote in support of their experience the same verses which
I do and interpret them differently. All this is possible. I, therefore,
never insist that all people should accept my experience as the
sole guide.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 378-80
