56. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SUKKUR,
February 11, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
If the peace in the kitchen becomes a permanent feature, it
will probably be kept even after I return there. A string, they
say, can make a dent in granite. Is there anything we cannot
do through practice?
You have solved the problem of ghee quite well. Our experi-
ment will proceed satisfactorily now. Weigh its results and exa-
mine its merits and demerits. Also consider its effect on the pur-
ses, the bodies and minds of those who eat it.
The knives made by Ishvarlal will give excellent service if
whetted from time to time. Get all of them cleaned after use.
Shankarlal knows the matter about Badrul. Do not accede
to his request immediately. He has not given a proper account
of Rs. 30,000.
If the skin of your soles still cracks owing to cold, the remedy
is to wash them at night in hot water mixed with soda-bi-carb,
to fill the cracks with ghee and bandage the feet. One who keeps
watch at night may do this during the day. There were cracks
in the skin of my toes and under them. I applied this remedy and
the cracks healed up in two days. I had not stopped any work.
I had even continued the walks.
It is necessary that you should not arrange the cleaning of
lavatories and night-watch for yourself on the same day. Divide
your work among the days of the week and lighten it in that
manner.
If Saraladevi feels that the mava which you send to her is too
much, send less. About the price, too, inquire the market rate and
charge her a little less than that. Keep all our dealings with others
above board. We need not force on her or anybody else anything
which they do not want. We can easily find other customers for
mava. Has the quantity of milk increased?
Employ for making bread only those who can do the work.
You have not explained why Dhiru had to be relieved. Ramnik-
lal should learn to make bread.
If anyone who cannot say that he span one lea during the
day has good reason for his not being able to do so, there is no-
thing to be said in the matter.
You need not feel the slightest hesitation in writing to me
about Ashram matters, small or big. Just as one must take
interest in news of births and deaths, so also must one in other
matters of joy or sorrow. One must cultivate the strength, or the
art, whatever you call it, of listening with interest to such matters
too, without getting upset. Who knows if what we feel to be a
cause of happiness or unhappiness is really that? Bhang is pleasant
to drink, but we know the effect it produces. We do not know the
results of other things which seem pleasant, and so are often de-
ceived.
Let me know about the condition of Totaram's eyes. What
was the matter with them?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5388
