439. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
POONA,
September 12, 1945
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter and the statement. You will see that
I have made many changes in the statement. I do hope that
you will understand the reasons behind them. They do not violate
the existing rules of the Charkha Sangh. Just now my advice
to you is that you may follow the practice of offering 1½
per cent discount to any member buying khadi worth Rs. 100 from
the store which you are running or the stores which are being
run under your supervision in Kathiawar. If the Charkha Sangh
accepts this rule, it should decide to buy khadi only from the
stores under the control of the respective branches. If, instead, a
member from Kanyakumari wants to buy khadi from a store
under the Punjab branch, there will be a danger of extensive
malpractices.
Your scheme does have my blessings, of course. I will,
moreover, definitely send something with anybody from here
going there.
Balasaheb Kher is engaged on the 2nd and the 3rd. He,
therefore, cannot come. He has suggested the following names
in his place. Narahari Parikh, Morarji Desai, Kaka Kalelkar,
Dada Mavalankar. From among them Kaka Kalelkar is here. I
met him. I think he will be able to give the maximum work.
Narahari cannot be spared at all just now. He has taken upon
himself a lot of work. Kaka can arrive there on the 1st and
must return on the 4th. He will not, therefore, be able to
undertake a long tour there. He has agreed to attend an impor-
tant meeting in Bombay on the 6th.
You are entering your 60th year today, but according to
me you should aspire to live for another 60 years still. You
may, therefore, be said to have completed half the journey.
Only today I read in a book that a man should aspire to live
150 years. Even if the millions could entertain such an aspi-
ration, it would be meaningless, for the condition affixed is that
the person concerned should spend all these years in service in
the spirit of yajna, that is, without attachment. It is an extremely
252
difficult job to practise non-attachment. But anybody who can
cultivate it is sure to live up to 125, and you have the ability
to cultivate it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8629.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
