213. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
April 11, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. There is no need for the people there to
meet and discuss what to do now. If you meet again and again,
you will talk about one thing every time. You will say that we
are unworthy and disperse, and all that will remain in the end is
despair. It would be all right if you meet to pass a resolution
to solve a particular difficulty, but really speaking there is no
need even to pass a resolution. A soldier's only duty is to go on
doing his work without looking up and devise measures to meet any
difficulty that may arise. All of us are soldiers fighting immorality.
We have done what was necessary. We brought out the evil.
We made two rules. Everyone is examining himself or herself.
This is enough. Think over what I have said in my article on the
Ramayana and the Gita in Navajivan. We should not think about
sense-pleasures either with interest or with repulsion. That is
non-co-operation. So long as I am alive, have consciousness, none
of you will exercise more freedom than you do at present. When-
ever, therefore, you can act without consulting me, you should.
When necessary, you may certainly consult me. Do not conceal
anything out of pity for me.
I see one thing of course. The thought that I myself tolerate
evil pains me. There is no one here just now who knows the Gita.
The persons who take it up and read it are Pyarelal, Subbiah and
Prabhavati. I make them read it by turns. I feel sorry that in
my eyes all the three have failed. Subbiah is on leave at present.
Prabhavati's deficiency is pardonable. But what about Pyarelal
and Subbiah? They have been living with me for years. I am a
lover of the Gita and they are among those dearest to me. And yet
I never took any interest in their reading the Gita or spinning. How,
then, can I blame them if they did not, either? I would not pass
Pyarelal's English if it was bad. I am now forced to listen to
his pronunciation of the words in the Gita and feel miserable within.
He certainly does not spin every day. But, then, do I make him
spin? I merely give a lecture on the subject and do no more.
The Ashram is my most important creation, but I always remain
away from it. I see, thus, that I am myself untruthful in my con-
duct. Is it strange, then, that there should be theft and Immora-
lity in the Ashram?
Hence, it is more necessary that I should think than that any
of you should. But what shall I gain by indulging in self-condem-
nation? I believe that I have the capacity to see my weaknesses
in their proper measure, and I strive to overcome them.
My aim behind this self-condemnation is this:
(1) To pay special attention to improving people's pronuncia-
tion of the words in the Gita and see that they understand the
meaning of the verses.
(2) To see that everyone scrupulously performs the spinning
yajna.
(3) To look after the kitchen carefully.
These three activities are of general concern and none of us
can escape them. Everyone cannot join in the goshala work, and all
do not engage in agriculture. But all must concern themselves
with the three things mentioned above. That is why I have laid
stress on them. If untruth does not enter these activities, we still
shall be saved. If we remain sincere in them, that will have an
effect on all the other aspects of our work.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5401
