116. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
BIRLA HOUSE, NEW DELHI,
April 2, 1939
MY DEAR SUBHAS,
I have yours of March 31, as also the previous one. You
are quite frank and I like your letters for the clear enunciation
of your views.
The views you express seem to me to be so diametrically
opposed to those of the others and my own that I do not see
any possibility of bridging them. I think that each school of
thought should be able to put forth its views before the coun-
try without any mixture. And if this is honestly done, I do not
see why there should be any bitterness, ending in civil war.
What is wrong is not the differences between us but loss
of mutual respect and trust. This will be remedied by time,
which is the best healer. If there is real non-violence in us, there
can be no civil war, much less bitterness.
Taking all things into consideration, I am of opinion that
you should at once form your own Cabinet fully representing
your views, formulate your programme definitely and put it
before the forthcoming A. I. C. C. If the Committee accepts the
programme, all will be plain-sailing and you should be enabled
to prosecute it unhampered by the minority. If, on the other
hand, your programme is not accepted you should resign and
let the Committee choose its President. And you will be free to
educate the country along your own lines. I tender this advice
irrespective of Pandit Pant's resolution.
Now for your questions. When Pandit Pant's resolution
was produced, I was on my bed. Mathuradas, who happened
to be in Rajkot that day, one morning brought me the message
that there was to be a resolution expressing confidence in the old
horses. I had not the text before me.
I said it would be
good so far as it went, for I had been told at Segaon that your
election was not so much confidence in you as censure of the
old horses, especially the Sardar. After this, I saw the actual
text only in Allahabad when I went to see the Maulana Saheb.
My prestige does not count. It has no independent value of
its own. When my motive is suspected or my policy or programme
rejected by the country, the prestige must go. India will rise or
fall by the quality of the sum total of the acts of her many mil-
lions. Individuals, however high they may be, are of no ac-
count except in so far as they represent the many millions.
Therefore, let us rule it out of consideration.
I wholly dissent from your view that the country has been
never so non-violent as now. I smell violence in the air I
breathe. But the violence has put on a subtle form.
Our
mutual distrust is a bad form of violence. The widening gulf
between Hindus and Mussalmans points to the same thing. I can
give further illustrations.
We seem to differ as to the amount of corruption in the Con-
gress. My impression is that it is on the increase. I have been
pleading for the past many months for a thorough scrutiny.
In these circumstances, I see no atmosphere for non-violent
mass action. An ultimatum without an effective sanction is worse
than useless.
But, as I have told you, I am an old man, perhaps grow-
ing timid and over-cautious, and you have youth before you
and reckless optimism born of youth. I hope you are right and
I am wrong.
I have the firm belief that the Congress, as it is
today, cannot deliver the goods, cannot offer civil disobedience
worth the name. Therefore, if your prognosis is right, I am a
back number and played out as the generalissimo of satyagraha.
I am glad you have mentioned the little Rajkot affair. It
brings into prominent relief the different angles from which we
look at things. I have nothing to repent of in the steps I have
taken in connection with it. I feel that it has great national
importance. I have not stopped civil disobedience in the other
States for the sake of Rajkot. But Rajkot opened my eyes; it
showed me the way. I am not in Delhi for my health. I am
reluctantly in Delhi, awaiting the Chief Justice's decision. I hold
it to be my duty to be in Delhi till the steps to be taken, in due
fulfilment of the Viceroy's declaration in his last wire to me, were
finally taken. I may not run any risk. If I invited the Para-
mount Power to do its duty, I was bound to be in Delhi to see
that the duty was fully performed. I saw nothing wrong in the
Chief Justice being appointed the interpreter of the document
whose meaning was put in doubt by the Thakore Saheb. By
the way, Sir Maurice examines the document not in his capacity
as Chief Justice but as a trained jurist, trusted by the Viceroy.
By accepting the Viceroy's nominee as judge, I fancy I have
shown both wisdom and grace and, what is more important, I
have increased the Viceregal responsibility in the matter.
Though we have discussed sharp differences of opinion be-
tween us, I am quite sure that our private relations will not
suffer in the least. If they are from the heart, as I believe they
are, they will bear the strain of these differences.
Love.
BAPU
The Hindustan Times, 14-5-1939; also Crossroads, pp. 140-
