447. LETTER TO BHULABHAI DESAI
June 7, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI,
I have sat down to write this letter after the morning prayer,
i.e., at about 6 o'clock. I saw your letter last evening.
I am writing this with the sole desire that you should retain
the eminent position you occupy. I hesitate to write because
I write without any official authority. There is a very big
difference between your legal style and my own old-fashioned one
or rather between your legal knowledge and mine. I am saying
this deliberately and not through false modesty. I learnt while
studying law and practising it-and I have always acted upon the
understanding-that a lawyer, having accepted the brief of an
untruthful case should give it up as soon as he realizes its un-
truthfulness, that is, ask for a verdict against his client. I know
that there is a section of the bar which holds the opposite view.
They ask what the function of the judge would be if an advo-
cate himself were to sit in judgment on his case. I have always
held, and hold even today, that that section is mistaken. This is
my own view. I find the whole of your argument unconvincing.
It should be of no concern either to you or to me whether
it is the question of League or the non-League Muslims. If the
case of those who hold opposite views from ours is just, I would
come forward to support it notwithstanding opposition from every-
body else, but if a case is unjust I would not support it even if
it were my own son's. I also believe that Bhai Khuhro's brief
should not be rejected merely on the ground that he is believed
to be inciting the Hurs. But, if after having accepted his brief
and studied it, I felt that he was guilty, my moral sense would
teach me that, if permitted by the client, I should plead guilty
and take the punishment. But if he should not permit me, I
would request him to release me and engage another lawyer. I
remember having done that for two Muslim clients.
In one
case I asked for a verdict against the client and in another admit-
ted the client's guilts and got his punishment much reduced and
ultimately had him released after he had undergone some years of
imprisonment. I therefore do not hesitate to request you that if,
after examining the papers of Khuhro's case, you feel that he is
innocent, you should fight for him, but if you feel that he is guilty,
you should advise him to plead guilty or ask him to relieve you.
This is but a suggestion from me. If, after weighing it carefully
you do not approve of it, reject it. Do not look to the person
who has given advice; only think over the advice.
As desired by you, I am sending your letter to Choithram. I
feel that he should have written to you. I also believe that he
should not have formed prejudiced views. But that is a character-
istic not only of our life but of that of the whole world. We
have observed that even the most balanced men have not been
able to shed this weakness. Hence, do not pay attention to Choith-
ram's shortcomings. If you find any substance in his otherwise
faulty reasoning, accept it. I have not explained to Choithram
the argument I have put before you. I am enclosing a copy of
the letter I have written to him.
I understand what you say regarding Chimur-Ashti. Please
see to it that those prisoners are not hanged.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
