60. LETTER TO JAGANNATH
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
[Before March 1, 1929]
DEAR JAGANNATHJI,
I have your letters from Shikarpur and Sukkur. With the
former I received a hundi for Rs. 1,700/- which I have duly for-
warded to the treasurer at Calcutta.
According to your letter which you wrote on the 17th instant
from Hyderabad, I ought to have received a cheque for
1 The date of this telegram is not ascertainable. It was written at the end
of C. F. Andrews's letter dated January 15, 1929 written on board S.S. Majestic.
The letter must have been received by Gandhiji some time in February.
2 The source bears the following instructions from Gandhiji: "Post copy
of this and Dr. Mehta's wire to Manilal K. Ashram address" from which it
is evident that the telegram was sent by Gandhiji while he was away from the
Ashram.
3 From the contents it is evident that the letter was written before March
1, 1929 when Gandhiji left for Burma.
Rs. 2,677-2- (which you say you have posted to Delhi on the 15th).
I have up till now, after I left you, received only one draft on
the Punjab National Bank for Rs. 2,009-4- which I received at
Delhi and another hundi for Rs. 1,700 which I got at Ahmedabad.
I should therefore be much obliged if you would kindly enlighten
me as to whether you sent three instalments and if so to make
immediate enquiry about the cheque for Rs. 2,677-2- which you
say that you have posted to Delhi on the 15th instant.
We are leaving Ahmedabad for Rangoon via Delhi and
Calcutta on the 1st March. We reach Delhi on the 2nd morning
and take Delhi-Agra-Calcutta Express which takes us to Calcutta
on the 3rd evening. We take steamer on the 5th morning and
reach Rangoon on the 8th. Our address at Delhi is: C/o Laksh-
mi Narayan Gadodia, Gadodia Stores, Chandni Chowk, Delhi.
Our Calcutta address is: C/o Satis Chandra Das Gupta,
Khadi Pratishthan, Sodepur (E. B. Rly.). And our Rangoon ad-
dress is: C/o Dr. P. J. Mehta, 14 Moghul Street, Rangoon.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 13320
