259. LETTER TO SWAMI
[After August 4, 1927]
Your two letters. One is about relieving you and the other
about the floods in Gujarat.
I do not know and I believe that your request to be relieved
has nothing to do with your quarrel with Kaka. If I have to
grant you the discharge, I cannot do it until I go over there, be-
cause I must, as is my practice, first get to know the main persons
there. Only then could I know what to do. I would know no-
thing about Bhai Mohanlal. If you have full confidence, I have
no objection to your shouldering the responsibility of the work
while taking up the other job and moving wherever you like.
If the responsibility is not yours, I can be carefree only when I
come to know Bhai Mohanlal and put him in charge or appoint
someone else as superintendent. I think neither course is possible
at the moment. Even the trust matter is uncertain at present.
Since you are coming here in connection with your work,
we shall discuss the matter further then. Kaka is all right. I had
gone out on tour for three days but did not take Kaka with me.
You may rest assured from my side about Kaka because I am not
the one to coerce. I shall try to give full weight to the idea sug-
gested by you if you come and explain it to me; if you do not
come at all I shall try to put it across to the extent I have
understood it. If you are suggesting that I have no right to direct
Kaka, I will not accept that view. I sensed some such hint in your
letter. I cannot quite agree with the meaning you seem to attach
to friendship. I too had interpreted it somewhat like that in my
nonage. If my assumption that you put a similar interpretation on
it is correct, I also know that it is contrary to dharma. I have
written somewhere in Navajivan itself that in this world there can
be no friend except God and that we are all bullocks together; in
that some are more close to each other, some less so. But then
I have digressed into a new subject. In short, it is enough if I
could satisfy you by being as agreeable as I could.
Now my view about the collection from Malabar is that it
should not be used in Gujarat. I think it would be upright to act
as if the amount had been spent up when the time-limit of the
notice I had issued expired. That it has not been spent up is
mere chance. That we act differently when pressed by circum-
stances and through weakness is another thing. I merely give
my opinion. But if you or Vallabhbhai do not approve of that
view, please do correct me. There is no place for delicacy in such
matters, and certainly none among us.
Now about my going over there. While reading your letter
I felt I should start soon. Not even three quarters of an hour
has passed after reading it, but the swoon is over now. I am no
longer fit to travel. I know my body well enough. I still have
enough strength to be left alone to think and do my work, but
the ability to talk to a group, to guide and to explain things
to a succession of people coming to me, to humour them, to get
angry with them and to get work out of them has all but left
me. After all it may possibly return. At present the ability to
lie down and sleep is on the increase. In this condition, I think
1 The source has this in English.
it is not possible for me to go over there, sit in the Ashram and
rally volunteers. Moreover, I believe one cannot do work without
running around and I never had the knack of taking work from
new people while sitting in one place without moving about. If we
cannot get volunteers in response to Vallabhbhai's appeal1, we had
better realize our limitations. If more funds come in, let them
remain unused; we may offer them to those others who could
do better work than we; on the other hand if we know that we
still command respect enough to collect more money but not
the strength to rally workers we should sit quiet, not squander
our influence by asking for funds. You may not be aware that
everyone in Malabar had surplus money left with him not be-
cause of lack of volunteers but because when everything is up-
rooted people work in a different way and do not even think of
the losses. There is no power in the world which would meet
the wants of crores of people. All of us can therefore do only
some patchwork. And I think we ought to do that. While do-
ing so if we can ensure that the rogues and thieves do not get at
the money or that the protectors do not become looters, we
shall have acquitted ourselves as well as taking a dip in the
Ganga. Such floods suggest that what we say in our childhood
is veda vakya —this is God's play with bat and ball. One day there
is sure to come a flood bigger than the present one. Even then
some will survive who will not brood over the dead but will
be able to laugh and multiply the race. Do not deduce from this
that I wish to say that it would not matter if we became cruel
or if we did nothing. Absolutely not. However, I must say we need
not take upon ourselves the responsibility for all this destruction.
But we needs must make our contribution to the extent possible
to relieving the misery arising from this destruction and rest con-
tent. I do not at all approve of the argument that at this time
we should organize an army of volunteers and awaken Gujarat
once again. When the time comes, and the understanding is there
and if it has been decreed that we become the instruments, any-
thing mayor may not happen now, Gujarat will wake up and so
will the whole of India. But this is for me a matter of faith more
or less. It is out of place here even to think of it. We should
not shirk doing whatever we can in regard to this emergency.
I can think of nothing more.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
