479. LETTER TO V. S. R. SASTRI
April 15, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I went through your letter very carefully as soon as I got it.
You should accept my assurance that I want to be convinced.
I have no axe to grind on this earth except to find Truth. You
insist upon your own interpretation, or call it the orthodox inter-
pretation, and you swear by it. That is quite natural. Others
whose learning I do not doubt for one moment swear by their
own interpretation. You are doing them an injustice when you
say that they do so to please me. I can only tell you what I do know
and what I alone can know, and that is this: They are indepen-
dent men. They are scholars known to fame. They have a cha-
racter to keep. And many of them were accepted as authority
on Shastras before I returned to India from my long exile. It
is between these two interpretations that I have to make my choi-
ce, guided by such knowledge as I have of the Shastras, both in
the original and in translations.
You suggest a meeting of the Pandits representing different
schools of thought. Perhaps you do not know that I had such
a meeting. I listened to their arguments with the greatest pati-
ence and with the utmost respect. I approached my task with-
out any bias. I resist untouchability because I regard it as a great
lie. If somebody convinced me that it was a great truth, I would
repent of my folly and swear by untouchability. Beyond this I
cannot argue.
But before dosing I must answer one pointed question that
you have put to me. It is only in God that everything melts
into one and there is neither virtue nor vice, neither good nor evil,
neither sin nor merit, neither happiness nor unhappiness, and if
you will, neither truth nor untruth. That is indefinable. But so
long as I am in a body I must continue to experience the duality.
The obliteration of duality can only exist in my imagination as
an intellectual grasp. And if any person were to put forth an
opposite claim, I should have no right to question his claim, and
I would gladly admit the inferiority of my position. The inferio-
rity would not worry me because it would be in accordance with
the Truth as I see it.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20948
