31. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
PHOENIX,
April 19, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
By this time you are already on your way to London. I do
hope that there you will get some rest, I was grieved to see from
the papers that you had a nervous breakdown. It is on such
occasions that I long to be with you.
Polak will write to you fully on the situation. I wish to state
only this that this time the struggle, if it comes, will involve more
sufferings than before. So far as I know, we shall not appeal to
the public in India for pecuniary support. If those who know
me personally wish to send anything, I shall gratefully accept
the help. The plan would be to beg in S[outh] A[frica] from door
to door. I think that thereby we shall manage to get sufficient to
feed and clothe us while we are out of gaol. May I ask you also
not to make any public appeal for funds. I have still about
£300. These I am jealously guarding for emergencies. Most of the
settlers here including the womenfolk will join the struggle. The
latter feel that they can no longer refrain from facing the gaol
no matter what it may mean in a place like this. Mrs. Gandhi
made the offer on her own initiative and I do not want to debar
her. The matter of Mrs. Gandhi's intention has not yet been made
public. Will you also not mention it anywhere for the time being?
I hope that you will do what you can for the London Commit-
tee. I am going on with the collections as I promised I would. As
soon as I have [a] decent sum by me, it will be passed on to you.
We have stopped sending anything to Maud Polak since this
month.
It is likely that Maud will discuss with you her conduct
regarding her visit to S. A. I wrote to her saying that she
had misled me and that you too had been misled. In spite of
the breach of the very personal relation between us, she has
1 For Gokhale's views on this, vide Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XXXVIII.
2 Vide "Conversation with Kasturba Gandhi," p. 31.
3 South Africa British Indian Committee (SABIC)
4 H. S. L. Polak's sister, was Assistant Honorary Secretary, SABIC
5 This letter is not available.
continued to do her work on the Committee satisfactorily. She
thinks that she is simply the victim of a misunderstanding. I
am disinclined to believe it and I have said so to her. I wish I
could have saved you the bother of having to revive painful re-
collections. But I was bound to let you know what had passed
between Maud and myself.
I should much appreciate a line about your health and the
treatment you may be undergoing. Could you at all find time
to visit Just's Jungborn and Kuhne's Institute?
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 926
Courtesy: Servants of India Society
