324. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
SEVAGRAM,
December 29, 1940
CHI. DEVDAS,
I got your letters. It is enough for me that you understand
my love. If you are ignorant, you alone are not to blame. I am
equally to blame, am I not? Has not the education of all you
brothers remained incomplete? I do not regret that. I am aware
of it. You too have been the victims of my experiments. But is
not that true of the whole of India? Critics say that I am destroying
the country.
Pyarelal's statement contains pure truth. It was not drafted to
prove anything.
The letter to Hitler also was prompted from within. There
is no bitterness in it at all. But it certainly states what I believe
to be truth. Your scepticism in this regard does not pain me. It is
a virtue to see only the good in others. But if we see the bad and
still cover it up, isn't that a vice? Was it not I who used to sing
'God Save the King'? After much experience, I have come to see
the darker side.
I have received the Government's reply. I am sending you
a copy of it. It is poisonous. I am in no hurry to see the letter
to Hitler published. It is enough for me that you are ready. I will
write to you when the time for you comes.
What you have said in the letter to Mahadev about your
policy is correct. There is no need for you to stand alone. It is
better to take a stand which others can share. I cannot send
Mahadev to take your place. My suggestion was quite different.
the clarification of your views. . . . It is not merely my personal desire to
offer hearty and sincere co-operation, but it is the desire of many who stand
with me. For doing this, it is neither necessary nor desirable to surrender or
abandon our political principles and connections. . . . In the previous struggle,
many worked shoulder to shoulder with ardent Gandhi-ites while differing
from them on several important questions. Why should not this happen again?
I beg of you to reconsider your decision. . . ." Vide also "Letter to Mukunda-
lal Sircar", 16-2-1941.
But that also cannot be done now. You may play whatever part
you can. This is but the beginning of the country's fight. The
worst is yet to come. Let us see how long God keeps me. God
knows what work He wants from me. I merely dance to His tune.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2023
