378. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
February 3, 1939
MY DEAR VALLABHBHAI,
Whatever changes I am making are dictated by your abun-
dant love. I am doing it against my own inclination. This is
to tell you that as from today I have been compelled to stop
taking service from girls. Lilavati, A. S., etc., have certainly not
liked it. Sharada and Vijaya have not liked it either. The last
two are sensible and so they are not feeling sad. Prabhavati
came yesterday. She may be doing something or the other but
even she is looking on in silence. Sushila is continuing to serve
me. She has not the heart to stop doing it while I am ill.
But I feel that I should stop it when I get well. As from
yesterday I have stopped sleeping close to them. That is, the
girls sleep far enough to be out of reach of my arms. Sushila
hardly slept near me. Now no girl or man sleeps close to me.
Sushila spreads her bed perpendicularly at my head. So does
Rajkumari near my feet. I am not at all sorry about these
changes. Maybe I am unhappy on account of the girls. I say
'maybe' because that is not the impression I get. It is my way
to abandon things for the sake of my colleagues. I like to make
such sacrifices, because thereby I can know myself better. I
know that you have made your suggestion in order to protect
me. You have of course considered the interests of the girls.
1 Vide the following item; also Vol. LXVIII, pp. 196-.
It remains to be seen if their interest will be served by this
sacrifice. Lilavati is lying utterly exhausted right now. She is
planning to study. I am encouraging her.
If you send this letter to Mahadev, Devdas will also see it.
I have replied to the Viceroy's statement. It is a harsh
reply but there was no other alternative. It seems it is going
to be a terrible battle. It cannot be predicted how far it will
take us. It has to be seen how long my body can take the
strain. The swelling is of course reduced. There is silence
most of the time. Ba will have left.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
