291. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
CAPE TOWN,
Phagan Sud 14, 1970 [March 11, 1914]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have some time to myself just now. Medh writes to say that
they are plotting again in Johannesburg to take my life. That
would indeed be welcome and a fit end to my work. I would not
be frightened by this and stay away from Johannesburg on account
of this. In case I die suddenly, be the reason this or any other,
I want to set down here certain ideas which I have thought out
and which I have not so far placed before you.
"Service of the family should come first." This is quite cor-
rect from the point of view of our supreme interest. He alone
who can render such service will be able to serve the community
or the country. What that service consists in is the only point to
consider. I think selfless conduct will show that quite easily.
The life of service or political work which we have followed so
far seems to me of the lowest order. Ours is a notorious family,
that is, we are known to belong to a band of robbers. Without
disparaging our elders, we may say that they have possibly done
service to the people, but only incidentally, while they pursued
their selfish interests. Judged by common standards, it would
seem that they have acted with a fair measure of justice. That is,
they treated people to a smaller measure of oppression. At pre-
sent, the family has fallen on evil days. Any member who failed
to obtain a paid job would be on the streets. The highest our eyes
can look up to is Narandas, slaving away in Bombay. Other
members of the family just loiter about or, wallowing in the poli-
tics of [princely] States, manage to earn just enough for their
food from day to day. All of them are busy multiplying, arranging
marriages, etc. The utmost limit of a grandmother's or a daughter-
in-Iaw's ambition is to get [the grandson or] the son married.
How may we save ourselves from this? If possible, we should
take another road. We should become farmers, in the first instance.
If, to our misfortune, that should bring unbearable hardships on
us, we should labour as weavers, etc., and live in the same state
as we do in Phoenix. We must reduce our wants to the minimum.
As for diet, we should, as far as possible, adhere to the system
which we have thought out. Milk, which is generally considered a
pure substance, may be taken, but it should be looked upon rather
as the opposite of pure. This is an important change. Its roots
go deep; and its consequences will be far-reaching. It is a sepa-
rate question whether or not the change will prove acceptable to
all. But knowing at least that this article is denied to millions,
one should avoid it. The idea that it is pure flesh and not in keep-
ing with the way of non-violence will never leave my mind. I do
not think I shall ever be able to consume milk, ghee, etc., while
I inhabit this body. You should do with the minimum use of fire.
Any boys from the family who might wish to join should be allow-
ed to do so and admitted. They should not be permitted to stay on
if they failed to follow these ideas. Widows who might not wish
to live such a life should be respectfully told that you would pay
them each one and a half times as much as would be spent on
each if they were to follow that way of life and so clear your debt
to them; that, apart from this, you could give them nothing else.
Never trouble yourself to get anyone married and provided
for. The boy, on growing up, will arrange the business himself if
he wants to marry. If it does become necessary to find hus-
bands for daughters, we would offer them to those who are
prepared to marry them with no more than a tulsi leaf for dowry.
We would not spend a single pie. We would wait till we came
across such a candidate and teach the daughter to be patient. We
should be prepared for some gossiping in consequence, and to be
sneered at. All this, we would bear with love. If we remain up-
right in our conduct, we would come to no harm. To have off-
spring is no religious obligation on us. It is none of our duty to
multiply numbers in the world. The real secret of life seems to con-
sist in so living in the world as it is, without being attached to
it, that moksha might become easy of attainment to us and to
others. This will include service of self, the family, the commu-
nity, and the State. We should not stop till we reach that stage.
Whoever joins us in this way of living will be to us as a
member of our family. We shall take in Raojibhai, Maganbhai,
Pragji and any others who may come forward. Should I meet with
an untimely end, it is my desire that you should order your life
as indicated here. Be in no hurry to leave Phoenix, but bear these
objects in mind and stay on. I am quite hopeful about Magan-
lal. If Jamnadas gets trained up, he has the necessary spirit.
He has determination, too.
After my death, the money needed on account of the widows
who have been my special responsibilities should be obtained from
Dr. Mehta. If it is not forthcoming, all of you who agree with
the aims set out above should make the necessary provision even
if you have to put yourselves to extreme difficulty and slave for
the purpose. Harilal will have to fend for himself. He may
entrust the children to you or anyone else who is in India. Fuli
has enough and to spare, so that there is no question of providing
for her.
And now remain Gokibehn Nandkorbhabhi Ganga-
bhabhi and Gokuldas's wife. If they live together, that will be
very good of them, graceful of them. If they do not, separate pro-
vision should be made for each. Children may be handed over [to
them]. But it would be better if they come over to live with the
others. In that case, the total cost of maintaining them is not likely
to be [even] as much as Rs. 40. The expenses for Ba also should
be estimated on a similar scale. She should, at any rate, understand
that the right thing for her would be to live with them. And she,
too, should hand over the boys. The sons who are prepared to
assume responsibility for their mothers should, of course, be wel-
come to do so. The suggestion made above concerns such of
them as apply to us for help. If Harilal takes upon himself the
burden of maintaining Ba, let him by all means. It would be
better still if he maintained Nandkorbhabhi. Then the problem
will remain only in regard to Gokibehn and Goka's wife, and
Gangabhabhi. It would be as well if Kaku should assume the
responsibility for his mother, and Samaldas 1 on account of his.
The way suggested above is for those who would be left with no
support. No one will be justified in expecting, or will expect,
anything above your own standard of living. Since I consider
that to be the best way of living, the ideas outlined above do
not appear to be harsh. The logic behind this reasoning is based
on poverty which, indeed, appears to be the only sound basis.
After my death, you may show this letter to anyone you
like. For the time being, it may be read by Maganlal, Raojibhai,
Maganbhai, Pragji and Jamnadas. I only want that these persons
should not mention it in other company. If you feel that all of
them should not be allowed to read it, show it to those only who,
you think, should read it.
I think the letter is so comprehensive that it will provide ans-
wers to all the questions which may occur to you. If, however,
any point seems to have been left out, ask me. If you want to
discuss any questions with me, set them down in writing. If you
differ from me, have no hesitation in telling me so. You should
also tell me if you feel that the responsibility will be too heavy for
you. Make all points by way of criticism that may occur to you.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Manilal is not there, otherwise I would have permitted
him as well to read this. For the present, make a copy of this
letter. If you approve, send it on to him by registered post, asking
him to read and return it to you.
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana
1 Son of Lakshmidas Gandhi, Gandhiji's elder brother
