620. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
April 9, 1945
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,
Can you read my handwriting? If you find it difficult, I
shall in future dictate my letters.
Days pass and there is no time left for a heart-to-heart talk.
I shall, therefore, put down in writing what I have to say. That
way I should be able to have my say. You can reply in a few
words. This does not, of course, mean that I am withdrawing
what I have said. I will not leave here till I have given you
time but I do not wish to postpone what I have to say. Profulla
Babu said to me : "Krishnakumar and Madhav Prasad have now
become so big that they could not even come to see me in my
illness. Formerly they did visit me occasionally and also asked
me questions." It seems to be a case of negligence. There is no
question here of big and small. I had asked Profulla if I could
bring this matter up.
2. My work has increased. My endeavour now is to see
that no one expects any money from me and the institutions I
have created become self-supporting. This will, of course, take
some time and meanwhile I shall have to find money for
them. The institutions are All-India Spinners' Association, Village
Industries Association, Nayee Talim, Hindustani Prachar and the
Ashram. The second, third, fourth and fifth need the money
now. So far as the fifth, the Ashram, is concerned it will never
be self-supporting. I am doing my best of course. The Ashram
also includes the hospital. The monetary provision for the hospital
is separate. Efforts are being made to secure funds for it from
various sources. Still the annual expenses of the Ashram alone
are in the neighbourhood of Rs. 100,000. I am quoting the
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
figure from memory. The Ashram is not in need of funds at present.
Rameshwardas sends the needed money. As for the second,
third and fourth, they need the money. I believe Rameshwardas
has sent some money. Money is needed for the propagation of
Hindi and for Nayee Talim. Probably I shall want Rs. 200,000.
Are you disposed to take this burden on your shoulders? As
for the "Sufferers' Fund"2, Rameshwardas's letter mentions it.
I have also given my opinion.
3. Now for my relationship with women and my experiment.
I have suspended the experiment for the sake of co-workers.
I did not see anything improper in it. I am the same who
took a vow of brahmacharya in 1906 and have been observing
brahmacharya since 1901. Today I am a better brahmachari than
I was in 1901. What my experiment has done is to make me
more firm in my brahmacharya. The experiment was designed to
make of myself a perfect brahmachari and if God so wills it will
lead to perfection. You wanted to talk to me and question me
on the subject. You may do both. Please do not hesitate. It
will be unbearable if there is any hesitation in one with whom
I have such intimate relations and whose money I have been so
freely spending.
It is good that two of your brothers are together. This
letter is certainly for both but you may take it that it is indeed
for all the brothers and the entire family.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I had thought of writing a short letter, but it has become
somewhat lengthy. After ail it covers three points.
I forgot to mention one thing. You have given Rs. 50,000
for the Ashram land which has been transferred to the goshala.
Now the list that Chimanlal has sent mentions the Ashram field
and some land with a well in it. If that is so, then all the houses
go too. This cannot be so. It must have been an oversight.
Though letters were sent to Janakidevi and others there was no
result. Now, if you think that the entire land with the well has
been given to the goshala, then a certain amount will have to
be deducted from your Rs. 50,000. Do what you think proper.
BAPU
From Hindi : C.W. 8069. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
