258. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
NADIAD,
April 30, 19181
DEAR MR. MAFFEY,
In pursuance of my declaration at the Conference yesterday,
I wish respectfully to state that I place my services at the disposal of
the authorities to be utilized by them in any manner they choose,
save that I personally will not kill or injure anybody, friend or foe.
But it would be better perhaps if I were to state how, in my
opinion, my services may be best used.
In the first place, it is necessary in order to make my work
effective that I should receive permission to go to Chindwara and
see the brothers Ali. I would like to confer with them and ascer-
tain from them their advice as to the objects of the Conference.
I have little doubt that they will approve of co-operation. If the
Government would accept the request originally made by me, they
would instantaneously soothe both Hindus and Mahomedans by
releasing the brothers, if only as a war measure, in order to ad-
vance the objects of the Conference. I shall be content for the
time being with the permission to see them. I merely state that
their release would, from the war standpoint, be a more effective
act. Of course I shall reserve to myself the right to press for
their release in any case.
Further I desire relief regarding the Kaira trouble. Relief
will entirely disengage me from that preoccupation which I may
not entirely set aside. It will also enable me to fall back for war
purposes upon my co-workers in Kaira and it may enable me to
get recruits from the district. The problem there is extremely
simple. I have suggested that the revenue—now probably less
than four lakhs of rupees—be suspended this year, with the proviso
that those who can will be put upon their honour and expected
to pay revenue voluntarily. I have already offered myself to see
that the well-to-do cultivators pay the revenue. If this offer is
not acceptable, I have suggested an impartial committee to inquire
into the differences between the authorities and the cultivators. I
suggest that action in this matter be taken as a war measure. This
will obviate the fear of the relief being regarded as a precedent.
Pray understand that my offer is not conditional upon relief
in either case. I merely ask for relief in the two cases in further-
ance of the common object.
As for my work, I would like, for the time being, to travel
about the country and place before the people the desirability of
offering their services and ascertain the possibilities of success.
I would, if I am to do this, like detailed information as to the
areas in which, in the opinion of the experts, work should be
done and some instructions as to the nature of it and any
further information that they may consider I should possess.
If it is desired that I should personally wait on any of the offi-
cials or meet you, I would be prepared to come up to Simla.
You may give me as short a notice as you like after the 4th of
May. My address would be Nadiad.
I suppose I must give you something of my past record. I was
in charge of the Indian Ambulance Corps consisting of 1,100 men
during the Boer Campaign and was present at the battles of Colenso,
Spionkop and Vaalkranz. I was specially mentioned in General
Buller's despatches. I was in charge of a similar corps of 90 Indians
at the time of the Zulu Campaign in 1906, and I was specially
thanked by the then Government of Natal. Lastly, I raised the
Ambulance Corps in London consisting of nearly 100 students on
the outbreak of the present war, and I returned to India in 1915
only because I was suffering from a bad attack of pleurisy brought
about while I was undergoing the necessary training. On my
being restored to health, I offered my services to Lord Hardinge,
and it was then felt that I should not be sent out to Mesopotamia
or France, but that I should remain in India. I omit reference
to renewals of my offer to Provincial authorities.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
N.A.I.: Home, War (Deposit): October 1918, No. 26
1 Vide Vol. III, pp. 153, 163-9, 174-6, 255- & 260-.
2 Ibid, pp. 215-.
3 Indian Stretcher-bearer Corps, vide Vol. V, pp. 368-74.
4 Vide Vol. XII, pp. 535-41 & 558.
