396. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS
May 28, 1927
BHAI LAKSHMIDAS,
Your letter. I have read Bhai Jethalal's letter. We have been
doing khadi work in the native States. But I have always had a
fear that when the impact of khadi begins to tell on foreign
cloth, it will be attacked from all quarters; I doubt whether at
that time we shall be able to carry on our work in the native
States. If our tapascharya is prolonged and sincere, we might
perhaps survive such attacks. Now the question naturally arises
what stand we should take in the native States during this transi-
tional period. My inner voice tells me that we should plainly re-
ject [their favour] if it means giving undertakings which would
compromise our honour. How can we give in writing anything
that would seem like ignoring Pathik and Ramnarayan? We
should talk to them politely and try to persuade them. 'We pro-
pose to do only khadi work in your territories. That too as a
matter of business. We have no wish to interfere in the affairs
of your State.' This we shall state, if you like, in writing. 'We
wish to do khadi work in your State merely from the business
point of view. But we do not want this to be interpreted to mean
that even outside your State we will have nothing to do with
politics or that we have no line of thought on the subject. We
have no political affiliations with Pathik and others, but we do not
wish to by-pass them in any way; nor do we regard them as trai-
tors. But we do not wish to be instrumental in harming them in
their relations with you.' I think we should boldly say something
to this effect. If we do not act in some such way khadi will
lose its power. If the Government takes away khadi work from
us and gets it done arbitrarily through its own machinery, shall
we be able to attach all the power to khadi that we do today?
In short, we would swallow many a bitter pill for the sake of
khadi. We may put up with personal insults, but even khadi
work may not be carried on under such circumstances as would
compromise our principles. The fact is that under such circum-
stances, khadi work simply cannot be done. Perhaps you are not
aware that an attempt was made to get the Charkha Sangh regis-
tered. The Charkha Sangh is an independent limb of the Con-
gress enjoying the power to secede from the parent body. The offi-
cials agreed to register it if this spiritual bond were broken. We
decided against getting the Charkha Sangh registered and de-
clined to snap that bond.
Well, I am dictating this from a height of 5,000 feet; you
may therefore look at it in the right perspective after making the
necessary allowances. I write not for being acted upon, but only
because it may help you in finding some solution. I have discus-
sed this matter with Jamnalalji to some extent. He will soon be
at the Ashram when you too should see him and do what you all
wish to. But then "the master's advice must be left at the door".
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
