219. LETTER TO P. S. TO GOVERNOR OF TRANSVAAL
CALCUTTA HOUSE,
PRETORIA,
January 6, 1903
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
To HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I had the honour on the 2nd inst., as Chairman of the
British India Committee, to write to the Honourable Colonial
Secretary enquiring whether the Right Honourable Mr. Joseph
Chamberlain would graciously receive a British Indian deputa-
tion in connection with the disabilities of my countrymen resid-
ing in the Colony, and protesting against the refusal of the
Assistant Colonial Secretary to allow Mr. Advocate M. K.
Gandhi to be the spokesman of the deputation. The Assistant
Colonial Secretary has after several verbal and written remind-
ers and after 4 days' delay sent the enclosed reply. Copy of
the letter to the Honourable the Colonial Secretary is herewith
enclosed.
I have the honour now to repeat the request for per-
mission for Mr. Gandhi to be our spokesman. The refusal seems
to my Committee, with due respect, to be a most extraordinary
procedure. As His Excellency is probably aware, Mr. Gandhi
has been hitherto allowed to represent the British Indians here
before British officers; as, for instance, he represented us on
several occasions before His Honour the British Agent at Preto-
ria, as well as the British Vice-Consul at Johannesburg, before
the war broke out.
Hostile as the late Republican Government was to our inter-
ests, he was moreover allowed to represent us before its mem-
bers.
My Committee also desires me to enter its respectful pro-
test against the Supervisor of Asiatics being imposed upon us
as our interpreter and spokesman. We have always understood
that the Right Honourable Gentleman's wish is to receive depu-
tations from representatives without any official restraint and
the presence of that officer is hardly likely to carry it out.
I am to request you to place this communication before His
Excellency, and I venture to trust that His Excellency will be
pleased to give my Committee directions in the matter.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
TAYOB HAJEE KHAN MAHOMED
Pretoria Archives: Lt. G. 92 & L. G. 2132, No. 97.. : Asiatics, 1902/
1906
