37. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM,
Tuesday [May 25, 1920]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I received your letter. I liked it very much indeed. I will certainly furnish
you all the means for finding your path. The path is quite easy for persons
like you. You may imbibe all the zest you can from Vinoba, but what you
are seeking, you will not get from anything outside of yourself but only from
within yourself. However, Vinoba will help you to scrape out the crusts that
may have grown over your mind. Do not be impatient. Repeat to yourself
1 According to the addressee, the letter was written by Gandhiji on train while
travelling from Ahmedabad to Bombay on 19th; Gandhiji left Ahmedabad for Bombay
on May 19, 1920 and thereafter went to Benares (Kashi) on 28th.
2 As supplied by the addressee. In his letter dated May 20, 1920, Prabhudas had
sought Gandhiji's permission to leave Sinhagad and return to the Ashram.
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
35
again and again that compassion is the root of dharma. Understand what is
real compassion and you will get everything else. It is the effort to understand
the real meaning of compassion and truth that wearies us. It is only through
experience that we understand their meaning. I will be returning after about
fifteen days. See that instead of going after this thing or that, you cling to
the study of Sanskrit alone. Music, of course, is there. If you do this, you
will feel no burden on your brain. Learn other things which you may in the
ordinary course of things. You have lost nothing by going to Sinhagadh. It
would indeed have been better if I could have stayed on. If, however, your
health improves, the other things will follow without any effort on your part.
But worrying even about one's health is a sin. If we are able to preserve the
body, we will be able to find the means of realizing the atman while still
alive. If we fail, we will get another, better than the present one. It is Tulsidas
who has taught us the truth that it is the body which is the source of the
sense of 'I' but as it is also a means [of realizing the self], we may try to
improve its condition, and you are doing that in Sinhagad.
You may certainly come here when you wish. I am sending the reply by
return of post. I thought of sending a wire, but then dropped the idea.
I have fully understood the nature of Balkrishna. He must have got my
letter. I will arrange things for him as he desires. I have written him a long
letter.
It seems to me that you will now come only with Radha.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33032
