191. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
HOTEL CECIL,
[LONDON,]
November 16, 1906
DEAR MR. POLAK,
I haven't a moment to spare for any leading articles or matter.
You will see from India a question and answer regarding the Godfrey
petition. Is it not a strange irony of fate that, while the doctor is madly
doing all he can to injure the cause, his two brothers here are doing
and rendering all the assistance in their power to further the cause?
Arithmetically, therefore, any evil effect produced by the activity of
the one should be neutralized, especially when it is remembered that
the activity of the two is in the direction of the right course. Sir Mun-
cherjee has addressed a letter to The Times on it. So have I. I send
you a copy of my letter, also copy of letter by the Godfreys. Your cable-
gram tells me that your Association is cabling Lord Elgin. Up to the
time of writing it would appear that the cablegram has not arrived.
I may have to cable next week for information.
We meet Mr. Morley on the 22nd. I think the deputation will
be strong. Sir Lepel Griffin will head it.
A room has been engaged for the permanent committee at £40
per year. Furniture has been bought for £25. Sir Muncherjee will
probably be the chairman. More later.
I am afraid that we cannot leave before the 1st week of next month
because the committee will require organizing and there will be some
work to be done after the interview with Morley.
We had an exceedingly nice chat with Mr. Stead. He has promised
to do all he can. I have therefore suggested to him that he should
write to his Boer friends to distinguish between Coloured people belonging
to different nationalities.
Ritch addresses his lecture to the East India Association on the
26th instant.
I have met Miss Winterbottom of the Union of Ethical Societies.
She feels very much interested.
The Pan-Islamic Society has sent a representation to Lord Elgin,
copy of which too I am sending.
I want to draw up a report of the meeting of the London Indian
Society but it is not yet ready, as also of the Pan-Islamic Society. I
might be able to give it herewith. The Pan-Islamic's representation
you should print. I am sending you also a splendid contribution by
Dr. Oldfield. He will probably give us a series. You may write a
short note on it, as also on the Indian Society meeting.
Yours sincerely,
[Enclosure]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4581
