215. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
MAHABALESHWAR,
May 13, 1945
CHI. LILI,
I read your letter just now. They handed it to me without
opening it. But I am going to give it to Narahari, Pyarelal,
Munnalal and Hemantkumar to read. That letter is a mirror
of your soul.
You have always been, and still are, silly. Remember the
verse: "Dwelling in thought on vishayas." Here vishaya does not
mean merely what it does in Gujarati, namely, immoral sex-
pleasure. All objects of desire are vishayas, as for example, de-
siring what appeals to the eye, hearing with the ear, smelling
with the nose, and other similar objects of sense. Your ob-
ject of desire is to come to the hills. If it didn't materialize
you should forget about it. But you would not be Lili if you
could forget anything. And that is why you suffer. Otherwise
there are few other women as fortunate as you. Though mar-
ried in the prime of your youth, you have remained a virgin
all these years so that all the desire in you for that momentary
pleasure has been burnt away. You like service and get oppor-
tunities for it. The best service you rendered was to Bhansali,
then to Ramprasad and then to Krishnachandra. I will not
consider your services to Ba, Mahadev and myself as there was
attachment in that.
You are educating yourself to be a doctor entirely with the
aim of dedicating yourself to public service. What purer happi-
ness than this could one have? If you are still discontented,
does it not mean that you are silly?
Hoshiari wishes to come to me, and so does Vina. And there
is no limit to the number of men who wish to come. If they
cannot come, does it mean that they are unfortunate? You should
completely burn up this desire of yours. Hence, though from
one point of view your letter is good, from another point of view
it is one that you should withdraw, and that too, cheerfully. You
must pass, and do so with credit. Afterwards you will be serving
to your heart's content. And you do get opportunities from time
to time, such as serving uncle. Sushila is there. Pyarelal is leav-
ing tomorrow.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9601. Also C.W. 6573. Cour-
tesy : Lilavati Asar
