383. LETTER TO JAYANTI N. PAREKH
September 22, 1936
CHI. JAYANTI,
I could manage only today to read your letter and I am
dictating this at once while spinning. You wrote the letter
on your birthday. Live long and bring glory to your elders and
to the country by your work. I have followed your argument
about the batch and it is correct. But the batch was never
disbanded; for those who have this faith, it still exists. But I
must admit that there are very few who have this faith. I give
you the freedom you now ask for. I would have liked to have
a little talk with you before granting you this freedom, if only I
had the time to send for you and meet you. That would be purely
for my own satisfaction. I have had to forgo such satisfaction
on several occasions before; so I can forgo it now. Do only what
your inner voice tells you. In this alone lies your good. Only
make sure that you rightly understand what the inner voice says.
If the inner voice prompts a murderer to commit murder, a de-
bauch to commit debauchery, or a thief to commit theft, we
shall not regard it as the inner voice. Men of experience have there-
fore laid it down that he alone can have recourse to the inner
voice who has acquired the ability to hear it. As men have often
failed to understand this clearly, they have pillaged and plun-
dered in the name of religion. However, I know I don't have
to explain all this to you. Write to me occasionally. I am
in correspondence with several socialists, though not with our
comrades from Gujarat. If I set out to seek such contacts on
my own I would be overwhelmed by them. I reply to those who
write to me, but at present I am curtailing even that kind of
correspondence, as I desire at present to bury myself in Segaon
and be forgotten. Even if this desire cannot be wholly fulfilled,
should I not at least do all I can to realize it? And that is
what I am doing. A certain amount of correspondence has
therefore come to a stop.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6263
