357. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
September 30, 1928
DEAR MOTILALJI,
Mahadev gave me your message. But as there was nothing
definite to say and as I have been overwhelmed with work in
connection with the Ashram, I did not write to you before now.
Mahadev tells me that you want me to attend the All-India
Congress Committee's meeting. What shall I do there? What can
I do? I know that that part of the national work is also use-
ful, but my heart has gone out of it and I become more and
more inclined to give my time to what is concisely understood
as constructive work. I do not mention khadi alone, because I am
giving such attention as I can to other items of constructive work
not even mentioned in the Congress programme. And I see that
everywhere strength of mind has got to be evoked and to the
extent that it is, the power of resistance is developed. Lucknow
seems evidently to have left the masses untouched. Today riots
are going on in Gujarat which never before knew Hindu-Muslim
rioting. News has just arrived that a brave Ashram lad was
nearly done to death yesterday. Whilst he was in a press build-
ing, the goondas broke into that building, indiscriminately assaulted
everyone who was in it and then set fire to it. A noted Vakil of
Godhra was fatally wounded and Waman Rao who is a member
of the Bombay Council and whom you know was seriously assault-
ed. Every day some fresh rioting news comes from some place
or other.
I know that in spite of all this, the constitution-building
work must be done. I only want to tell you that these riots
largely unfit me for such work. Indeed, I am contemplating absence
even from the Congress if you could permit me to remain away.
There is a double reason: the prevailing atmosphere and the
decision of the Calcutta Committee to copy the Madras type
of Exhibition. The Council of the All-India Spinners' Associa-
tion has decided to abstain from being represented at that Exhibi-
tion. Much though I feel the error in using Madras Exhibition
as a type, I do not want to criticize it in the public. If I go to
Calcutta, my presence will either embarrass the Committee or my
silence will embarrass me.
I have now given you what is today oppressing my mind.
You will now decide firstly, whether you want me for the All-India
Congress Committee in Calcutta and secondly, whether you want
me to attend the Congress in December.
You and Vithalbhai worked wonders in Simla.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13695
