128. LETTER TO N. P. COWIE
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
October 4, 1919
DEAR MR. COWIE,
I sent you a telegram on Wednesday last regarding the levy
of rupees one hundred and seventy-six thousand from the mill-
hands of Ahmedabad. I said in the telegram that I would submit
for His Excellency's consideration the argument against the amount
of the levy, as also the class of labourers from whom it is being
or to be exacted. It seems to me that the labourers have been put
on a par with the wealthiest citizens of Ahmedabad; and whilst
the payment to be made by the latter will take some time before it
is collected, the labourers are being required to pay the (to them)
terrible sum of Rs. 1,76,000 at once. I hope it will not be replied
that the Government's duty is finished as soon as they have paid
themselves out of the caution-money retained by the mill-owners
and that the mill-owners may collect as they choose.
It is a well-known fact that labourers are continuously changed.
All, therefore, who were employed in April were not necessarily
under employment in September. It is therefore difficult to under-
stand the justice of levying from the labourers to be found on the
books of the mill-owners in the month of September.
In my humble opinion, justice demands that any levy imposed
should be recovered from the labourers on the books of the several
mills on the 10th of April. I venture to think, too, that collection
from women and boys employed in the mills is also an injustice.
I submit therefore that the amount to be collected should be re-
duced; that all the labourers who were not employed on the 10th
of April, women and boys under the age of eighteen, should
be exempted from payment; and as submitted in my telegram,
the payment ought not to be recovered during the current festival
month but that recovery should be spread over a long enough
period to enable the labourers to pay without extreme inconveni-
ence to them.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of a handwritten draft: S.N. 6926
