15. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 5, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,
I was silent over your letter because I wanted to have a talk
with Kanu, which I had at length yesterday. He does not wish
to be away for the present at any rate. He particularly wishes
to acquire from me whatever he can just by remaining by my
side although he no doubt wants to learn a good deal of music
from Panditji. Hence, I have assured him that he may rely with-
out fear on my promise that I would gladly let him go any time
he thinks he has had enough of me or wants to go to Panditji
or anywhere else and obtain some special knowledge. I think this
is enough for the present. Of course I shall be watching him.
He has a clean mind, but after all he is only an adolescent.
Sometimes he suffers from melancholy but it is momentary and
there is no particular reason for it. Didn't we all at his age have
a similar experience more or less?
As for the school, I am getting convinced more and more that
we should start thinking in terms of closing it unless it becomes
self-supporting. For, if it does not stand on its own it could be
looked upon as being run to serve our needs. We however believe
that knowledge should be imparted only to the seeker. Yes, of
course we would go begging money for such students if we have
any as might thirst for knowledge and yet be unable to pay their
way. If we had such seekers, they would cheerfully carry out our
word and within a year fully bear their financial burden. There
are many institutions of the kind in America where immediately
on admission the student begins to earn his board side by side
with his studies. You may continue this discussion in your letter
if you wish.
Kanu has gone through this letter and says that I am not
correct in saying that he has a great desire to learn music under
Panditji. If he is ordered to go to Ahmedabad, he would rather
learn it at the Gandharva Vidyalaya under Shankarrao Vyas
although it cannot be said that this is what he wishes. Accord-
ing to his present state of mind, his only wish is to be with me
and do what I ask him to. He will be under my care and there
is no reason to worry on his account. He has written a long
letter to you.
I have written to the Press on the subject of Harilal, though
nothing has been published yet. I do not say anything here,
hoping it will be in print in due course.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
The progress made there in spinning is excellent in my view.
As for Sardar, I will speak to him. He should, however, make
it a point to come if he can have an opportunity.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III. Also C.W. 8492. Cour-
tesy: Narandas Gandhi
