216. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
June 26, 1944
BHAI DINSHAW,
I could have only a brief talk with you. But all the time
I have been thinking about the nature cure. The result is:
This institution should remain as it is, with some modifica-
tions, because it is your creation. Do not enlarge its sphere of
work.
Buy about a thousand acres of land near a village under your
supervision. There should be enough space for patients and also
provision for the healthy ones to remain so. The rich and the
poor should stay in the same way, and food for them should be
produced there itself. Almost all the things should be grown
there. Treatment through earth, water, light, air and ether should
be given. Manage everything in such a way that the poor can
get what they require. Such new institutions should come up
as you get more workers. The management should be such that
the institution is able to meet its expenses.
Do not take Government aid so long as power is not in the
people's hands.
Convene a meeting of naturopaths and discuss the issue.
Take workers from among them.
There should be a trust for this and the new institution which
will come into being. At least you, Ghanshyamdas and myself
should be among the trustees. You can take any fees you think
proper. But take [only] the sum fixed for your personal expense.
The rest should be debited to the institution's account.
Define what items can come under nature cure, and write
books of general knowledge about them.
There is no need to wait for some occasion to arise. So
long as I am out and alive, it will be under my supervision.
But it should be so planned that it will function even during
my absence.
I have already started discussing it with Ghanshyamdas. He
has agreed to do as I say.
Think over this and let me know what changes you would
like. You are absolutely free to suggest them. This can be ac-
complished only if you have your heart and mind in it. I can
think only of you in this matter. I wish to forget about it, if you
are not convinced. I believe we can get the help we need for
the institution.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
