414. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BARDOLI,
June 5, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. You did right in having paid a visit to
Rajkot.
If you go on pleading with the elders through letters, they will
probably listen to your advice regarding khadi.
Some days ago, I had a letter from Mukundrai, which I am
sending on to you. It will help you to a better understanding
of the facts about Mahalakshmi. I did not know that she was rela-
ted to Gaurishankar. I should be happy if you can take her into
the Ashram.
If the other lady is what she seems to you, you can admit her.
You should try to know her husband. If she had such intense aver-
sion against worldly happiness, why did she marry? How old
is she? What has been her education? To which community does
she belong? What are her husband and father-in-law? What is
her father? In principle, we should admit such women.
If Ratubhai has gone to Bombay, we shall meet. I had indeed
realized, when I went to Rangoon, that the Doctor was unhappy
about Lilavati. But I will have a talk with Ratubhai when he
meets me in Bombay.
The suggestion that Madanmohan should stay with Jamna-
lalji seems all right to me. Haribhau was here and I had a talk with
him too. If he stays with Jamnalalji, there will be no need to pay
him anything.
We should let Amtulbehn stay in the Ashram if she is ready
to live in it till the end of her life. She may be permitted to receive
money from outside. If no one sends her any money, we should
bear the expenditure on her account. I think she will recover if she
does very little physical work. You must have got the bill of ex-
change in Ba's name which was received here.
If an inmate of the Ashram lives elsewhere, his expenses
should be borne by the people there. If, however, Chhaganlal
desires another arrangement in regard to any person, do
as he suggests.
I have written to Chhaganlal also to this
effect.
328
I have advised Dwarkanath that he should live outside
Gujarat till my suspicion against him regarding arms is removed.
He will leave in a few days. We have yet to decide what to do
about his bill. Chhaganlal thinks that he is innocent. I have written
to him and told him that, if he feels inclined to pay the bill, he
may do so. If, therefore, he writes to you requesting you to pay
the bill, please do.
I shall leave this place on Monday and return on the 12th,
leaving Bombay on the 11th.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
