283. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
March 24, 1932
CUNNING RAIHANA,
You are trying to delude me by praising my Urdu. By God's
grace, however, I will not let myself be deluded in this way. My
handwriting is very bad, and so is my spelling. Before my Urdu
deserves such praise, Raihana will have grown into an old woman
or I would have to give more time to it [than I do]. I now
copy the bhajan. Imagine that Raihana is singing it.
Arise, awake, O Traveller, it's morning now.
Where is the night that you are still in bed?
He gains who stands awake,
And he who slumbers loses.
Open your eyes a little,
You careless one, turn your mind to God.
This is not the way to love,
That while He is awake, you slumber.
Know that you will have to eat the fruits of your doings,
O sinner, how can sin ever bring happiness?
You carry a burden of sin on your head,
Why, then, hold your head in grief and weep?
What you would tomorrow, do today,
And what you would today, do right now.
After the sparrows have ravaged your crops,
What will it avail you to beat your breast and weep?
I see that the handwriting continues to be bad, but I can't
write better with the left hand. I will try and improve it slowly.
Meanwhile, endure it as it is. Please do not feel ashamed of such
a dull pupil. If you are patient, I may in course of time deserve
your praise, which I do not deserve now. If that does not happen,
I will blame you. Isn't there a book which explains how to spell
in Urdu? Please inquire. If Hamid Ali and Sharifabehn are
still there, convey to them my many salaams and tell them that
I have not forgotten the meeting with them at Godhra and the
help given by both at the Social Reform Conference.
Tell Father that I got his postcard. However, it would not
be proper for a prisoner like me to write often to a big person
like him. I can write as many letters as I choose to girls like
you. Father may write to me as often as he wishes. There is
certainly some justification for such a rule. There might be no
harm in a prisoner receiving letters, but there may be in his writ-
ing. Hence a prisoner may write innocent letters to children
without objection. It should cause no surprise that Father's
memory is getting weak. It should be enough for us if God pre-
serves long his strength to dance [with joy]. To Father and
Mother, many salaams and as many vandematarams from us all.
Kisses to Kamalmiyan . Blessings to Hamida, Rohini, and others.
It is a very good thing that Ba has now returned to them. Send
me from your treasury some good bhajans of your choice. If you
write in Urdu script, it will serve as a lesson in Urdu for me.
Ask Pashabhai to write. Blessings to him from Sardar and me.
Let Sardar remain for ever only Vallabhkaka for you.
Long live Raihana! Khuda Hafiz.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9639
