327. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
January 28, 1907
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter to hand.
As a lot of material has been held over, Mrs. Besant's article may
well be postponed to next week. Whenever you print it, see that all of
it appears in one issue. It may conveniently be held over for two weeks.
It would be better if the article on the Amir were concluded in
this issue.
The suggestion about decreasing your burden is quite justified. Do
keep Mothoo. You would be quite right if you had already decided
to keep him before this reached you.
This is the time for you to give your fullest attention to realizing
the dues and to the account books. We must on any account satisfy
our customers. If they do not get satisfaction just when they have begun
to be interested in what we write, we shan't be able to keep them on
the register. It is [however] as necessary to collect the dues as it is
to satisfy our customers. You must therefore give full attention to the
books. I realize this quite well.
You will be justified therefore if you have decided to keep Thakkar
by offering him an increment. He can be cured of his bad habit if you
keep an eye on him.
When will the balance-sheet be ready?
I am returning Sheth Haji Habib's advertisement about the mosque.
I have written to him. I hope you remember that £6.10. have already
been collected from him. A credit note for the amount has been sent
to him.
I am sending you some more material today. Do not hold over
anything that is topical.
Even though the expenditure on your visit to England is ultimately
to be borne by the Press, I know that the money will have to be found
by me now, and this is how I look at the matter.
The Press is growing day by day. Its work will increase as the
purity of our objectives is progressively recognized and increases. If
this purity is accompanied by skill and ability, we shall be able to do
a great deal, provided of course that we do not succumb to greed and
self-interest. For this we should lay down that no one among us could
draw a monthly allowance of more than £10 or up to any other limit
we decide upon. Whatever is left over after these charges have been
met, we should use to promote education, health, etc. In order to do
this we should ourselves be better educated. I have therefore decided
to send a person to England, whom I consider the most steadfast of all.
He should go there with the firm resolve that he would not make a single
pie for himself from the education he receives, but would pass on all
the benefit [of that education] to the Press and would accept and live
on what the Press gave him. You appear to me to be the only Indian
who has attained to this degree of fitness. I believe you understand the
significance of the whole thing and you seem to be the only person who
can be depended upon to carry forward the heritage of my thoughts
and words. Messrs Polak and West know and understand a lot. There
are things which they understand and you don't. However, it seems
on the whole that you understand more than they do. Our ultimate
capital is not the money we have, but our courage, our faith,
our truthfulness and our ability. If therefore you go to England, your
intellect remains unspoiled and you return with your physical and
mental powers strengthened, our capital will have appreciated to that
extent. I cannot write more as people have again begun to drop in.
[Blessings from
MOHANDAS]
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4690
