500. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
April 18, 1933
DEAR MOTIBABU,
I have your letter and I am glad you have written to me
so exhaustively.
In thinking of temple-entry, we must not think of what the
Harijans want, but what is due by us to them and what was pro-
mised so solemnly at the Bombay meeting under the President-
ship of Malaviyaji. Temple-entry was there promised and that
promise has to be fulfilled at the sacrifice of life itself. Remember
the words of the Mahabharata, "Truth in one scale and all the other
sacrifices in the opposite scale: the scale holding Truth will outweigh
the other scale." Breach of promise to the Harijans and to God is
unthinkable. We may be as patient as possible with the sanatanists,
but those who have any regard for that solemn promise must cease-
lessly pursue temple-entry. I do not therefore need to examine the
other part of your argument about temple-entry. Of course educa-
tion has to be an active programme. Education in the widest
sense of the term is wanted, not merely for the Harijans but also
for the savarna Hindus. What we are today suffering from is not so
much the want of education as too much of mis-education. Irreli-
gion and hypocrisy has been taught us in the place of religion and
honesty, superstition in the place of true knowledge, intolerance
in the place of charity, incontinence in the place of chastity,
distortion of the Shastras in the place of a true and simple
interpretation thereof woven round the central truth.
I note what you say about the activities of the Sangh, and
I hope that your efforts will be crowned with full success. If you
will keep the central fact of hand-spinning intact, you will not
yield to the temptation of taking the fine yarn from the indi-
genous mills. I do not know whether you have traced the history of
Harijans being driven from weaving to scavenging simply because
the natural cord between hand-spun and hand-woven has been
broken. If you will have fine cloth, you should teach the men and
women how to spin fine yarn. Out of good slivers I spin 70 counts.
Mahadev has gone as much as 110 counts. This is finer than the
finest spun by any mill in India, and you will be surprised to learn
that a Harijan weaver at the Ashram has woven Mahadev's 40
counts. Finer than 40 we began to spin only during this incar-
ceration, but I have no doubt that when our stock of fine yarn can
be given for spinning, the same weaver will be able to handle
it. We must face the difficulty, cost what it may, in this movement
of regeneration.
Much as I would like to discuss the question of my coming
out for the sake of the Harijan cause, prison restrictions would not
admit of any such discussion.
I did not know that Arun had purposely sent the Message and
Mission of the Prabartak Sangh for my opinion.
I must now
look it up if I can lay my hands on it and read it critically.
I think that your medical adviser is quite right. Your eyes
need rest. With all the devoted workers that surround you, why
should you use your eyes at all? I do not know whether you know
that there is in vogue a new and strikingly convincing method of
treating the eyesight. It is called Bates's method, and there is a
physician in India who knows this method. His name and address
are: Dr. Agrawal [Ram Eye Hospital, Bulandshahr].
I do not know the gentleman at all. He corresponded with me
and brought this method first to my notice. Since then American
friends have written to me and sent literature also. If you at all
feel like it, you should correspond with Dr. Agrawal.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20968
