313. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
ANDHERI,
Thursday [On or after March 13, 1924]
CHI. RAMDAS,
I have your letter. You are having ups and downs. I realize
that. Overcome the state with patience, or be like the sea which
does not breach its bounds in spite of high tides and low, and
retain your poise. All people are prey to all kinds of thoughts
but he who does not let himself be affected and remains steady
triumphs in the end. I advise you to be present at the prayers even
if you cannot concentrate. We attend prayers only to develop
concentration. One who can concentrate mayor may not attend
prayers. It is all the same. All we can do is not to let the mind
wander. And if we persevere, some day we can become filled with
Rama as Tulsidas was. Just as you set impossible tests for your-
self and feel disappointed, you seem to be doing the same with
regard to others and they fall short. There is no cause to despair
if some people in the Ashram are not able to live up to my ideals.
If they knowingly remain deficient they will show themselves up
as hypocrites, for it will prove that they have no faith at all in
our ideals. But you will not have seen many persons in the
Ashram who though not believing in our ideals, stay there
merely to deceive us. Even if that were so it should not make
you feel disheartened. In this world there is no reason for anyone
who tries, to feel disheartened. You certainly are trying. I wish
you would understand one thing. We never know whether we are
or are not qualified to attain the goal. But we have control over
the means. We are the masters and it is easy to gain success in
this. Moreover, to the extent that we have perfected the means,
we have moved closer to the end to be achieved. We can distinguish
the means, because they have been laid down by the sages, whereas
the end has been declared unfathomable. The first means is
Truth. I am sure that you are well qualified in that regard. You
do not deceive anyone. You do not deceive even yourself. You
do not wish even to deceive yourself and that is why you remain
discontented. For you cannot at once become what you want to
become. This irks you. But we must be a little patient even
with ourselves. Applying these considerations to your case, I would
merely say that you must slowly set about doing what you plan
to do, try to succeed in it and be detached as to the results.
I am ready to provide you a house if you wish. I am eager
to do everything that will bring you happiness and peace. I have
already confessed and confess again that had I tried to give you
more education, you would not have been in such a disorganized
state. But who can undo what has already been done? Let us
make a fresh start.
Remember that if you cannot find peace, you are always
free to run up to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Ramdas Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
