467. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
April 14, 1933
MY DEAR HARIBHAU PHATAK,
My claim to be a servant of Harijan, of Daridranarayana, has
yet to be established, and I freely admit that my food is undoubte-
dly one of the obstacles to the successful establishment of my
claim. But you should know that I do not spend anything on
my food. Here it is the costly Government assisted by spend-
thrift friends who supply me with my food, but the fact that some-
body else spends a lot of money over my food is no defence, nor
perhaps is it any defence that the goat's milk and the fruit that I
take are a medical need for the body. I know that there are
thousands, if not millions, whose bodies too would be pronounced
to be in medical need of the kind of food that I am taking.
But they have no doctors who would issue such certificates to
them, and if they happen to get such a doctor, neither this Go-
vernment nor our millionaires would supply them with the food
that I receive.
I am an out-and-out believer in the doctrine of swadeshi,
but I flatter myself with the belief that my swadeshi is not a
narrow doctrine. I will take from the whole world what I can-
not and do not produce in India profitably in terms of the millions.
Therefore I do not hesitate to take from Arabia its health-giving
dates or from Afghanistan its equally health-giving raisins. These
are only a few examples of the foreign articles that I use. But
my claim to be a votary of swadeshi is well established because
I would take the coarsest hand-spun manufactured by Harijans in
preference to the finest cloth manufactured in Indian mills.
Yes, poor Pyarelal, knowing my weakness for everything
Indian, thought that he had found out dates in his paradise, the
Punjab, and he did find them. These were expensive enough
for those who sent them, but I had to pay nothing for them.
I took them whilst they lasted at the expense of Arabia, but
the latter won the day, because the Punjab dates were available
only during the season which lasts only two or three months.
So, on the whole, Arabia will remain the victor with me be-
cause I do not propose to deny myself the dates which my body
needs and by taking which I deprive no date-grower in India.
I cannot give you the name of the agents because Pyarelal could
not get the names, for he interested a friend of his in procuring
the Punjab dates.
I am glad that the Poona Municipality has passed Sjt.
Pashankar's resolution throwing open all public reservoirs to the
Harijans.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20927
