316. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BOMBAY,
Friday [June 6, 1919]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. You must have received the two letters
I addressed to you at Vijapur. Let not the women or the men
take fright. In the Ashram, we shall use only hand-spun yarn
for weaving but, till we are able to make wearable dhotis or saris
from such yarn, we shall get them woven from outside with mill
yarn. The idea is that in the Ashram we should not spend our
time in weaving cloth with mill yarn. Only thus shall we realize
our aim, that we should restrict ourselves, as soon as practicable,
to the use of home-spun yarn for our own cloth.
I have already written to you to say that we certainly can-
not give any money to aunt to help her repair the house.
I have, personally, no doubt at all that with their little hands
children will be able to spin best. See that everyone learns it
with the utmost speed. I would say that, if Ranchhodbhai gets
a fixed monthly pay, he should not charge any commission. I
do not know what his understanding has been so far. Settle the
matter as you think best. If, henceforth, he does not follow the
course I have suggested, I think he will have to give up the
work there. I am sure that, if Ranchhodbhai works from an
entirely business point of view, we cannot spend public money.
If he wants to earn something more than a bare living, he should do
some independent business. We would buy what yarn we needed.
What is the arrangement with Gangabehn? I do not remember
having agreed on any such arrangement with her. She works
entirely in a spirit of service. I should like her to take a little
for this work, enough to meet her needs. But I do not know if
she does even this.
It seems quite right to charge Mavji's pay to the Famine
Committee. Do in this matter as Vallabhbhai or Indulal may
advise.
See that Chhotalal and Jagannath learn spinning immediately.
These two and Mavji should be employed wholly on weaving.
You hope to raise the money for the Ashram expenses through
agriculture. Work on it as much as necessary for this purpose
and no more. Please consider it our duty to give most of our time
at present to spinning and weaving, for we do not lose to other
countries crores of rupees because of agriculture. Thanks to the
disappearance of weaving, we lost sixty crores during last year
alone. Certainly, we do not want to give up agriculture; in fact
we want to improve and develop it. But we cannot work on two
things at a time and, therefore, it will be proper to attend to
what is more important for the immediate present. Even then,
you may certainly work on agriculture as much as it is possible
to do with hired men, without loss to us. Ask the boys to give
some of their time to this work. I hope you have followed my
point. We shall also be generally in difficulty for money. I can
ask for only as much as I may get with little effort. Personally,
I very much like the changes we have introduced in regard to
weaving. They will also help us to be free, to a very great
extent, from difficulties about money.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 7326
