146. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
December 3, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
At about 7.15 this morning Major Mehta handed me the
following message:
Mr. Gandhi may be allowed to do his own conservancy work if
he wants to. But he should be informed that Government cannot accept
his intervention on behalf of convict Appasaheb Patwardhan.
It seems to me that Government have not appreciated the
position. The permission to me to do my own conservancy work
is of little moment. Relief for Appasaheb Patwardhan is the chief
and central thing. My fast began this morning as per my letter
to you and, I am sorry to say, has to continue till relief is granted
to Appasaheb Patwardhan and his associates. It should be under-
stood that they have asked not for doing their own conservancy
work, but for joining the regular file and this they have done as
a matter of sacred principle. Government should also know that
it is not Bhangis alone who are given this work but others des-
cribed as low castes are compelled to render this service although
they have never done it outside prisons. Reformers like Appa-
saheb Patwardhan who were civil disobedience prisoners in 1930
in Ratnagiri could not suffer the misery of non-Bhangi prisoners
being forced against their will to do the work and submitted to the
authorities that they should be allowed to replace such men. This
was, in my opinion, a laudable offer which the authorities should
have gladly, if not thankfully, accepted. It was a voluntary
offer made to help the Government. Meanwhile the Delhi Pact
came. The same offer was renewed this time and these prisoners
were permitted to do the work. Suddenly orders seem to have
been sent to prohibit the work. Hence Appasaheb Patwardhan's
putting himself on reduced diet. I ventured to seek relief as soon
as I came to know of this tragedy.
In rejecting my humble and helpful intervention, Government
seem to have suddenly reversed the policy which they adopted
as early as 1922-23 in connection with me and have continued
ever since. When during my first incarceration in 1922-and that
as a convict-I sought to intervene on behalf of two hunger-
striking prisoners, it was at first resented and then on reconsidera-
tion the Government accepted it. The then Inspector-General of
Police who was deputed by His Excellency, Sir George Lloyd, to
carry on negotiations with me and the Superintendent of this Prison
thanked me for the happy result of the intervention. Two pre-
cious lives were saved and a beneficial circular was issued by the
Government as a result of my humble effort.
In 1930 under
similar circumstances the new Superintendent who knew little or
nothing of the event just described of 1922-23 disliked my offer,
but subsequently it was accepted by you yourself again with happy
result and the practice was then established of my being allowed
to see fellow-prisoners for the definite purpose of my being able
to render the humble office of intermediary between them and the
administration. That practice has been continued up to now, not
I hope with any unhappy result. Each time I have intervened,
I hope the officials concerned will testify, I have done so in a
helpful manner. It is, therefore, difficult for me to understand
the Government without any apparent cause reversing this policy,
and that too just when I have been obliged most reluctantly to
embark upon a fast. I must regretfully adhere to the fast until
relief is given to my friends and the human right of intervention
that the Government have hitherto recognized is restored to me.
There is one thing I should mention. I am carrying on con-
centrated conversations about untouchability from day to day with
many friends who come to see me. Just at present the strain is
greater than usual because of the members of the Anti-Untouch-
ability League being in Poona. The visitors are bound to notice
the weakness that must overtake me even today and they are
bound to inquire about the reason. I shall be unable to conceal
the truth from them and yet I have no desire whatsoever that
they should know anything about the unfortunate contretemps between
Government and myself. For I am hoping that the Government
will recognize the utter reasonableness of my request.
Yours sincerely,
Home Department, Political, File No. 31/108-Poll., 1932, pp. 40-.
Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also G.N. 3872
