15. LETTER TO SIR SURENDRANATH BANERJEA
August 10, 1918
DEAR MR. BANERJEA1,
I have your telegram redirected from Ahmedabad where I
am at present engaged in recruiting. A visit to Calcutta means at
least a week simply in going and coming back. If I am to do
my work at all satisfactorily, it is impossible for me to absent my-
self for such a long time, and at the present moment I dare not
do so, for I have just heard from the Government that they have
acceded to my proposal to open a training depot in Gujarat and to
form a Gujarat Company. You will agree that I cannot leave
this work.
But even if I could have come, I do not know that I could
have rendered much assistance. I hold strong, and probably pe-
culiar, views not shared by many of the leaders. I implicitly be-
lieved that if we were to devote our attention exclusively to recruit-
ing, we should gain full responsible government in a year's time, if
not sooner. And instead of allowing our utterly ignorant country-
men to enlist nolens volens, we should get an army of Home Rulers
who could be willing soldiers with the knowledge that they will be
soldiering for the sake of the country. I do, at the same time, be-
lieve that we should declare our opinion about the Montagu-
Chelmsford Scheme in unequivocal terms, we should fix the
minimum of our demands and seek to enforce them at all costs. I
consider the scheme to be good in its conception. It requires much
modification. We should have no difficulty in arriving at a unani-
mous conclusion. I should like a party in the country that would
be simply pledged to these two propositions, helping the Govern-
ment on the one hand in the prosecution of the war, and en-
forcing the national demands on the other.
I do not believe that at a critical moment like this we should
be satisfied with a patched-up truce between the so-called extre-
mists and the so-called moderates, each giving up a little in favour
of the other. I should like a clear enunciation of the policy of
each group or party and naturally those who, by the intrinsic
merit of their case and ceaseless agitation, make themselves a power
in the land will carry the day before the House of Commons.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
