29. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
October 11, 1935
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Encouraged by you, I am pressing Jivanlal-
bhai. I am sending your letter to him. I will write to you after I
receive his reply.
If Pranjivan Joshi has already been relieved I will not waste
time in inquiring into the matter now.
Let me know the result of your experiments in making manure
out of bones and carcasses.
You shouldn't have had the difficulty which you had regar-
ding the use of hand-made paper. The argument has often
been advanced against the use of khadi and we have solved the
difficulty in but one way. Though khadi is relatively costly, those
who have understood its importance have found a way of making
it cheap for themselves. Many of us, for instance, reduced the
consumption of cloth after they started using costly khadi and on
the whole effected some saving. Those who could not reduce
consumption saved on other items but did not accept defeat.
Similarly, when we resolved to use hand-made paper, we reduced
writing or included more matter in a given amount of space
than previously. We stopped using envelopes costing four or five
pice and started using postcards costing three pice only. I resumed
here the practice of writing on small slips of paper, which I used
to follow in jail. On the balance, therefore, our expenditure on
postage has not increased.
I do not know how things are in Delhi. But I hope Malkani
has started practising economy. What we give to the Government
is in fact given to ourselves. It is, therefore, not right to think
that we should spend less on postage because the money goes to
the Government. Even when the Government will be in our hands,
it will certainly not be proper for public workers to spend extra-
vagantly on postage. In jail, we tried to keep the consump-
tion of everything to a minimum because we thought that all
things in the country belonged to us. For, no matter who ran the
Government, everything it owned belonged to us, the people. The
20
money that we give to the Government is spent for Government
purposes.
Because the Government money is spent extravagantly when
the Government is in foreign hands, it does not mean that such
money ceases to be ours. It is our duty of course to check its
extravagance. But so long as it continues, it is we, the people,
who provide the money in one way or another. Hence the argu-
ment of increase in postage should not be advanced against the
use of hand-made paper. In propagating the use of such paper,
the expenditure on postage may perhaps go up in the beginning.
Even then, if the use of hand-made paper is likely to increase
through our example we ought not to grudge the additional
expense on postage.
Those teachers who see the moral necessity of manual work
will themselves find out some crafts which they can take up.
Nobody else can advise them in this matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5536
