531. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
May 28, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,
Your letter came in yesterday. The post comes after the
closing of the outgoing mail.
You are a proper family party—Judge, Government Member,
Doctor, with rebellious sister in their midst and you want the
Collector Brother in your midst to finish your happiness. Remem-
ber that feeding up an exhausted brother is not the only man-
ner of expressing a sister's love. She has to know the food that is
required for a given constitution. I know cases where rich and
nutritious food has resulted in harm. But you have lived with
me in vain if you do not know how to choose the correct articles.
The manner of preparing them must be your very own.
When I read the sentence in your letter, attributed to me as
having ever said to Kallenbach, I couldn't believe it. I re-read
the thing and then I laughed. I never lay down the law like
that even for little children. Though K. had immense faith
in me, he would not tolerate the autocracy and arrogance
attributed to me. And faith like his would not require such
assertions of infallibility. You must now fill in the gap and
tell me who regaled you with the precious information and I
might be able to throw some more light on the grave problem! But
my denial should not be taken to mean that I won't lay down
the law for rebels and idiots and require obedience because it
is given by me. I must live up to the title given to me if only
to give you the satisfaction of proving your rebellious spirit! And
then heaven help me, if such assertion being heard by some-
body is quoted as an authentic example of my arrogance!!!
When we descend to Bangalore I shan't have time to give
you such nonsense. Here there is quiet and therefore compara-
tive leisure for giving you senseless things.
I do hope this hospitality even of nearest and dearest is not
proving a strain on your weak body. I know what closest at-
tention to the tiniest details, of which you are capable when it
is a matter of loving service, means to the person giving such
love. Happily Shummy is there to prevent you from over-
doing it.
451
Mira was badly ill but she is better now. She was taken
to J.'s bungalow. She must have returned to Segaon.
Rameshwari Nehru comes here today for three days. She
had a very successful tour in the Harijan cause in Travancore.
There was no indication in your note on Lucknow Exhi-
bition that you did not want it published.
I read it carefully,
made alterations to hide your identity and let it go. You will
tell me how it reads. And why did you not want it published?
Next time you will mark all such things suitably so as to in-
dicate your wishes. That note had little value if it was not
meant to tell the people what a town-bred woman had felt about
the Exhibition.
Here is a note received from Mr. Marsden which speaks for
itself.
Love.
TYRANT
[PS.]
Remember we descend to Bangalore City on 31st and stay
there not beyond 15th June.
From the original: C.W. 3728. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6884
