357. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Phagan Sud 6 [March 14, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
The letters you wrote from India have arrived now. They
were read with great interest. I know the restrictions you have
placed. But in these letters you have given me permission to show
them to Chhaganlal and Maganlal. They were also shown to
Manilal. I thought it was in his interest that he should read them,
so admirable they appeared to be. I shall not show them to anyone
else. If any letter of yours contains only personal reflections of
an intimate nature, I alone will read it and then destroy it.
Your boils must have disappeared by now. You will continue
to have one ailment or another till your blood is completely puri-
fied and you have suitable diet as dictated by experience. With
effort, this [trouble] can be overcome. This desire [that you should
recover] was one of my reasons for wanting you to be with me.
Ginger, according to our rule, need not be avoided, but it is
not beneficial either. Its undesirable effects will be immediately
observed in those who live on a fruit diet.
"If we must know English we should know it well"—from this
we cannot conclude that if we must travel by railway, we should
travel first or second. Studying English is not bad in itself, travel-
ling by railway is wholly so; if we must travel, therefore, we should
just huddle ourselves in and mind no discomforts. Moreover, where
countless people are forced to put up with hardships, we should
submit to them voluntarily—that is, on occasions when it is not
immoral to suffer.
All the items of the diet on the Farm may not be suitable
in Phoenix. You fell ill because you did not wait long enough for
necessary adjustments to be made.
A ship is bound to look after the needs of deck passengers.
I agree that you should not give up milk or curds, but do not
give them the chief place. They make us more indolent. Our
friend Kotwal is now in India. Cultivate contact with him. He
still lives on fruit diet. You may profit by his experience. He is
likely to go deep into the matter and discover things which you
will not.
While doing honour to Brahmins, one must maintain a reve-
rential attitude and not treat them with contempt, in the same
way that we would respect a person born in a noble family even
while we pity him. We would, naturally, feel no respect for a prosti-
tute's son. I do not mean, however, that we should support any
Brahmins in their wicked ways. If you interrupted your studies
to offer some little flour to Brahmin beggars who had no business
to go begging, you would only be sacrificing your studies. I would
not think that in doing so you had done honour to the Brahmins;
I would rather count it as your timidity or want of judgement.
Question me again if you have not followed this.
Give up the afternoon nap, forcing yourself if need be. When
you feel the urge coming over you, take a bath.
I am not against schools or against education, but against the
stamp. This is one ground of objection against government schools.
A second objection is the lack of character in teachers and the
fact that pupils have no intimate contact with them. The wasting
of time over certain subjects is the third objection, and the fourth
that quite often these schools become symbols of our slavery.
The Parsi cap is not the Parsis' but ours, though an adop-
ted one. Our forefathers may have erred in adopting it. The error,
however, is not one that need be corrected now. But why should
we take the trouble of adopting a fresh one? Putting on a Hungarian
or Moghul cap is suggestive, in a way, of pride and conceit—that
we are different from others.
I imagine that even after my going [to India] the press will
continue as before. There is a possibility that Miss Schlesin and
Miss West may go over to India ultimately. Mr. Polak and
Mr. Ritch will of course practise and live on in South Africa. About
Mr. Kallenbach, nothing is certain. Kotwal, it seems, will re-
main with me. Manilal, probably, will be where I am. He is
going strong with his studies. They will still continue. I cherish the
fond notion that no one else can, and will, teach him as quickly
and as well as I. Jekibehn keeps well enough. She is, for the pre-
sent, my only adopted daughter. She is mine more than Dr. Mehta's
so that it seems likely she will remain with me.
Do not be eccentric in your dress. The head should be covered,
a shirt may be worn, if needed, and so also slippers. These
latter, however, only when you go out. At home, keep bare-footed,
and outside, too, except when it is very hot or cold. One need not
be too particular about these things, but such of them as one has
grown used to should be kept up.
All the questions raised in your letters have now been answer-
ed. I have no time to write more. I pray that all my hopes in you
be realized, that you remain firm in your mind and that God may
help you.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5642. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
