115. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Tuesday [March 5, 1929]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have your letter and the translation. I do not mind your having written
a long letter. I am going to entrust to Kaka the job of revising your translation.
I had wanted to compare your virgin pure style of language with our style,
particularly with my adulterated style. That has been done. You have not
been able to achieve as natural a style of language as I had expected you
would. Maybe your being over-careful has made the language artificial or
94
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
perhaps it only seems so to me. I am now thinking of entrusting to you a job
of quite a contrary nature. The purpose is to see how much you can improve
my translation from the point of view of language:
1. The Gita does not follow the present style of writing. We find in it
one and the same thing elaborated in all the chapters in different ways. Out
of all that, we may accept what appeals to our heart. This much, at least, is
clear that the first thing is to attain a state of actionlessness, and then faith
in knowledge. The state of actionlessness bears fruit in the heart opening to
knowledge. But even when we have attained both, if there is any trace in us
of 'I-consciousness', that state would not be of complete self-surrender to God.
A rasik may work without attachments but even a particle of knowledge may
not touch his heart. One may have both knowledge and non-attachment in
action, but if one does not at all have faith in something Divine, the sense of
'I' will certainly not disappear. Have you not observed anyone with such a
condition of mind?
2. This question of the sense of 'I' is quite relevant here. Ultimately,
everything has to be given up. How, then, can we avoid bringing it in? It is
our intellect which makes the distinction between a last and a first step. That
is the cause of lack of utmost purity in us, and that is the reason why we are
unable to reduce ourselves to a zero. Such a state cannot be cultivated by an
intellectual effort. This applies to you. But you should not make yourself
unhappy by so applying it to yourself. "Learn it by worshipping the feet of
the teacher and questioning him again and again and by service. 2 Anyone
who wearies of again and again asking till he has thoroughly understood,
will be so much the loser.
3. 'Will be lost' means 'will lose both the worlds'.
4. But being unable to describe God's ways, man resorted to words like
'delusion' and 'maya'4, etc., and that seems right. He who acts under a
delusion, does not believe that he is deluded. If Arjuna had acted in conformity
with his nature, he could not have been described as acting under delusion,
but if he had acted contrary to his nature, he could have been so described.
Mirabai let herself be ruled by God and therefore sang 'I let myself be pulled
as He wills'. Arjuna resisted [Shri Krishna] for a while and therefore believed
that he was being misled. What else could [Shri Krishna] do but threaten
him [that he would be lost]?
5. I see nothing wrong in the meanings you have given to the terms
abhakta and bhakta . Those meanings would not have occurred to me.
I like what you have written regarding prayer because I see from it that
you do not wish to deceive either me or yourself. I also see that you have
1 A person with attachments
2 The reference is to the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter IV, verse 34.
3 The practical as well as the spiritual
4 Illusion
5 & 6 One who has no devotion to God and one who has, respectively
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
95
still not understood the meaning of prayer. But it is in no way your fault.
Even we elders have barely begun to understand it, that is, if we have
understood it at all. Though seniormost among the elders, I certainly do not
understand its full meaning. What I have is the greatest faith in it, and hence
I cannot have the least doubt about its usefulness. Without mentioning your
name, merely on the basis of your question, I explained the meaning of prayer
during the two days I spent in the Ashram. Prayer saves you from impure
thoughts; that is no small benefit of prayer. But that is only the first step. It
is not that while praying one has to remain absorbed only in the meaning of
the prayer for, when one is really absorbed in the prayer, one is not conscious
of its meaning. In a state of purest prayerfulness, we are in a state which is
beyond meaning. In that state, we are aware only of God. Language becomes
an obstacle at such a time. I am unable to describe this state of mind. The
purpose of prayer is to be single-minded in devotion. The purpose of collective
prayer is to be single-minded in devotion collectively and the individual has
to lose himself in the group. The individual loses himself or herself in the
group and the group loses itself in God. What is the meaning of reciting
Aum or Ramanama? The shlokas and other verses we recite at prayer time
have the same meaning as Aum and Ramanama. I have not the shadow of a
doubt that those who recite the prayer in this spirit, will attain the supreme
state of peace. He who lives in the social group, must have no aversion to
social work, that is, collective prayer. He who loses himself in God, sees the
whole world as God. It may be said that collective prayer is the first step in
social work for attaining such a state of mind. From the Negroes to the
Christians of Europe, from the Muslims of Arabia to the Hindus to
Bharatvarsha, none of them has been able to do without prayer. If the churches,
the mosques and the temples were to be demolished, the society, too, would
go down with them. Divine music is going on all the time where God is and
we can only imagine what it is like. Collective prayer is a rationally
inexplicable attempt to join in that music, and he who joins in that music is
for ever in a state of bliss. I take it that you will be able to deduce the rest
from this. If you cannot do so and doubts remain, go on asking me again
and again.
I understand what you say about your health. If it is completely restored,
we will have all that we can wish for.
You are doing a good job in trying to make a spinning-wheel. I do imagine
some difficulties, but since you are having direct experience of the thing, I
am not placing my difficulties before you. All I wish is that you may succeed
in your attempt. But see that you do not sacrifice your health in the attempt
to succeed. You have not gone there for that experiment. Experiments should
be only a recreation for you.
96
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
I think I have now given you enough. This time Jamnadas also is with
me and the sea gives us much peace and rest.
Blessings from
BAPU
[Ps.]
Your comment on the student's difficulty is reasonable. But I do not know
how far you have correctly reproduced the substance of his letter. But whatever
new things one may have to say at this time of transition are bound to seem
harsh. My duty is to repeat the same thing to make it easier for you to
understand. If you tell me what you found harsh in it, I will try to explain it
further.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33000
