92. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER"
DURBAN,
July 30, 1900
TO
THE EDITOR
"THE NATAL ADVERTISER"
SIR,
The Natal Emigration Agent at Calcutta has forwarded to
the Protector of Indian Immigrants leaflets for distribution among
the indentured Indians and those that have become free and
settled in the Colony, appealing for funds in aid of the relief
of the terrible famine now raging in India. This appeal, in my
opinion, has an awful meaning. It shows the intensity of the
calamity; it shows also that, in spite of the resources of a great
Empire, it has been found necessary to ask even poor Indians to
contribute their quota.
It will be recollected that in 1896, when India was visited
by a widespread famine, a direct appeal was made to the Mayor
in South Africa, to which a prompt response was made from
all parts of the continent. This time, evidently, there has been
no such direct appeal made, owing to the distress which we are
undergoing ourselves. The same cause has prevented the Indian
community in Natal, which has narrowly kept itself in touch
with the situation in India and which has so far contented itself
with having forwarded subscriptions to the branch office in India,
from placing it before the Colonists generally. But the Viceroy of
India has sent a fresh, pathetic appeal to the Lord Mayor of
London, which urges every part of the great Empire to come to
the rescue. The receipt of copies of the appeal and the simulta-
neous arrival of the leaflets from Calcutta change the aspect very
materially, and, in my humble opinion, makes it incumbent upon
the Indian community here, not only to make a fresh effort
itself, but also to bring the matter, at any rate, to the notice of
the Colonists, so as to enable them to exercise the privilege (shall
I call it) of helping millions of their starving fellow-beings, who
1 Of Durban; vide Vol. II, p. 138.
180
are, moreover, subjects of the same Queen as themselves. It will
be, at the same time, exceedingly improper to ignore the fact
that the Colony has suffered, and will yet have to suffer, a great
deal owing to the war. But I may be pardoned for saying that
our State is very prosperous compared to the miserable conditions
of the millions in India, who have to be engaged in a war in
which there is no victory to be gained, in which, probably, the
only reward is a painful and lingering death. One penny would
just feed a man for a day in the disaster area in India. Is there
a man in the Colony who cannot, without any inconvenience,
spare a shilling, and thus be the means of feeding 12 hungry
mouths for a day? Though, therefore, it is quite true that many
individual members cannot give very large sums, hundreds, even
thousands, can give at least a few shillings each.
The Lord Bishop of Natal has dwelt on the good that the
war, bad as it is, has done, in that it has brought closer together
the various parts of the mighty Empire to which it is our pride
to belong. It may be that the threefold scourge in India—viz.,
famine, plague and cholera—black as it is, will be the means of
forging another link in the chain that ties all together.
Close on 6,000,000 of the famine-stricken in India have to be
daily supported through the State, not to mention the flow of
private charity, which saves tens of thousands of lives. Mr.
Adamji Peerbhoy alone supported, according to The Times of India,
during the month of May last, 16,300 men per day. The number
of those seeking relief, according to Dr. Klopsch, increases by
10,000 per day.
The welcome rains that have watered the greater part of the
afflicted area, will, for the present, increase the numbers to
be relieved and put a heavier strain on the resources of
the State, both in men and money. The plague has been doing
its work of destruction unremittingly for the last four years, and
the cholera fiend, the right hand of famine, has completed the
havoc. Besides the various British Colonies and Settlements, America
has raised a fund and sent a special representative, Dr. Klopsch,
to administer it. Germany has also come to the rescue. India's
misery is such as all friends and strangers alike may assist in al-
leviating. Why not Natal?
In conclusion, it is my pleasant duty to announce that His
Excellency the Governor of Natal, the Honourable the Attorney-
General, and the Honourable Sir John Robinson have showed
great sympathy for the starving millions of India, and promised
to patronize any fund that may be raised on their behalf.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Advertiser, 31-7-1900
