181. LETTER TO AMRITA LAL CHATTERJEE
November 25, 1941
MY DEAR AMRITLAL,
I have your letter. So long as you feel grieved by my conduct,
how can you forgive me? I have no conviction of wrongdoing. Just
think clearly a bit. Was I in any way bound to pay you a single
pice? You pleaded inability to get on with the Bengal workers.
You wanted to come to Sevagram. I took pity and let you come.
Inch by inch I came to know of your difficulties and I began to
accommodate you. When I thought you to be unworthy of sup-
port, I declined to continue, after notice. Was that a wrong done to
you? You yourself admit that you acted hastily and thoughtlessly. I
acted in the only honourable way I could. I was disbursing public
funds. You should know that I brought you here almost against the
wish of trusted co-workers. Your wants were and are beyond your
market value. I doubt whether I should have given you the support
I did. I still continue to do what I can for you because I believe
you to be a person willing to serve but with reasoning faculty gone
astray. Your present letter is proof of what I say.
I suggest your showing all the correspondence between us to
your friends or rather the other workers. Let Dhirendra say what he
thinks of it. It is a serious thing for you to harbour the wrong
against me and be satisfied that all is well.
Of course if you harbour any wrong against me, your wife
cannot help it. And it is but natural that she cannot send Abha to
such a man as me. I hope this letter will clear all your doubts. If
it does not, you should pursue the inquiry till you convince me of
my error or are yourself convinced of doing wrong to me in think-
ing as you do.
You are wrong about Sailen. He is not going to help Rishabh-
das but the latter is willing for my sake to take him up. Had you
not been in need of money, I might not have sent Sailen. S[ailen]
too likes the job.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 10328. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee
113
75-
