500. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
Y. C. P.,
January 27, 1932
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
After the receipt of your very frank and good letter received
by me in London, I had not expected the turn the events took
on my landing. I suppose I am right in thinking that yours is
the brain working behind this repression. If my surmise is
correct, I should not perhaps be shocked at anything that is
happening. For did you not tell me in Delhi that you could hit
hard in fight, as you could be perfectly warm in friendship?
I am not going to consider you as an enemy.
Hence this letter. I hope you will not regard it as an
impertinence. Did I not tell you in Simla that after all we had
to convert the I.C.S. rather than the English people as a whole?
I do not despair. Civil Resistance is a method of conversion.
Behind it there is no ill will.
Perhaps you have seen my letter to the Viceroy sent some
days ago. Last week I wrote to the Governor of Bombay.
If the fact of the Government blunder is not recognized
and repression must continue its mapped course are some of
the things that are said to be happening necessary? One reads
in the newspapers that notwithstanding denials, things are the
worst in the Frontier Province. If they are not, why this expul-
sion of Father Elwin5, a cultured Englishman, and of Miss
Naoroji, who is no immature girl but a woman of high attainments
past 30? She is more English than Indian, having been brought
1& Gulzarilal Nanda and Khandubhai Desai, who were in the Dhulia Jail
3 Vide pp. 294-296.
4 For Gandhiji's letter to Sir Frederick Sykes, vide Vol. XLIX, pp. 19-20.
5 Verrier Elwin
up as a child under English influences. She is no politician. She
is a polished singer. Love of the country has drawn her to the
struggle, as conviction of British misrule in India has drawn
Father Elwin to the Indian cause. You ought not to repel the
advances of such men and women. Try and see them. They are
no fanatics. I must confess that I am filled with the greatest
misgivings about the happenings in the Frontier Province. How
I wish my misgivings were wholly unjustified, I would need
very strong evidence to allay my worst fears.
I now come nearer home. Horses were run over an absolu-
tely peaceful meeting in Ahmedabad. I observe that one of the
injured boys has just died. I know some of the Ashram boys had
severe injuries done to them. And I am glad that they had
them rather than unknown boys or men. In Madras one young-
ster has succumbed to lathi blows. There they play hose pipes
even on women. Two women are reported to have fainted
through the force of the jet of water.
As Mrs. Gandhi is reported to have said justly at her trial,
what is the use of women like her or men like Sardar Vallabhbhai
and me being pampered prisoners when others who, being misled,
as you would say by us, break laws and suffer lathi blows or
worse? I do really think that there is much in what The Daily
Express says when it suggests that I as the author of "all this
mischief" should be sent to the gallows.
Does it not strike you that there is something terribly
wrong with a Government that has to declare a thousand associ-
ations unlawful? How is it possible to crush a movement which
has taken such deep root? You have suppressed social and
economic activities. You have taken possession of school build-
ings, hospitals, khadi depots, a library that contains valuable
research and religious works. Is that what you meant by hitting
hard?
I fear you have undone Lord Irwin's work. I had come with
the fullest desire to tender co-operation, if it was at all possible.
You should have seen me, reasoned with me and if you had
found me wilfully obstinate, you might have taken such course
as you had thought necessary. As it is, I cannot help feeling that
you took a course which I should not have thought you to be
capable of taking.
I plead : retrace your steps. Some day there is no doubt there
will be negotiation if not between the present Government and
the present Congressmen, then between our successors. Let us
not do anything that will make them meet with bitterness in
their souls. I can say for myself with the clearest possible con-
science that I have done nothing to embitter the relations. If
you too can say likewise, I can only say let an impartial autho-
rity judge between us. In any case, so long as there is breath
in me I shall long for co-operation even through my non-
co-operation. I do not believe in a make-believe co-operation.
You will please pardon me for this long letter. If it is an
infliction, you are to blame, for you allowed me to think that
we had become good friends. I have exercised the privilege of
a friend.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: India Office Library and Records. Courtesy: The
British Library, London
