267. LETTER TO SIR J. G. LAITHWAITE
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
December 10, 1940
DEAR MR. LAITHWAITE,
The time has arrived for informing His Excellency of the
development that is going on within and the outward expression it
is to find.
In every step I am taking I bear in mind the difficulties through
which the brave people of the British Isles are passing. Hence
I am moving slowly and with the greatest deliberation. It is my
deep conviction that in all I am doing I am serving the British,
in spite of themselves, equally, with my own people. This I can
do only if I keep the movement completely non-violent or as much
as is possible for a popular movement to be. I know that notwith-
standing great care, I am sometimes deceived. But I know too that
in the aggregate the balance is in favour of honesty. To ensure this
and to set the tone, I began with my best representative who can-
not be called a politician in the accepted sense. I refer to Shri
Vinoba Bhave. Then I took up politicians, pure and simple. But I
cannot be sure of the probity of large numbers of people with whom
I have no personal contact. I have perforce to rely upon certificates
of political associates. I believe that in the majority of cases the
selections have been well made. But since I am myself not offering
civil disobedience, I feel that I must send more men like Shri
Vinoba Bhave for I am anxious to show that the movement is not
purely political. It is much more. And so Pyarelal Nayyar has
gone today. He and Mahadev have been my constant companions
all these many years. Satyagraha is a movement of self-purifica-
tion and self-sacrifice. I must continue to part with the best I
have. And so Mahadev will follow Pyarelal in due course. There
are many who have no political ambition and yet who have a pas-
sionate love for freedom and still greater for the famishing millions.
Many of these have still to be sent. They and the elected members
in the Congress organization who fulfil my conditions as to the
charkha, untouchability and communal harmony will be offered.
I propose to offer them from the beginning of the New Year.
I must continue to offer such sacrifice until I carry conviction
to the ruling power that the satyagrahis represent a definite
227
opinion in the country and that they represent millions. Theirs is a
mission of peace to vindicate which they are prepared to sacrifice
their all. It is no less to them a matter of principle of the life and
death than to the British power against whom they are seemingly
at war. They are as much opposed to Hitlerism and Fascism as the
latter. Only they fight with the weapons of non-violence whereas
the latter vainly expect to kill Hitlerism by excelling Hitler and
Mussolini in the manufacture and use of weapons that these two
dictators use. I hope this argument will not jar on His Excellency.
I bring it forward to claim for our movement the same reality and
strength that are claimed on behalf of the British. They are none
the less because they do not apply to the whole of India. It was
therefore wrong for Mr. Amery to characterize the movement as
artificial. Do the hundreds who have gone to jail love prison
life? Oh, for an ounce of imagination to realize that a human
being wearing a brown or black skin can have equal susceptibility
with the wearers of the white skin!
The notes that Mahadev prepared for me put these words in
your mouth:
I have to reply to your question about Harijan. Well, Mr. Gandhi
has to make up his own mind. Only let him or you not preach any
breach of the law.
If Mahadev has correctly reported you, may I say that the
warning was unnecessary. How can an unlawful movement be
conducted lawfully by a newspaper guided by the author of the
movement? But many things remain lawful so long as the Govern-
ment wish them to remain so. I am quite sure that you can pro-
secute me or Mahadev for many things we have written. Harijan,
therefore, can be restarted during the pendency of the movement,
only if the Government desire it and believe that it was an organ
which was serving both the nations, indeed the whole of humanity.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: C.W. 7859. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
