330. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
January 29, 1907
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Yours to hand.
I enclose herewith Desai's letter. If Mothoo has not yet come
and if you know Nathalal and consider him suitable for our work, write
to Desai. I have written to him asking him to write to you.
We must have one person well trained before you leave. It would
be nice if this could be Maganlal.
I have thought of the Bar for you. If you have to say anything
about it or suggest something else, do write to me. There is likely to
be one difficulty in your going [to study] for the Bar, namely, it will entail
an additional expenditure of £150. If we decide that you should study
law, you can take the LL.B. degree of London University. Please let
me know what you think about all these things.
I received the Pretoria list yesterday and have sent it to
Gaurishankar.
I have already written to you to postpone printing Mrs. Besant's
article . It would not matter if it appeared next week.
I have written earlier about Madanjit too.
I send herewith the letter about drinking after making corrections;
you may print it .
I am trying to find Urdu poems bearing on Ethical Religion. I
have not yet come across any. I hope to send one next week. The first
poem you have sent to me does not strike me as appropriate. We want
to give poems which do not start a controversy.
I shall be able to send a reply if the letter about the Colonial
Secretary is sent to me. Please send the Act along with the letter.
I am sending a demand draft for £35 in favour of you and West.
It is good that Anandlal has got started.
I have already written all I had to say about Thakkar. If he goes
away, I believe we shall be losing a very good hand. On the whole, I
think he is all right; and we shall not be able to get another man as well
1 Addressee's brother
2 Vide "Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi", p. 301.
3 Vide "Madanjit's Enthusiasm", p. 303.
4 Vide Indian Opinion, 2-1-1907.
5 A nephew of Gandhiji
informed in the near future. However, you may let him go if he does
not stay even on £5.
Please let me know where Maganlal bought the type in Bombay,
and in what condition it was received here. Also let me know if there
would be any objection to our getting the type this time from the
Gujarati Foundry.
I came to know from Harilal yesterday that the money had not
been paid for the tea we bought from Sanghavi nor was the bill credited
to him in our books. Please tell me what you know about this, and
pay up the bill for the tea if it has not been already paid.
I have sent Manilal the Sanskrit book he wanted. What does he
propose to do with it? Please let me know how he is getting on with
his studies, how he is working in the Press, etc.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 4691
