128. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
July 1, 1932
DEAR KISHORELAL,
I was waiting for your letter. I do not wish you to write to
me, making use of the occasion when it is necessary for you to
write to anybody else. But do write to [me] when you can easily
do so. Devdas was suffering from mild typhoid. But now he is
entirely cured. I receive letters from him. He was taken good
care of. He is getting books to read. Ramdas is here and is
all right. Chhaganlal, Surendraji, Darbari and several others
are with him. Qureshi is also there. Ramniklal, Kanti, Surendra,
Vithal, Fulchand, Diwan Master and several others are in Visapur
jail. Jamnalal, Pyarelal, Vinoba, etc., are in Dhulia jail. There
the Gita is being studied with great enthusiasm. Manilal, Sushila,
Sita, Pragji all had an attack of the poisonous fever prevailing in
Natal. But all have been saved. Pragji is not willing to un-
dertake responsibility. So Manilal is engaged and it seems that
he will not come. Gangabehn, Tara, Mahalakshmi, Rama,
Gangabehn Jhaveri, Nanibehn, Bhaktibehn, Shanta, Lilavati
Asar, etc., are here. As doctors believe that my hand complaint
is due to exertion, I have been giving rest to it. The complaint
is not permanent. It recurs when a particular kind of work is
done. As an experiment, it is given diathermy; but the doctors
here believe that rest is the only remedy for that part of the
hand. It is not necessary even to direct a thought over it.
I have been taking milk nearly for the last ten days. My weight
is 104 lb. The reason for taking milk is that the Superintendent
here is pressing for it. I did not think that it was essential. But
as the weight was going down, I gave up my determination. I
am working Prabhudas's spinning-wheel by foot and am drawing
the thread with the right hand. It is working well. Sardar
and Mahadev are doing well. The nose complaint of Sardar
is lying dormant for the present. The complaint in the leg-bone
from which Mahadev was suffering was completely cured in a
few days after he came here. Mahadev spins yarn of 40/50 counts.
He is doing some carding work and reading, of course, in addi-
tion to what he has to write for me. Sardar is reading and add-
ing to the wealth of the world by making envelopes from useless
badami paper. As we do not differentiate between the Govern-
ment and other property, we hold the so-called Government
property to be ours and make a careful use of everything. Such
troubles as you infer should not arise from the working of the
Gandiva spinning-wheel. Its wheel should work without the least
trouble. It requires only a gentle push. But if you believe that
though the wheel of the Gandiva spinning-wheel you have been
using is turning very lightly, yet your wrist is aching, then you
should use a spinning-wheel with a perpendicular wheel even
for the sake of removing your doubt. That your weight is in-
creasing can indeed be regarded as good news. The diagnosis
of the doctor about the asthma may be correct and if two grains
of quinine every day cures the trouble, it should be regarded to
be very good.
I had written on prayers 1 and on a subject like that of the
regulations to be observed by a satyagrahi but not on this sub-
ject. However, I have not got a copy of the same. But as you
refer to it, I shall call for it and correct errors in it and send
it to you, if possible. It will not be regarded, I feel confident, as
a letter. There is indeed pressure of work in the Ashram.
Shankarbhai writes the Ashram letter when he gets leisure. Several
essential things are left out in it. I have kept up the idea of
reading your book carefully, but believing that I have ample time
I do not turn to it, leaving aside what I have been reading at
present. You have done well in going through the Gita again.
If you send it here, I will get it. I do not desire to recom-
mend you to read anything special. I do not believe that you
have read less. My own reading can indeed be regarded as be-
ing quite odd. I have been reading Urdu at present. As my
ignorance on currency is unpardonable, I have been making some
progress in the subject. The spirit of service lies behind both
of these, and submitting to this spirit, though I can be regarded to
be on the eve of death, I aspire to have a good knowledge of Tamil
which has been left incomplete; and from this point of view I
had begun to read Bengali and Marathi, and I shall not be sur-
prised if I plunge into their study if a good time is passed here.
If your mind is working in any such direction and if you desire
to know any new language, do not fail to do so. We had this
aspiration about languages when the Ashram was established. It
has not weakened at all so far as I am concerned. But I do not
desire to draw you under this temptation. The one necessity
which I see for all of us is that we should think on what we have
read, digest it and make it a feature of our life. From this
viewpoint I have gone even to the length of advising Bhagwanji
to give up (the reading of) Gita and writings of Raichandbhai
and to remain engaged in his own work and think over it alone;
because I found that he had crammed much from the Anasakti-
yoga and the writings of Raichandbhai, but he was unable to
make the right use of all these. His heart, I believe, is clean, but
his intellect defeats him, he indulges in various thoughts and at
last he remains where he is. My writing appears to have produced
a deep effect on him and he is appeased. Whatever may be the
result of this advice, it has become clear to me from several ex-
periences that the line of thought behind it is quite correct. Ac-
cordingly I cannot think of recommending the reading of religious
books to persons like you. I agree to a certain extent with the reali-
zation by you of defects in you. I have, however, marked many
times that you are in the habit of entering into discussions. You
appear to have taken an exaggerated view of this defect in your
letter. I see no reason for it. But I am, indeed, of opinion that much
of the discussion can be curtailed. This does not mean that you
should not reply to what one asks you. If one does not ask a man
like you, whom will one ask? It is one thing to give to an inqui-
sitive [man] what one can out of what one has, and to enter in-
to discussion is quite a different matter. Do not be confused by
interpreting these observations of mine in an unwarranted man-
ner. Do not uselessly reprove yourself also after deep introspection.
My support is not intended to magnify the defects you have seen,
but is meant to explain their proportion. In order to live with
ease with persons of queer nature, silence is indeed greatly essen-
tial. We must understand that we have not known religion until
we are able to maintain calmness though we live in society.
Imitation of Christ is a treasure of experiences of a real man.
So it cannot but produce effect. I will tell you how I was induced
to study the sky. When I accidentally found that it had become for
me a means of seeing God, I looked at it at once. Kaka was with
me. He induced me much. But my mind turned me aside from
it. 'When I got leisure from other work I would do it' was the feel-
ing. In 1922 when I was here, I had collected books on the subject.
At that time also, I was deferring this study for one reason or an-
other. Shankerlal gradually studied the subject himself. I was
induced several times to see Cassiopeia. After seeing a little I
engaged myself again in my work. But at this time thoughts came
to me suddenly that the sight of the sky was equivalent to a
valuable religious association. The stars were silently talking with
us. I do not wish to dilate upon all these thoughts. In short what
1 The following has been reproduced from the English rendering of the
letter available in Bombay Secret Abstracts.
2 The two sentences which follow have been collated with the Gujarati
in Mahadevbhaini Diary.
I want to say is that when everything becomes a religious lesson
for me, then only I dive into it and now I cannot come out of it.
As much time has passed, I do not lengthen the letter now.
If this letter will reach you safely, I will write again further.
Blessings from
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (3), Pt. 11, pp. 123-31 and Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 267
