86. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
CUTTACK,
Sunday [December 18, 1927]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have been able to read carefully the copies of the articles on sugar and
malaria sent by you only today.
Per capita = per head
The bone powder used for cleansing sugar seems to be harmless. Not a
trace of it remains in the sugar. It is thrown out with the impurities. It is not
necessary to kill even a single cow for obtaining bones for this purpose. This
should be regarded as the same thing as the use of bones for fertilizers. It is
therefore wrong on our part to object to it on religious grounds. Sugar worth
Rs. 18 crore is imported into India. The quantity would have perhaps increased
now. It is impossible to produce sugar worth Rs. 18 crore in India. No one
has ruined our sugar industry. We use up all the sugarcane we produce. The
use of sugar has increased disproportionately in India as well as in the whole
world. . .2 Whatever sugar we produce is like a drop in the ocean. If you
want to ask me more on the subject, please do. Write to me if you know
more.
I am sending the copy of the article on malaria to Navajivan. There is
some mistake in the copy. I constantly think about why we have not been
able to control malaria in the Ashram but am unable to find a solution. I
have talked to Kakasaheb. He is carrying on correspondence on the subject
with Dr. Talwalkar. I feel it is due to our fields and the inept method of
burying the night-soil of our toilets. Only experiments can ascertain the causes.
But how can we conduct the experiments? I intend to give more thought to
this on reaching the Ashram. Only God knows how much I will be able to
do.
I hope to reach the Ashram before January 1.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32867
1 From 'Cuttack' and 'Sunday' in the dateline, and Gandhiji's programme of
reaching the Ashram before January 1; in the year 1927, Gandhiji was in Cuttack from
December 18 to 21, and Sunday was on the 18th. He reached the Ashram on the 31st
of the same month.
2 A few words here are illegible in the source.
72
