54. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
DELHI,
January 2, 1935
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I got your letters as also the cable regarding Ramdas and
Nimu. I wanted something like this, but I had not asked for a
cable. It is difficult to say if Ramdas will go [to South Africa].
At present he is looking for an opening in some business in
Bombay. Anyway Manilal has, though belatedly, discharged his
obligation.
Harilal has for some time now settled in Rajkot. He seems
to have undergone a metamorphosis.
I have noted what Sushila writes about Sita. It will be enough
if she is educated as you four brothers were educated by me. I don't
repent it. It does not matter that they had no formal schooling.
They have lost nothing thereby. Harilal was stubborn and did
eventually go to school, doing himself harm. What children get
in the loving company of their parents they can get nowhere else.
Sita need not be sent here. Know that you have a duty towards
Sita as you have your other duties. When you try to discharge
this duty you will learn the lesson of pure brahmacharya. Just by
her trying to pick up your calling she will train herself. She will
pick up your speech whether decent or indecent. If you know
your grammar she will learn it. If you can keep your accounts,
she will learn her arithmetic. She will dust, cook, fetch water,
tend the plants, learn press work. In this way by learning your-
selves and helping others learn, you will all rise higher and higher.
When she grows up you can send her elsewhere where she can
learn more. This is the purport of the varnashramadharma
and there is economics underlying it. This is true education. Give
up your fondness for schools. It is my firm belief that although
the schools may offer you a free play for the intellect they do
little towards character-building.
I myself know many who
have suffered in character by going to school. I do not know of
many people who could add lustre to their character by attending
schools. I for one believe that those parents who send their child-
ren to school do not observe their dharma. Yes, when the child-
ren grow up, that is, say, attain the age of sixteen, they can
42
do whatever they like. Hence, let Sita remain under your personal
care till she is sixteen so that she turns out an accomplished girl
and may not suffer any kind of handicap. To achieve this she
should participate in all your activities and play her part in-
telligently. With this you will have observed your dharma.
The purport of all that I have said is only this: Forget for the
time being your obsession with schooling for Sita. Let her have
as much English, Hindi, Gujarati as you two can give her. Teach
her your calling. You can impart to her plenty of knowledge
through everyday conversation. In this way she will be making
rapid progress. The right thing for her is to stick right there.
Teach her the prayers, bhajans, etc. She should learn the Rama-
yana and other stories. Let her know about the Gita and other
books. Some books you and Sushila have to read just for Sita's
sake. None of you need think of the country for the time be-
ing. When you come you should all come together.
Having
thought over all this "do as you like".
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4831
