178. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR H. PAREKH
February 18, 1934
BHAISHRI PRABHASHANKAR1,
I got your letter.
I am returning the letter which you sent
with it. You have not understood rightly the reason for my not
mentioning your mother. Why need I be angry with you?
Moreover, it would be against my nature to vent my anger against
you on an ailing person. There is no question at all of my cool-
ing off towards you. The truth is that even in personal letters
I don't always make formal inquiries about others in the family,
old or young.
My letters to you were on business, and since your
writing about your mother in your letters seemed to me in keeping
with your nature, I didn't think it necessary to say anything in reply.
Of course I wish her and your wife the best of health. My good
wishes for their health would not be any stronger if I expressed
them in words. I daily recite a sincere prayer wishing good health
to the whole world, and I strive ceaselessly to live fully in the
spirit of that prayer. You will be surprised to know that even
in my letters to Ba or to Manilal far away in Africa, I make
few inquiries of this kind. Please tell Mother all this. I cannot
say whether or not I shall be going to Rajkot. As I shall have
to go to Bihar, perhaps I may get no time to go to Rajkot.
Though you have sent Bhagwanji's certificate, how can I dis-
regard my own experience or change my view based on that
experience? Why should you fail to do your duty because
Chhaganlal fails to do his? If the Doctor's intention to give
the daughters a share each is clear, that should be enough for
you. Ratilal can never suffer by giving the sisters their share. He
himself is in no condition to look after his own affairs. I believe
that you, as his guardian, should not permit his money to be squan-
dered away. I don't wish to say anything to Ratilal himself in
this matter, as he is incapable of thinking. Champa would
naturally be under your influence. Hence all the responsibility
rests on you. But I see that you are not discharging it properly.
What is the use, then, of your sending me a certificate from
Bhagwanji or certificates from any number of other people?
Manibehn can afford to forgo her share and Jekibehn feels utterly
weak and helpless. I am sorry, but I see no justice in Ratilal
refusing his own sisters their share of the property.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Bhai Bhagwanji's letter is enclosed.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8767
