254. LETTER TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN
BHANGI COLONY,
NEW DELHI,
July 5, 1947
DEAR BADSHAH,
Khudai Khidmatgar Alam Khan saw me before 12 o'clock and
he said that he was leaving for Peshawar tonight. I did not send
any letter through him. But I told him that there should be no
demonstration against the Muslim League, that it should be enough
that in the present state of tension and misrepresentation Khudai
Khidmatgars should not vote at all one way or the other, that
they were entitled so far as internal affairs were concerned to
claim and to have complete autonomy without any interference
from Pakistan or the Union, and that they could come to a
decision as to the choice between the Union or Pakistan when
the constitutions of the two were promulgated and when the
Frontier Province had fashioned its own autonomous constitution.
Above all, every occasion for clash with the Muslim League mem-
bers was to be avoided. Real Pathan bravery was now on its
trial. It was to be shown by cheerfully meeting blows or even
meeting death at the hands of the opponents without the slightest
sort of retaliation. Boycott would certainly result in a legal victory
for Pakistanis, but it would be a moral defeat if without the slightest
fear of violence from your side the bulk of Pathans refrained in
a dignified manner from participating in the referendum. There
should be no fuss, no processions, and no disobedience of any
orders from the authority.
I had acted promptly on receipt of your letter. I wrote a
long letter to His Excellency on which he took action. You must
have seen also how I had dealt with the question of the Frontier
Province in one of my post-prayer speeches. I send you herewith
a copy of my letter to the Viceroy and of my post-prayer speech.
This letter is also in answer to a complaint received by the
Viceroy that it was reported that there was fear of disturbance to
be caused by the Khudai Khidmatgars.
I hope the strain under which you are working is not telling
upon your health.
Love.
BAPU
Abdul Ghaffar Khan, p. 445. Also Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Govern-
ment, 1944-47, pp. 266-
