237. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
April 17, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
You are passing through a severe ordeal. I have pointed out
to you the mistake which was made in the affair about S. Instead
of the matter being discussed with P.2, all attacks were directed
at S., and this was like leading an assault against an ant. I
knew this, and still I joined in the assault, and, therefore, I don't
blame you much for what happened. Everything was done
through good motives. Whatever has happened is good. It was
natural on So's part to go and live with H. Both will be tried
now. It is true that I feel unhappy at the thought that S. was
unnecessarily subjected to a sort of pressure. For this, however,
I blame myself more than I do you. But now this chapter
is closed.
We now open that of Vasumati and Kusum. Consult me in
this matter and then do what you think fit. I have written a
letter today to Vasumati. I see that she will have to be given a
separate room. I have advised her not to insist on being given the
one which was occupied by Chhotelal. I have also advised her to
give up the thought of getting a new room built for her. The only
right thing for her is to accept one of the eight rooms. I shall
try to persuade Ba, too, to accept a separate room. I must admit
my defeat in regard to the women's section. I had some hopes
about Vasumati, but I see now that they cannot be realized. I
do not blame her for this. Shard a has left. I don't see any
possibility of Kusum living there alone at present. She wants to
accompany me on my tours. On my next tour, I will not prevent
her from going with me, but I cannot say what her ultimate
future will be. Who else, then, remain in the women's section?
We certainly cannot count Yashodadevi and Sarojinidevi. I feel
that we have no choice but to give them, too, separate rooms.
My defeat, therefore, is complete. I must be humble and know
that such experiments cannot be conducted unless I live in the
Ashram all the year round. If you wish, do about these two
what you have done about Nanubhai, provided they and their
husbands desire that.
Who looks after Vimala and Katto?
I wish to reduce the burden on you. Surajbhan and Sitla
Sahai do know the condition about brahmacharya. They should so
live that it can be observed. If they cannot observe it, they may
leave the Ashram. We should trust them. You can go so far
without consulting me. I am constantly thinking what more we
can do. My soul is ever present there.
If you think that Narandas will help you in all these things,
discuss the matters with him. Perhaps he will be able to lighten
your burden.
I had a letter from Harjivan. I send it with this for you to
read.
Whenever people leave the Ashram, you should think that
there will be so much the less burden on you. Do not lose heart
if the Ashram becomes deserted and do not blame yourself for such
a result.
We can ask Kakasaheb to give only as much help as he can
easily give from the Vidyapith. We cannot request him to come
and live in the Ashram. We do not wish to improve the
Ashram at the cost of the Vidyapith. If you assume certain
things as fixed, you will not get confused in your thoughts.
You cannot call either Kaka or Vinoba or Lakshmidas; you
may keep Mahadev there. And you ought not to overwork
yourself.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5405
