56. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
January 27, 1944
ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
(HOME DEPARTMENT)
NEW DELHI
SIR,
Some days ago Shri Kasturba Gandhi told the Inspector-
General of prisons and Col. Shah that Dr. Dinshaw Mehta of
Poona be invited to assist in her treatment. Nothing seems to
have come out of her request. She has become insistent now
and asked me if I had written to the Government in the mat-
ter. I, therefore, ask for immediate permission to bring in Dr.
Mehta. She has also told me and my son that she would
like to have some Ayurvedic physician to see her. I suggest
that the I.G.P. be authorized to permit such assistance when
requested.
2. I have no reply as yet to my request that Shri Kanu
Gandhi, who is being permitted to visit the patient every alter-
nate day, be allowed to remain in the camp as a whole-time
nurse. The patient shows no signs of recovery and night-nursing
is becoming more and more exacting. Kanu Gandhi is an ideal
nurse, having nursed the patient before. And what is more,
he can soothe her by giving her instrumental music and by
singing bhajans. I request early relief to relieve the existing pres-
sure. The matter may be treated as very urgent.
3. The Superintendent of the camp informs me that when
visitors come, one nurse only can be present. Hitherto more
than one nurse has attended when necessary. The Superintendent
used his discretion as to the necessity. But when difficulty arose
I made a reference to the I.G.P. The result was that an order
was issued that a doctor in addition may be present. I submit
that the order has been issued in ignorance or disregard of the
condition of the patient. She often requires to be helped by
more persons than one. Therefore I ask that there should be
no restriction as to the number of the attendants.
4. It would be wrong on my part, if I suppressed the
fact that in the facilities being allowed to the patient grace has
been sadly lacking. The order about the attendants is the most
glaring instance of pin-pricks, besides being in defeat of the
purpose for which attendance during visits of relatives is al-
lowed. Again, my three sons are in Poona. The eldest, Hari-
lal, who is almost lost to us, was not allowed yesterday, the
reason being that the I.G.P. had no instructions to allow him
to come again. And yet the patient was naturally anxious to
meet him. To cite one more pin-prick, every time visitors who
are on the permitted list come, they have to apply to Govern-
ment Office, Bombay, for permission. The consequence is that
there is unnecessary delay and heart-burning. The difficulty, I
imagine, arises because neither the Superintendent nor the I.G.P.
has any function except that of passing on my requests to
Bombay.
5. I am aware that Shri Kasturba is a Government patient,
and that even as her husband I should have no say about her.
But, as the Government have been pleased to say that instead of
being discharged she is being kept with me in her own interest,
perhaps, in interpreting her wishes and feelings, I am doing what
the Government would desire and appreciate. Her recovery or at
least mental peace when she is lingering is common cause between
the Government and me. Any jar tells on her.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3926
