404. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
LONDON,
Kartak Sud 7, 1971 [October 25, 1914]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have not been able to write to you lately.
Being better today, I have sat down to write. I am still
confined to bed and shall be so, it seems, for another ten days
at least. This time the pain was extreme and the reason for it, in
my opinion, was that I listened to doctor friends. Pressed by
everyone, I agreed to take things against which I had not taken
an inviolable pledge. I ate dal, rice, and vegetables for four days.
The pain went on increasing all these days, instead of subsiding as
expected. On the fifth day, I took salt. The pain on that day
was unbearable. On the sixth day, I gave up the doctors and
went back to my own remedies. The pain vanished entirely and
the piles also disappeared. The pain returned, however, thanks
to my own foolishness. On the day I ate salt there was blood
in my cough, for the first time in my life. I still get it. And so
Mr. Kallenbach brought a white doctor, a vegetarian, whom I
know. He said that there was no need for salt, but pointed to the
need for roots and tubers. He suggested, moreover, that the body
having grown extremely weak through fasting, I should not take
oil, nuts, etc., for the present. Hence I live at present on barley
water, eight ounces of fresh fruit, and eight ounces of soup of
turnip, carrot, potato and cabbage mixed. The body is extremely
emaciated. I do not have full faith even in this treatment. Since,
however, I have not myself hit upon the key to my health, I am
trying out this experiment. The pain has stopped. Blood conti-
nues to come up while coughing. I have lost all taste for food and
XII-35
hence this is an excellent opportunity for mastering the palate.
The doctor has stopped lemon as well, so that, in the absence of
oil, the soup of turnip, carrot and cabbage is not very inviting,
but I take it with relish. In the beginning, barley water did not
taste nice. But now I think I can stand it. I write all this in detail
to you, but there is no need to worry. I hope I will be all right,
and that too, I still feel, with fruits. It is yet to be seen whether
this is borne out by experience. Friends insist that I should take
milk, but I have flatly refused to do so. I have told them that
I have vowed not to consume it and would not therefore have
it even if I should die without it.
Ba's stamina is wonderful. She is coming to have more faith
in my remedies.
I have had to start a satyagraha here against the India
Office, details of which I will give in my next letter.
Follow all the ideals of Phoenix even at the cost of extreme
suffering. Tell me in detail how everybody is keeping and what
has been the effect of the environment on the minds of the children
after going there.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana
