274. LETTER TO DABHOLKAR
May 15, 1918
I have your letter. I am grateful to you for writing to me so
frankly. There is not a trace of "policy" in my letter. I wrote
what I believe to be true, every word of it. You have summed
up my ideas perfectly. I do believe that, if we were to sacrifice
ourselves silently in our thousands, swaraj would be ours today. If
you could not see how this can be even after reading that letter
of mine, it is hardly possible for me to explain it in this one. I
would, therefore, request you to read that letter repeatedly and to
ponder over every word of it till you have understood it. The
effort will not go unrewarded. I did not write that letter in a
hurry. I took great pains over it and wrote it in perfect sincerity
and entirely out of my love for the country. I think my tapas-
charya must be still imperfect if the letter is not clear enough or
seems to lend itself to two interpretations. If the country under-
stands my plan and carries it out, I am sure it embraces every-
thing, swaraj and many other things besides. To say that we shall
fight [in the war] after swaraj is granted seems, to me at any rate,
to betray complete ignorance of the meaning of swaraj. I do not
admit that, as a representative of the people, I am in duty bound to
place before the public all the letters that I write to the Viceroy.
All through my life, there have been a good many, and to my mind
important, actions of mine in my representative capacity which
have remained, and will ever remain, unknown. My first letter to
His Excellency the Viceroy was meant for him alone. I cannot
give publicity to the views which I expressed to him as to a
gentleman and a friend. To publish the courteous but bitter
language used in that letter would be inviting mischief. I have
given publicity to such part of my conversation with him as would
bear being made public. My second letter relates to what I intend
to do and, in comparison to the first one, is not very important.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
