150. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
September 8, 1937
MY DEAR IDIOT,
This is being written after the evening walk. No cause for
any worry about me. You must not be shocked to learn that I am
1 This is a postscript to Mirabehn's letter to the addressee which inter
alia read: "Bapu sent you a reassuring wire this morning, and this is just to
add a few words. He really is much better today. The tiredness to which
Jamnalalji refers in his Press message is the end of the tiredness of which
you saw the beginning. It was these interviews and Chhotelal's death all
one on top of another. Now rest and plenty of sleep have made a wonderful
difference."
114
taking that specialist's ampules. He has given me full details.
It is a simple herb treated with the sun's rays. He says it has
never failed to give lasting relief. It can do no harm. Of course
it deprives me of one food substance. But that does not matter.
It would be wrong not to try this drug.
Khan Saheb's letter is worthy of him.
I am glad you are taking ice and steam. You must add the
earth bandage. What had Shummy to say to your health? I
would like his opinion. Tell him this with my love.
I understand what S. and]. have to say about Charlie.
You should not only regulate his food whilst he is with you but
you should also draw his attention to his weakness.
I was looking at that note on education. Do you still want
me to study it and give you my opinion on it?
Mira is getting on. She is doing some writing work. A[m-
tul] Salaam is fairly happy just now. Sharda is flourishing.
Lilavati has left in a huff because I lost my temper with her.
I can become an ass. Sometimes I doubt the reality of my ahim-
sa. Why can I not curb my temper for ever? If my ahimsa is
worth anything, surely it ought to resist all temptation and provo-
cation. Please don't defend me but go for me. If Lilavati is
lost to me, I shall be largely to blame. She is too good not to
return to me. If she does, the credit will be hers.
Love.
TYRANT
[PS.]
J. is due tomorrow.
From the original: C.W. 3805. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6961
1 Since 1915 Gandhiji had been observing a vow of restricting his meals
to five substances of food; vide Vol. XXXIX, p. 310.
2 The addressee's brother, Kunwar Shamshere Singh, a retired surgeon
3 C. F. Andrews was convalescing in Simla after a serious illness.
4 Daughter of Chimanlal N. Shah
