219. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
NADIAD,
April 10, 1918
I am daily expecting your promised reply regarding Ali
brothers.
You may know that I am engaged in a domestic quarrel with
the local authority on the Kheda crops. I am hoping that the
cry of the people will have its due weight and that their opinion
will be respected.
What vexes me, however, is the case of the brothers Ali. I
seem to be ever worrying the administrators in the country when
as a respectable citizen of the Empire I should be taking my
share in the war. I should have felt happier being in Mesopotamia
or France. I twice offered my services but they were not accepted.
I feel ashamed that since my arrival in India I can show no war
work record in the conventional sense of the term.
On the contrary I seem to be making myself responsible for
embarrassing situations and I may find myself in the midst of an
agitation which might from its very magnitude cause grave anxiety
to the Government. I entertain too great a regard for Lord Chel-
msford to wish to add to his anxieties and yet I dare not shirk an
obvious duty regarding Ali brothers. Their internment has soured
the Muslim section. As a Hindu I feel that I must not stand
aloof from them. I must assist in securing the release of the
brothers, if I cannot justify the Government's action by producing
before the public a case against them. If therefore the Govern-
ment have a real case against the brothers, it should be produced
and the atmosphere cleared. If there is no producible case I can-
not help saying that the brothers should be discharged.
If Lord Chelmsford is of opinion that they ought not to be
released, the Government must prepare for facing an agitation
which must result in the incarceration of the leaders of it. But
I plead their discharge with all my strength. The Government
can only gain in prestige by responding to public opinion, and so
far as danger to the State is concerned I can only say that I
should lay down my life for it, if their release should mean any
betrayal of trust.
N. A. I.: Home: Political—A: June 1918, No. 359
XIV-21
