68. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY FARM,
LAWLEY STATION,
TRANSVAAL,
October 14, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your diary is before me. I see you are still pursuing the goal with
unflagging zeal. May you never turn away from it. I am sure that your
steadfastness must be a source of great strength to your people. They
must love you all the more for appearing for the moment somewhat
strange to them. The world has a curious way of coming round to
him who does not and will not come round to it.
1 Vide Vol. XI, pp. 162- and also p. 169.
Fencing is going on apace now. Standards have been now fixed
for the greater part of the way. By Wednesday the fixing of standards
will be completed. Albrecht supervises the whole thing. He is assisted
by Basella and Sam 1 and Desai.
You know Sam of Phoenix. He has come here for a change. He
is a worker. So naturally he is a handyman. Manilal Doctor of Mauritius,
Dr. Mehta's son-in-law and Barrister, has come here to see me. He
is a charming man but, as he himself says, very obstinate. Because
he was told by everybody that he would have to do manual work at
the Farm he has promised himself not to do any at all whilst on the
Farm. So much is this the case that he simply idles away the whole
of his time. I can only pity him. He is one of the most straightforward
men you could meet. He proposes to leave for Mauritius and thence
for India about the end of this month. He may return to practise here.
Kennedy told me that he could not come last Sunday as he was
very busy. He however said he would seek the opportunity of coming
some other day.
Gordon has been coming to the Farm off and on.
You showed some concern as to whether I did write regularly.
Well, I have made it a religious duty not to fail at all. So that if you
have not received my letter any week, the fault must be the postman's,
either at my end or yours. The letters have been always (I think) posted
at Johannesburg. One week I may have posted at Lawley but I think
not even one week.
Call is still at Pretoria. He is getting on. I sent Isaac again and
propose to send him from time to time. It is no use my trying to go.
I have not a minute to spare. The arrears are appalling.
Nothing yet certain about the Indian visit. I expect a cable any
day. But I feel that I am not going. I certainly hope I am not.
You will be pleased to learn that Smuts is releasing two of Quinn's
men. These are long-sentence prisoners. Quinn feels like having
received a new lease of life. This is more to him than his own release
from gaol.
Of course you will go to India, if you think you should. Things
here are in a fair condition. Thanks to your careful arrangement, the
African Building matter causes little trouble.
After a gentle reminder to Lapin, he has sent me another cheque
for £62. Hilt is not at all playing the game. He has not yet paid the
rent. I have asked Lapin to press for payment. Am I right ? I hope
1 'Sam' was Govindsami, a machine foreman in the International Printing Press
at Phoenix.
you do not mind my not sending you a weekly account of income and
expenditure.
I have drawn a cheque for £60 for the Government regarding the
mill.
No, I am not sending you I.O. from here. On second thoughts,
I felt that you would get Maud to send you a copy. I take it that
she has your German address. Needless to say we are still saltless.
I am most strictly so. I have been also on one meal per day for the
past fortnight with the exception of one day's break. I broke the rule
today because Mrs. Gandhi and Miss Schlesin wept over it. I have
now placed myself under stricter discipline by limiting myself beforehand
to so much only per meal and taking much less time than usual. This
is harder for me than one meal per day. But I think I shall cope with
it. This experiment only started today.
Please give my love to all your people.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
