420. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON,
January 10, 1938
CHI. KANTI,
Your letters are lying with me. I have read all of them
carefully and with interest, for I was waiting for them practically
every day. I wanted to write to you even before I received your
first letter, but I was held back because I was afraid of you.
The fear was that you, who were already angry with me, might
get more so if I [inadvertently] wrote something which you didn't
like. Despite this fear, however, I would have decided and
summoned up courage to write were it not for my illness. I was
happy to see no sign of anger in your letters. But I do believe
that it was because of anger that you had abruptly discontinued
writing to me. However, as is your wont, after some reflection
you overcame your anger and started writing to me as before.
Your letters are to me, what the rain is to the chataka. In fact,
I have never given up hope of you. I am sure that, before I
die, you will again become one with me as you were before.
This certainly doesn't mean that I want you to give up your
study and run up to me. Do complete your study.
You did well in visiting Trivandrum. Saraswati was longing
for you. You may come here only when you conveniently can.
The discussion with the teacher was very fine. You certainly
have the power of reasoning. What about Tamil, Malayalam and
Kannada? It will be quite easy for you to learn these languages.
Amala knows thirteen languages and can even teach some of them.
Max Muller knew fourteen languages including Latin, Greek,
Hebrew and Sanskrit. He could even correspond in Sanskrit.
We, on the other hand, try to learn everything through English in
order to master that language and as a result get exhausted and
become incapable of doing anything else. In itself, knowledge
of several languages is as useful as it is interesting and easy to
acquire.
I hope you are taking care of your health. I am still not
permitted to write letters. I think this is the first long letter I
have written after I fell ill. Mahadev will correct me if I am
making a mistake in this.
I am gradually improving. I do hope to recover completely.
The only medicine is rest, and I am taking as much of it as I
can.
Write to Devdas, as also to Manilal and Ramdas. Manilal
or Sushila may be coming.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7332. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
