15. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Silence Day [February 25, 1929]
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I am so much burdened with work that even some urgent
letters remain unwritten. What then to say of writing to you?
It was for your convenience that I had written about re-
imbursing the money you had given to Shankaran. For the rest
you know that I have not felt, and I would not feel, ashamed
to rob you. I gave the instructions I did because I am not
aware of your present circumstances. I do not feel any hesitation
in incurring such expenditure on your behalf.
Shankaran had written to me also. He is sensible and he
will have undertaken the fast only after due consideration.
Let Shankaran come there if you need help. I shall pay
his monthly allowance of Rs. 12/- from here. He is a man who
can be easily accepted. It is another matter if I keep him for
work in his own home-town. But it is not acceptable to me that
you should spoil your health by straining yourself. Rather than
that you should have Shankaran. I shall certainly arrange to
send somebody else if he cannot come. Let me know frankly. I
should of course be happy if you could and would do without
any help.
I keep myself informed about the Ali Brothers. I do not
read anything. But friends keep me fully informed. I am also
corresponding with them. We have only one criterion for judg-
ing people; so how can their behaviour affect us? However, I
shall read what you send.
As for Rasik, I have written about him in Navajivan and
Young India.
Mahadev is still in Bardoli. He will accompany me to Burma.
I shall leave here on the morning of Friday the 1st. I shall go
via Delhi. Devdas is there. He has detained Pyarelal. You must
be observing Pyarelal's work.
Ba has been very patient. She will not be accompanying me
this time.
I shall return from Burma to be here on the 27th or 28th.
Then I shall be in Kathiawar for three days and immediately
after that I shall be in Andhra Desh. It is to be seen how
long the body can take the strain.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I shall not write a separate letter to Shankaran now. In
your letter to him you may give him a hint of what I have
said. Taramati must be enjoying herself. How shall I recognize
Dilip now?
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers, Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
