463. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
April 28, 1932
The question you have put me about the meaning of pinda
and brahmanda is a big one. But I will explain the idea in brief.
For our purpose, we may understand the word pinda to mean our
body, and the word brahmanda to mean the earth. Now, the state-
ment [as in the pinda, so in the brahmanda] means that everything
that is in the body is there in the earth, too, and likewise there
is nothing in the earth which is not in our body. The latter is
composed of the same substance as the earth. There are five ele-
ments of the earth, and the body is made of the same five elements.
Innumerable creatures exist on the earth and also in the body.
As one body perishes and another is born, so the substance of the
earth also is continually undergoing transformations. We can am-
plify this analogy still further. But we can deduce from what I
have said, that if we know the real nature of our body, we shall
know the real nature of the earth as well and shall not have to go
far afield in search of knowledge. Our body is the nearest thing
to us, and if we understand it we shall have attained our object.
If we try to know about the earth, our knowledge will always
be incomplete. That is why wise men have told us that there
is nothing in the brahmanda which is not to be found in the pinda.
Therefore, if we know the self, that knowledge will include all
other knowledge. But we may also enjoy the knowledge of other
things which we gain while we strive for knowledge of the self,
since we shall be enjoying it as incidental to our pursuit of know-
ledge of the self . . .1. I think that Narasinhbhai has not thought
deeply enough in interpreting the Gita. We should not confuse
the Krishna of the Gita with the Krishna of history. The prob-
lem before Krishna was not that of violence or non-violence.
Arjuna shrank not from violence but from having to kill his rela-
tions. Krishna, therefore, explained to him that in doing one's
duty one ought not to treat one's relations differently from others.
In the age when the Gita was composed, the men who influenced
its thought did not raise the question whether the violence com-
mitted in war was right or not. That question seems to have
been raised only in modern times. The principle of non-violence
was accepted even then by all Hindus; but opinions differed then, as
they do now, as regards what involved violence and what did not.
Our descendants may see violence in many things in which we
do not see it today. For instance, we do destroy life when we
consume milk or cook cereals. It is conceivable that future
generations may wish to refrain from such violence and stop
drinking milk and cooking cereals. Today we commit this viol-
ence and still claim without any hesitation that we observe non-
violence. In exactly the same manner, war was regarded such a
normal thing in the age of the Gita that people did not feel that
they violated the principle of non-violence by engaging in it. The
illustration of the war in the Gita, therefore, seems to me per-
fectly innocent. If, however, we reflect over the teaching of the
Gita as a whole and examine the characteristics of the sthitaprajna,
of the man who has merged in the Brahman, of the bhakta or of
the yogi, we can come to only one conclusion, namely, that the
Shri Krishna who taught the path of the Gita was literally an
avatar of ahimsa and his exhortation to Arjuna to fight does not
in the least detract from the purity of his ahimsa. On the con-
trary, if he had advised Arjuna to follow any other course, I am
sure that the perfection of his knowledge would have been called
in question and he would never have come to be worshipped as
the most perfect avatar of God. You should read what I have
written in this connection in Anasaktiyoga
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 127-
