540. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 8, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your large packet.
After reading Prema's letter, I feel that we should get Lak-
shmi married immediately. I have written to Lakshmidas and
told him that, if Marulia has changed his mind, he has a right
to do so. I think it will also be good if Prema writes to him
and tells him about the special circumstances of Lakshmi. If
Marulia has changed his mind, we will think what to do.
Post the accompanying letter to Dudabhai. And please send
me his address.
Read the letter to Liladhar and then pass it on to him.
Take him back if he agrees to behave well. I leave the matter
entirely to your decision. I assume that, if Liladhar comes to
live in the Ashram, you will entrust him with some work.
Ask the doctor why Kusum's injection turned septic. How
long will she have to take the injections?
I had agreed with what you had written about Bhikhabhai
and Balwant. I, therefore, did not say anything in reply. Thus
the reason was not that I had any doubt in my mind.
There is still no letter regarding Amina's children.
I am expecting Pyare Ali's letter in a day or two.
Please let the Muslim lady who has come from Ajmer stay
there for the present. Write to Pyare Ali about her. Read out
our rules to her. She may stay there as long as she is ready to
observe them. Tell her that, meanwhile, we are inquiring about
other places where she can stay. If there is an institution for
Muslim women in Ahmedabad itself, you should try to get her
admitted there.
Know from her all details about her, whether
or not she has been educated, where she was brought up, etc.
1 Vide p. 398.
2 The following was added at this point by Mahadev Desai before the
letter was despatched: "Pyare Ali's reply was received today. He says that he
cannot keep the children. Now discuss the matter with Qureshi. Bapu thinks
that for the present the best thing would be that they should accompany
Aminabehn daily to Sharda Mandir."
403
Such cases will turn up again and again. Even if, instead of
becoming what we intend it to be, the Ashram becomes only a
place of refuge, we shall not lose heart. I am not sure if, by re-
jecting such persons who throw themselves on us, we would not be
committing violence. But in taking any decision in this matter,
we should of course take into account our capacity, our rules, our
aim, etc. After considering all these factors, do what you think
best. There is no absolute dharma in this matter. If in the last
resort we have to be guided by the principles of truth and non-
violence in all that we do, we must sometimes relax the rules
framed by ourselves. But the final decision will be entirely yours.
Treat my opinions and sermons as so much weaving of words.
You may use them only for coming to your own decisions.
Prabhudas can leave Almora. We should draw a lesson
from this, that the place can be looked after even if nobody stays
there. And in any case the boys are there. I am sure the
expenditure has come down now. I am glad that, while he is in
his present very unsettled state of mind, he lives at Wardha.
And, moreover, he will be marrying shortly. Let him, therefore,
remain at Wardha so long as the expenditure is not excessive.
I understand what you say about a well near the river bed.
I know Malik's goodness. Convey my vandemataram to him and
thank him on my behalf. Soniramji had written to me and
promised to pay up to Rs. 5,000 towards the cost of a well. It is
possible that I do not remember the figure correctly, but I have no
doubt about the promise itself. Write to him, therefore, for the
money required for the well. He may send the actual amount
spent or the amount which he had promised.
Do what you think proper about Hariyomal. I think that
we have no choice but to let him stay as often as he comes.
What you say about him is quite right, of course. But how can
we reject him if he is so importunate?
BAPU
[PS.]
Do you still receive the annual remittance for Mirabehn? If
you do, let me know what the amount is.
[From Gujarati]
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
