616. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
February 18, 1947
CHI. BALKRISHNA,
Your letter of November 14, 1946, reached me only three
days ago. Such is the confusion in the postal arrangements here.
It is also true, of course that I am, from the point of view of
postal communication, in a rather inaccessible place.
Your
health seems to be sufficiently restored now. Do you experience
any difficulty in singing? If you do not, you should freely use
your gift for the service of the people. But of course not at the
cost of your health.
You will see the letter I have written to Manibhai. The
problems there are quite complicated and you will be able to
play an important part in solving them.
Probably you do not know that Manubehn (Jaisukhlal's)
sleeps with me. This has pained Bhai Kishorelal, Narahari, Swami
and others and they have, therefore, stopped their connection
with Harijan. Sardar also is very angry with me. For me Manu's
sleeping with me is a matter of dharma, and I am resolved to
drive home the lesson that a person cannot give up what is a
matter of dharma to him for the love of those who are dear to
him or out of fear of anybody. If in a situation like this I give
up what I believe to be my dharma through false regard for
friends or fear or love, my yajna would remain incomplete and
bear no fruit. This is my side of the case. Kishorelal's side, as
far as I can understand it, is the opposite. He thinks that I
have come to regard adharma as dharma and that, therefore,
my practice dishonours my brahmacharya and sets a bad example
to people. The thought that a man like me should set a bad
example is intolerable to them, and, therefore, these friends have
started non-co-operation with me. They are free to take whatever
further step they choose. I do not know what Vinoba thinks.
But the friends named above have corresponded with him and
therefore I also have written to him and asked for his opinion.
Either be guided by Vinoba's reply to my letter or think for
yourself and write to me what you think. I have discussed this
matter in three of my speeches. I send copies herewith. You
need not return them. Show them to the friends there.
As regards Gokhale, I have already written to him. I had
assumed that he had not joined the Uruli experiment and,
therefore, did not mention his name. I had no intention at all
of ignoring him. But this is merely in reply to your query.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 820. Courtesy: Balkrishna Bhave
