5. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
UNION CASTLE LINE,
R. M. S. KILDONAN CASTLE,
November 24, 1909
CHI. MANILAL 1,
It is 9.30 p.m. now. It is five days' voyage hence to Cape Town.
As I am tired of writing with the right hand, I write this to you with
the left. As I may have to go to gaol straight on landing, I write
now.
I take it that you at any rate will rejoice at my going to gaol,
for you have understanding. The secret of the struggle lies in going
to gaol cheerfully, and being happy while there.
It was good you asked the question about Phoenix. First of all,
we shall have to consider how we can realize the self and how serve our
country. After we do this, we can explain what Phoenix is. For realiz-
ing the self, the first essential thing is to cultivate a strong moral
sense. Morality means the acquisition of virtues such as fearlessness,
truth, brahmacharya [celibacy] and so on. Service is automatically ren-
dered to the country in this process of cultivating morality. Phoenix is
of great help in this process. I believe that it is very difficult to preserve
morality in cities where people live in congestion and there are many
temptations. That is why the wise have recommended solitary places
like Phoenix. Experience is the real school. The experience you have
had in phoenix you could not have got elsewhere. Thoughts about
realizing the self, again, could only occur to you there. The very fact
that you have asked me such a profound question when you are a mere
child shows your merit. The credit of your having been able to nurse
Mr. West and others also goes to Phoenix. As most of the people in
Phoenix are just beginners, you may find faults all round you. They
may be there. phoenix is not perfect but we wish it to become so.
The phoenix School has nothing to do with what I have said
above. The school is a means to achieve our end. If it breaks down, we
shall know that we are not yet fit for that kind of work. I understand
your eagerness to study. My advice to you is to have patience. Concern-
ing you, I have been thinking in various ways. I shall explain this to
you when we meet. Meanwhile have faith in Bapu. Ask me if there
is anything you have not understood.
1 Gandhiji's second son
2 Manager, International Printing Press, Phoenix; during his illness, Manilal
attended on him; vide Vol. IX, p. 475.
It is all right that Mr. West has given you a pocket book. You have
not served him for the sake of a gift. He has not given you the book
as a reward but as a memento.
I am anxious about Deva. Please look after him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the original Gujarati in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 92
Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
