77. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
June 8, 1934
I have your note of the 4th instant.
You enquire about things here. I shall content myself with
giving you just a subjective report of the policy of the manage-
ment as I expect detailed report of work done to reach you
through Pyarelal and others from time to time.
My asking you for the expenses of your party has had a salu-
tary effect and people are more careful in debiting items
against the Bihar Central Relief Committee. But still there is a
tendency to mix up reconstruction work with relief work. They
want bridges built-even pucca ones-out of our funds with-
out first tapping District Boards, the Government and other
sources. Even the wells sunk seem excessive and they have not
yet got over the idea of free doles. It appears to me, a great
deal of the relief work is undertaken with political motives espe-
cially after the A.I.C.C. decisions. The Bihar Central Relief
Committee does not get the impartial and unadulterated attention
of those in charge and the work is not what it should be because
of mixed motives. Middle class relief is an answer to pressure.
As an organization our weak point lies in the absolute con-
trol and discretion vested in the officers in charge at the dis-
tricts. True, the Managing Committee sits down in all seriousness
to budget. But when the President, out of the goodness of his
heart, is persuaded to give blank cheques to officers in charge
without consulting the Managing Committee such budgeting
becomes a farce and is to no effect. The work merely reflects the
imagination or the lack of imagination of one man in each dis-
trict. Dictatorial powers are good in an emergency but it
seems to me in constructive work some control of the executive
is important to co-ordinate effort. The Audit Department, in
the nature of things, is a day after the fair and is subject to
executive discretion generally; while the inspection department
becomes an organization for recording pious opinions.
From a photostat: G.N. 10105
