24. LETTER TO ANANDSHANKAR B. DHRUVA
November 19, 1932
You have always been diffident about yourself. You were no
less diffident when you got an offer to go to Banaras. But see,
how many years have you spent there? And who knows for how
many more years still you may remain there ? Your diffidence is not
likely to have any effect on me. Rajaji has advanced a very sound
argument against Malaviyaji's going to the South. So long as he
has not opened the Kashi Vishwanath Temple (for Harijans) the
pundits of the South will not listen to him. They will ask him
to open that temple before going to the South. We should not
put him in that awkward position. Moreover, Rajaji has also
argued that, in view of Malaviyaji's indifferent health, we should
not ask him to undertake such a long journey. If, therefore,
Malaviyaji agrees, you should immediately start as his represen-
tative. Don't mind if the people do not listen to you. But I
don't think that is likely to happen. So much about your tour
of the South.
Now, about the correct interpretation of the Shastras. I send
with this some of the literature on the subject given to me. Go
through it carefully and draft a well-reasoned reply as soon as you
can and obtain on it signatures of all the pundits whom you
can persuade to join with you. The reply should be in Sanskrit,
Hindi and English. It should be addressed to four types of read-
ers: to the honest sanatanists, to impartial students who wish to
know the truth, to persons who are working for the removal of
untouchability and to whom your statement can be a great help
in meeting the arguments of the sanatanists and, last, to non-
Hindus who should know that the true sanatana dharma does not
consider anybody as untouchable from birth and that, if in certain
circumstances, a person is considered untouchable, he or she soon
becomes touchable again. You should also point out that the
oppression to which the untouchables are subjected today has no
sanction in the Shastras at all. I quote here a sentence from a
man whom you, I and many other thousands respect:
In this part of the country these classes have come to be excluded
from temples from the very time the people started worshipping in temples.
Scholars will find it difficult to ascertain the time when the untouchables
22
were permitted to enter temples. I am afraid, though I don't take pride
in the fact that our religion as it is practised today enjoins exclusion of
the untouchables. The people who cling to the practice as a religious
principle have the law, the Shastras and tradition on their side. They
are the sanatanists.
You have to reply to this argument. Law, i.e., the law of the
Government, may be on their side, custom, i.e., the custom of
the degenerate present, may also be on their side. But the
Shastras at any rate are not. If you can honestly show that the
law of the Hindu period was not on the side of the sanatanists and
also that true custom, i.e., the practice of the enlightened, was
never on their side during the great prosperous days of Hinduism,
you should do that convincingly. Your statement should not be
like a pronouncement of the Delphic oracle. Send me as early
as you can a statement enunciating such a Dhruva1-principle.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 255-
