280. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
DURBAN,
[Before April 7, 1906]
TO
THE RON. THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PIETERMARITZBURG
SIR,
We have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the 24th
ult., dealing with the subject-matter of our letter of the 10th ult., in
1 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 220-.
an exhaustive manner for which the Committee of our Congress is obliged
to you.
Our Committee freely admits that the passes and certificates referred
to in our letter are intended for facilitating the movements of those who
hold such passes.
The submission of our Committee is that such passes are issued for
the satisfaction of those who desire the enforcement of the Act.
Our Committee contends that, although the immigration of certain
persons affected by the Act is prohibited, their passage or their tempo-
rary sojourn in the Colony is not. Although there is no obligation on
the part of those who are entitled to remain in the Colony to take out
domicile certificates, etc., the stringency with which the Act is being
enforced renders it absolutely necessary that British Indians should hold
them.
Our Committee is aware that most of the visiting passes are taken
out by Indians in the Transvaal. This is natural, as there is so much
inter-trade between the two Colonies.
Our Committee is of the humble opinion that every facility should
be given to Transvaal Indians by issuing visiting passes. Both visiting and
embarkation passes, as to which a prohibitive fee has been imposed,
are a source of considerable revenue to the railways. The whole of this
question was raised during the late Mr. Escombe's administration when
similar fees were imposed and, subsequently, on representations by our
Committee, withdrawn.
Our Committee feels that the charge for wives' passes, as also the
embarkation and visitors' passes, is a very serious thing and, there-
fore, requests reconsideration.
We have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,
O. H. AMOD JOHARI
M. C. ANGLIA
JOINT HONORARY SECRETARIES,
NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS
Indian Opinion, 7-4-1906
