39. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
As AT BORSAD,
April 26, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,
I thank you for your letter of the 24th instant. I must apo-
logize for the omission to send you a copy of my letter of the 20th
instant to Mr. Garrett. I repair the omission now and send you
a copy herewith as also translation of the circular now recalled.
From the copy you will observe that I never claimed that the
Government and the people can have no dealings with one another
except through the Congress. My objection was to the Mamlat-
dar's notice issued over my head whilst negotiation was going on
between Mr. Garrett and myself. Mr. Garrett, you will note,
gave the following categorical reply:
You refer to the Congress as an intermediary between the Govern-
ment and the people. This is not one of the matters agreed upon in the
Settlement and I am unable to agree to the suggestion.
The position taken up in your letter under reply is surely
different from this as also different from what Mr. Garrett has
taken up in his latest letter of which I attach copy herewith.
He writes under date 24th instant.
You write that 'the Congress must be recognized as the intermediary
between the Government and the people whom the Congress represents'.
I am unable to see anything in the terms of the Settlement which bears
on this point. There is nothing to prevent the Congress advising people
as to what they should do, nor can any restriction be placed on the duty
of the Government officers to perform their functions directly with those
concerned.
It will be observed that the quotation from my letter is
torn from its context and is thus made to bear a meaning which
is wider than the one it bears when read in its context. Mr.
Garrett wrote the letter after having ordered the issue of a revised
notice by Mamlatdars not very different from the notice which
it substitutes.
My contention is that even the new notice is premature and
that in any case it should not have been issued without consultation
with the local workers. Such notices become necessary only when
it has become clear that the people affected are deliberately with-
holding payment. That this is not the case at present is mani-
fest from the fact that the people have been paying as fast as it
is possible in spite of the non-fulfilment in several respects by the
Government of the terms of the Settlement. This is hardly con-
sistent with the terms of the Settlement which contemplates ami-
cable relations and mutual trust. I confess that here, in Gujarat,
see not only no trust but a secretiveness and distrust which one
sees when the relations are strained. I hope that the matter will
receive His Excellency'S immediate attention. Notwithstanding the
serious grievance, I want to give my assurance that I am anxious
that the people should carry out their part of the Settlement to
the fullest extent possible.
If His Excellency the Acting Governor thinks that any useful
purpose can be served by mutual discussion let him consider me
to be at his disposal.
Yours sincerely,
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also Young India, 20-8-1931.
