590. LETTER TO PYARELAL
January 23, 1947
CHI. PYARELAL,
I have your letter.
No new man is needed. Ramachandran suddenly arrived and I did
not think it proper to turn him away. Parasram insisted. He stayed
on. Now he has gone but it means no loss. Manu is getting the help
she needs. She has to learn to solve problems. A new person will
be an obstacle in her education. Besides, so far as possible we must
engage only a Bengali. It is only proper. Now if this new man turns
out well, train him. Do not send anybody to me.
lt has to be considered whether or not Jivanji will have Parasram.
It does not quite suit me. If his place is not with me, then he is certainly
free. This is a point to be understood. If you have not understood it,
there is no time at present to explain.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
591. LETTER TO MAHOMED TAYABULLA
KAZIRKHIL,
RAMGANJ P.S.,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
January 24, 1947
DEAR TAYABULLA 2 ,
I have your recent letter. I cannot understand this panic on the
part of the Assamese. It is panic which always unhinges man, much
more so when it seizes a large number of people. The resolution passed
by the A.I.C.C.3, if it is correctly reported in the papers, gives enough
if not clear guidance to Assam for it will not compel Assam to act
against the declared wish of the people through the Legislative
Assembly. Second, naturally Assam has to watch the future
1 A fragment of this letter has been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVI, p. 392
under the date-line January 26, 1947.
2 President of the Assam Provincial Congress Committee
3 Vide Vol. LXXXVI, Appendix VII.
351
developments and act as occasion requires. It would be unwise to take
any precipitate action. Whatever action is taken must always be taken
so as not to impair the autonomous character of the constitution of
Assam. There need be no confusion in anybody's mind.
You will please write to me further if what I have written is not
quite clear to you.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
