26. LETTER TO M.
March 9, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter about N. She was with me for
a few days and I regret to have to report to you that her record
is not what you describe. Bit by bit she made her confession and it
made a ghastly story. She seems to have led a most extravagant
and immoral life, even from tender years. She was open to the
advances of practically any person, and she was no better after her
acceptance of Hindu religion. She has debts amounting to nearly
Rs. 10,000 spread over Europe and India.
She has travelled
under a false name. The only thing I am able to say in her
favour is that she has been quite frank with me in her recital of
her recklessnesses, though, as I have said, they came bit by bit in
answer to my cross-examination. She has professed penitence and
made me a definite promise to say good-bye to her past life. I
have told her that I could not take her on trust but that if she prov-
ed true to her promise I would not hesitate to defend her and
to guide her. I do not know what capacity she has still left for
controlling herself and keeping her promises.
In giving you this painful story of her confession I am be-
traying no confidence, for, she was to have published a confession
much like this immediately on her reaching Bangalore. She was
also to give up the boarding house and with her son become a beg-
gar relying purely upon a forgiving world's charity and was to live
in a corner in Harijan quarters the simplest possible life giving
up the governess and letting her baby son share the privilege of
her penitent life.
There are some further details, some other particulars of
her life, which I may not disclose, nor, so far as I am aware, will
she.
Her confession has made me sad. I have had many boys and
girls making their confessions to me, but it has never been my
misfortune to come across a case like N.'s. But I have no right
to judge her. Judgment is in the hands of God. Being myself
in need of pity from the world I only pity her and love to help
her to the extent of my ability. I felt drawn to her when she
wrote to me announcing her decision to fast with me if I had
commenced the fast in the beginning of the year. I had warned
her against it and the correspondence became lengthened. I had
hoped that she would become an excellent member of the army
of Harijan servants and her letters gave all that promise.
I thank you for your personal wishes for me and kind
thoughts about me.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 20502
