41. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Thursday [About December, 16, 1921]
DEAR SHANKERLAL,
I have received your two letters together.
Enclosed is the draft of a resolution to be moved at the
Congress. Please show it to Bhai Umar, Mrs. Naidu, Jayakar and
others whom you think should see it and let me have your opinion and
theirs. I am sending the draft to Vitthalbhai also. It is not meant to
be published. I shall also send it to Chhotani Mian. All the copies
may not be got ready today. Do stay on there if it is necessary. I feel
that Bhai Umar should come for the Working Committee. But if he
too cannot come and has to stay back in order to maintain peace, he
may stay back. Mrs. Naidu, I think, will certainly come.
There is no intention of bringing out a bulletin. The rumours
appear to be unfounded. For the rest, read what I have written about
swaraj in Young India. However, do write if you think it necessary.
Picketing has been stopped. For the present we have no need to
resume it. Even by way of expiation for the burning of Parsee wine
shops it is necessary not to resume picketing. We certainly cannot
have special volunteers to do picketing. We shall have to fight when
the new corps is declared illegal. We shall have only one volunteer
corps and picketing will not be its task for the present. Many of them
will be there simply to court imprisonment. Others will be there to
serve. You can divide them into two groups if you wish. But I think
it would be advisable not to divide them into groups right now.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have received one letter. Read it and then destroy.
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 32719
1 From the contents; vide Vol.XXII, p.36.
2 Which was moved later at the Congress Session at Ahmedabad on
December 28, 1921; ibid; pp.99-104.
3 On November 17, 1921, in Bombay, a violent riot had broken out in
which Parsee wine shops had been burnt down and Parsee women had been
molested; vide Vol. XXI, pp.461-.
36
