1. LETTER TO E. W. ARYANAYAKUM
February 21, 1947
I was more than glad to have your brief visit and the
briefest chat with you on matters of common interest.
You have given me a cutting from the Hindustan Standard
purporting to report the views of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad on
education. Assuming the correctness of the report I say categorically
that it is inconsistent with the line followed by the Hindustani Talimi
Sangh. It is in the villages of India where India lives, not in the
few Westernized cities which are the citadels of a foreign power.
I do not believe that the State can concern itself or cope
with religious education. I believe that religious education must
be the sole concern of religious associations. Do not mix up religion
and ethics. I believe that fundamental ethics is common to all
religions. Teaching of fundamental ethics is undoubtedly a func-
tion of the State. By religion I have not in mind fundamental
ethics but what goes by the name of denominationalism. We
have suffered enough from State-aided religion and State Church.
A society or a group, which depends partly or wholly on State aid
for the existence of its religion, does not deserve or, better still,
does not have any religion worth the name. I do not need to give
any illustrations in support of this obvious truth as it is to me.
The second point deserving attention in the report in ques-
tion is regarding the replacing of the Urdu and Nagari scripts
by the Roman script. However attractive the proposition may
appear to be and whatever is true of the Indian soldiers, in my
opinion the replacing would be a fatal blunder and we would
find ourselves in the fire out of the frying pan. In this connec-
tion, I would like you to read my statement on the subject
issued to the Press on January 21 last.
The third thing that pained me was the reference to military
education. I think that we have to wait a long time before a
nationwide decision on the point is made. Otherwise, we are likely
to become a curse rather than a blessing to the world. Leaders are
not made, they are born. Should the State be in a hurry over
this matter even before full independence is established? Therefore,
I am surprised that the Central Advisory Board should be party
to such a sweeping recommendation as they have made.
Harijan, 23-3-1947
