136. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Phagan Vadi 7 [Samvat 1966]
[April 2, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Your letter to hand. I return it to you so that you can understand
my reply to it.
I shall try to answer the questions you have raised. But even then
you may not understand thoroughly. You will perhaps find the ex-
planations you have sought from [Hind] Swaraj itself if you read it afresh
once or twice.
There is no doubt that we shall have to go back to the extent to
which we have imbibed [modern] civilization. This part of the task is
the most difficult one, but it will have to be done. When we take a
wrong path there is no alternative but to go back. We have got to
free ourselves from attachment to the things we are enjoying. For this
it is necessary that we begin to feel disgust for them. Whatever means
and instruments appear to us to be beneficial are not going to be given
up. Only he who realizes that there is more harm than the apparent
benefit from a particular thing will give it up. I personally feel that no
benefit has been derived from our being able to send letters quickly.
When we give up railways and such other means we shall not bother
ourselves about writing letters. A thing which is really free from fault
may be used to a certain extent. We who are engulfed in this civiliza-
tion may avail ourselves of postal and other facilities as long as we are so
engulfed. If we make use of these things with knowledge and under-
standing we shall not go crazy over them, and instead of increasing our
preoccupations we shall gradually reduce them. He who will under-
stand this will not be tempted to take the post or the railway to the
villages which do not have these. You and I should not remain passive
and increase the use of steamers and other evil means for fear that these
things cannot be abolished forthwith and that all the people will not
give them up. Even if one man reduces or stops their use, others will
learn to do so. He who believes that it is good to do so will go on do-
ing so irrespective of others. This is the only way of spreading the truth;
there is no other in the world.
It is very difficult to get rid of our fondness for Parliament. It was
no doubt barbarous when people tore off the skin, burned persons alive
and cut off their ears or nose; but the tyranny of Parliament is
much greater than that of Chengiz Khan, Tamerlane and others. Hence
it is that we are caught in its meshes. Modern tyranny is a trap of tempta-
tion and therefore does greater mischief. One can withstand the atro-
cities committed by one individual as such; but it is difficult to cope
with the tyranny perpetrated upon a people in the name of the
people. It seems to have happened in the past that some rulers were
like King Foolishman while others turned out to be wise. Had Edward
alone been our ruler it would not have been so objectionable; but
every Englishman is ruling over you and me. Please ponder over the
meaning of this statement. I do not refer here to people's fondness for
this world. The common man in India at least believes that the
Parliament is a hoax. Even an extraordinarily intelligent man, caught
in the meshes of this civilization, loses his sanity in Parliament.
By saying that mercy cannot have any effect on the Pindaris you
have denied the very existence of the soul or its [essential] attribute.
Lord Patanjali has emphasized the greatness of mercy, etc., in such a
way that we feel delighted even while thinking of those virtues. The
real fact is that fear has taken deep root in us and consequently truth,
mercy and such other virtues do not develop. And then we think that
mercy has no effect on cruel people. If we show mercy to the person
who shows mercy to us it is no mercy; it is only the return for mercy.
We should be considered weak if someone protects us free of charge
or even if we pay him for doing so. If we have to seek outside help to
be free from the menace of the Pindaris, etc., we are unfit for swaraj. If
we would subdue them with physical force, we shall have to develop
1 The sage who systematized the Yoga darshana (philosophy)
that force in ourselves. We shall not then have to pay blackmail or
tribute. A woman seeks her husband's protection as a matter of right;
but she is considered an abala (weak) after all.
Swaraj is for those who understand it. You and I can enjoy it even
today. All the others will have to learn to do likewise. What is secured
for us by others is not swaraj but pararaj, i.e., foreign rule, whether they
be Indians or Englishmen.
In calling the cow-protection societies cow-killing societies, I have
but stated the truth; for their object is to rescue the cow or protect her
by bringing pressure on Mussalmans.
To rescue the cow by paying money is no protection of the cow;
it is a way to teach the butcher to be deceitful. If we try to coerce the
Mussalmans they will slaughter more cows. But if we persuade them or
offer satyagraha against them they will protect her. No cow-protection
society is necessary for doing this. That body should be for teaching
Hinduism to the Hindus. It is better to kill an ox by a single blow of
the sword than to kill it by starving it, by pricking it, by over-working
it and thus torturing it.
It would be very confusing to take the examples of Shri Rama-
chandra and others literally. I have never imagined the possibility of a
Ravana in the physical form of a man with ten heads and twenty arms.
But to imagine that he was a huge passionate senseless animal and that
he was killed by Shri Ramachandra representing the divine essence may
appeal to the intellect. Tulsidasji has described Ramachandraji as the
forces of the Sun who is the destroyer of pride, infatuation, and the
darkness of the night of excessive attachment. Do you think we shall
have the least desire left in us to destroy anybody when we are rid of all
pride, infatuation and attachment? If you say 'no', how could Rama-
chandraji who was free from pride, infatuation and attachment and who
was an ocean of mercy destroy Ravana? However, let us first attain
his stage, like Lakshmana give up sleep and observe brahmacharya for
fourteen years and then see where physical force could be used.
I want to say that everything is achieved by humility. The example
you gave of the Transvaal is quite appropriate. It is not enough merely
to profess orally to have the above sentiment; it should stand the test
when the occasion comes. Think of the numberless adversities Harish-
chandra had to face before his [devotion to] truth was proved. Think of
the suffering Sudhanva had to undergo before his bhakti (devotion) was
proved to be genuine. We may not consider these as mere legends.
It may be that the names and forms were different; but they who have
composed these stories have given their own experiences through them.
Even in the Transvaal the babblings of persons like me are being put
to the test. Also bear in mind that many who were regarded as satya-
grahis have proved to be insincere demagogues. Who, then, should be
regarded as true satyagrahis? Of course, they who possess virtues like
compassion, etc. Nowhere has it been said that suffering may not have
to be undergone. And what does suffering after all mean? It is the
mind, says the Gita, which is the cause of our bondage as well as of our
freedom. Sudhanva was thrown into boiling oil. The person who got
him thrown into it thought that he was inflicting suffering on Sudhanva;
but for the latter it was a grand opportunity to show the intensity of
his devotion.
It will never happen that all are equally rich or equally poor at the
same time. But if we consider the good and evil aspects [of the various
professions] it seems that the world is sustained by farmers. Farmers
are of course poor. If a lawyer would boast of his altruism or spiritual-
ity, let him earn his livelihood through physical labour and carry on his
legal practice without charging anything for it. You will not easily
realize that the lawyer is lazy. Just as a sensuous man, even when
exhausted by indulging in passions, remains engrossed in sensual pleasures,
so a lawyer, even when he is exhausted, goes on straining his nerves to
the breaking point in his practice in the hope of getting wealth and
attaining to greatness and later on passing a life of luxury and com-
fort. This is his objective. I am conscious that there is a little exaggera-
tion in this; but, what I have said above is true for the most part.
What service will an army of doctors render to the country? What
great things are they going to achieve by dissecting dead bodies, by kill-
ing animals, and by cramming worthless dicta for five or seven years?
What will the country gain by the ability to cure physical diseases? That
will simply increase our attachment to the body. We can formulate a
plan for preventing the growth of disease even without the knowledge of
medical science. This does not mean that there should be no doctors
or physicians at all. They will always be with us. The point is that many
a young man who gives an undue importance to this profession and wastes
hundreds of rupees and several years qualifying for it, ought not to do
so. We must know that we are not, nor are we going to be, benefited
in the least by allopathic doctors.
I hope I have replied to all your questions. Please do not carry
unnecessarily on your head the burden of emancipating India. Emanci-
pate your own self. Even that burden is very great. Apply everything
1 +1'i'I ll;,! +1'~~'l'll1t 9il<:ui iipI+1'l~<il: This sentence, though generally attributed to
the Gita, is from the Brahmabindu Upanishad.
to yourself. Nobility of soul consists in realizing that you are yourself
India. In your emancipation is the emancipation of India. All else
is make-believe. If you feel interested, do persevere. You and I need
not worry about others. If we bother about others, we shall forget our
own task and lose everything. Please ponder over this from the point of
view of altruism, not of selfishness. If you want to ask anything more,
please do.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati Gandhiji-ni Sadhana by Raojibhai Patel, and Mahatma
Gandhiji-na Patro, edited by Dahyabhai Patel
