676. LETTER TO PYARELAL
February 24, 1941
CHI. PYARELAL,
Your letter arrived only today. It was no trouble at all
sending Sankaran and Kanu. They had themselves asked to be
sent. I purposely did not send Mahadev. Mahmud was to go
but he had gone to Ramtek.
Fearing is in your nature. But you should only fear what
would seem to incite fear. Yes, I would say nothing with re-
gard to A. S. Whatever dreams you may have cherished about
her may well remain mere dreams. Of course, even that can-
not be said with certainty.
Satya's marriage will be only in the beginning of March.
It will be a civil marriage followed by religious rites. This
434
could not be done last week because the notice was not
sufficient.
Tari is getting on well. She is still in Delhi. It looks as
though she would have to remain there. I understand that in
view of the hubbub of Satya's wedding, Tari will be shifted to
the Harijan Colony.
I am in the best of health. I shall be going on the 28th
to open the Kamala Hospital. I think I shall have to stay in
Allahabad for a day. By the time you are released, my return
will have become an old story. Mahadev and Kanu will also
be with me.
Your quotation from the Koran is certainly beautiful.
I have sent the preface to your pamphlet yesterday. It
may be published by the time you come.
Janakibehn may be said to have had a new lease of life.
Even Madalasa is under Dr. Das's care at the moment. She
is also feeling well. Her blisters have subsided. Rukmini has
adjusted herself well here. She is nursing Janakibehn.
I shall be able to see your spinning in person. The Parsee
lady who used to bring coconuts, etc., has arrived here. She
tries to please Ba by offering her dried fruit and nuts. Prema-
behn came here yesterday after her release. She will be going
back on Tuesday (tomorrow). We shall be going on Wednesday.
Rajkumari is doing well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From
the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru
Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
