143. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
IN THE TRAIN,
[After September 25, 1913]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I find myself in an awful state today. I ran for the train. I
gave no end of trouble to the boys. Everyone was delayed because
of me. Unmindful of that, I committed a further mistake and sent
Purshotam again. Thinking of this, I felt extremely miserable.
Even those of my actions which I believed to be for a spiritual pur-
pose have a big flaw in them. I am too full of moha and lobha .
It is never the mark of a spiritual aspirant to be in too great a
hurry and make himself a nuisance to others. He may, of course,
not overtax himself— ought not to. What an ignoble state to be in!
All this is the consequence of initial mistakes. I also realized that
if I had skipped the meal, I could have worked with an unruffled
mind, with plenty of time on hand, and would have been no cause
of trouble to any of you. A spiritual aspirant should not accept
exacting services for himself. To make you give up the school and
to send the boys running argue an abject state of mind. I always
knew this, but realized it vividly today. I felt ashamed within myself
even as I was on the way— I reproached myself. I, who used to
believe that I had perhaps something in me, find myself today
in a humiliating state. I tell you all this because you attribute so
many excellences to me. You should see the faults in me in order
that you may save yourself from like faults. Plunged as I have
been in the affairs of South Africa, I think I can be entirely free
only in India. But please warn me whenever I take upon myself
too heavy a burden. You will be with me, no doubt, even in India.
If I am imprisoned, it will be all peace and nothing but peace for
me. If not, I may even return there. Please warn me if ever in
future, even in South Africa, you find today's story being repeated.
We could have done without bread for Mr. Kallenbach and with-
out groundnut jam for me. We need not have been particular
about feeding the children. Or rather, we might have pleased
ourselves in all these ways and yet things would have been all right
if I had not insisted on having my meal. But I would ride all the
horses and that is why God ordained my fall. Surely this is not the
first occasion when such a thing has happened to me. This time,
however, the lesson has been brought home to me. I will now
change myself a little.
Please arrange the household things, or have them arranged
properly. There are old cotton beddings near where the tools
are stored. Ask Baku to wash them. Have them stitched by
Mrs. Sam and put them back well arranged.
For the present, let the children learn to write the addresses
carefully. It will be good to lighten this burden on Devibehn by
half— and to remove it entirely by and by. If Chhotam and Navin
worry her, draw them away to yourself. The matter about Lord
Ampthill will now have to be attended to by you, unaided.
While in Durban, I heard that the men will be removed from
Volksrust to Maritzburg. If they are, it is just as well. That
will be some experience indeed and, with Rustomjee Sheth there,
they will be better able to face the situation.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
If the children cannot manage to write 300 addresses this time,
you should try and help them to complete them on Sunday or
Monday. You will find there a jacket made by me for Budrea1;
this is to be sent on to Polak.
Two powers [of attorney] on behalf of Rustomjee Sheth have
been left there. They should be attested by you and Devibehn
under the date of Monday, Phoenix, and preserved there.
Fill [in the details], if you can. Otherwise I shall do that when
I am there.
From the Gujarati original in pencil in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5649
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
