85. LETTER TO EDWIN M. STANDING
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 5, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I was delighted to receive your letter and the photograph.
I was wondering where you were and whether you ever received
my letter. I am having your name registered for Young India. I
hope you will get it regularly.
Yes. I am taking rest for one year at the Ashram. It is not
possible to say that I have retired from politics altogether for the
year but my political activity is confined to whatever I can do
from my place in the Ashram.
What photo did I promise you? If it was my own, I must
have made some mistake for I thought you knew that I did not
possess any myself. There are so-called portraits of mine which
are sold in the bazaar. Surely you do not want that misprint.
I do not interest myself in the activities of the Theosophical
Society.
I do not subscribe to the proposition that you seem to imply
that good things require a library to explain them or that one needs
numberless libraries to describe one's joy and satisfaction. On the
contrary, I have known that where reasons are sound and pious
they can be summed up in a few lines and joy which is real is
either inexpressible or its expression often condensed in one word
or a phrase. I would therefore still ask you, if you care to ex-
plain, the reasons that have led you to Catholicism and describe
if you can the secret of the endless joy it has given you. I ask
this question not for idle curiosity but in order to understand the
meaning and the power of Roman Catholicism.
I understand
somewhat but sufficiently enough for my purpose Judaism. I
understand still more fully Protestantism; I understand Islam;
I understand also Hinduism but though I had a few Roman
Catholic friends, I have never been able to come near enough
to them to understand Catholicism. The superficial distinctions
between the two churches I do understand.
What I want to
reach is the heart of Catholicism. You can perhaps help me.
Hence my question.
Mr. and Mrs. Ambalal often see me. So also the children.
They are all grown. Mridula is almost a woman in wisdom. I
shall be sending your letter to Saraladevi who I know delights
to hear about you.
Yours sincerely,
EDWIN M. STANDING
SEFTON PLACE, ARUNDEL
SUSSEX, ENGLAND
From a photostat: S.N. 12438
