322. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
April 25, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,
Of course you have my blessings. Though I see that you had
no choice but to get on the lorry, in my view you did commit
an error. I am pointing it out in fact for the benefit of others, but
let my criticism be for your benefit too. There was no need to for-
feit the vehicle. I had thought that you would devise a method of
carrying the salt by stages as they used to do in carrying Ganga
water, and had very much liked the idea. Suppose that we have
a camp of twenty-five men at every five miles or so. A batch of
twenty-five, each man starting with five seers, would mean three
maunds and five seers. The first batch would hand over the stock
at the second camp and stay there. The second batch would
deliver the stock at the third camp and return to its camp, after
which the first batch would proceed to Dholera. This would have
provided very good training and it would have been easy to pro-
tect the salt. There was nothing to lose in this arrangement. The
method which you followed involved the possibility of losing the
cart and the certainty of losing the lorry. Moreover, it required
your hiding something, and the success of your plan depended on
your ability to do so. We should, of course, have nothing to hide.
Any method in which we have to hide something requires the
cunning needed in the ordinary kind of war, which we ought not
to practise. Moreover, for taking possession of the salt carried
in a lorry, the police would be required to use much greater force.
We should not needlessly compel them to do so. Hence, though
your plan certainly required much courage and no less intelligence,
it was not based on perfect non-violence. But in the prevailing at-
mosphere, I do not think you would have realized this by your-
self Who knows where I myself may be going wrong? All I can
say is that I never take a single step without thinking carefully and
that I get time to do that. My thinking nowadays takes the form
exclusively of prayer. I do not use my reason, but look into my heart.
Swami's idea of lifting salt from Bhayander would also have
involved a similar error. Dharasana is very near from where I am,
but I do not let anyone approach even that. When it is ultimate-
ly decided to attempt to seize the stocks there, a pilgrim party will
321
43-21
start for the purpose, after giving public notice of its intention.
Please do not blame yourself or feel sorry for what you have
done because of my criticism. I have written this only to help
you in jail to think and understand the fine and subtle aspects
of non-violence and as guidance for the future to Kaka, Narahari
and others. But in any case it is good that you have been
arrested. You would have had no opportunity of facing bullets
and on account of excessive work you would probably have fallen
ill. By the time you come out, some thousands will have lost their
lives. What grace of God to the few chosen ones that they will be
automatically saved. Those who die and those who survive, both
classes of persons should be regarded as equally blessed. We need
not believe that he alone is blessed, or more so, who gets killed.
Personally I do feel, after the incidents at Peshawar and
Chittagong, that there are bound to be two or more big massacres
of innocent people. Or it may be that they would deliberately
and firmly put the innocent behind the bars. In Karachi at any
rate, only the innocent were killed or wounded. The truth is that
even the Government does not know where it stands and what it
wants to do. What is happening is something quite new for it and
for the whole world.
Now take good rest. Make a takli of wood and spin on it as
much as you can. Khadi stocks have been exhausted. Ask other
prisoners also to spin.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9858
