165. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
NADIAD,
June 25, 1918
DEAR MR. MAFFEY,
I have purposely refrained from acknowledging your letter
of the 4th instant, as I was desirous of reporting to you on the
several matters referred to in our correspondence or our conver-
sation.
The Kaira affair was settled locally. I have called it a
settlement without grace. You might have seen my note upon
it. If not, I will not tax you with it. Did I not want to com-
mence recruiting at the earliest moment, I would not have been
satisfied with several aspects of the settlement.
I duly attended the Bombay Conference. I did what I could
to heal the breach caused by Lord Willingdon's blunder. You
may not agree that it was a blunder at all. I still feel that Lord
Willingdon could gracefully admit his mistake and I have not
hesitated to say as much to him. It has certainly added to my
difficulty. That however need not daunt me. I shall persevere.
Ever since my return from Delhi I have been engaged in
organizing public opinion in Gujarat in favour of an active,
ceaseless recruiting campaign. We on this side do not supply
soldiers. I am trying my hardest to remove the blemish. Several
private meetings have been held to induce the people to
come forward. The campaign was publicly started on the 21st
instant. No tangible result can yet be reported. Our workers
have now gone over to villages to talk among the people. I am
addressing a meeting tomorrow, having been invited thereto by
the villagers. In a few days I shall know whether I shall get
any response. Anyway no stone will be left unturned by me to
obtain recruits in their thousands. Nothing less will satisfy me.
My first leaflet you will see in translation in the Press. As a
specimen, I enclose a Gujarati copy.
And now for the brothers Ali. I was not thinking of a
time limit. But I did gather from you that if I waited for
about a month I would probably find them released. Whether
I carried with me a false impression or a true one does not
much matter. Naturally I shall accept your version of your
words in preference to mine. But it is essential that either the
necessity for their internment should be judicially or otherwise
publicly proved, or they should be discharged. A big agitation
has been held in abeyance only on my word that I am trying
through your good offices to secure their release. Will you not
therefore exert yourself in this matter? In our circles the talk
is that the brothers are held up only to satisfy Sir William
Vincent and Sir Charles Cleveland. I endeavoured to move the
former, but I rubbed him up the wrong way. A mere mention
of their names was a red rag. And I completely collapsed. You
(the Government) have asked for a calm atmosphere in order
to prosecute the War. You are entitled to it so long as you do
not ruffle it yourselves. But may I for my "tinpot" recruiting ask
for an equally calm atmosphere by either releasing the brothers
or furnishing your avowed friends with a proper justification?
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm : Lord Chelmsford Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library
