229. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
FROM M. K. GANDHI
AHMEDABAD,
November 26 [1915]
MY DEAR FRIEND,
You have asked me to tell you more about Andrews and Pearson
than I have done. I came in very close touch with both of them in
Santiniketan. We came nearer one another than we ever were. They
are both now in Fiji investigating the indenture question. Before going,
they passed some time here. They were quite happy. They are to
be back in two months' time. Pearson is a full-fledged teacher at
1 From the contents; vide Vol. XIII, pp. 126-30.
228
Santiniketan. Andrews is the Poet's mentor. He takes no part in
teaching. Andrews was at death's door recently having had a severe
attack of cholera. He was better when he left.
Maganlal was upon his trial when the Pariah was admitted. He
stood it well. He remains as much attached to the Ashram as ever.
But what I said in my letter holds good. My soul may take me anywhere
any day and I may find myself without the staunchest of my co-workers
at that time. It will certainly be no fault of theirs. I cannot expect
them to understand or follow me in all my flights.
Mrs. Gandhi still remains disturbed. She does not want to live away
from me. If she could overcome the strong desire to live with me,
she would have left me long ago.
Jeki had a son born to her in Fiji. She is now in Rangoon. I have
not met her. Dr. Mehta was here the other day. He told me she was
well.
Indian Opinion has been reduced in size. The price too has been
reduced. It is ld. now. Ritch has returned to South Africa.
This finishes the budget of news.
You say you have not influenced your surroundings, if anything you
have been influenced by them. I do not gather it from your letters.
In any event one certainly cannot be too much on one's guard. True
worth of a man seems to me to consist in his capacity to resist his
surroundings. It is the measure of his self-realization. If we control
ourselves we cannot be controlled by others, not even by our
surroundings, not fashion, nor food, nor spectacles, nor games, nor
company, nor hobbies. There is no true happiness without this real
SELF RULE. You have a unique opportunity of acquiring it. May it be
your lot to do so.
With love,
Yours,
OLD FRIEND
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
