219. LETTER TO SYED BASHIR AHMED
[Before September 30, 1937]
I cannot subscribe to your sweeping opinion that a Mussal-
man who joins the Congress betrays Muslim interests. On the
contrary, I hold that Mussalmans who desire complete indepen-
dence for India cannot do better than join the Congress in its
uphill fight for independence. It is an organization that is open
to all who care to join it. Do you not see that Mussalmans, if
they join it in their thousands, can shape the whole policy of the
Congress? There is no proportional representation there. It is a
wholly democratic organization without any communal barriers.
Not being in the Congress, I cannot hold myself responsible for
everything that the Congress and Congressmen do. But being a
firm believer in the Congress objective, I had no hesitation in
advising the Congress to adopt the office-acceptance programme.
On questions relating to Mussalmans, the Congress is solely gui-
ded by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. I have no notion of the
obligation undertaken by the members of the Muslim League, but
I doubt not that the Maulana Saheb has taken every care not
to allow the Congress to become a party to a violation of any
moral principle by any Muslim.
Generally speaking, I see nothing wrong in a member of a
political party transferring his allegiance from one party to an-
other. I do not see what objection you can have to the Congress
trying to have within its fold all the Muslims it can have by
every honourable means. It seems to me that the Congress will
forfeit its title to be called an all-India organization if it does
not endeavour to represent Mussalmans and other sections as
well as Hindus. That has from the very beginning been the
traditional policy and strength of the Congress. I, therefore,
fail to see where the slightest departure from truth takes place
in the Congress accepting those Mussalmans who favour complete
independence for India and who appreciate the means adopted
by the Congress, as for instance, communal unity, khadi, prohi-
bition, removal of untouchability and other things recited in the
Congress election manifesto.
The Hindu, 2-10-1937
