299. LETTER TO PREMNATH BHARGAVA
February 3, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter enclosing your questions. I return
the questions with answers given against them.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. PREMNATH BHARGAVA
BAGH RAMSAHAI, GHAS KI MANDY
AGRA
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.
The report of the Hide Cess Committee, vide copy enclosed, states
that the depressed classes and the peasantry would derive much benefit from the
development of the tanning industry and incidentally refers to the existing
appalling waste. Can this statement be accepted entirely in respect of unslau-
ghtered cattle hides? If it can be, how should the development be brought about
so as to yield maximum benefit to the depressed classes and to the peasantry?
A.
It can. The development can be brought about only by
teaching the classes concerned simple but scientific methods fitted
for individuals and villages of lifting carcasses at the places where
the cattle die and of treating every part in an economic manner
excluding the use of meat for food.
Q.
Should tanning of unslaughtered hides be taken up in India to the
exclusion of slaughtered hides or only as an industry mixed up with that of
slaughtered hides as at the present stage? Is it in any way derogatory for
caste Hindus to take up this industry as a profession?
A.
I should love to have tanning of the unslaughtered hides
as a separate industry distinct from that of slaughtered hides. In
my opinion it is not derogatory or irreligious for caste Hindus to
take up this industry. It is essential for the purpose of cow-
protection that this industry be developed as an aid to cow-protec-
tion and therefore on philanthropic lines.
Q. Would not the tanning of unslaughtered cattle hides on a large scale
by modern scientific methods be helpful to the following?
(a) Economic uplift of Harijan brethren and an immediate item of pro-
gramme of work for the Servants of Untouchables Society.
(b)
Improvement of the living wealth of the country.
(c) The creation of a new field of activity for the educated unemployed.
(d) Protection of cows.
A.
I have my doubts. Home or village tanning is necessary.
Q.
The unslaughtered cattle hides can be tanned to near perfection of
the slaughtered ones. Is your information to the contrary?
A.
I believe that this is only partly true, if the carcass is
taken up immediately after death and removed so as not to
damage the hide.
Q. In the manufacture of leather goods, particularly shoes, difficulty is
being experienced in providing lining which is to be thin and delicate. Such
a leather is only available from the skins of live sheep and goat. Since Hindu
India in a fair number is a flesh eater would it go against the principles of the
industry of unslaughtered hides to utilize the skins for lining and other purposes
of such sheep and goats as are unavoidably killed for food?
A.
Much as I should like to answer otherwise, I believe that
for the majority of Hindus the use of the skins of goats and sheep
slaughtered for food will not offend their religious sense.
Q. In the event of the Agra Tannery at Agra restricting its activities to
the tanning of unslaughtered hides exclusively, may the Tannery expect your
blessings and distinguished patronage?
A.
Any tannery restricting its activities as suggested would
certainly receive my blessings if it is run on the lines suggested
by me, but whoever does so should realize that in the initial
stages he might have to lose. I can say nothing of distinguished
patronage.
From a microfilm: S. N. 19291
