164. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
July 6, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I got your letter. You should not belittle your idea of
sewing for yajna. Its real value lies in turning to use even the
poorest quality of khadi. We cannot afford to pay for sewing.
However, those who are ready to do sewing as free service can
give even to the most unattractive khadi the value which devo-
tees of God give to flowers by making garlands for the deity
from them. For instance, one who gives such service should not
make a shirt from bad khadi, but he can make quilts, bags or
pillows from it. We can think of a number of things made from
such khadi which would not need to be washed and which could
be used for a long time in the same condition. I had a hand-
spun and hand-woven woollen blanket with me, which I had
received as a gift. It had been so much worn out by use that,
if used longer, it would have got torn out into pieces. But, be-
ing of an ingenious turn of mind and having a friend like Janaki-
blanket was made new. It was sewn on to a piece of thick
khadi, the whole surface being stitched both length-wise and
breadth-wise. The worn-out woollen blanket, being thus lined
with khadi, became as good as new and gave more warmth than
before. This does not mean that the effort which you are making
for improving the quality of yarn is unnecessary. I daily realize
the necessity of such effort. But such improvement will not reduce
the importance of sewing for yajna or dispense with it. The love
of khadi has still not spread widely in the country. It means, in
other words, that love of the poor has not spread so, or, even
where it exists, the people who have it are ignorant and are
not yet convinced that the best way of showing their love is by
patronizing khadi. If they can be convinced of this, your dis-
covery can become very useful. I have not, therefore, become
indifferent to it in the slightest degree. Do write a book on how to
spin better yarn. But do not make a single statement in it the
truth of which you have not tested. Nor should you deduce any
general principle only on the basis of exclusively your expe-
rience. Others also must have found it true. If you have not
checked all your statements in this manner, postpone writing
the book. I observe again and again that books which have no
basis in experience are practically without any value. For in-
stance, if anybody translated Charaka the work would not be of
any use today since we cannot find many of the herbs and
plants described by him and, with regard to those which we do
find, cannot prove the properties attributed to them. The most
important thing therefore is that you yourself should spin the
finest possible yarn of different counts and, while doing so, analyse
and note the contribution of the spindle, the type of the spin-
ning-wheel, the quality of the cotton used, the quality of the
carding and your own, that is, the spinner's skill towards the
result. Then tally your experience with that of other spinners.
A book based on such data will be accepted without question, like
a bar of gold weighed on the scale kept in the market for public
use. You asked me what limit I have fixed with regard to the
count of the yarn spun. Previously I had fixed it at 20, then
raised it to 40. I do not lay down any limit now. If we can
get or grow cotton from which we can spin yarn of 400 counts
and which we can card well enough for such purpose, and if we
can get men or women spinners who have sufficient patience to
spin yarn of such quality, I would certainly desire that we should
reach that level. In short, I think it very important that we
should go in this direction as far as we can, for this is likely im-
mediately to enhance the value of the art of hand-spinning. I
am sure you know that a friend of Satis Babu had reached up to
150 counts. The khadi woven from it is preserved in Satis Babu's
collection. But along with this I also insist that as we progress
in spinning yarn of finer and finer count the yarn should al-
ways be strong and even. I cannot say what marks any specimen
of yarn should earn for passing the test in these respects. Only
you and other experienced spinners can say that. I certainly
have a rough test for this purpose, and it is that any weaver
should be able to weave the yarn without difficulty. If a weaver
rejects a lot, I would treat it as below par though it may have
passed our test. When I get the cup, I will try the method
suggested by you and test the strength of my yarn. Even without
testing it, however, I know that it is not good enough, and I am
myself not satisfied with it. Because of the pain in my elbow, I
have had to change from one hand to the other [for drawing the
yarn]. My hand had set very well on the Gandiva spinning-wheel
and I could spin on it yarn of sufficiently uniform quality as I
wished, though the speed was not much to speak of. But I was
obliged to draw the thread with the right hand and then to spin
on the Magan spinning-wheel, with the result that it is only
now that I have acquired some control over it. As if this was
not enough, I thought it my duty to use up the very inferior
quality of slivers we had and I began spinning them. I have
now resumed spinning with good slivers since a few days ago,
and so, by the time your cup arrives and I try it, my yarn will
have become good enough to pass the test. Previously I used to
spin yarn of about 25 counts, but after I started spinning with
the Magan wheel I remain at about 19 counts. Probably I will
go up now. I think I have now answered all your questions.
Have courage and cultivate strength of mind. Don't think too
much. How is Motibehn1?
I have received the cup.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3755
1 Addressee's wife
