415. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON SUSPENSION OF CIVIL
DISOBEDIENCE
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
July 21, 1919
SIR,
The Government of India have given me, through His Excellen-
cy the Governor of Bombay, grave warning that resumption of
Civil Disobedience is likely to be attended with serious consequences
to the public security. This warning has been enforced by His
Excellency the Governor himself at interviews to which I was
summoned. In response to this warning and to the urgent desire
publicly expressed by Dewan Bahadur Govinda Raghava Iyer,
Sir Narayan Chandavarkar and several editors, I have, after deep
consideration, decided not to resume Civil Resistance for the time
being. I may add that several prominent friends belonging to what
is called the Extremist Party have given me the same advice on the
sole ground of their fear of recrudescence of violence on the part
of those who might not have understood the doctrine of Civil Resis-
tance. When, in common with most other satyagrahis, I came to
the conclusion that the time was ripe for the resumption of the
Civil Resistance part of satyagraha, I sent a respectful letter to
His Excellency the Viceroy, advising him of my intention to do so
and urging that Rowlatt legislation should be withdrawn, that an
early declaration be made as to the appointment of a strong and
impartial committee to investigate the Punjab disturbances with
power to revise the sentences passed, and that Babu Kalinath Roy
who was, as could be proved from the record of the case, unjustly
convicted, should be released. The Government of India deserve
thanks for the decision in Mr. Roy's case. Though it does not
do full justice to Mr. Roy, the very material reduction in the sentence
is a substantial measure of justice. I have been assured that the
Committee of Inquiry, such as I have urged, is in the process of
being appointed. With these indications of goodwill, it would be
unwise on my part not to listen to the warning given by the
Government. Indeed, my acceptance of the Government's advice
is a further demonstration of the true nature of Civil Resistance.
A civil resister never seeks to embarrass Government. He often
co-operates and does not hesitate civilly to resist where resistance
becomes a duty. He attains the goal by creating goodwill believ-
ing as he does that unfailing exercise of goodwill even in the face
of unjust acts of a Government can only result in goodwill being
ultimately returned by the Government. Further suspension of
Civil Resistance is, therefore, nothing but a practical application
of satyagraha.
Yet it is no small matter for me to suspend Civil Resistance even
for a day while Rowlatt legislation continues to disfigure our
Statute-book. The Lahore and Amritsar judgments make suspen-
sion still more difficult. Those judgments, read by me with an
unbiassed mind, have left an indelible impression that most of the
Punjab leaders have been convicted without sufficient proof and
that the punishments inflicted on them are inhuman and outrageous.
The judgments go to show that they have been convicted for
no other reason than that they were connected with stubborn agi-
tation against the Rowlatt legislation. I would, if I had my way,
have therefore preferred to court imprisonment to retaining the
restricted liberty vouchsafed to me by the Government of India.
But a satyagrahi has to swallow many a bitter pill and the present
suspension is one such. I feel that I shall better serve the country
and the Government and those Punjabi leaders who, in my opinion,
have been so unjustly convicted and so cruelly sentenced, by sus-
pension of Civil Resistance for the time being.
But this suspension, while it lightens my responsibility by
reason of the feared outbreak of violence, makes it incumbent upon
the Government and the eminent public men who have advised
suspension to see that the Rowlatt legislation is removed without
delay.
I have been accused of throwing lighted matches. If my oc-
casional Civil Resistance be a lighted match, Rowlatt legislation
and persistence in retaining it on the Statute-book are a thousand
matches scattered throughout India, and the only way to avoid
Civil Resistance altogether is to withdraw that legislation. Nothing
that the Government have published in justification of that legis-
lation has moved the Indian public from the attitude of opposition
to it.
I have thus suspended Civil Resistance to hasten the end of that
legislation. But satyagrahis will pay for its removal by their lives
if it cannot be removed by lesser means. The period of suspension
is for satyagrahis an opportunity for further discipline in an enligh-
tened and willing obedience to the laws of the State. The right of
Civil Resistance is derived from the duty of obedience voluntarily
performed. And satyagraha consists not merely, or even chiefly,
in civilly resisting laws, but mainly in promoting national welfare
by strict adherence to Truth. I would respectfully advise fellow-
satyagrahis and seek the co-operation of all great and small in the
propagation of pure swadeshi and promotion of Hindu-Muslim
unity. Swadeshi is, I hold, a necessity of national existence. No
Englishman or Indian can view with equanimity the huge enforced
waste of the labour of twenty crore peasants during half the year.
That labour can be quickly and immediately utilized only by res-
toring to the women their spinning-wheels and to the men their
handlooms. This means the elimination of unnatural Lancashire
interest and the Japanese menace. The elimination of the un-
natural Lancashire interest purifies the British connection and
makes the position of equality possible. The elimination of the
Japanese menace will avert a national and Imperial disaster.
Extension of Japan's hold upon India through her commerce can
end only in India's degradation or a bloody war.
The Hindu-Muslim unity is equally a national and Imperial
necessity. A voluntary league between Hindus, Mahomedans and
Englishmen is a league in my conception infinitely superior to and
purer than the League of Nations just formed. Permanent union
between the Hindus and Mahomedans is the preliminary to such
Triple Union. That unity can be materially advanced by the
Hindus whole-heartedly associating themselves with the Maho-
medans in their very just aspirations regarding the Caliphate, holy
Mecca and other holy places of Islam.
The swadeshi propaganda and work for Hindu-Muslim unity
require powers of organization, honesty of purpose, integrity in
trade, and immense self-sacrifice and self-restraint. It is, therefore,
easy enough to perceive that swadeshi propaganda on the purest
lines and promotion of Hindu-Muslim unity cannot but have an
indirect, though none the less effective, bearing on the movement
for securing withdrawal of the Rowlatt legislation for which the
Government can claim no justification—little as they can claim
even now—when we give an unexampled demonstration of the
qualities named above.
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 23-7-1919
