287. LETTER TO "THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE"
SABARMATI,
June 2, 1918
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
SIR,
I offer no apology for seeking the hospitality of your columns
for the enclosed extracts from Indian Opinion. They deal with the
well-being of over two lakhs of emigrants from India. Mr. Ahmed
Mahomed Cachalia, the esteemed President of the British Indian
Association of Johannesburg, has sent from that place the follow-
ing cablegram regarding one of the matters referred to in the
extracts:
Mass meeting, fifth, strongly protested section nineteen Railway
Regulations. Resolved cable supporters India. Regulations impose sta-
tutory colour bar in regard to issue of tickets, placing in, and removing
from compartments, occupation of places on station platforms, empower
minor officials remove without assigning reason. Please make suitable re-
presentation appropriate quarters. Community unanimous assert rights
unless relief sought granted.
Mr. Cachalia was one of the staunchest workers during the
passive resistance campaign that raged for eight years in South
Africa. During that campaign, he reduced himself to poverty,
and accepted imprisonment for the sake of India's honour. One
can, therefore, easily understand what is meant by the words
"Community unanimous assert rights unless relief sought granted."
It is not a threat, it is the burning cry of distress felt by a com-
munity whose self-respect has been injured.
It is evident that the white people of South Africa have not
been visibly impressed by the war which is claimed to be waged
for the protection of the ryots or weaker or minor nationalities.
Their prejudice against colour is not restrained even by the fact
that local Indians have raised a volunteer bearer corps which is
gallantly serving in East Africa with the column that was taken to
East Africa by General Smuts.
The problem is difficult—it is complex. Prejudices cannot
be removed by legislation. They will yield only to patient toil
and education. But what of the Union Government? It is feed-
ing the prejudice by legalizing it. Indians would have been
content if the popular prejudice had been left to work itself out,
care being taken to guard against violence on either side. Indians
of South Africa could not complain even against a boycott on the
part of the whites. It is there already. In social life, they are
completely ostracized. They feel the ostracism, but they silently
bear it. But the situation alters when the Government steps in and
gives legal recognition to the anti-colour campaign. It is impossible
for the Indian settlers to submit to an insulting restraint upon their
movements. They will not allow booking clerks to decide as to
whether they are becomingly dressed. They cannot allow a plat-
form inspector to restrict them to a reserved part of the plat-
form. They will not, as if they were ticket-of-leave men, produce
their certificates in order to secure railway tickets.
The pendency of the war cannot be used as an effective shield
to cover fresh wrongs and insults. The plucky custodians of India's
honour are doing their share in South Africa. We are here bound
to help them. Meetings throughout India should inform the white
inhabitants of South Africa that India resents their treatment of
her sons. They should call upon the Government of India and the
Imperial Government to secure effective protection for our country-
men in South Africa. I hope that Englishmen in India will not be
behindhand in lending their valuable support to the movement
to redress the wrong.
Mr. Cachalia's cable is silent on the grievance disclosed in the
second batch of extracts. It is not less serious. In its effect it is
far more deadly. But the community is hoping to right the wrong
by an appeal to the highest legal tribunal in the Union. But really
the question is above that tribunal. Let me state it in a sentence.
A reactionary Attorney-General has obtained a ruling from the
Natal Supreme Court to the effect that subjects of 'Native States'
are aliens and not British subjects and are, therefore, not entitled to
its protection so far as appeals under a particular section of the
Immigrants' Restriction Act are concerned. Thus, if the local
Court's ruling is correct, thousands of Indians settled in South
Africa will be deprived of the security of residence in South Africa,
for which they fought for eight years and which they thought they
had won. At least a quarter of the Indian settlers of South
Africa are subjects of the Baroda and Kathiawad States. If any law
considers them as aliens, surely it has to be altered. It is an insult
to the States and their subjects to treat the latter as aliens.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 7-6-1918; also, Speeches and Writings of
Mahatma Gandhi
