61. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI AND OTHERS
[Before September 18, 1897]
SIR,
We are aware that the troubles in Poona as well as in parts
of India occupy very largely the attention of the public men
interested in Indian affairs and, were it not for the gravity of
the situation as regards Indians in Natal, we would not have
trespassed upon your time and attention.
The Natal Government Gazette publishes this week the address
of Mr. Chamberlain to the Colonial Premiers who had as-
sembled in London during the Diamond Jubilee season. The
following appears in the address with reference to the legislation
in regard to the immigration of Indians to this Colony and
other parts of the British Empire.
In spite of Mr. Chamberlain's eloquent tribute to the loyalty
of the Indians to the British Crown as well as their civilization,
the conclusion is irresistible that the Right Hon'ble gentleman
has completely given up the Indian cause and yielded to the anti-
Asiatic clamour of the different Colonies. He has indeed granted
that the traditions of the British Empire "make no distinction
in favour of or against race or colour," but, in the same
breath, he accepts the position taken up by the Colonies with
regard to the Indians and almost unreservedly approves of the
Natal Immigration Restriction Act, Petition regarding which,
with copy of the Act, was forwarded to you some months ago.
Mr. Chamberlain cannot be unaware of the fact that the
Natal Act was passed with the deliberate intention of applying
it almost exclusively to the Indians. The extracts quoted in the
petition amply prove this. It was also stated by the Right
Hon'ble Mr. Escombe, the Premier of the Colony of Natal, at
the time of introducing the Immigration Bill, that it was be-
cause the desired end, namely, the stopping of free Indian im-
migration, could not be obtained by direct means he had to
resort to indirect means.
The measure was almost unanimously pronounced to be un-
British and dishonest. It was in fact a stab in the dark. And
Mr. Chamberlain, much to our disappointment, sets the seal of
his approval on such a measure. We do not know now where
we are and what we are to do. The Act has already begun to
tell upon us. Only a few days ago, seventy-one Indians, who had
their rooms in Natal but had gone over to the Transvaal to
dispose of their goods and had returned to Natal, were arrested
some time after their return and kept in prison for six days for
being prohibited immigrants while their trial was going on.
They were discharged on technical exceptions but, had it
been otherwise, the trial might have gone on for some days more
and it might have cost them several hundreds of pounds before
they could have got the right to remain on a British soil. As it
was, it cost them not a little during the seven days' trial. Such
cases are bound to happen from time to time. And then, only
those who have been formerly domiciled in Natal could come.
Mr. Chamberlain says that a man may be an undesirable
immigrant "because he is dirty or he is immoral or he is a
pauper or he has some other objection which can be defined in
an Act of Parliament." Indians whom the Natal Act debars
from coming to Natal are, as Mr. Chamberlain has himself ad-
mitted in his despatch to the Transvaal Government, neither
immoral nor dirty. They are certainly not paupers. The weakest
point in the Natal Act is that it makes special provision for the
admission of those that are perhaps likely to be immoral or dirty because
they are drawn from the lowest strata of society, namely, the
indentured Indians. Immediately after the Act was passed, the
Indian Immigration Board sanctioned an indent for 4,000
indentured Indians—probably the largest indent yet on record
on a single occasion. How could Mr. Chamberlain ignore these
facts we do not know. We still venture to maintain, as we have
maintained all along, that the agitation against the Indians is
due to colour and trade jealousy. We have courted an impartial
inquiry and, if it is granted, we have no doubt the result will
be that the presence of the Indian in Natal will be found to
have been beneficial to the Colony. The commissioners, who
sat in Natal about 12 years ago to enquire into certain Indian
matters, have recorded that the presence of the Indian has been
a blessing to the Colony.
Really speaking, Mr. Chamberlain has practically granted
that an Indian so soon as he leaves India, ceases to be a British
subject, with the awful result that we have to witness, from day
to day, the painful spectacle of Indian British subjects deported
from or debarred from entering Natal, a British soil, to or to be
driven to the Transvaal or Delagoa Bay, both foreign territories.
The Transvaal Alien Act was, comparatively speaking, a
boon. An Indian taking a passport from Natal, Delagoa Bay or
India, or an Indian getting previous employment in the Trans-
vaal, could enter it while the Alien Law was in force. More-
over, it was not specially applied to the Indians. Therefore, any
Indian who was not absolutely a pauper could enter the Trans-
vaal, yet the Transvaal Law, because it told severely upon the
Uitlanders, was repealed owing to the pressure from Downing
Street. The same pressure, unfortunately for us, though we are
British subjects, is not available on the British soil. The Natal
Act debars any Indian from entering Natal who cannot read and
write any of the European languages, unless he has been for-
merly domiciled in the Colony. Therefore, the Mahomedan
community would not be allowed to bring to Natal a Moulvi
nor the Hindu community a Shastri, no matter how learned each
may be in his own department, because, forsooth, he does not
know English. An Indian merchant who has been domiciled
in Natal may come back to the Colony, but he dare not bring
any new servants with him. The inability to import new Indian
servants and assistants is a very grave inconvenience to the Indian
community.
Even if the Immigration Act is to remain on the statute-book
of Natal for ever and Mr. Chamberlain refuses to disallow it,
the clause with regard to the European languages needs to be
modified so as to admit all those who can read and write their
own language and are otherwise eligible as immigrants under the
Act. We are sure that this is the least that might be granted
to us. And we would beseech you to exert your influence in
bringing about that change, if nothing else. Mr. Chamberlain's
address portends, perhaps, that he would not disallow the other
anti-Asiatic Acts also, to which the petition herein mentioned
refers. If that be so, it is practically a notice to the free
Indians in Natal to quit the Colony, for that will be the effect of
the Dealers' Licences Act, if it is enforced rigorously as it is likely
to be now that the Colonists know that they would get almost
anything from Mr. Chamberlain for the asking of it—only if
what is required to be done is done by indirect, and, shall we
say, unfair methods. It breaks our hearts to think that Her
Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies should
approve of any unfair method, but that is the unanimous opi-
nion of the Europeans and the Indians. Even the Europeans
who are the bitterest opponents of the free immigration of Indians,
though they do not mind it, think and admit, that the above
methods of restricting free Indian immigration are unfair.
We are powerless. We leave the case in your hands. Our
only hope lies in your again bestirring yourself with redoubled
vigour in our favour. And we feel sure that you would do it,
for our cause is absolutely just.
(Sd.) CASSIM MAHOMED JEEWA
AND OTHERS
From a photostat of a handwritten draft bearing corrections in Gandhiji's
hand: S.N. 2509
APPENDIX
[EXTRACTS FROM CHAMBERLAIN'S ADDRESS]
One other question I have to mention, and only one; that is, I wish
to direct your attention to certain legislation which is in process of consi-
deration, or which has been passed by some of the Colonies, in regard to
the immigration of aliens, and particularly of Asiatics.
I have seen these Bills, and they differ in some respects one from the
other, but there is no one of them, except the Bill which comes to us from
Natal, to which we can look with satisfaction.
I wish to say that Her
Majesty's Government thoroughly appreciate the objects and the needs of the
Colonies in dealing with this matter. We quite sympathize with the determi-
nation of the white inhabitants of these Colonies which are in comparatively
close proximity to millions and hundreds of millions of Asiatics that there
shall not be an influx of people alien in civilization, alien in religion, alien
in customs, whose influx, moreover, would most seriously interfere with the
existing rights of the labour population. An immigration of that kind must,
I quite understand, in the interest of the Colonies be prevented at all
hazards, and we shall not offer any opposition to the proposals intended with
that object, but we ask you also to bear in mind the traditions of the
Empire, which make no distinction in favour of, or against, race or colour;
and to exclude, by reason of their colour, or by reason of their race, all Her
Majesty's Indian subjects, or even all Asiatics, would be an act so offensive
to those peoples that it would be most painful, I am quite certain, to Her
Majesty to have to sanction it. Consider what has been brought to your notice
during your visit to this country. The United Kingdom owns, as its greatest
and brightest dependency, that enormous Empire of India, with 300,000,000
of subjects, who are as loyal to the Crown as you are yourselves, and among
them there are hundreds and thousands of men who are every whit as civi-
lized as we are ourselves, who are, if that is anything, better born in the sense
that they have older traditions and older families, who are men of wealth,
men of cultivation, men of distinguished valour, men who have brought
whole armies and placed them at the service of the Queen, and have, in
times of great difficulty and trouble, such, for instance, as on the occasion of
the Indian Mutiny saved the Empire by their loyalty. I say, you, who
have seen all this, cannot be willing to put upon these men a slight, which,
I think, is absolutely unnecessary for your purpose, and which would be
calculated to provoke ill-feeling, discontent, irritation, and would be most
unpalatable to the feeling not only of Her Majesty the Queen but of all
her people.
What I venture to think you have to deal with is the character of the
immigration. It is not because a man is of a different colour from ourselves
that he is necessarily an undesirable immigrant, but it is because he is dirty,
or he is immoral, or he is a pauper or he has some other objection which
can be defined in an Act of Parliament, and by which the exclusion can be
managed with regard to all those whom you really desire to exclude. Well,
gentlemen, this is a matter, I am sure, for friendly consultation between us.
As I have said, the Colony of Natal has arrived at an arrangement which
is absolutely satisfactory to them, I believe, and remember they have, if pos-
sible, an even greater interest than you, because they are closer to the immi-
gration which has already begun there on a very large scale, and they have
adopted legislation which they believe will give them all that they want,
and to which the objection they have taken does not apply, which does
not come in conflict with this objection which I am sure you share with
us; and I hope, therefore, that during your visit, it may be possible for us
to arrange a form of words which will avoid hurting the feelings of any of
Her Majesty's subjects, while at the same time it would amply protect the
Australian Colonies against any invasion of the class to which they would
justly object.
Colonial Office Records: Parliamentary Papers, 1897, Vol. 2, No. 15
