165. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
December 5, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your two letters, of the 3rd and the 4th, together. I
understand from what you say in your letter that Kusum will
follow Dr. Talwalkar's advice, but Radha will not. She will
derive any benefit from the treatment that she is likely to get only
if she carries it out with determination. Qureshi's decision to go
to Lucknow is correct. You did right in not sending Hasmukh-
rai's letter. See if you can still reason with Parvati and restrain
her.
I would not have the courage to undertake the experiment
which you are making with regard to Ratilal. This does not
121
mean that you should not continue it. But it can certainly mean
that you have more love in you than I, and it should not be
surprising if that is so. The real test of a teacher lies in his success
in training his pupil to do better than himself. In other words,
he should give to the pupil all he has. If, however, he had had
to struggle hard to acquire what he has, his knowledge and skill
would be limited. On the other hand, if the pupil whom he is
training has great natural aptitude, he can considerably increase
what he receives from the teacher. I have not, therefore, paid you
an idle compliment in saying what I have written above. It is
nothing but an expression of my sincere wish, and that has always
been my nature. Whenever I try to impart to somebody what I
possess, my only wish is that the other person should improve upon
what I give him. In small matters this has actually happened.
Prema seems to be deceiving herself. She overworks and
falls ill. She had said in her last letter that the pain in the back
had completely disappeared and that she was confident that it
would not come back. Take the necessary measures immediately.
If it is absolutely necessary to get her tonsils removed, do so as
soon as possible.
Chhaganlal is at Hyderabad. I expect him to return here in
two or three days.
I have not received Flowers of St. Francis. You need not,
however, send it if it is with you. I have been able to get
another copy.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8274. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
