86. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Night, January 28/February 1, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I feel that my right hand will not give good service for long,
and so I intend to use both hands. It will take more time,
of course. But I should not want time here. I will give less
time to other work.
I have written a letter to Chanchalbehn
whose son Visu died the other day. That letter should not be
published or talked about. My actions are governed by mutual
trust. I do nothing without the knowledge of the authorities.
I will talk to them about this letter. There seems nothing wrong
to me in writing a letter of condolence. But it would be wrong
if such a letter were published. That would be propaganda.
That is why I have asked Gangabehn to show that letter to Chan-
chalbehn and then bring it back with her. No letter of mine is
intended for publication in newspapers. There is nothing wrong,
though, in your publishing in the "Ashram Samachar" extracts from
them containing moral discussions or news about our health.
Parnerkar does not seem to have calmed down. I believe that the
problem before him is certainly a moral one. Call him to you and
comfort him. Ultimately, of course, you will do what you think
best.
I don't look upon the orchard as a white elephant. It is a
useful investment. The money that is spent on it will not, in
the long run, have been wasted. An orchard always increases the
value of the land, helps the soil to retain moisture and cools the
air. This is a universal experience. The choice of trees to be
planted may of course require thinking. I have only stated a
general principle. Obtain Prof. Trivedi's opinion. He has seen
the plot of land. Send him a list of the plants and the number
of each. Ask him if he can throw some light. Write also to Prof.
Higginbottom. Pattanisaheb must have employed a curator.
You may seek his assistance, too. It is possible, however, that
under the present pressure of work, you will not get time to think
about all this. If that is so, ignore my suggestions. Totaramji is
everybody to us and we should be content with what he can do.
Where is Somabhai? And Bhansali? Have you any news of
Lilabehn? How is Hasmukhram?
Afternoon, January 29, 1932
I got your second letter today. Do not send by post the
leather for repairing the soles of sandals. Anyone who may
come to see us may bring it along with him. I see great risk in
keeping . . .1 alone with . . .2 . She may have exaggerated in
her letter, but . . . is not responsible for himself. How can one
say when he will have a fit of madness? If you keep . . . with
him, a responsible person should stay with them. If. . .3 can
control . . ., he may stay with them. Or somebody else. The
position would have been different if . . . had strength of her
own to stay with . . . . Moreover, . . .is a slave of passion. If,
under the urge of passion, he assaults. . . and she becomes
pregnant, that too would be a painful matter. Think over all
this and do what you think best. I have written this because
I know that you can bear the burden of every kind of
responsibility.
Do they permit food to be supplied to Abbas Saheb from
outside? Do we supply any? How is Mridula's condition? Is
the newspaper report about Ranchhodbhai correct?
I am writing to both Budhabhai and Parvati. Is Nanibehn
there?
Night, February 1, 1932
Anyone who proposes to come and see me should first see
Dahyabhai or know from him if he has any message to send.
This should be done so that both may not come here and
Dahyabhai may be able to send a message if he wishes to.
There are 57 letters this time, not counting yours and the
talk on the Gita.
Blessings from
BAPU 4
At night, February 1, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Please ask the women and find out whether they understand
the purport of the accompanying summary and let me know. On
further reflection I see that I should make a third attempt and
1, 2 & 3 The names have been omitted.
4 For the text of the Gita discourse (Ch. xv) which followed, vide "Letters
on the Gita", 21-2-1932.
give a still easier summary. I do not know whether I shall be
able to do that, but it may help me if I see some criticism of what
I am about to complete.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8206. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
