165. LETTER TO CHAIRMAN, A.I.C.C.
September 25, 1920
THE CHAIRMAN
ALL-INDIA CONGRESS COMMITTEE
CALCUTTA
SIR,
By a resolution of the All-India Congress Committee held at
Amritsar and dated the 2nd January last the undersigned were
appointed a Committee to draft amendments to the Congress Con-
stitution and Rules. The report was to be presented on or before
the 30th June last. We regret to say that owing to unforeseen
difficulties we were not able to prepare our final draft by that
date.
We now append hereto our final draft of the Constitution.
We have not been able to meet at any place for mutual dis-
cussion but have been obliged to confer with one another only by
correspondence.
In coming to our conclusions we have carefully considered all
the suggestions received from various quarters.
We have not been able to agree to the principle of fixing the
number of delegates to the Congress. Mr. Gandhi is alone res-
ponsible for the suggestion. The majority of us consider that the
Congress will lose its demonstrative and influential character if the
number is restricted. The majority admit the unwieldy nature
of the present Congresses. But in their opinion the benefit of hav-
ing an unlimited number outweighs the difficulty of the problem.
Mr. Gandhi on the other hand considers that the restriction is
essential in order to give the Congress a truly representative charac-
ter and to make it a proper deliberative body. He thinks too that
the Congress demands will become irresistible when it scientifically
represents the whole people of India with an effective and pro-
portionate voice in its deliberations and when every resolution has
been considered with precision. He thinks that its demonstrative
character will remain unimpaired by reason of the admission of
visitors and guests in an unrestricted manner. The draft hereto
attached embodies Mr. Gandhi's suggestions. If therefore the All-
India Congress Committee rejects Mr. Gandhi's proposal the section
dealing with the restriction of the number of delegates will have
[ to] be deleted. If Mr. Gandhi's proposal for restriction is accepted,
we approve of the principle of proportional representation known
as the single transferable vote.
The All-India Congress Committee will note the change we have
made in the Congress creed. The most noteworthy change propo-
sed by us is the substi[tu]tion of the adjective constitutional by
legitimate and honourable in reference to the methods to be
adopted. We think that the word constitutional having a double
meaning-popular and legal-causes embarrassment.
We have
also removed the clause "a steady reform of the existing system of
administration" in order to bring the article more in accordance
with the recent resolutions of the Congress on reforms.
Another noteworthy change we have made is to redistribute
the provinces on a linguistic basis. We believe that the present
distribution made from time to time to meet the exigencies of a con-
quering power is unscientific and is calculated to retard the political
and social progress of the respective communities speaking a com-
mon vernacular and therefore the growth of India as a whole.
We therefore feel that so far as the Congress is concerned, we should
re-divide India into provinces on a linguistic basis. This would
also strengthen the movement for securing such a redistribution by
the Government.
We have made no special provision for Mussulman representa-
tion in the Congress. In view of the happy relations existing between
XVIII-19
the two races, we do not consider it necessary to make any special
provision for their representation. But we wish to state that
if the Mussulmans desire any special provision or protection, it
should be made or granted for the asking. So far as recognition
of Urdu is concerned we have used the common term Hindustani
which includes both Hindi and Urdu and we have recognized both
scripts, Devnagari and Persian.
We present no separate draft rules. We consider that the
ordinary recognized procedure for such assemblies like the Con-
gress and its offshoots should be applicable where no special men-
tion to the contrary is made in the Constitution.
We remain,
Sir,
Your truly,
From a photostat: G.N. 8228
