136. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[DURBAN,]
September 22, 1913
DEAR MR. GORGES,
I am much obliged to you for your letter of the 19th instant
regarding the marriage question. I have not widened the original
scope of my request. But I shall endeavour as clearly as possible
to re-state the position.
It is submitted that authority should be taken from Parliament
during its next session to legalize monogamous marriages already
solemnized or hereafter to be solemnized by Indian priests among
Indians belonging to non-Christian denominations. Legislation
has become necessary only because the marriage clause in the new
Act was hastily worded without considering the full position.
Unless the relief now sought is granted soon, the status of Indian
women married in South Africa is that of concubines and their
children not lawful heirs of their parents. Such is, as I take it,
the effect of the Searle judgment combined with the action of the
Natal Master of the Supreme Court and the Gardiner judgment .
I have asked for a promise of amelioration during the next session
because I submit that the matter is one of urgency. With regard
to polygamy, I have not asked for legal recognition but the admis-
sion, under the powers vested in the Minister, of plural wives without
the Government in any way recognizing their legal status. The
admission is to be restricted only to plural wives already married
to Indians who may be found to be unquestionably domiciled in
the Union. This at once restricts the scope of the Government's
generosity and enables them to know now how many such wives
will have to be admitted. I have already submitted a plan as to
how this can be brought about.
In my humble opinion, the letter of the 10th August, 1911,
referred to in your communication, bears the interpretation I have
placed upon it. The British Indian Association raised the question
of polygamy and the above-mentioned letter containing the assur-
ance was the reply. I suppose you know that plural wives have
actually been admitted by the Immigration Officers and that
polygamous unions are even registered on the Transvaal registra-
tion certificates.
As doubts have arisen as to the meaning of the term "mono-
gamous marriage", I beg to record that the meaning that the com-
munity has placed upon it is that a marriage is monogamous if a
man is married to only one woman, no matter under what religion
and no matter whether such religion under given circumstances
sanctions polygamy or not.
I observe that paragraph 2 of your letter seems to suggest
that my reply to your last wire did not [cover], though it might have
covered, the other points referred to therein. I purposely refrained
from touching the other points as I felt that no scope was left open
for me to do so. But if General Smuts is still prepared to consider
the other points, I shall be certainly prepared to make a further
submission. I cannot help feeling that the unfortunate rupture
has taken place on points very vital to the Indian community but
of little consequence to the Government or the dominant popula-
tion of the Union.
Pray, always consider me to be one the least desirous to obs-
truct the Government and most anxious to serve it in so far as I
can do so consistently with my duty to my countrymen.
[I have, etc.,]
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913
