475. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
October 31, 1928
CHI. MIRA,
I have your two letters at the same time, one about the
Ashram and one describing your Meerut visit. I sent you two
letters to the Muzaffarpur address, one on Sunday and the other
on Monday.
I don't know how the news about the Ashram appears in the
papers. Anyway most of it is all false. If there was any violent
change I would have surely written to you. I have not dealt
with even the change of name in the paper because Mahadev
and others were anxious that I should not even announce change
of name in the Press. Now, of course, I shall be obliged to do so.
But the committee of the Udyoga Mandir would not relax the rule
about brahmacharya, so that the fundamental rule about brahma-
charya and all fundamental rules remain as they were. So does
the common kitchen remain a fixture irrevocably for at least one
year. At the end of the year only, it is now possible to recon-
sider the question of the common kitchen in the light of the experi-
ence that will be gained. The kitchen is going on merrily.
The Gandhi Ashram people in Meerut want carding demon-
stration and demonstration of other processes at the time of a fair
that is to be held on 21st November. If you are not going to
Nepal, it might be well to retrace your steps and go to this fair
and give them what help you can and then proceed to Kashmir.
Apart from everything else, I would like you to visit Kashmir and
that you will do only while there is some khadi work going on.
And you can take the help of Devdas, Rasik and Navin for ar-
ranging the demonstration, in which case it won't be necessary to
send anybody from here, and as we are terribly short-handed at the
present moment, it will be very inconvenient to send any from the
Ashram. Yet I am anxious to help the Meerut people. Having
known my views, you will do what suits you best. I have not
held out any hope to Muzmudar who is the one to write the
letter.
With love,
BAPU
SHRIMATI MIRABEHN
C/O KHADI DEPOT, MUZAFFARPUR (BIHAR)
From the original: C.W. 5320. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 8210
