324. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
[NADIAD,]
July 2, 1918
BHAISHRI PRANJIVAN,
I have not been able to write to you for some time past. I
carry on with the money I get here and do not go out to beg. I
am in utmost need of money at present. Construction work is in
progress. I have already spent forty thousand rupees on it. Sixty
thousand more will be required. I have to provide accommodation
for at least a hundred and fifty persons and install sixteen looms.
Work on cloth is expanding rapidly. After the Ahmedabad strike,
I have come into contact with a number of weavers. About three
hundred women have started working the rentia. I believe we shall
get, before long, about two maunds of handspun yarn every day.
These women were unemployed. They are employed now. About
thirty weavers outside have also found employment. Some of these
are Dheds. They used to labour for wages but now they have found
an independent vocation. I think this is a very important activity.
For it, too, I need more money. I reckon I shall have to invest
ten thousand rupees in this. The National School activity is, I
think, equally important. It is my impression that even at pre-
sent the boys of this school compare favourably with other boys
at the same stage of education. The qualities of fearlessness, etc.,
which they have acquired are there for all to see. I can see that
the school will require one thousand rupees every month, though
just now the expenses are lower. If I were to look after both these
activities myself I am sure I could expand them considerably. But
I cannot manage that. Even as it is, I find that good progress is
being made in both. I have to tax you for a large amount just now
and should like you, as a permanent arrangement, to make good
any deficit that may remain after contributions from elsewhere
have been received. Please give, if you can, what I have asked
for, so that my anxieties may end. If you disapprove of my work,
I certainly cannot ask you for anything. But do not stint if you
think that it is along the right lines.
You must be watching my work of recruitment. Of all my
activities, I regard this as the most difficult and the most important.
If I succeed in it, genuine swaraj is assured.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
