16. LETTER TO PROF. JEVONS
August 11, 1918
DEAR PROF. JEVONS 2 ,
I have gone through your note. I like it in the main. We
should supply as many men as may be needed and this not through
the official agency, but by Home Rule organizations. If we do
this, we have Home Rule.
I do not agree with your financial side. The comparison
between England and India is hopelessly misleading. England
can afford. India is poverty-stricken. A few have enriched them-
selves during the war. But the masses? I have come in the
closest touch with them in Kaira and Champaran. They have
nothing. In Kaira, the exorbitant demands of the Government
have impoverished a people who were once rich and powerful. In
Champaran, the Planters have sucked the life-blood out of the
people. You talk of a rise in the salt tax and send a shudder
through my body. If you knew what is happening to the people
owing to the tax, you would say, "Whatever else is done, the tax
must go today". It is not the heaviness of it which oppresses, but
the monopoly has artificially raised the price of salt and today
the poor find it most difficult to procure salt at a reasonable price.
To them salt is as necessary as water and air.
As for the publication of the note, I think it need not be. The
Reformers have no faith in the Government and they feel that even
now there is no honesty in their dealings with the people. It is a
curious phenomenon. We do not trust you and yet we want you.
It shows a consciousness of the wrongs done to the people but
their utter incapacity to remedy them. Enslavement of the nation
is thorough. The Englishmen have not deliberately meant it but
they could not have done more if they had. I only cling to
England because I believe her to be sound at heart and because
I believe that India can deliver her mission to the world better
through England. If I had not this faith, I so thoroughly detest
her act of disarming India, her haughty and exclusive military
policy and her sacrifice of India's riches and art on the altar of
commercial greed, that I should declare myself a rebel.
I did not want to give you a long letter but my pen would
not be checked.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
