326. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
October 29, 1909
MY LORD,
I have received a cablegram as follows:
Committee advises delegates return Africa if work finished London.
This is in reply to my letter which reads as follows (writing on the
8th instant to Mr. Kallenbach, a German friend, who together with
Mr. Doke, looks after the matters connected with the struggle there):
This letter will be in your hands on Thursday. My programme
now is that we should leave here on the 30th of this month.
There is every hope of our being able to finish off the work by
that time. If we do, then comes the question about India. This
will be in your hands two days before the proposed date for
departure. Unless you hear something from me to the contrary,
or unless the situation has developed otherwise, will you please cable
what the intention of the Committee is. Next week I may have
to cable myself asking for full instructions, but if I do not, a
cable from you on receipt hereof may be necessary. The Indian
tour means two months, one month for the voyage there and back
here, and one month in India—it may mean even more. As a
passive resister I feel that the Indian tour, as indeed this tour,
is useless, but thinking from the standpoint of non-passive resi-
sters, just as a few months have been given to London, two more
may be added to finish off India. There will be, then, a question
of funds also, and funds will have to be cabled to me.
Whether the Committee has taken a purely passive-resistance view,
or whether it is owing to the want of funds, or both, it seems that, under
the circumstances, we should abandon—for the time being at least—
the Indian visit. The matter is further complicated by a cable from
Mr. Polak, who cables today from India as follows:
Very strongly advise you to come.
But on the whole, I feel that, no matter at what stage the struggle
stands, we shall leave definitely on the 13th November for South Africa,
and challenge arrest on the Transvaal border.
Lord Crewe's reply has not yet been received. I do not know what
this means, but if it comes too late for public action whilst we are here,
I think it should then be carried on by the Committee. Mr. Ritch['s
opinion] coincides with this view.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5150
