307. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
May 2, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your two letters of the 26th and the 27th. Don't mind
the expenditure on the operation on Chi. Ratilal's son. In such
matters, he will not forget so soon that he is a rich man's son, nor
will Champa let him do so. Slowly teach him as much simplicity
as you can. He is a young man with a very frank nature. You
do the right thing in giving him a seat next to yours. It will be
excellent if he spends his time in writing a little, spinning for a
while and reading something. Write directly to Dr. Mehta about
the operation. Mention the expenditure, too.
I don't wish to press Chi. Narandas or Ramniklal. I would
not mind if you, the women, Surendra and others persuaded
them to stay on. After all, it is you who have to work with
them. If they refuse to stay on, I will not blame you in the
least for that. It would be good if they stayed till my return.
Chhaganlal's ten thousand, so far as I know, was accumulated
in this manner: sale proceeds of jewellery, savings in Phoenix,
accumulated interest and what was saved from the money given
by Dr. Mehta. The latter had given the money for a specific
purpose—for the expenses in England. If anything was saved
from it, it should have been returned to him. Instead, Chhaganlal
kept the amount with him, and that was theft. He, too, has looked
upon it in that light. He said something of the kind at the time
of handing over the money. I, however, made no comment, since
I had not the slightest suspicion in my mind. But I understood
what he had meant when the fact of his having kept back the
money was discovered, and he, too, explained the position in
clearer words. I do not know what the amount in question was.
Whatever it might be, he certainly cannot use money which con-
tains a portion which was stolen.
I advise Ramniklal to go to Jabalpur. If, however, Kishore-
lal is ready to go, that will certainly be the right thing. He may then
ask anyone of his choice to join him—if, that is, a field exists there.
Read about the case of the widow Satyavati in Young India.
It should also appear in Navajivan. If she wants to join, we cannot
but admit her. There is little likelihood of her joining, though.
When Mahadev is free, he should take the women's classes.
Do not think of asking Maganbhai and Soman to come and help.
We cannot just now snatch away anyone from Kaka. The train-
ing given in the Mandir is of an altogether different kind. We
want knowledge of the letters, but its place is secondary. No one
will judge the Mandir from its standard of literary education.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
After I had finished the foregoing letter, more letters have
arrived. I am thinking of sending a wire about Kanti, so
that it may be easier for you. If he can be released from dairy
work without inconvenience, let him go for some time. It seems
that Harilal wants to give him a camera. If he does, I do not
feel inclined to ask Kanti not to accept it. However, advise him
as you think best.
Personally I approve of your having given the land to Pannalal.
You need not consult me about the decisions in the matter.
Besides, Kaka is there; whom else do you require? But the
consent of the Cow-Service Society is not enough. That Com-
mittee may consider the merit or otherwise of the proposal.
It is the Managing Committee's right to rent out land. Its
consent, therefore, will be necessary so that the transaction
may be in order. Personally I wish that Pannalal should not even
put up new structures. He should pay rent for Joshi's house too.
Or, is that the agreement?
It is good that Maitreyi has left. Do Durga and Mahavir
work?
Why did Jayanti get fever? And Bal?
It is indeed a fine thing you are doing, running the Mandir,
as you do, like a school. That is our ideal.
I welcome the present time, which you regard as "critical".
I take interest, from this distance, in everything that is happen-
ing.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5408 and 5493
