233. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
October 18, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
Whilst the totally inoffensive Indian pickets are being charged,
without an iota of proof, with intimidation of those who may wish to
take out registration certificates, you will, perhaps, be so good as to allow
me to draw public attention to the hollowness of the charge, as also to
counter-intimidation, which is a reality.
A case happened yesterday in which three Indians from Pietersburg
were actually offered escort by the pickets, but it was refused. The fact
is that an attempt is being made to discredit the pickets by feigning
terror, and by asking for police protection. We, too, have our "national
scouts". They undoubtedly wish to increase their number, and allega-
tion of intimidation is one of the methods adopted. If there is any truth
in the charge, why has not anyone been prosecuted? It must be the
easiest thing to prove, because intimidation is supposed to take place in
broad daylight in Von Brandis Square in the presence of hundreds of
passers-by.
As to counter-intimidation, many Indians believe that Indians
possessing permits issued by either Capt. Hamilton-Fowle or Mr. Chamney
are, under quasi-official pressure, being dismissed for not having submitted
to the Registration Act. Whether such pressure exists or not, I have
before me a letter from the chief ganger at Germiston, confirming the
information received that nine Indians were dismissed because they
would not apply to be registered under the new Act. It causes little
wonder, seeing that General Smuts himself has led the way. He has
threatened all kinds of punishment—deportation and deprivation of
licences at the same time for the same persons. How both can take
place I do not know. Physical deportation is not even possible without
the immigration measure, which has still to receive Royal sanction.
Indians do not mind a fair fight, and, so far as I can see, they are pre-
pared even for an unfair fight, though it will be strictly un-British. Why
should the assistance of European employers be called in to force
Indians to take out certificates of slavery? That many employers have
up to now resisted any such pressure and positively declined to dismiss
Indians in their employ redounds to the credit of both—of the emplo-
yers because they will not take part in the process of hitting below the belt,
of the Indians because they are too valuable and faithful servants to be
dismissed.
I have just learned that the four Indians on whose behalf it was
stated that they were intimidated, and who were admittedly without any
permits, have to-day been discharged and assured in the open Court
that they will receive registration certificates. No doubt slaves deserve
their badge. In my opinion, those who possess old Dutch passes, as these
men are alleged to do, should be treated in the same way as those who
have received permits under the Peace Preservation Ordinance, but it
is a matter of public knowledge that Mr. Jordan had to perform the
painful duty of giving all such persons notice to quit the Colony. One
such man received notice the same day that the four men above-named
stated they would apply for new registration certificates. General Smuts
is thus, indeed, finding out the lawful residents from the unlawful ones.
The latter will become, under the Registration Act, the chosen people,
because they will have applied for certificates under it, and the former,
because they value their manliness more than worldly riches, will be
turned into unlawful residents.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 19-10-1907
