231. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
February 27, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I am writing this letter on Tuesday on board the Dayavati.
We are going from Kundapur to Karwar. Chandrashankar has
gone home. Since Valji is with me, there was no inconvenience
in letting him go. I have to leave Hyderabad on the 9th and
reach Patna on the 11th. Soon after reaching there, I shall be
entering upon my weekly silence, but it seems necessary that I
should reach Patna on that date. It was difficult to leave earlier.
All preparations had been made in Karnataka and it would have
been difficult to return to Karnataka from Bihar. Ambalal and
Mridula came and saw me. They had just come to see me
through their love for me. Ambalal and Saraladevi are going to
England. So long as Bharati and Suhrid are there, the two can-
not feel easy in mind. On the one hand, they give complete free-
dom to all their sons and daughters and, on the other, there is a
strong bond of love. I have found them a wonderful couple.
I have already written to you about the Professor's visit. He
also had nothing particular to discuss.
Miss Lester has gone to Ceylon. Agatha Harrison will leave
London on March 2 and come to India.
Lakshmidas has been suffering from enteric fever for the last
eight days. There was a wire about him from Swami yesterday.
I have asked him to wire to me every day. Prithuraj is with me.
So far he has not expressed a desire to go. But I have given him
my permission. Velanbehn must be very unhappy. Swami informs
me that Lakshmidas is being properly looked after.
Enclosed are a letter from Ba and Bhansali's postcard which
I had preserved for you. I have already given you the contents.
You must have read in The Times [of India] about me. It is
all poison. Even if I make a joke, it is described as my belief.
Could I do anything except joke with that "self-respect"? But
even that has been misrepresented. How can one counter such
propaganda? This is only the poison that comes into the open.
There is plenty being poured out behind the scenes. How can
one reply to it? I am firm in my faith that this falsehood will
not succeed against truth. So far I have not found that faith
to have been proved false in any instance.
Chhaganlal (Joshi) will be released on the 3rd. I have writ-
ten to him. Pyarelal is in Wardha. Chhaganlal seems to have
done good reading while in jail. He has acquired some pro-
ficiency in Marathi also. He seems to have read a good deal on
other subjects, too. I have told him in my letter that he may
come and see me in Belgaum if he wishes. Kanjibhai did not
come after all.
Thakkar Bapa will part company with me at Itarsi. He
need not come to Patna just now. I have not yet been able
to decide what Pyarelal should do. In the last resort he can of
course resume the work which he was doing. The prevailing
atmosphere is such as would confuse anybody.
I have had no letter from Devdas.
Raja left our party at Arkonam. Amtussalaam must still be
at Tiruchengodu. I have had no letter from her after leaving
Arkonam. I shall reach Karwar tonight. I would not be sur-
prised if I got a letter from her there.
Jamnalal was to go to Patna, but has postponed doing so
because of cough.
I have not heard from Dahyabhai recently. When you write
to Mani, please tell her how my attempt failed. How painful it
would be not to be able to see her or Mahadev though I would
be in Belgaum for two days? But we are helpless.
The dairy, which was being run separately, has been made a
part of the Harijan Ashram. It has been decided to make a
separate trust for it.
has been released. He was fined, and he paid up the
fine. Such things go on. He was not keeping good health.
You must have come to know that Vinabehn is no longer in
your hospital now. She has taken a separate house in Bombay
and is living there. She has got custody of her daughters and
intends to file a suit against her husband for their expenses. She
will probably get them.
1 The name is omitted in the source.
2 Mrs. Lazarus. Kumarappa introduced her to Gandhiji.
3 Vadilal Sarabhai Hospital run by the Ahmedabad Municipality
I met Kamaladevi's son and mother in Mangalore. The son
was dressed in U.P. style. I called on Sadasiva Rao's mother
and mother-in-law. Kamaladevi's mother and son had called on
me. A case is going on against Sadasiva Rao. Today was the
last hearing. We shall know the outcome in Karwar. If I get
time I will let you know about it.
Blessings to you both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 81-
