205. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
[Before April 5, 1918]
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN 2 ,
It grieves me to find that sometimes you jump to hurried con-
clusions and will not have the patience to hear the other side.
This, I venture to think, adversely affects your capacity for national
service which I know you always want to render. Take this Kaira
affair. I do not mind your differing from me. On the contrary,
I honour you for your stating your convictions even though it may
hurt you to have to hold them in opposition to your friends. My
complaint however is against the haste with which you form your
conclusions. You do not know the inwardness of the Kaira struggle
and you have no time to study it. There was the Godhra Con-
ference in which the masses for the first time took an active part.
Some of these men, at the end of the Conference, twitted the leaders
with these remarks : "What is the use of your holding Conferences
and inviting us? Kaira is face to face with practically a failure
of crops. The raiyats are entitled to suspension. What are you
people doing in the matter?" Some of the listeners accepted the
rebuke as well deserved and undertook to move in the matter.
Hence the petition signed by thousands for suspension. This peti-
tion alone should have been sufficient to warrant suspension which
would have meant merely loss of interest to the Government, but
the gaining of goodwill in return. The officials, however, took a
dubious and a devious course. They set about getting annawari
patraks of which I can say that most of them will not bear a close
scrutiny. The raiyats have exhausted every means at their disposal
for getting relief. Each time these faulty documents are flung in
their faces. What are they to do? To sell their cattle, trees or other
belongings and to quietly pay the revenue? I would defy you to
be on the scene as I have been and to advise the raiyats to do so.
You must know the methods that are employed in order to exact
payment from raiyats when they have no crops. I could not calmly
contemplate an emasculation of the raiyats taking place in front
of me. Nor could you. I hold that it is a perfectly constitutional,
just and righteous thing for a people to say, "Since you reject our
petitions and if we have to pay, we can only pay by borrowing
or selling our belongings." You have only to come and see with
what perfectly good humour the fight is being carried on, how the
people are steeling their hearts for any kind of loss and how elderly
men and women, too, are taking part in the demonstration. You
at least ought to see that this self-inflicted suffering must exalt the
nation, whereas the same suffering unwillingly undergone hitherto
has only degraded the nation. This is a bread-agitation. What
is the use of a thousand meetings in India, praying for redress if
they are to tell the people calmly to denude themselves of their trees
or their cattle or their ornaments whilst a constitutional agitation
is being carried on? It is like giving them stone when they asked
for bread.
I wish this letter would prick your conscience, stimulate your
inquiring spirit, bring you to Kaira and see the campaign in work-
ing. I would then not only be prepared to submit to, but would
invite, your report no matter how adverse it may be to the cause.
I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that you have at least
studied the question. You owe this to yourself, to a friend, and to
the nation. If you cannot give this much time to the cause, you
must have no business to hold any opinion on the Kaira affair.
I hope you will pardon me for my presumption in writing to
you as I have done. As I have told you so often, I always en-
deavour to secure your co-operation and help in my work and I
should be satisfied not to have it if you withhold it after full con-
sideration. You ought not to be led astray by the term "passive
resistance". You have got a concrete case. Judge it on its merits.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
