239. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Ashadh Vadi 3 [July 25, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
The letters you address direct to the Farm reach me sooner.
There can be no comparison between the sufferings in a gaol and
those on the steamer. But Hey makes such a comparison and it is shame-
ful on our part that we give some cause for his doing so. This, as I
understand it, is what Thaker means to say and his criticism appeals to
me as quite fair. Please think over it again.
I send herewith Chhaganlal's letter. You need not return it to me
as I have already made use of it. It would be nice if Chanchi could
be sent along with Dhanji. I do not think I shall be able to go there
at that time.
Since Santok has given birth to a daughter, there is no worry on
her account now. Karka kasadara karpavai. Please ponder over this
sentence printed at the top of Pope's [Tamil] grammar. There could
hardly be a task more difficult than to conquer one's passion in regard
to one's own wife. You will certainly succeed as your mind is inclined
that way. Do persevere in your efforts and try to create a favourable
atmosphere so that you will easily succeed. Even after I had made up
my mind and was persevering in that effort, Ramdas and Devdas were
born. You have to take courage from my initial failures. Poets have
compared man to a lion. All of us have the inborn capacity to become
kings of the forest of the senses; we can get that strength by giving conti-
nuous thought to it.
If there is a surplus stock of vegetables with anyone there, you may
please send it here by "to pay" parcel. Pumpkins, chillies, etc., will all
be of use here. Induce the vegetable dealers of Durban and Verulam,
if you can [to help us]. If they send parcels of vegetables occasionally,
that much money will be saved here. Some of the experiences gained
here are worth telling you about, but I have no time to write.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
1 Vide footnote 1 to "Letter to Maganlal Gandhi", p. 291.
2 Vide footnote 2 to "Letter to Maganlal Gandhi", p. 291.
3 Chanchalbehn Gandhi
4 The original has this in Tamil script. It means "What you learn, learn fault-
lessly. [Having learned it, live up to it.]"
[PS.]
Mr. Kallenbach says that it would not now matter if the plants
are sent in gunny bags instead of in tins. If they are to be had at all,
they should reach here right now. It wouldn't matter if they didn't
come, but we should know the position.
I have sent Dr. Mehta a detailed report on the construction of sep-
tic tanks. It would be better, I think, to accept what West and Cordes
say in the matter. Moreover, we shall make the necessary changes if I
am there at the time of construction.
Please remember that a third-class ticket to Lawley has to be pur-
chased for Ba when she comes here. The railway fare for Park station
is the same as for Lawley.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4932
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
