314. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
March 31, 1932
As I had no news from you at all, at last I wrote to Tara-
mati.
Then unexpectedly I got your letter yesterday and felt
happy. I do not worry about your loss of weight. Your health
should remain good in other respects. From the point of view of
climate, Nasik is excellent. Write to me regularly from wherever
254
you may be. If writing to me comes in the way of your writing
to others, ask one of those to whom you must write to convey your
message to me. The understanding between the authorities here
and me is that I can write to any of my fellow-prisoners. This
should mean that, if the prisoner chooses to reply to me, his letter
should not count among the number he is entitled to write .
. . . 1 A prisoner ought not to even think of the outside
world. Karmayoga for him would mean doing the duty which
now has become his in jail.
In the verse ~~T ~\0lI1fr"l;;§2J "seek refuge in the attitude of
detachment", etc., the word buddhi certainly does not mean the
samkhya, or the path of knowledge. Here it has the meaning which
it bears in the phrase yogabuddhi, about which the Lord had pro-
mised to explain in the verse ~qT ~Sf-.:r~IfT 13i~~ ~f~!ll'iTft"ll1i ~!l! 1 3 "Thus
have I set before thee the attitude of Knowledge; hear now
the attitude of Action", etc. That is to say, if any comparison is
to be made at all, it is between karmayoga and bhaktiyoga. But in-
stead of making a comparison between Jnanayoga, karmayoga and
bhaktiyoga, the Gita aims at a synthesis of the three. To practise
anyone of them perfectly, one must also practise the other two.
That is, the three are inseparable. There is some indication of the
superiority of karmayoga from among the three, but only because
there is less risk in it of being deceived. ;:ri[Tf-.:r'!iI1<n~TS~1f 5lc!l"lT!l <! ~~~14
"Here no effort undertaken is lost, no disaster befalls", etc. I
believe that we must first grasp the general purport of the book
we are trying to study. In other words, our thinking about it
should be independent.
As for rebirth, there is no room for doubt at all. Our body
changes a little every day, so that in seven years the whole gets
changed altogether. It seems to be the same because the form
remains the same. If the body can be transformed every seven
years, there is no reason whatever to think that what we know
as death means complete annihilation. The atman is different from
the body and it is certainly not destroyed when the body is des-
troyed. Then, all that takes place at death is a change of state. If
a change of state is possible, why not a change of the body?
However, we can have a full discussion of this subject only when
we meet. Meanwhile, I certainly wish that you should be able
to get rid of your doubts about certain conclusions.
For this
purpose, you may put me any questions that you wish.
I don't think that I can write a smriti. What I write or say
has not been thought out in conformity with a system. I have
only enough strength to enable me to meet every situation as it
arises in the course of my quest for truth. That is to say, I am
no Shastri, and only a person learned enough to write a Shastra
can compose a smriti.
This suggestion was first made to me by
Kishorelal. I would certainly write such a treatise if I could. I
would be fortunate, however, if I can use rightly whatever powers
God has given me.
We three are quite well. The third is Mahadev.
[PS.]
I see nothing wrong in your trying without concern for the
result to come to see me. I would be very happy if you succeed.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 105-
