155. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
CAPE TOWN,
February 25, 1914
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I fear that my letter written to you yesterday has either been
destroyed through mistake or enclosed in a letter to Polak. For I see
Ramdas's letter before me and I thought I would post your letter myself
after dinner, which I did not do. I do not know what is going to happen
to Mrs. Gandhi. She hovers between life and death. Her appetite seems
to be coming to her. But she has again developed the ominous swellings
which frightened Dr. Gool who asked to examine her urine. His examination
has led to no results. And the swelling persists. He is a good man.
He never interferes.
Solomon has undergone his operation but he is causing anxiety, so
Polak wires. He is receiving best attention.
What is happening just now is that I am becoming a society man
and Miss Molteno is the instrument. She insists on introducing Mrs.
Gandhi and me to all the families she knows. Yesterday, we went to
the great Estate of the Moltenos and met several people. That is the
nature of work just now. She is undoubtedly a tactful peacemaker.
Sir Benjamin continues consciously or unconsciously to cause
mischief He is now in league with Habib Motan, whom I saw with
our friend Nooruddin and Morris Alexander of Johannesburg coming
out of Sir Benjamin's office as I went in.
Manilal must be there now. I hope you will try to be with him
as much as you can. If he remains morose I suggest your taking him
with you to your office and using him for office work in so far as
you may and can. I should like you to take your meal with him for
the time being.
You will be agreeably surprised to know that my eldest brother 2
who used always to go strongly against me has now completely changed
and repents of his past letters and thinks that I have not discredited
the family after all as he used to think before. He is ailing and his
one wish is to see me before he dies. His is a most pathetic letter
this time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 The letter was later traced and sent to the addressee with one dated March
19, 1914; vide the preceding item.
2 Lakshmidas Gandhi
165
