105. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
Shravana Sud 6 [August 7, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
You say you were scared by what Harilal told you about
baths. There is no reason for it, though. Harilal has been talking
in his ignorance. All that caution is unnecessary. I never bother
to take the temperature and so on. There is no need to. The
temperature of the water should be lower than that of the body.
The rest one knows from experience. Whenever Kuhne baths seem
to be called for, they may be taken without the least hesitation.
This is the reason behind the notion that tomato, lime, etc.,
are a cause of fever. When they are taken with a heavy meal and
illness follows, it is blamed on them. Secondly, when a person
whose blood is excessively hot through the use of spices, such as
chillies and pepper, and pulses and things of that nature, starts tak-
ing lime, etc., there is likely to be a crisis at first. If, however,
he gives up the use of spices and similar things and starts the use
of lime, etc., according to need, there is no doubt that his blood
will be purified. A man who has been in a very hot place and
then suddenly exposes himself to a breeze may get cramps. It is
possible that lime may have a similar effect on one who has been
accustomed to eating chillies, etc.
I think I have written to you about looking upon Brahmins
with reverence.
I am not against a good school, but I believe that a school with
too many pupils cannot be a good one. Moreover, that alone is a
school in which the pupils are on the campus for all the twenty-four
hours. Otherwise, one receives education of two different sorts.
When I am there, the Press will continue to work as usual.
Mr. Polak will carry on his practice. Miss Schlesin is already fixed
up elsewhere. Mr. Kallenbach will very likely accompany me.
Miss West will stay on in PHOENIX for the time being. Manilal
will go with me.
We need not assume that all our shastras have been written
after careful thinking and from knowledge. Charvaka's is also a
shastra. If by the term shastra we mean that alone which contains
perfect knowledge, then, of course, we can say that all shastras have
been written from knowledge. From this point of view, any shastra
which mentions human sacrifice, etc., should be taken to be mere
ignorance. The idea may have been interpolated in the genuine
shastras at some later time. One who wants to realize the atman need
not go in for such research. It is the concern of the historian; we,
on the other hand, should look for the essence, the spirit, of every
text or utterance. Why should we put ourselves to the bother of
reading sense in their nonsense in the belief that all shastras are
shastras [in fact] ?
In India, as elsewhere, knowledge and ignorance go hand in
hand and so we find obnoxious practices, like offering sacrifices
to Kali1, followed in the name of religion. We may not concern
ourselves at present about stopping them either. Our first concern
is that we should realize the atman. When we have learnt that
lesson and mastered it, we shall be able to solve all others with
little effort.
If Vibhishana went over to Shri Ramachandra with no selfish
motive, what he did was perfectly right. Who would conceal from
God the fault of even a blood brother? One is, moreover, justified
in seeking God's help to undo a brother's evil.
It is not possible to cling to the literal meaning of the verse
you have quoted from the Bhagavata . Krishna alone knows the
meaning of His sport. He may, submitting to the urge of desire,
pursue love, but we creatures of flesh and blood cannot do likewise.
The freedom He may have by virtue of his Godhead, we cannot
possibly take. Apart from this, the author of the Bhagavata wrote
what he did about Krishna within the limits of his own knowledge.
No one knows the real Krishna.
For the present, you should spend your time in the service
of your parents, in manual labour and studies.
I cannot say where I shall settle down permanently. I don't
know where a photograph of mine may be found. You need not
insist on securing one. Mr. Kallenbach's will be available.
I have not passed the test qualifying me for moksha. All my
desires have not been subjugated. I cannot still claim to have
mastered the palate. I dare not assert that the desire for sexual
pleasure will never get the better of me in whatever state I may
be. Love for the wife, the sons and other members of the family
has not yet melted away. All that can be said about me is that
I am one who is striving earnestly to attain moksha.
All your letters, which I have been carrying with me for so
many days, are now answered. You may ask whatever else you
may yet feel like asking.
I have been in Johannesburg for the last ten days. I have
come here to revive the struggle in case a settlement fails to come
off. I cannot say what will happen. I am waiting for a reply
from Pretoria. Mr. Polak has gone to England as desired by
Mr. Gokhale.
Let me know your daily routine. Write to Kotwal. His
address : Kotwal House, Thana.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5648
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
