9. LETTER TO T. PRAKASAM
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 7, 1922
MY DEAR PRAKASAM4,
You ask me for my future programme. I have just sent you
a telegram as follows :
"In Ahmedabad till Saturday Surat Sunday Monday Bardoli
Tuesday."
1 At a meeting of the Congress Working Committee in Delhi on Febru-
ary 24-25, Gandhiji tried to bring about a compromise between conflicting
views on the suspension of civil disobedience; vide Vol. XXII, pp. 480-.
2 Gopal Krishna Gokhale (1866-1915); patriot and statesman; presided
over the Banaras session of the Indian National Congress in 1905; founder
of the Servants of India Society; visited South Africa in 1912 at Gandhiji's
suggestion.
3 The Servants of India Society, Poona
But that is Government willing, for I have persistent rumours being
thrust upon me that my leave is now more than over-due, and
I am also told that I shall be relieved of my burdens inside of
7 days. Subject, therefore, to that happy contingency you have the
foregoing programme. If I am arrested, I look to you and all
who are out to keep absolute peace. It will be the best honour
that the country can do me. Nothing would pain me more, in
whatever jail I may find myself, than to be informed by my
custodians that a single head has been broken by or on behalf
of non-co-operators, a single man had been insulted or a single
building damaged. If the people or the workers have at all under-
stood my message, they will keep exemplary peace. I would cer-
tainly be delighted if on the night following my arrest there was
throughout the length and breadth of India a bonfire of all foreign
cloth voluntarily surrendered by the people without the slightest
compulsion having been exercised and a fixed determination to
use nothing but khaddar and, till then, in the glorious weather of
India, to wear nothing but a piece of loin-cloth, and in the case of
Mussalmans the minimum required by religious obligation. I would
certainly love to be told that there was a phenomenal de-
mand for spinning-wheels and that all workers who did not know
hand-spinning had commenced it in right earnest. The more I think
over our future programme and the more news I get about the
spirit of violence that has silently but surely crept into our ranks,
the more convinced I am that even individual civil disobedience
would be wrong.
It would be much better to be forsaken by
everybody and to be doing the right thing than to be doing the
wrong thing for the sake of boasting a large following. Whether
we are few or whether we are many, so long as we believe in the
programme of non-violence, there is no absolution from the full
constructive programme. Enforce it today, and the whole coun-
try is ready for mass civil disobedience tomorrow. Fail in the
effort, and you are not ready even for individual civil disobedience.
Nor is the matter difficult. If all the members of the All-India
Congress Committee and Provincial Congress Committees are con-
vinced of the correctness of the premises I have laid down, the
same can be done. The pity of it is that they are not so convinc-
ed. A policy is a temporary creed liable to be changed, but while
it holds good, it has got to be pursued with apostolic zeal.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 7973
