339. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BOMBAY,
June 15, 1919
CHI. MAGANLAL,
In my letter of yesterday I said that Chi. Shamaldas would
most probably arrive there today. My condition with him is this—
that he should learn weaving, sufficient for his purpose, do all that
may need to be done about it and go wherever necessary. I expect
him to cultivate contacts with weavers all over India, to set them
working and find out capable men among them, as also women who
can spin. I think he can do all this. Another condition I have
made is that he should bring over Shanti to the Ashram. Shanti will
perhaps agree to live there, but I do not think, nor does Shamal-
das, that Nandkorbhabhi will. If I remain free and succeed in win-
ning her over and bringing her to the Ashram, persuading her that
the activities there are wholly concerned with dharma, that will be
another story. Meanwhile, however, Shamaldas must stay with
Nandkorbhabhi. I think it will be possible for him to rent the out-
houses in Miyakhan's bungalow. Anasuyabehn tells me that, apart
from these rooms, some other house will also be available. Do what
you think best in this matter. Shamaldas believes that in 15 to
20 days Nandkorbhabhi will agree to come over there. The con-
dition I have agreed upon with him is that I should provide him
80 to 90 rupees a month. Give the amount to him and enter them
in the books accordingly. I think I shall be able to obtain this
from Dr. Mehta. It is for you, Chhaganlal and Shamaldas him-
self to see that he is wholly absorbed in the Ashram activities. You
can ask me for any help that may be needed.
I am very keen
that all the three brothers should join me in my work. I had a very
good letter from Ranchhod. He says that he would certainly love
to take an examination and that, accordingly, I should let him
satisfy his desires; he is sure, though, that, after taking his B.A.,
he will come over there. He has no doubt that he loves all the
activities I have undertaken. Ranchhod's language is very beauti-
ful. I see from this that he has improved his Gujarati.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 6661
