308. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
October 14, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your cable from Madras. I am sorry Mr. Doke's book is
not yet ready. I have just got two advance copies, but I suppose it is
not necessary for me to send one out to you. As soon as the copies are
ready, I shall ask Mr. Cooper to send 250 to Mr. Natesan.
I enclose herewith cutting from The Times reporting the Madras
meeting . You will see also a cablegram from Pretoria. I do not know
what it means. Surely, negotiations have gone on after Smuts' departure.
However, we have to work as if they have fallen through. The report
of the Indian Immigration Commission is good at the present juncture.
I think that when you are in Calcutta, an attempt should be made to
have an All-India deputation to wait on Lord Minto. You may get
Sir Charles Turner to join you, though I can well imagine your difficulty,
but whether he does or not, there would be no difficulty in having the
deputation, and a representative may travel from Madras, Bombay,
Allahabad, Lahore, etc. I am writing with reference to your appoint-
ment as a delegate to the Congress and [the] Mahomedan Conference.
They will be held, I suppose, about the same time, but [if] it is the same
day, you will have to use your discretion whether you will go to the
Mahomedan Conference or whether you will go to the Congress. Along
passive resistance lines, it appears to me that the Mahomedan Conference
will be the best. I take it, too, that you will go to Aligarh.
I am still creeping. I had thought that there would be a letter from
Lord Crewe in reply to mine at once, but up to the time of dictating this
(Thursday morning) there is none, and until his authority for publishing
the net result of the negotiations is received, I feel that nothing can be
done. It is now problematical whether, even if a reply is received this
week from him, I can finish the work of education before the 30th inst.
As you will be seeing practically the whole of India—a privilege I have
myself not yet been able to enjoy—I think I should jot down the definite
conclusions to which I have almost arrived after more matured observa-
tions made here.
The thing was brewing in my mind, but there was no certain clear
light. The heart and brain became more active after I accepted the invita-
tion of the Peace and Arbitration Society to speak to them on "East and
West". It came off last night. I think this meeting was a splendid
success; they were earnest folk, but some insolent questions were put on
the South African situation. You will be surprised to learn that even in
Hampstead there were men enough to stand up for the tragedy in South
Africa, and to talk all the claptrap about the Indian trader being a
canker, and what not. A dear old lady got up and said that I had ut-
tered disloyal sentiments and, just as we have to deal with idolaters in
South Africa who would think of and cling to form and superficiality as
in the case of finger-impressions, so had I last night in the Friends'
Meeting House. My main purpose was, in all the questions that were
1 (1845-1914); Viceroy and Governor-General of India, 1905-10
2 In the office copy from the Sabarmati Sangrahalaya, two pages are missing
here. These have been supplied from a handwritten copy in the Gokhale papers with the
Servants of India Society, Poona and collated with the part of the letter given in
M. K. Gandhi and the South African Indian Problem by Dr. P. J. Mehta.
3 Vide "Speech at Hampstead", pp. 475-.
addressed to me, forgotten, and details were warmly taken up and dis-
cussed. The following are the conclusions:
(1) There is no impassable barrier between East and West.
(2) There is no such thing as Western or European civilization, but
there is a modern civilization, which is purely material.
(3) The people of Europe, before they were touched by modern
civilization, had much in common with the people of the East, anyhow,
the people of India; and, even today, Europeans who are not touched by
modern civilization are far better able to mix with the Indians than the
offspring of that civilization.
(4) It is not the British people who are ruling India, but it is modern
civilization, through its railways, telegraphs, telephones, and almost
every invention which has been claimed to be a triumph of civilization.
(5) Bombay, Calcutta, and the other chief cities of India are the
real plague spots.
(6) If British rule was replaced tomorrow by Indian rule based
on modern methods, India would be no better, except that she would
be able then to retain some of the money that is drained away to England;
but, then, Indians would only become a second or fifth edition of Europe
or America.
(7) East and West can only and really meet when the West has
thrown overboard modern civilization, almost in its entirety. They can
also seemingly meet when East has also adopted modern civilization.
But that meeting would be an armed truce, even as it is between, say,
Germany and England, both of which nations are living in the Hall of
Death in order to avoid being devoured, the one by the other.
(8) It is simply impertinence for any man or any body of men to
begin or contemplate reform of the whole world. To attempt to do so
by means of highly artificial and speedy locomotion is to attempt the
impossible.
(9) Increase of material comforts, it may be generally laid down,
does not in any way whatsoever conduce to moral growth.
(10) Medical science is the concentrated essence of Black Magic.
Quackery is infinitely preferable to what passes for high medical skill.
(11) Hospitals are the instruments that the Devil has been using
for his own purpose, in order to keep his hold on his kingdom. They
perpetuate vice, misery and degradation, and real slavery.
(12) I was entirely off the track when I considered that I should
receive a medical training. It would be sinful for me in any way what-
soever to take part in the abominations that go on in the hospitals.
If there were no hospitals for venereal diseases, or even for consump-
tives, we should have less consumption, and less sexual vice amongst us.
(13) India's salvation consists in unlearning what she has learnt
during the past fifty years.
The railways, telegraphs, hospitals, lawyers, doctors, and such
like have all to go, and the so-called upper classes have to learn to live
conscientiously and religiously and deliberately the simple peasant life,
knowing it to be a life giving true happiness.
(14) Indians should wear no machine-made clothing, whether it
comes out of European mills or Indian mills.
(15) England can help India to do this, and then she will have
justified her hold of India. There seem to be many in England today
who think likewise.
(16) There was true wisdom in the sages of old having so regulated
society as to limit the material condition of the people: the rude
plough of perhaps five thousand years ago is the plough of the husband-
man today. Therein lies salvation. People live long, under such condi-
tions, in comparative peace much greater than Europe has enjoyed
after having taken up modern activity, and I feel that every enlightened
man, certainly every Englishman, may, if he chooses, learn this truth
and act according to it.
There is much more than I can write upon today, but the above is
enough food for reflection. You will be able to check me when you
find me to be wrong.
You will notice, too, that it is the true spirit of passive resistance
that has brought me to the above almost definite conclusions. As a
passive resister, I am unconcerned whether such a gigantic reformation,
shall I call it, can be brought about among people who derive their
satisfaction from the present mad rush. If I realize the truth of it, I
should rejoice in following it, and, therefore, I could not wait until the
whole body of people had commenced. All of us who think likewise
have to take the necessary step; and the rest, if we are in the right, must
follow. The theory is there : our practice will have to approach it as
much as possible. Living in the midst of the rush, we may not be able
to shake ourselves free from all taint. Every time I get into a railway
car, use a motor-bus, I know that I am doing violence to my sense of
what is right. I do not fear the logical result on that basis. The visit-
ing of England is bad, and any communication between South Africa
and India by means of Ocean's grey-hounds is also bad, and so on.
You and I can, and may, outgrow those things in our present bodies,
but the chief thing is to put our theory right. You will be seeing there
all sorts and conditions of men. I, therefore, feel that I should no longer
withhold from you what I call the progressive step I have taken mentally.
If you agree with me, it will be your duty to tell the revolutionaries and
everybody else that the freedom they want, or they think they want, is
not to be obtained by killing people or doing violence, but by setting
themselves right, and by becoming and remaining truly Indian. Then
the British rulers will be servants and not masters. They will be trustees
and not tyrants, and they will live in perfect peace with the whole of
the inhabitants of India. The future, therefore, lies not with the British
race, but with the Indians themselves, and if they have sufficient self-
abnegation and abstemiousness, they can make themselves free this very
moment, and when we have arrived in India at the simplicity which is
still ours largely and which was ours entirely until a few years ago, it
will still be possible for the best Indians and the best Europeans to see
one another throughout the length and breadth of India and act as the
leaven. When there was no rapid locomotion, traders and preachers
went on foot, from one end of the country to the other, braving all the
dangers, not for pleasure, not for recreating their health, (though all
that followed from their tramps,) but for the sake of humanity. Then
were Benares and other places of pilgrimage holy cities, whereas today
they are an abomination.
You will recollect you used to rate me for talking to my children
in Gujarati. I now feel more and more convinced that I was absolutely
right in refusing to talk to them in English. Fancy a Gujarati writing
to another Gujarati in English, which as you would properly say, he
mispronounces and writes ungrammatically. I should certainly never
commit the ludicrous blunders in writing in Gujarati that I do in writ-
ing or speaking in English. I think that, when I speak in English to an
Indian or a foreigner, I in a measure unlearn the language. If I want
to learn it well and if I want to attune my ear to it, I can only do so
by talking to an Englishman, and by listening to an Englishman speaking.
Now I think I have given you a terrible dose, I hope you will be able
to digest it. It is very likely that you with your great imagination and
sound common sense have perhaps, in your varied experience there,
probably come to the conclusions independently of me. After all, they
are not new but they have only now assumed such a concrete form and
taken a violent possession of me.
I have just received the following cablegram from Johannesburg:
Smuts tells newspapers he awaits Secretary State's answer regarding his pro-
posals. London Committee continues for present.
This cablegram means that the question is being somewhat agitated
in Johannesburg and that Smuts is no longer sanguine about smashing
passive resistance. It shows, too, if Lord Crewe made a supreme effort,
he could bring about a settlement. However, we can but fight on. So
the London Committee continues. This does not alter the situation,
and it eases Ritch's position.
Poor Mrs. Ritch will have to undergo another and further opera-
tion. She may not even survive it. It will be a great relief to her if the
living death turns into real death.
9-31
Later—Millie was here after the foregoing portion of this letter was
finished. As I considered it to be so important, I read it to her. This
was followed by a fruitful discussion, which you can picture to yourself.
Mr. Ali Imam is still here. He leaves, I believe, on Monday.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5127, a photostat of the handwritten
copy and M. K. Gandhi and the South African Indian Problem
