426. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 11, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Your long letter came yesterday.
Your argument appeals
to me. Women themselves have resisted the argument that you
have advanced. I have believed it always that man is the aggres-
sor. He is more sensual than woman. I have therefore no
difficulty in following your argument. But the corollary you
draw defies experience. It has been happy where it has worked.
But they are rare cases and will always be so-nor is it unfortu-
nate. The usual condition is marriage and procreation. That
means breach of brahmacharya as we know it. That does not mean
that we should not aim at it. We must aim at it even though
there may be only one case of perfect brahmacharya out of the ex-
periment. Many attempt, only a few will attain salvation. There-
fore generally we shall have to be satisfied with married people
growing to brahmacharya and a few only being life brahmacharis.
If I am right, the Ashram will have to be what it is, always
rising higher after every failure. . . .1 and . . . are infinitely
better for having lived in the Ashram nor is the Ashram
any the worse for their having lived in it. They would easily
have been much better if I had been less imperfect and more
wise and for that matter the other elders. But I was their foot-
rule, so imperfect and untrue. Yet I do not consider myself
an unsafe guide because I am not consciously untruthful and al-
ways attempt to discover and throwaway my imperfections. All
I say is that failures there must be so long as we have not in our
midst a perfect man or woman. But we need not lose hope nor
become unnerved on discovering instances like . . .'s; they are
attempts of the system to throw off impurities. I rejoice at
the discovery, while I deplore . . .'s error, even as I would
rejoice at the discovery of a disease in my own body, though
I may deplore it. Further than this I cannot carry this trem-
endous problem-'one step enough for me, I do not ask to see
the distant scene'. We know the fundamental truth we want to
reach, we know also the way. The details we do not know,
we shall never know them all, because we are but very humble
instruments among millions of such moving consciously or un-
consciously towards the divine event. We shall reach the Ab-
solute Truth, if we will faithfully and steadfastly work out the
relative truth as each one of us knows it.
Ba wants her letter separately because of the separate delivery.
According to the date of the delivery of my letter to her, the
fortnight is not yet complete. I do not understand this intricate
working of the jail regulations. It differs in every jail evidently.
But that ought not to cause any worry. The philosophy of pri-
son life is that the body belongs to the keeper, i. e., the State.
Therefore generally speaking it may be said that a prisoner is
foolish who worries about exterior wants the supply of which de-
pends wholly upon the keeper's will. Thus everything given to a
prisoner is a concession which may be withdrawn at the will of
the State. Domestic letters fall under that category. We may
thankfully receive and write them so long as they are allowed but
we may not foam or fret or curse, if we are not allowed to do so.
Regularity of delivery we may prize but irregularity ought not to
unhinge us. Those who are prisoners for conscience' sake should
at least grasp this very simple but not generally understood truth.
If you can explain it to Ba, you should do so.
I shall see about the delivery of Hindi Harijan. My weight
is steady at 104.
Love from us all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Sacred cards going in a separate packet.
The slip containing your copy of the vows is too precious
a possession to be with me. I therefore return it for you to
keep.
From a copy: C.W. 9674. Courtesy: Mirabehn
