99. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
COIMBATORE,
Monday [October 17, 1927]
CHI. GANGABEHN,
I got both your letters. Please don't think that I feel hurt
by what you and other women there write to me. It is but right
that I should know everything that happens there. If I don't
stay in the Ashram, I should help you through my ideas at any
rate as much as I can.
You were the one that started the women's prayers. If you
now don't take interest in them, wouldn't that be like the sea
catching fire? It is your especial duty to attend them.
I wish to advise you all with regard to the conflicts among
you which have arisen, without sitting in judgment over any-
one. I will not form any opinion in my mind before I have talked
with everyone. I have certainly not felt that Ramniklal is to blame
in any way. I didn't send Radha's letter to him to inquire and
ascertain the truth; I sent it so that all the women may under-
stand the problem, come together and remove the misunderstandings.
There was no reason for anyone to feel upset on reading that
letter. Why should we be upset on discovering that someone
thinks, justifiably, in a certain way about us? If we have done
anything wrong, we should not feel upset when told about it,
but atone for it and thank the person who drew our attention
to it. If, on the other hand, the person has attributed anything
to us without reason, whether he is an old man or a child we
should look upon him as an ignorant person and forgive him.
You may show this to the other women if you wish to.
And now your questions.
I have nothing to say about the comparison with gold.
You enjoyed peace in Bordi, Borivali and Matar because you
were a guest there and were careful how you behaved. You
lived there in an atmosphere created by you, or others treated you
as a guest and changed the atmosphere to make you feel com-
fortable. But you look upon the Ashram as your home, you have
made it so, and therefore you are not a guest there. You are all
members of one family. It is in the Ashram, therefore, that you will
be really tested. Anyone there may find fault with you, or no
one may listen to you; but you must bear with it all. If you do,
you will enjoy peace. In a place where there is no cause for
losing peace, the peace which you enjoy is not real peace. What
is the value of the peace which an opium-addict enjoys? You
will have won peace only when you enjoy it in circumstances the
opposite of peaceful. Be sure that, so long as you do not enjoy
the profoundest peace in the Ashram, you have not won real peace;
that, till then, you have not really become an inmate of the
Ashram. She alone is an inmate of the Ashram who lives on in the
Ashram when others have left it, and will remain there till her
death. Unless the inmates live thus, the Ashram will not be a
real Ashram. I have never believed that it is. We are trying to
make it one.
Neither you nor anyone of us can say that what you regard
as self-development is really so. The Lord has said that he alone
goes to Him who thinks of Him, is filled with peace, even at the
moment of death. It is, therefore, at that moment that we shall
be tested, but who will judge whether we have passed the test?
The truth is that real peace cannot be described, it can only be
experienced. Ask the countless people sunk in ignorance; won't
we have to say that they enjoy peace? But in fact their peace
is not the peace of knowledge. The peace of knowledge is like
nothing else in our ordinary experience. Even the capacity to
endure hunger and thirst, heat and cold, should not be regarded
as a sign of peace. A good many murderers have shown such capa-
city; but they draw their sword as soon as someone says a word
to offend them. He alone enjoys real peace "who has no attach-
ment and no aversion, no love for honour, for whom the pomp of
wealth is nothing but a misfortune".
Question me again if you have still not understood, and go
on questioning till you do understand.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8705. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya
1Ramacharitamanasa, Uttarakanda
