289. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 2/7, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the Ashram packet yesterday. Mostly the packets are
handed over to me on the very day on which they arrive.
Read the letter which I am writing to Harilal Desai. I have
nothing to write about Giriraj this time. Do what you think best.
I was glad to read about Zainu. I am writing to Bhagwanji. His
letter will have no effect on me. I know his nature. I felt after
reading Madhu's letter that she was a very innocent girl. I am sure
Navin and others will learn simplicity by and by. I am happy
that you trust others. No one who does so has ever lost any-
thing in the world. The suspicious gain nothing; on the contrary,
they often lose something and exchange worry for peace of mind.
Take care about three things in regard to all who have got
malaria. They should see to it that they clear their bowels. If
they do not do that in the natural course, they should take either
a purgative or an enema. Even after the fever has come down,
they should take 5 grains of quinine daily for a week, dissolving
203
the quinine in lime juice and adding 10 to 15 grains of soda
bicarb to the mixture, drinking it as they would soda water.
There will be, and ought to be, effervescence, when the mix-
ture is prepared. Further, for at least one week after the fever
has gone they should live on milk and black dried grapes or
boiled vegetables. Those who have had no attack of malaria
should, if they sleep where there are mosquitoes, rub kerosene over
the exposed parts of the body before going to bed. In any case
everyone should keep his stomach light. Amidas does cause me
worry. I should be happy if my letter has had any effect and
he has started taking milk.
Punjabhai may follow his inclinations and live as he wishes.
If Jamna is treated by the Udasi Vaid who treats Chandrashankar,
she may also benefit. Chandrashankar is all praise for him. Go
and see him once. Read my letter to Gangabehn. Give her some
time and console her. If she comes to Poona even on the excuse
of visiting Kakasaheb, she will have change of air for three days.
Keep urging Nathji. His presence, too, may give peace to
Gangabehn. Tell Mahadev's mother that you are glad she has
come, and that she should not think of returning to Dihen in the
immediate future. If possible, she should stay on permanently in
the Ashram. Read my letter to Chhaganlal. You will see from
it what restraints should be observed by those who write to me.
If in any letter they are not observed, it should be kept back and
not forwarded to me. I think Khadag Bahadur's letter did not
observe them. Premabehn, too, seems worried. Read the letter
to her and console her. Read my letter to Kamalabehn Lundi.
Some of her suggestions deserve to be welcomed.
October 4, 1930
Read my letter to Chhaganlal Joshi. Everyone who writes
to me should observe the restraints which I have mentioned in it.
Any letters which violate them should be kept back. Khadag
Bahadur's letter was of that type. I don't want to burden you
with the responsibility of reading all letters. But you may glance
through a letter by anyone who is writing for the first time. Letters
by the women never contain anything objectionable. You will,
therefore, need to read only a few of them. I certainly feel some-
times that I should put in a separate packet the letters which I
write to people there. Perhaps the task of redirecting the other
letters is much too heavy a burden on you. I cannot think what I
should do to reduce it. Since those letters are not such as I need not
write, I continue to burden you with the task of redirecting them.
Read my letter to Harilal Desai, so that you may bear in
mind the suggestion I have made in it. I have recently started
spinning on the Gandiv spinning-wheel. I like it. I can spin on
it with almost the same speed as on the portable spinning-wheel.
I hope to increase the speed. With a few improvements, this
wheel can perhaps be made a perfect model. Read what I have
written about it in my letter to Ishwarlal Vimawala. Read what I
propose to write about it in my letter to Mirabehn too. I should
like someone in the Ashram to try it. You, too, may examine it.
I have suggested to Ishwarlal that he should send two or three
wheels. I have seen quite a number of models, but at the
moment I think that among them all this is the only one worth
trial and examination. I will write further about it after I have
had more experience of it.
Tuesday morning, October 7, 1930
I got the cotton and the yarn belt. The cotton was particu-
larly welcome, as Vallabhbhai is being supplied with slivers from
here. I am awaiting the scale, but there is no urgency about it.
Humility cannot be an observance by itself. For it does not
lend itself to being deliberately practised. It is, however, an in-
dispensable test of ahimsa. In one who has ahimsa in him it
becomes part of his very nature. A preliminary draft of the rules
and regulations of the Satyagraha Ashram was circulated among
friends, including the late Sir Gurudas Banerji. He suggested
that humility should be accorded a place among the observ-
ances. This suggestion could not then be accepted for the reason
that I have just mentioned. But although humility is not one of
the observances, it is certainly as essential as, and perhaps even
more essential than any of them. Only it has never come to
anyone by practice. Truth can be cultivated as well as Love.
But to cultivate humility is tantamount to cultivating hypocrisy.
Humility must not be here confounded with mere manners or
etiquette. One man will sometimes prostrate himself before another
although his heart is full of bitterness against him. This is not
humility, but cunning. A man may chant Ramanama or tell his
beads all day long, and move in society like a sage; but if he is
selfish at heart, he is not meek but only hypocritical. A humble
person is not himself conscious of his humility. Truth and the
like perhaps admit of measurement, but not humility. Inborn
humility can never remain hidden, and yet the possessor is un-
aware of its existence. The story of Vashishtha and Vishwamitra
furnishes a very good case in point. Humility should make the
possessor realize that he is as nothing. Directly we imagine our-
selves to be something, there is egotism. If a man who keeps
observances is proud of keeping them, they will lose much, if not
all, of their value. And a man who is proud of his virtue often
becomes a curse to society. Society will not appreciate it, and he
himself will fail to reap any benefit from it. Even a little thought
will suffice to convince us that all creatures are nothing more
than a mere atom in this universe. Our existence as embodied
beings is purely momentary. What are a hundred years in eter-
nity? But if we shatter the chains of egotism and melt into the
ocean of humanity, we share its dignity. To feel that we are
something is to set up a barrier between God and ourselves; to
cease feeling that we are something is to become one with God.
A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent, al-
though it is unconscious of it. But it is dried up as soon as it
enters upon an existence independent of the ocean. We do not
exaggerate when we say that life on earth is a mere bubble. How
is it possible to cultivate such utter humility? It develops of it-
self if we understand the spirit of our observances. Can one who
aspires to follow truth ever be a proud man? A life of service
must be one of humility. He who would sacrifice his life for
others has hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the sun.
Inertia must not be mistaken for humility, as it has been in
Hinduism. Because it has been so mistaken, lethargy and hypo-
crisy have often flourished in its name. True humility means
most strenuous and constant endeavour entirely directed towards
the service of humanity. God is continuously in action without
resting a single moment. If we would serve Him or become one
with Him, our activity must be as unwearied as His. There may
be momentary rest in store for the drop which is separated from
the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which knows no
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we be-
come one with the ocean, in the shape of God, there is no more
rest for us, nor indeed do we need rest any longer. Our very
sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of God in our
hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest. This never-
ceasing agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. True humility,
therefore, requires us to dedicate ourselves to the service of all
living creatures. When we have surrendered our all in this manner,
no day in the week is a day of rest for us. This supreme state
of total surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds
of human experience. It has been attained by many dedicated
souls, and may be attained by ourselves as well. This is the goal
which we of the Satyagraha Ashram have set before ourselves;
all our observances and activities are calculated to assist us in
reaching it. We shall reach it some day all unawares if we have
truth in us. It is unattainable if we consciously strive for it.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 61 letters today.
Some women from the Ashram should go and see Khurshed-
behn. If you have some news about Manibehn, let me have it.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
