220. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 17, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Should we not believe that you are unlucky? I sent the
birthday blessings by return of post, but the letter itself was
held back here. I don't know if it was posted yesterday. What
good do blessings conveyed in a letter do? You should be satis-
fied if my heart showered blessings on you, which it certainly
did. We never know how a person feels in his heart. It is the
heart which matters; all else is false.
You must cure the pain in your back. It can have some con-
nection with your monthly periods. Are they normal? I feel the
same doubt about Anandi, Mani and Mangala. Talk with the girls
and find out. It is probably time for Mani to begin to have menses.
I remember that she was three years old when she was brought to
the Ashram. She should be sixteen now. Mangala, too, may be
of the same age. Know from them all the facts.
If any of the women who have joined the Ashram recently
can write, ask them to write to me. Get into close contact with
Narmada. Her story is a painful one.
I do not know the life of President Wilson. I am told that he
was a good man and that his motives were sincere.
The last War seems to have done no good. Moral bonds have
weakened and hatred has increased. The war mentality is not
less strong today than it was before the War and the lure of power
and pelf has become stronger.
We can certainly pray for some person or with a material
aim, and such prayer may even be rewarded. But prayer which
is inspired by no such motive is probably more beneficial to the
atman and the world. Prayer produces an effect on oneself, that
is, it awakens further the Indwelling Spirit and, as the latter
becomes more and more awakened, the area of its influence be-
comes wider. What I have said above about the heart is appli-
cable here. Prayer is a matter of the heart. Saying it aloud
and similar other activities are intended to awaken the heart.
The Infinite Power which exists outside us also exists inside us
and is equally infinite there. The body is no obstacle to Its opera-
tion. The obstacle is created by us. Prayers remove that obstacle.
We do not know in any particular instance whether or not our
prayers have answered our wish. If I pray for Narmada to be
delivered from her suffering and if she becomes free from it, I
should not assume that that was the result of my prayer. Such
prayer is never in vain, but we do not know how it bears fruit.
Moreover, when the effect for which we had prayed follows, we
need not believe that it is necessarily for our good. In this matter,
too, we should follow the path shown in the Gitabodh. Prayers
should be offered in a spirit of non-attachment. Even when we
have prayed for some person, we can remain unconcerned with
the result. We may pray for a person to be delivered from
his suffering because we think that is for his good, but we should
remain unconcerned whether or not he becomes free. Because the
effect is the opposite of what we had prayed for, we need not
believe that our prayers have not been answered. Tell me if you
want me to explain the matter still further.
Remember about the list of Urdu books which I have asked
you to send. It is quite uncertain now when you will get this
letter and when I shall get your reply. We should however culti-
vate and feel certainty in the midst of uncertainty.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10294. Also C.W. 5750. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
