615. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
September 20, 1935
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I hear that the date of your arrival here is being repeatedly
postponed. As that means a longer stay in Almora, I certainly
like the postponement. You do need rest. Even there, however, you
cannot have complete rest. There are letters to be written and
visitors to see. Besides, you have to attend to the affairs of that
place.
Nevertheless, the strain which you will have to bear
here is certainly not there. Hence, I would even like it if you
stay there till the beginning of winter. And winter there is
famous. The winter of Simla is even more famous, and in winter
the cost of living there is much less than even in Wardha. Bunga-
lows can be rented almost for nothing.
Green vegetables, fruit,
etc., are plentiful and cheap and the scenery is perfect. The
cold there is a creation of people's imagination only. Simla is less
cold in winter than Lahore. I would, therefore, give you leave to
stay there even for the whole of winter. I am sure you will do
some work wherever you are. If you spend one whole year peace-
fully at a hill-station, then I believe your ear complaint will be
cured, Madalasa's health will become perfect and even Janaki-
maiya will become an excellent rider, assuming that she does not
have her bones broken meanwhile. I would certainly like you
to attend the meeting of the Spinners' Association. However, I
would do without you if you are content not to attend. We have
had enough discussions about the new policy, and you can write
to me from there and send your views. If decisions about Khadi
Pratishthan, Meerut and Kashmir remain to be taken, my views
about these also have been formed.
You may send your views about them too, and then resign
yourself to what happens.
There remains the meeting of the Congress [Working] Com-
mittee. You need not attend even that. However, I excuse you
from all this on condition that you spend all the time at some
hill-station. If you come down, then it will be your duty to
attend both the meetings. Didn't you go to Jullundur, as you had
intended to do? Radhakrishna and Sardar believe that you did not.
Now Sardar will have to go. Everything is going on well here.
Balkoba is experimenting with an exclusive milk diet under the
guidance of Gaurishankar. He is better now. I enclose herewith
a letter from Bhagwanji. I have asked him to see the man you
wrote to me about.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2975
