270. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
NADIAD,
June 7 [1918]
MY DEAR MILLIE,
I was glad to have your letter. I was looking forward to it.
Pearson has written a book which is undoubtedly seditious in the
sense that he desires separation, not home rule within the Empire. I
have not read the book but this is what I am told. The book is prohibited.
There is nothing wrong in Pearson's activity if he believes in it. And
it must be conceded that there is nothing wrong in the Government
trying to crush the rebellious spirit. P. was in China. This gave the
Government an easy way of getting hold of P. They have got him
and now he is probably on his way to England where I suppose he
will be comparatively free to preach separation. From what I hear,
he is quite happy and almost expected the result.
Yes, the letter to the Viceroy cost many an anxious hour — I
could not help writing the letter. The story of its creation is worth telling
but I have not the time to reproduce it here. When we meet and have
leisure you shall have it if it has not become too stale then.
You will see my letter about S.A. You should write to Cachalia.
I wonder why Anasuyabehn has not replied. I shall speak to her.
She is by no means so lazy or discourteous.
I am going to Bombay on the 10th instant. I must then see about
your trunk. Narandas is there now. He was away in Kathiawad. I
will see to the proper labelling and have the carriage prepaid.
I hope you are all keeping well. So the Kaira struggle has ended.
You will see my final letter on it.
1 Vide Vol. XIV, pp. 121-.
2 From the contents; ibid., pp. 410 and 416.
3 W. W. Pearson
4 Vide Vol. XIV, p. 403.
I have not had practically a single acknowledgment of my many
letters. They have evidently been sunk or miscarried. Please pass this
on to him. I have not heard from him otherwise either.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BHAI
[PS.]
Do you know that Manilal is now all alone in Phoenix ? Mr. West
and Sam are in Durban doing commercial printing. Of course West
is helping Manilal. I. O. is now truly independent. I understand Manilal
is working day and night. West could not do otherwise than what he
has done.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
