444. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
April 13, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
You will see in this week's Harijan a reply to your difficulty
about the fast. I shall anxiously await your criticism. The story
of Nineveh came into my hands quite accidentally, but it fitted
in so well I thought.
In your letter of 22nd March you have asked a question
about Dr. Subbaroyan's Bill. As soon as I got the Bill I felt
the difficulty about a fair majority myself and I brought it up to
Rajagopalachari's notice. I had suggested too an amendment
even to the extent of three-fourths majority being required, be-
cause my idea always has been that unless the majority is a very
decisive majority, the big reform contemplated could not work
satisfactorily, and you must have seen how I have contemplated
meeting the objection even of a minority of one, because what
might be superstition to me may be a matter of life and death
to that minority of one. His particular temple might be all-in-
all to him and it might be his absolute faith that the temple
will be no good to him if he had to offer worship side by side
with a Harijan. But all these things are to be done when the
proper time arrives. I have discussed them publicly too, but I
do not want to reopen the discussion because nobody thinks of
It Just now. But you can have the assurance and give it to those
who need it that when the Bill reaches the Committee stage an
amendment for a decisive majority will certainly be carried, and
any other amendment that might satisfy the sanatanists and that
could leave the principle intact will most decidedly be accepted.
Mahadev has not yet made any guess about the name you
have for me. I have no doubt that you have many names and
not only one.
Thangai naturally would want to say nothing to me about
your capacity for taking in dates because she knows that there
at least I could always beat you and not by a bare majority.
About under-stamping of the envelope, there was no eco-
nomy, false or otherwise, possible for us. Not having been ever
a prisoner, you evidently fancy that we are free to do as we like
even to the extent of putting on stamps. You may then know
that stamps are not affixed by us. They are affixed in the pri-
son office.
Love from us all.
Yours sincerely,
MOHAN
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (3), Pt. IV, pp. 289-90; also G.N. 1302
