118. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Tuesday morning,
August 12, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
Control of the palate: Control of palate is very closely connected
with the observance of brahmacharya. I have found from experience
that the observance of celibacy becomes comparatively easy if one
acquires mastery over the palate. This does not figure among
the observances of time-honoured recognition. Could it be because
even great sages found it difficult to achieve? In the Satyagraha
Ashram we have elevated it to the rank of an independent obser-
vance, and must therefore consider it by itself.
Aswad means not to enjoy savour; savour means pleasure.
Food has to be taken as we take medicine, that is, without think-
ing whether it is palatable or otherwise and only in quantities
limited to the needs of the body. Food means everything we
eat. Hence milk and fruit are also included in it. Just as
medicine taken in too small a dose does not act or acts only partial-
ly, and as too large a dose injures the system, so it is with food.
It is, therefore, a breach of this observance to take anything just
for its pleasant taste. It is equally a breach to take too much of
what one finds to one's taste. From this it follows that to put
salt in one's food in order to increase or modify its taste or in
order to cure its insipidity is a breach of the observance. But the
addition is not a breach if it is considered necessary for health to
have a certain proportion of salt with food. Of course it would
be sheer hypocrisy to add salt or any other thing to our food, de-
luding ourselves that it is necessary for the system if as a matter of
fact it is not.
Reasoning along these lines, we find we have to give up
many things that we have been enjoying, as they are not needed
for nutrition. And one who thus gives up a multitude of eatables
will acquire self-control in the natural course of things. The
proverbs "one cooking vessel expects thirteen different ingredients",
"the stomach makes one submit to forced labour", "the stomach
makes one a flatterer", etc., are full of meaning. This subject has
received such scant attention that choice of food with this obser-
79
vance in view is a very difficult matter. Parents, out of false
affection, give their children a variety of foods, ruin their con-
stitutions and create in them artificial tastes. When they grow up,
they have diseased bodies and perverted tastes. The evil conse-
quences of this early indulgence dog us at every step; we waste
much money and fall an easy prey to the medicine man. Most
of us, instead of keeping the organs of sense under control, be-
come their slaves. An experienced physician once observed that
he had never seen a healthy man. The body is injured every
time that one overeats, and the injury can be partially repaired
only by fasting.
No one need take fright at my observations or give up the
effort in despair. The taking of a vow does not mean that we
are able to observe it completely from the very beginning; it does
mean constant and honest effort in thought, word and deed with
a view to its fulfilment. We must not practise self-deception by
resorting to some make-believe. To degrade or cheapen an
ideal for our convenience is to practise untruth and to lower our-
selves. To understand an ideal and then to make a Herculean
effort to reach it, no matter how difficult it is, this is purushartha,
manly endeavour. (The word 'purusha' should be interpreted in
its etymological sense, and, not merely to mean a man. That
which dwells in the pura, the body, is purusha. If we interpret
the word 'purushartha' in this sense, it can be used equally for men
and women.) One who at all times fulfils the key observances
in their perfection has nothing else left for him to do in this
world, he is Bhagavan, perfect man; he is a yogi. We are but
humble creatures, aspiring after moksha and seeking knowledge,
determined to follow Truth and dedicated to its quest. As taught
in the Gita, therefore, we should keep on struggling humbly but
vigilantly. If we do so, one day we shall be fit for God's grace
and then all our pleasures in objects of sense will disappear.
If we have realized the importance of this observance, we
should make fresh effort to practise it. For that, it is not
necessary to think about food all the hours of the day. The only
thing needful is perpetual vigilance, which will help us to find
out very soon when we eat for self-indulgence and when in order
only to sustain the body. This being discovered, we must resolu-
tely set our faces against mere indulgence. A common kitchen
where this principle is observed is very helpful, as it relieves us
from the necessity of thinking out the menu for each day, and
provides us with acceptable food of which we may take only a
limited quantity with a contented and thankful mind. By eating
thus we are able to observe without any difficulty the vow of con-
trolling the palate. The authorities of a common kitchen lighten
our burden and serve as watch-dogs of our observance. They will
not pamper us, they will cook only such food as helps us to keep
the body a fit instrument for service. In ideal conditions we
should require the use of fire but rarely or not at all. We should
find our food from what the great fire, the sun, cooks. If we look
at the matter from this point of view, it becomes clear to us that
man is purely a herbivorous creature. But here we need not go
so deep into the matter. All that is necessary for us to consider
here is the nature of the vow of controlling the palate, the diffi-
culties involved in its observance and its close connection with the
observance of brahmacharya. Having understood this, let everyone
make an honest effort to observe the vow to the best of his or her
ability.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Part I, pp. 102-4; also C.W. 8121.
Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
