216. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY,]
Vaisakh Sud 8 [April 24, 1912]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have kept for the present the report of the [Gujarati] Sahitya
Parishad and the Hindi books. The latter are being used for Budrea's
son who is here. The report, I myself want very much to read.
Yours was the right reaction to the Titanic report. Such
occurrences serve to remind us from time to time that we are no
better than fleas.
Jamnadas is extremely restless. He cannot stick to the same
idea for two days running. He and Manilal are in the same state.
Jamnadas, however, is an obedient lad. I have, therefore, no
anxieties [on his account]. Sometimes he is seized by a strong urge
to renunciation and at other times sinks into the depths of igno-
rance and vain desire. The reason for this unsettled state of mind
is that he has not been happy with Ba. I have argued hard with
him that this is a bitter draught he must swallow. In any case, he
has made a promise and I shall hold him to it. When his permit
was about to expire, we had a talk at the end of which he showed
himself willing to stay on, and intimation has already been received
that his permit has been extended for another six months. I have
explained to him, therefore, that he must not leave during this period.
1 The Titanic sank on April 14, 1912, in which year this letter was therefore
written.
2 Literary conference
3 A client of Gandhiji; vide Vol. VIII, p. 144.
4 Both Chhaganlal and Maganlal Gandhi often sent Gujarati leaders or
articles they had written to Gandhiji before publication; vide, for instance,
"Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi", p. 155. The reference here is very likely to a
Gujarati article entitled "Act of the Omnipotent Creator" which was published
in Indian Opinion, 27-4-1912. It said: "Our saints and bhaktas have always
taught that the minutest act cannot be performed without God's will. Man
should learn this truth from the sinking of the Titanic . . . [The Americans
and the British] worship science and man's power over Nature . . . . They
repose so much faith in the muscle and the intellect that they consider them-
selves worthy of creating anything that their conceited intellect can think of
. . ." The views expressed are similar to Gandhiji's. For Gandhiji's own re-
actions to the fire in the Paris Metro, vide Vol. III, p. 500; to an earthquake
in Northern India, vide Vol. IV, pp. 428- and to a famine in Central India,
vide Vol. VIII, pp. 156-.
Latterly, Ba too has been well disposed [towards him]. Moreover,
he was recently away to Johannesburg for three or four days. I
believe therefore that he is quite at ease with himself, though he
may soon get restless again. Restlessness is a defect natural to adoles-
cence, and has to be tolerated. Boys who, though restless, are obe-
dient, can easily become their normal selves again. I am sure
that it will turn out so with Jamnadas.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Ani should be given £4 a month.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 5774a(2)
