85. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[BOMBAY,]
January 10, 1919
These days, I have been thinking so much about all sorts
of things that I often feel a strong urge to share some of my
thoughts with you all. But, thanks to physical weakness and
mental torpor, I can neither write nor dictate. Today I cannot
help dictating. In the changes I am making at present, my
atman bears witness that I am showing no weakness. I am
making them with a detached mind and out of my strength, the
main purpose being to satisfy all of you and the other friends. I simply
cannot bear to look at Ba's face. The expression is often like that
on the face of a meek cow and gives one the feeling, as a cow
occasionally does, that in her own dumb manner she was saying
something. I see, too, that there is selfishness in this suffering of
hers; even so, her gentleness overpowers me and I feel inclined
to relax in all matters in which I possibly may. Only four days ago,
she was making herself miserable about milk, and, on the im-
pulse of the moment, asked me why, if I might not take cow's
milk, I would not take goat's milk. This went home. When I
took the vow, I was not thinking of the goat at all. I knew nothing,
then, about the use of goat's milk and it was not a goat's suffering
which was so vividly before my mind. My vow related only to
cow's milk. I was not thinking about the buffalo either. But
taking buffalo's milk would kill my chief aim [in taking the vow].
It was different with goat's milk, and I felt I could relieve friends
of much of their concern. I, therefore, decided to take goat's milk.
Though, from one point of view, my vow does not retain its full
value, now that I know all about goat's milk, it does not lose
its value altogether. Be that as it may, I am glad the thing is over
and done with, for friends' agony was increasing day by day and
Dr. Mehta kept bombarding me with telegrams. There is no differ-
ence between cow's milk and goat's milk, if the goat is well
looked after. It is even on record that in England the goat's milk
is richer than the cow's. The milk from our goats is considered
lighter, but this is an advantage rather than otherwise. Be the fact
of the matter what it is, I have done all I could. I even let
the doctor to inject arsenic, strychnine and iron. If my health
does not come round after all this, we certainly cannot say that
it will if I give up the vow [restricting me to the use] of no more
than five articles [a day]. No one, therefore, has anything now to
complain of. We shall have to be patient and watch what effect
all these changes have. Though I have allowed myself this free-
dom, my conscience does not, for a single moment, cease asking
me, "Why all this labour?", "What would you do with life?",
"What is it you would so much exert yourself to reform?" When
I think of the plight of Germany's Kaiser, I feel as if a great Being
were playing with us as we play with cowries. We are infinitely
smaller, in relation to the globe on which we move, than the ants
moving on a ball are in relation to that ball and like them, ever
ignorant, we press forward and get crushed. Despite such thoughts,
I have not even a moment's doubt about our duty. We cannot cease
wholly from activity and, therefore, everything we do must tend
to paramartha. A man so active can attain the most perfect peace.
In the Ashram, too, we must undertake such activity. Do what
you think best in regard to the suggestion you have received
about sowing jowar, and about weaving. Let me know what you
do. And remember that you can engage a servant for the kitchen,
if you feel the need.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
