668. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
April 5, 1933
CHI. SUMANGAL PRAKASH,
I have your letter.
(1) One cannot give reasons for everything in this world.
Dharma does not lie in giving up a custom simply because no
reason can be given for it. On the contrary dharma consists in
respecting the customs of the society of which one is part, pro-
vided these do not go against morality. Therein lies truth and
non-violence. To cause pain to anyone without reason is untruth
and violence. A person who gives up a practice because he can-
not see any reason for its continuance is unwise and wilful.
(2) In regard to inter-dining and inter-marriage there is no con-
tradiction between my earlier writings and present writings. When
I wrote those articles I had Lakshmi with me and I was planning
to have her married outside the Dhed community. I still hold
that in inter-dining and inter-marriage some restrictions are neces-
sary. I do not think that varnashrama comes in here. There is
no loss of dharma in marrying a suitable partner outside one's
varna. I may say that my views are now much clearer than
before. But I hesitate to revise the views I have held for a long
time. My present views supplement the views I have expressed
earlier. However, if it appears that there is conflict between the
two you should accept what I say now and reject what I have
said before.
(3) I should not answer this question. I am also not compe-
tent to answer it. Everyone should be able to find the meaning
of the vow he has taken. The meaning that I may give to your
vow should be considered false, while the meaning you give it
should be taken as valid. When one does not have confidence
in oneself one may accept a witness's interpretation. Here the
witness is not in a position to give an interpretation. Therefore
you should either interpret the vow yourself or ask other co-
workers.
(4) That is because the address of the journal is changed.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have left out the question about smallpox. Whether the
patient is a child or an adult, I know only one treatment: apply
a wet pack to the stomach. Dissolve some permanganate of potash
in cold water, enough to make the water rose-pink. Dip a sheet,
large or small, in the water and wring it. Then spread a rug
on a cot and cover the rug with this wet sheet. Then wrap
the whole round the patient right up to the neck. Keep him in
this position for as long as he can bear it. If the patient does
not get a motion in the natural course, give him an enema. For
diet only fruit juice. If the tongue is clear and the patient
feels hungry, milk also may be given. Give him as much water
as he can drink. Add a few drops of lemon juice to the water
if he likes that. The room should be well ventilated. I have
heard that red curtains help.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
