186. LETTER TO B. MADHAVA BALIGA
February 1, 1935
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. I do not know what I have done with the
verse sent by Sastri. Most probably they are still lying in the
Harijan file. There is a great deal of matter still lying awaiting
attention. If you have a copy, you may send it to me. It may be
that I might have examined the verse, and not finding it suitable
for the columns of Harijan, might have destroyed it.
For the answer to your question I would refer you to my
Introduction to Anasaktiyoga published in Gujarati. I translated
the Preface into English for the benefit of the readers of Young
India. If you get hold of the old file of Young India, you will find
the translation in it. The answer briefly is this:
The Gita was written not to establish ahimsa, but to show
a groping world a way of acting truly in every conceivable circum-
stance.
But nevertheless you can gather that the Gita leads you
infallibly to ahimsa. Remember that Arjuna was not striving to
follow ahimsa, but he was struggling to get out of the the duty
in front of him because of his partiality which he had suddenly
developed for his kinsmen. The question before him was not
whether to kill or not to kill, but whether to kill one's kinsmen
or not to kill them.
Then, again, nigraha 1 in the verse quoted by you means a
fruitless fight against one's fundamental nature. Fight against one's
weakness is repeatedly enjoined in the Gita, but where a weakness
becomes settled nature with a person all fighting becomes vain.
Arjuna's nature was that of a fighter, not because he was born to
fight but because his own individual nature loved fighting. When,
what may appear to us, weakness in a man becomes part of his
being, it ceases to have the quality of weakness with him; and if
at the behest of someone such a person begins to fight against
his nature, he is bound to fail or else he would become a hypo-
crite. To ask such a person to go against his nature would be to
expect a leopard to change his spots.
Yours sincerely,
SHRI B. MADHAVA BALIGA
VANI VILAS MOHALLA
VONTIKOPPAL P.O., MYSORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
