503. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
July 21, 1937
CHI. KANTI,
I read both your letters. You were keeping in touch with
Amtul Salaam even in Bombay. I have seen in your letters,
too, that you are still clinging to her.
But I don't think there
is anything wrong in that. In the beginning, of course, you made
a mistake in showering thoughtless love on her, but there was no
impurity even in that. You shouldn't, therefore, completely break
off your relation with her. But there is no need at all for you to
let her come to Bangalore, not even by way of atonement. There
is no need for any atonement. You are right in saying that she
is a child. My advice now is that you yourself should write directly
to her and tell her that I had asked your opinion; and that it was
foolishness on your part to have shown such excessive love. You
may tell her that her coming to Bangalore would not benefit either of
you in any way, that on the contrary it would upset you, etc.
Write a fairly long and affectionate letter. I will manage the rest.
Don't worry about her being hurt. Keep writing to her, but only
postcards. Don't mind expense on a postcard every week. She
has asked me to send her your letters to me. I will not send the one
426
about her, but will send the other one in which you have
described your discussion with the Christian. I will use my discre-
tion every time. I will thus satisfy her. Try to bear with her having
gone to Trivandrum. Your admiration for her had its root in a
beautiful sentiment. Her sacrifice is beyond description. Poor
girl, she lacks intelligence and has bad health. If her health im-
proves and she gets strong, I hope to take much work from her.
Don't cut her off completely, but don't think from this, either,
that deep in my heart I want you to permit her to go to Banga-
lore. I fully endorse your decision on that point. I am sending
this reply by return of post.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7327. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
