401. LETTER TO BALWANTRAI MEHTA
[After September 2, 1927]
I have your letter. You may rest assured that I shall not
take a decision hastily. I am now conveying all my doubts to
everyone who should know them and am seeking assistance in
coming to a decision. I make no distinction between K and Devdas.
It is no pleasure to me to entertain any suspicion about K. K and
K are in fact related to me as children. Hence it is not at all
possible that I shall decide anything in haste.
Your argument does not appeal to me. You may know that
I myself am a proof before you that sex does not discriminate bet-
ween the young and the old. Even today I have to erect all sorts
of walls around me for the sake of safety.
Despite this, I was in danger of succumbing a few years ago.
Moreover, sexual desire does not bother about time either. Des-
pite our belief that Bhai K's ideas about brahmacharya, etc.,
were pure it is no wonder if ultimately he succumbed to desire.
A young man whose case was almost similar confessed to me in
Bangalore. He is regarded as a brahmachari. He is a darling of his
family. No one can suspect him as things stand. He studies in
the intermediate class. He has not been able to save himself from a
widow who is related to him. He came to me saying, "Save
me from this fever." Despite having sworn to a friend, he fell
again. Hence he sought refuge in me. What refuge could I pro-
vide? But that is a digression.
What I have learnt is this: K had closer relations with K
and her family than warranted. Both were reprimanded and both
were convinced. Both agreed not to have such intimacy. In spite
of this, they were seen secretly meeting each other. So Maganlal
went on a fast. Notwithstanding this, they again met secretly.
If my information is correct, I cannot get over my doubt. And
if K has committed this slip such a man can in no time succumb
to temptations of money. But these are all my inferences based
on a single premise. I cannot but have all sorts of doubt about
a person who acts with deliberate dishonesty. I am still investi-
gating. I am not unaware of Maganlal's opinion which you
quote. You are also aware that I have great confidence in his
judgment. I shall write to him too.
Now the question that either you or his father should re-
imburse the amount, if K has embezzled any, does not arise
at all. I am considering only the ethical aspect of this question.
Whatever I shall now write for Navajivan cannot but reflect
my doubt; hence if you let me have some draft I shall consider
and publish it, if I can.
I have not made light of suicides. I know of only two oc-
casions when suicide becomes a duty. There are many grounds
for that opinion. A man who is helpless against indulgence and
cannot control himself but has sense enough to bring about his
end ought to do so. That would be his dharma. Likewise,
when a beast of a man attempts to criminally assault a woman, it
is her duty to save herself by committing suicide. Indeed I have
very often quoted these two instances in the Ashram. And I think
it is only proper. Even if K has committed all the three faults
mentioned above, as far as the tenets of the Ashram are concerned
the duty to commit suicide cannot be established nor that of run-
ning away. Atonement is the only duty in such a case but I
know from the many letters K wrote to me that he has always
opposed a number of rules observed in the Ashram.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
