445. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
August 30, 1933
DEAR BROTHER,
I treasure your letter.
I do not mind anything you have said. On the contrary, I
appreciate all you have said. Having said this, I must say that I
utterly dissent from your interpretation of Government orders.
If you saw all the correspondence, perhaps you will revise your
judgment. I am not given to special pleading consciously. You
may not have noticed that the Government have themselves
dropped the idea of 'another set of conditions'. On the con-
trary, they said that they made a mistake in making what you
call 'concession in the first instance', and the mistake made was
not one on merits but had reference to their own convenience.
However, I shall not strive with you in connection with your
pronouncement upon my statement, but if you will care to study
the whole question I would gladly send you the whole of the
correspondence. I hope that you yourself do not consider me to
be capable of desiring to blame the Government for the sake of doing
so or that that performance would be dearer to me than Harijan
uplift. I consider myself capable of a just discrimination and
therefore of knowing when the Government is in the right. But this
is all beside the point. I have taken so much space with what is
now immaterial, in order to tell you that I do not plead guilty
to the charge you have made against me.
Now for the central point of your letter. I quite agree with
you that I am wholly unfit for the constitution building at the
present stage. In my opinion that time is not yet. It will come
only when the nation has developed a sanction for itself. I would
therefore gladly retire from the Congress and devote myself to the
development of civil disobedience outside the Congress and to
Harijan work. The difficulty is, how to do it? Can I do it by
seceding from the Congress? That was the question that
troubled me at the time of the informal conference and that is
the question that confronts me again. I am seeking light. As soon
as I have regained sufficient strength, I shall again sound the mind
of Congressmen and if I can possibly retire from the Congress I
shall gladly do so. My impression, however, is that the Congress
mentality has not changed. Whilst it is true that a large number
of Congressmen have got tired, very few would care to subscribe
to the White Paper or work for securing certain improvements in
it. They want a radical change. But I am in no hurry to come
to any final decision. I can give you this assurance that nothing
will deter me from taking any steps that might be in the best
interests of the nation. There is no question even of self-efface-
ment. Performance of duty I have held always to be a thing of
beauty and a joy for ever. The awful fact, however, has often
been to know where duty lies.
You won't give me up, but continue to guide me and you
will not hesitate to come if you felt like coming. I am not go-
ing to hesitate to ask you to come when I feel that I need your
personal contact and a constant exchange of thoughts.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 260-
