59. LETTER TO W. PALMER
[DURBAN,
After November 13, 1899]
DEAR MR. PALMER,
I thank you very much for your kind note which is a surprise
to me.
1& The addressee, Treasurer of the Durban Women's Patriotic League,
had written to Gandhiji on November 13, 1899, complaining that while
"Coolies" had contributed their three-penny pieces to the street collections,
the "Arabs" (Asiatic merchants) had "declined to render any help".
I would, if it is possible, like to know the names of the ladies
who went to collect and of the' Arabs' who declined to assist.
It is just possible the men did not know the ladies or the
true aim of the fund.
Before the Indians offered their services to the Imperial
authorities for active service on the battlefield, I went over to
Mr. Jameson and asked him whether it was advisable to make
the offer. He seemed disinclined to advise it owing to the
inability of the volunteers to handle arms, but suggested a contri-
bution to the fund referred to in your note. Ever since, I have
been thinking of inducing the leading Indians to make a small
collection. But, as you know, the offer has been made, one of
the conditions of which is to support the families of the volunteers
during active service. The fund started for this purpose and the
terrible strain thousands of Indian refugees have put upon the
purse of the Indian merchants have rendered it necessary for the
merchants to discriminate in subscribing to various funds.
However, I am awaiting an opportunity of drawing more
generally the attention of the Indians to the fund in question.
Please assure the self-sacrificing ladies that no Indian could
have declined to assist from want of sympathy. We are all fired
by one spirit, viz., the imperial, and we all know what sacrifice
volunteers and those they have left behind have committed. The
existence—if it be so—of a few selfish persons need not, in my
humble opinion, cause us to think uncharitably of the whole class
to which they may belong. And, after all, the Coolies are as
much Indians as Arabs.
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 3323
