1. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
December 16, 1934
CHI. PREMA,
Your letters I shall send on to Narandas. Today also I got
up at 1.45 a.m. and started writing letters.
It has become a
habit with me now to wake up at about 2. I go to bed before
9 p.m. During the day, I take a nap once or twice and get
half an hour to one hour. That seems to be enough for me.
By writing "not revised" I ensure —and do—justice to my-
self and to the person to whom the letter is addressed. If by
chance I have written "aaj mar gaya" instead of "Ajmer gaya", the
other party may correct the mistake or, in case of doubt, ask me.
A letter which has not been revised should always be regarded as
incomplete. But I would prefer, and so would you, that I write
an incomplete letter to you rather than not write any.
Most probably I shall be going to Delhi on or about the
27th. Continue to write to me at the Wardha address till you
hear from me or you read in the papers.
The atonement for any violation of a vow in a dream is
generally greater vigilance and Ramanama on waking up from
the dream. Such violations of vows or moral rules in dreams are
signs of our imperfection. Unconsciously we harbour deep in our
hearts the desires which we gratify in dreams. We should not
despair because of such dreams, but should become more and
more vigilant. Despair may be a sign of the person being at-
tached to the senses; it is certainly a sign of his lack of faith.
If a person tires of repeating Ramanama—despairs about its
usefulness—shouldn't we say that he has lost faith in it? When
Columbus's companions lost faith, they wanted to kill him. But
with his eyes of faith Columbus could clearly see the coast and
he asked his companions to give him some more time, and he
reached America! !! If a person dreams that he is eating forbid-
den food, such a dream also means what I have explained above.
There may be external causes for such dreams and, whenever
we discover any, we should remove them. "I am the spotless
Brahman that is witness of all the states." This is what we sing.
We can sing thus only if we strive ceaselessly to be that. The
1
60-
dreams that we get are a sign that we have not succeeded in
becoming spotless. They are a warning light for us.
Not a leaf can stir without God's grace, but we cannot dis-
pense with human effort either, which is the means through which
God's grace works. Realization means nothing but pure and selfless
service of all living creatures.
It is very good indeed that Kisan has decided to stay with
you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10364. Also C.W. 6803. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kan tak
