480. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,
June 14, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
Your letter enclosing an unsigned opinion of the Legislative
Department on the meaning of the word "return" in the Settle-
ment came upon me as a bomb shell. I was wholly unprepared
for such an opinion. I had flattered myself with the belief that
my knowledge of law had not become absolutely rusty. But the
opinion of your legal department shook what little confidence I
had yet in my legal knowledge. I therefore hastened to refer the
matter to the best counsel available in Bombay at the present mom-
ent. I am sending you a copy of their opinion. The first two
signatories are ex-Advocates-General of Bombay and they are both
today, as is also the third, distinguished practising lawyers. For
the moment therefore my confidence is restored, but that can be
of no avail to you. I can quite understand your not accepting
the opinion of Bombay lawyers however eminent they may be,
in the teeth of opinion from your legal department however con-
trary to common sense. I, therefore, suggest what I have suggested
to the Government of Bombay. As the matter involved is one of
principle for the Management of the Navajivan Press, I would
repeat the suggestion I have made to the Government of Bombay
that the Chief Justice of Bombay should be appointed sole
arbitrator in the matter. The Managing Board is naturally anxious
to end this controversy and also to avoid a continuing loss that the
deprivation of the press causes to them. I hope therefore that
the matter will be finished one way or the other without delay.
This impasse brings to me a matter of general importance.
I am having, as I imagine, more trouble than I have told you
from the Bombay Government in connection with the matters
arising out of the Settlement. And there is trouble growing in the
Madras Presidency over liquor picketing. Here is an extract
from Syt. Rajagopalachari whose instructions on this very point
you had seen and which you so admired that you asked me to
congratulate him:
I had hitherto refrained from worrying you. The Government here
are beginning to feel that peaceful picketing is not so harmless as they
had imagined. They have discovered that it does stop drinking most
effectively and as a result the revenue is threatened. They may hold ren-
ters to their contracts this year, but what about the next auction? They
see that without any physical obstruction or coercion of any kind,
picketing does keep people away from the shops.
The renters too expected that like last year the Congress activities
would soon be interfered with by the police and so they did not them-
selves do anything at first to interfere with the volunteers. But now they
realize that the Truce has put an end to the old order of things. They
are consequently in a fright. They have begun to make strong representa-
tions to Government demanding either police interference or writing off
of dues. Both Government officials and renters are thus opening their eyes
to the reality of the moral power of picketing and the implications of the
Truce. Both Government officials and renters have, therefore, it seems,
resolved on new tactics. There is almost by concerted action a number of
cases cropping up everywhere of rowdyism to intimidate volunteers. Be-
sides rowdyism, which might be expected, the renters whether instigated
or encouraged by officials or not, I cannot yet say, are bringing up false
charges through private complaints in order to get fines and imprison-
ments imposed on the workers and sympathizers and worry and tire out
the Congress organizations. And magistrates, too, imagine that they
should support the liquor-shop men. Further, even where they know the
cases are false, they dare not expose themselves to the suspicion that they
favour the Congress and do not support the revenue.
Local police authorities have begun to harass and interfere with the
picketing. Finding that there is no sort of coercion or disturbance of the
peace, and that they cannot legitimately object to the picketing, they are
trying other ways. They are making demonstrations of police force, pushing
the volunteers away to impossible distances from the shops and from each
other and demanding the observance of conditions that reduce picketing
to an ineffectual farce. Local police authorities are permitted to terrorize
town and village folk and proclaim that any assistance or harbouring of
Congress volunteers would amount to abetment of offenders. In fact, the
You might be unable to interfere with the working or not
working of the Settlement by local governments. Or your inter-
ference may not go far enough according to my view of the Settle-
ment. Time has therefore perhaps arrived for the appointment
of a permanent Board of Arbitration to decide question of inter-
pretation of the Settlement and as to the full carrying out of the
terms by the one party or the other. I would therefore like you
to consider this suggestion.
Yours sincerely,
Encl. 1
H. W. EMERSON, ESQ.
SIMLA
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
