400. LETTER TO K. MADHAVAN NAIR
POST ANDHERI,
May 6, 1924
MY DEAR MADHAVAN NAIR,
I have your letter enclosing your thoughts on the Vaikom strug-
gle. There cannot be any question for displeasure over an honest
difference of opinion. In the midst of blind assent, which is being
given to all, I say your difference of opinion comes to me as a ray
of sunshine. I congratulate you upon it, and I would ask you
to adhere to your view until you are convinced to the contrary.
Now for your manuscript. You will be surprised to learn that
I have not yet read the Social Reformer to which you have referred.
I always love to read Mr. Natarajan's writings. I have kept even a
copy of that number in my file, but I have not been able to read
it. It is my misfortune that I read newspapers the least when I
am editing the most. Now let us consider the merits. Do you
know that, when Kesava Menon started the movement, he told me
that the general body of the Hindus was with the movement?
Letters received by me after, from other workers, gave me the same
impression. Satyagraha is taken up by one who feels that truth
is being trampled under foot. He fights against error with only God
as his support. He is never in search for any other support. It
comes in time, and if it is legitimate, he accepts it. A satyagrahi
is pledged to fight single-handed in the face of starvation and
worse. Pray read my article again, and you will probably under-
stand my meaning more clearly than you have done. There is no
such thing as a settled fact in satyagraha. If you find that you have
erred at any stage, it is never too late to retrace your step. If, in
Travancore, public opinion is not in favour, you may not over-
awe the public by a demonstration from outside. You must pa-
tiently wait and suffer. Reduce yourselves to the position of the
1 Nair had sent Gandhiji on May 2 a long note on his views on Gandhiji's
article in Young India, 1-5-1924, on the Vaikom Satyagraha. He had written
in the letter forwarding it: "I hope, in the generosity of your heart, you will
pardon me for this difference of opinion. 1 earnestly entreat you to bestow
your consideration on the Vykom question and advise us as to how the fight
is to be proceeded with." He had sent copies of his note to The Hindu and
Swarajya, Madras.
2 The Indian Social Reformer, then edited by S. Natarajan
suppressed classes. Live with them and suffer their humiliation.
You are the first person to tell me that the public in Travancore
are not with you.
If you are fighting as an enlightened Hindu against the bigoted
Hindu, it is your bounden duty not only not to seek but respect-
fully to reject all support from non-Hindus. Surely, I do not need
to prove the truth of such a simple proposition. I think I have
traversed all the points raised by you in your manuscript. I have
placed before you, in all humility, the view of satyagraha as I know
it; and since I am the author of the word, you must let me give
its meaning, and if you do not accept the meaning, the proper
thing is to find another word that will bear your own meaning.
But, of course, this is a technical point. Even the author cannot
claim any exclusive control over words he may coin or the mean-
ings he may give to them. Once they escape his lips or pen,
they are no longer his property.
Do please ask me any questions that may arise out of my letter.
I purposely refrain from discussing the future programme in view of
the barricading of the roads and the Government's refusal to make
any arrest. The preliminary thing now is to understand the mean-
ing of satyagraha and its implications. When that is done, and not
before, it is easy to settle the future course of action in the light
of the interpretation that may be accepted.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. K. MADHAVAN NAIR
VAKIL
CALICUT
From a photostat: S.N. 10304; also G.N. 5674
XXIII-35
