282. LETTER TO SWAMI
August 9, 1927
Your latest telegram. I have sent a reply by wire which you
must have received. Your telegram and your letter are full of your
love and your sorrow. I expect nothing else of you.
It is my duty to restrain excess of love. I could not see from
the figures you sent me that we are at the moment in a position
to produce Rs. 25,000. I understand that at present we can
somehow balance the two sides.
But if we have a saving of Rs. 25,000, does it not prove that
we must be making a huge profit somewhere or that we do not
pay enough to our workers?
It mayor may not be as you say. None the less I do feel
that if we have the capacity to make this donation it could be
done only anonymously. If our small institution could make
such a large donation, it would have an impact on others and
this may arouse jealousy, obviously it could not be emulated.
Generally, a donation is announced so that others may follow
suit. Else it is merely showing off.
For us being in good shape means not being able to give
away anything at all. I see from your report that the tenements
of our workers are in a state of disrepair. If our resources permit
we should utilize what we can spare for repairing their houses
so that they would not be a burden on the public funds. I
would regard that as our substantial contribution.
No one here has understood fully the meaning of your tele-
gram. If you thought that the workers, etc., would accept mini-
mum wages and pay up the remainder as monthly instalments, I
would suggest that as they save up progressively, those savings
should be utilized for the benefit of the Dheds and the Bhangis
and something permanent can thus be achieved. I believe all
will receive the help urgently needed and they will find their feet.
If we have earned our money honestly, I wish you to make the
purest use of it.
But you may, if you like, treat all this as needless fuss. I
might have scribbled a lot without knowing things. You are
free to do anything in consultation with Vallabhbhai, Jamnalalji
and others and I shall approve of whatever you do. I shall be
quite content if you regarded the above ideas as emotional out-
burst of one of the press workers and treat them accordingly.
It may be that you would be bound for two years; but I like
that.
Whatever I send you now is sent only after being shown to
Kaka. And that will be the case hereafter. Take it that he has
approved, what he has not objected to.
Had I not had on my hand today grave matters beyond my
capacity, I would have written much more.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
