219. LETTER TO LORD PETHICK-LAWRENCE
VALMIKI MANDIR, READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
May 20, 1946
DEAR LORD,
As the matters we discussed yesterday morning and the day
before were very important and affected and still affect my atti-
tude and corresponding action, I think it worth-while to reduce
a summary to writing. You can correct me if there is a mis-
understanding. This may even help you wherever necessary.
I may add that I have conveyed to the Working Committee
of the Congress the purport, to the best of my ability, of our
talks.
With this preface I proceed to give the summary.
1. You were good enough to assure me that you will see
to it that European members of Provincial Assemblies, neither
voted at the elections of delegates to the Constituent Assembly
nor expected to be elected by the electors of non-Muslim dele-
gates.
2. Election of the possible 93 delegates on behalf of the
States would be determined by the Nawab Sahib of Bhopal
and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. In the absence of an agreed solu-
tion, there should be no election of delegates on behalf of the
States, the function of looking after the interests of the Princes
and their people devolving upon the Advisory Committee refer-
red to in clause 20 of the State Paper
3. In view of the fact that there is no machinery in British
Baluchistan analogous to the Provincial Assemblies, it should be
treated as the special concern of the Constituent Assembly and
should be included in the function of the Advisory Committee.
Meanwhile it should be the duty of the Interim National Govern-
ment to set up machinery to bring Baluchistan on a par with the
other Provinces.
4. I ventured to suggest that Paramountcy should cease
even while independence is at work in fact, though not in law,
till the Constituent Assembly has finished its labours and devised
a constitution. Sir Stafford saw danger in acting upon my sug-
gestion. I hold the opposite view. Acceptance of my proposal
would vivify the people of the States as if by a stroke of the
pen. And the Interim Government would be a boon to the
Princes who, though the creation of the Paramount Power and
dependent on it for the continuance of their existence, still chafed
under its heavy hand. The immediate end of Paramountcy
would test the sincerity of the Princes and the Paramount Power.
But if this Indian feeling did not find an echo in your
hearts, I personally would be satisfied with Sir Stafford's view
that Paramountcy which had been admittedly used to protect
the Princes against their people in the shape of suppressing their
liberty and progress, should for the time continue for the pro-
tection and progress of the people. If the people of the States
are backward, it is not because they are different in kind from
the people of the direct British parts of India but because they
have been groaning under a double yoke. I endorsed also the
suggestion that Paramountcy should be exercised in consultation
with the National Government.
5. I have written to you on my difficulty on grouping.
I need say nothing more on the subject, pending reply to it.
6. Whilst I appreciate your and Sir Stafford's frankness,
I would put on record my conviction that independence would
in fact be a farce, if the British troops are in India even for
peace and order within, or danger from without. The condition
of India after the labours of the Constituent Assembly are over
will in this respect be no better than now. If the position
about the troops persists, "independence next month" is either
insincere or a thoughtless cry. Acceptance of "Quit India" by
the British is unconditional, whether the Constituent Assembly
succeeds or fails in bringing out a constitution. A drastic
revision of the attitude is a necessity in every case.
Finally it can in no way be contended that in the face of
the troops, there would be natural behaviour in the Constituent
Assembly.
7. As to the Interim Government, the more I think and
observe, the more certain is my feeling that a proper National
Government responsible in fact, if not in law, to the elected
members of the Central Legislative Assembly, should precede the
summons for the election of members of the Constituent Assembly.
Only then, and not before, can a true picture of coming events
be presented. The food crisis demands immediate formation of
a strong, capable and homogeneous National Government. With-
out it, deep and universal corruption cannot end, without it the
psychological effect will not be produced in spite of the landing
on Indian shores of expected grain from outside. Every day's
delay in forming such a Government is agony added to the agony
of famished millions of India. There can therefore be no ques-
tion of parity whether the Government is allowed to be formed
by the Congress or the Muslim League. The best and incorrup-
tible men or women from India are wanted for the purpose. I
was therefore glad to find that the Viceroy was already moving
in the matter as quickly as possible.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 193-
1 Vide p. 165.
2 For the addressee's reply, vide Appendix IX.
