318. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
10 p.m., May 4, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I see that you are at your wit's end. I
think the suggestion that the boys and girls should be sent to
the Vidyapith will be difficult to carry out. But in this, too,
I don't insist on my view. If all of you think that this is the
right decision, and if Kaka agrees with you, you can certainly act
upon it even before I return. You need not hesitate to take any
step. My own view is that those children alone may remain whose
parents are content with what we give them. That is our real
experiment [in education]. Such an experiment can be made
only in the Ashram, and we have created the necessary facilities
for the purpose. We need not lose heart while making this experi-
ment. If, however, you think that we are beaten, do what you
think best.
It is absolutely necessary to send Radha and Rukhi for a
change of air. I had thought of sending them to Matheran to
live with Mathuradas. But there is no time for that now. I have,
therefore, sent a wire to Jamnalalji. Do what he suggests, or
anything else that occurs to you. That is what Balkrishna is.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5411
1 & 2 Not available
319.
KHADI IN HARDWAR
It is a matter of pleasure as well as of sorrow that, in a
small place like Hardwar, a khadi shop was opened and closed
down and it has been opened again by the efforts of Pandit Dev
Sharma, a scholar worthy of the titles of Ved Visharad and
Acharya. It is a matter of pleasure because a large religious class
appreciates the merits of khadi. It is a matter of sorrow because
in a place like Hardwar the consumption of khadi in which lies
the economic progress of the millions can be brought about only
with effort. You may find as many shops of foreign cloth in Har-
dwar as you like. But a khadi shop needs the protection of the
Pandits. Pandit Dev Sharma has written a letter in Hindi about
the khadi store of which I give the gist below.
I hope that the store will progress and that it will receive full
encouragement.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 5-5-1929
