95. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
January 19, 1909
TO
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
By the time this week's issue of Indian Opinion is out, I shall per-
haps find myself lodged in the gaol-palace. I, therefore, think it neces-
sary to address a few words to the Indian community concerning the
present situation.
There is no doubt that some Indians have weakened. Many of
them have given up the fight. Others, it appears, are about to do so.
A letter has been published in The Star over the signatures of
[some] Pathans in which they state as under:
We, Pathans, wish to inform the Government and the public
through your paper that the British Indian Association has raised
a volunteer corps of pickets to keep a watch on the Asiatic Office
and the Licensing Office. The pickets are dressed in khaki uni-
form, and wear bands like soldiers. We saw some of them smartly
parading up and down the roads. These pickets have been
posted with a view to defeating the intention of the Pathans to
help the Government and inciting loyal Indians to resist it. And
therefore we, Pathans, who have been loyal servants of the late
Queen-Empress Victoria, and the present King-Emperor and
Queen- Empress—may God save them—consider these volunteers
of Gandhi and Polak as bullies. We pray to the Government not
to oppose us in what we may do in this connection. Not only does
Gandhi always make derogatory remarks about our religion and
pass insulting remarks against our Prophets, but he is ever dis-
turbing the peace [of the land]. If the Government cannot remove
him and his corps of volunteers from the Colony, we can do that
much for the Government with all despatch. We shall be grateful
to you if you give publicity to this letter.
I have said that the letter is over the signatures of Pathans.
I cannot say that it was drafted by them. There was a time when the
Pathans sent a petition to the Government to say that they would
rather be blown up by its cannon than submit to the law. It is not
likely that these very Pathans would submit to the same Act or help
others submit to it. Should that happen, it would be a matter of shame
for them and for us.
How, then, did this letter come to be written? I am sure that there
is the hand of a well-known Indian behind it. Some whites have been
indulging in intrigues against the community in order to protect their
own interests. There are some Indians who, having burnt their own
fingers, want others to do likewise and thus wish to drag down the
entire community. Both these classes of men want to use the Pathans
as pawns in their game. The Pathans, being illiterate, are easily mis-
led and induced to give their signatures. They ought to think before
they do so. I should very much like some Indian to read out this letter
to them in the right spirit. If the Pathans give their signatures to any
sort of letter, without giving thought to its content, they will bedim the
lustre of their swords. When a sword is used in the service of a wrong
cause, I regard it merely as a piece of rusted iron.
The man who has written this letter or caused it to be written has
held out a threat to the pickets. But the Pathans must realize that it is
not proper for them to raise their hand against a single Indian.
I have not much to say about what has been said against me in
the letter. The author of the letter wants to create dissensions among
Hindus and Muslims. To charge me with insulting the Prophets of Islam
betrays sheer ignorance. I have not even dreamt of such a thing. It is
certainly not in the nature of true Hinduism to insult the religion of
others. I believe myself to be a follower of that religion. Since my life
is devoted to discovering the means of uniting Hindus and Muslims,
how is it possible for me to insult the Prophets of Islam? But the
enemies of the community, anxious to provoke dissensions, circulate
all kinds of stories in order to break the bonds that have been forged,
seeking to implicate the Pathans also.
The thoughtful members of the community, and those who want
it to prosper, must be alert at a time like this. The first thing is not to be
intimidated by threats from any quarter. The community is offering
satyagraha against the Government, and it will do the same against
any Indians who may act as their enemies. It is only Khuda-Ishvar
that one must fear. Those who wish to harm the community must be
pitied for their ignorance. But one must not be cowed down by them.
The fight has been protracted—it will be prolonged still further.
Everyone will see that we ourselves are the cause of its being prolonged.
Likewise, it is in our own hands to hasten its end. The only way to
achieve this is for those who know what the fight means to put their
whole heart into it. They must not give way to panic or anger. More-
over, the greater the pressure on us, the more determined should our
resistance be. Accordingly, those who understand the meaning of the
struggle should put up with greater losses and bear heavier suffering.
It is of the essence of the fight that we should be fearless and rejoice
in sacrificing our lives and allowing our property to be ruined, recog-
nizing that only by acting in this manner can we serve our own interests
and those of the community. Only thus will the fight be won.
The attack on Mr. Polak should fill us all with shame. I, at any
rate, cannot truly estimate his services to the community. I do not know
how to describe his goodness. There is perhaps no Indian who under-
stands the meaning of our struggle so well as he does. The remarks made
against such a man in the letter mentioned above show that we have
fallen on evil days.
I do not know the author of the letter or the man who insti-
gated it. I only pray to God that He may show the right path to that
man, to the Pathans and to all Indians, and also that the community
may remain firm in the great task it has undertaken.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
SERVANT OF THE COMMUNITY AND SATYAGRAHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 23-1-1909
