137. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAREKH
SINHGADH,
April 30 [1920]
BHAISHRI MANGALDAS,
I have your letter. It was three in the afternoon when I got
it and I am writing this reply immediately. Even so, I do not think
it will reach you on the 1st. I think your suspicion of Ambalalbhai
is unjustified. I told you even that I had agreed with Ambalal-
bhai on certain rates. I did not go further into the matter because
I thought you knew why I had gone to his place. There was
nothing in my talk with him which I need have kept back from
you, nor did I consider it improper to enter into negotiations
with him after I had informed you. I negotiated with the mills
which agreed to do so. I thought it advisable to restrict the
scope of the strike, and I still think that way. How may I con-
vince you that I have not the least desire to have things my own
way in all matters? I exert myself to the utmost to see that
justice prevails. More often than not, the line I take up is based
on pure justice and, as justice always prevails, the people in their
simplicity are led to believe that I try to have my own way in all
things. When they come to know me better they see that I have
no such desire, for I want neither money nor honour. I had had
enough of wealth and gave up its pursuit. God meets all my
needs through friends. Honour I receive in overflowing measure
from my conscience so that no room is left for receiving more from
others. For what other reasons, then, should I feel tempted to
have anything my own way?
There is a fundamental difference
between our points of view and so there always remains some dis-
tance between our positions. You believe that, as it is, the workers
get more than enough and that they will not use well what they
will now get [in addition]. I believe that they get very little at
present. I do not think either that even the increase I have asked
for is sufficient to meet all their needs. Nor do I believe as a
matter of principle that they will use their additional income
unwisely. Hence I demand practically the highest rates which
prevail in Bombay, not the average of the highest and the lowest,
and I see no injustice in this. I have already told you that, had
I known in advance how much they spend on machinery in
Bombay, I would never have agreed, as I did when we took the
decision to appoint a panch to take the Bombay rates for com-
parison. It is my duty to see that the industry in Ahmedabad
does not suffer in any way, and as far as I can see I am not at
all violating this duty in asking that the workers be paid as much
as Rs. 30. Because you cannot see this, you think I am obstinate,
but how can I believe so myself? I see that the difference bet-
ween us is understandable. I would do much to be able to go
with you, but I would not take a single step which would do
injustice to the workers. Ambalalbhai has had no hand in the
letter which I wrote to you. I think that he has acted in all
sincerity, that he has done nothing out of a desire to harm your
good name. If I think any time that this is his motive, I would
not be with him even for a moment. To me, your reputation is
as dear as his. I should like to be a party only to what will
advance your interest. It is still my request to you to accept the
rates which have been agreed upon and, with the help of sin-
cere workers like Anasuyabehn and Bhai Shankarlal whom you
have with you today, raise the industry in Ahmedabad to a high
level and set an example to others.
My health has gone down very badly these days, otherwise I
would have come running straight to you.
If possible come to
Sinhgadh yourself and take some rest. There is no need to worry.
I return the papers which you sent.
SHRI MANGALDAS PAREKH
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 7044
