157. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 19, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
Your letter was very good. I was glad that you wrote
quite freely.
This is my reply to your criticism. I must hear what the
persons concerned have to say in their defence. Only after that
can I express my opinion in each case. In a general way, however,
I can say that, whenever some freedom was permitted, it was
done not as a privilege but as a matter of necessity. I have form-
ed the impression that those who permit themselves any freedom
do so not out of lethargy but because their bodies, or say their
natures, demand it. We ought not to sit in judgment over others.
We may not even be aware of the effort they make [to follow the
rules]. This does not mean that such persons have no imperfec-
tion in them. If they did not have any, why did they join the
Ashram at all? They are not hypocrites. There is a great error
in believing that everyone should or can do what one does. If I
tried to lift a weight which Hariyomal can, I would die that
very moment. Similarly, it would be wrong of him to envy me
my weakness.
Many have said that people deceive me. I don't say that no
one deceives me, but the number of such persons is certainly not
large. I have observed that many persons cannot, when they are
away from me, keep up the standard of behaviour which they
preserve when I am there. Some even leave me for this reason.
There are many such instances and that is why I have been ac-
cused of possessing a kind of magnetism.
But this is not likely to satisfy you or others. Nor have I
said this to defend myself. I have only explained my attitude. The
real position, however, is this, and I have held this belief for
many years. The deficiencies of the Ashram reflect my own. I
have told many people that they cannot know me by meeting me.
When they meet me, I may even impress them as being good. Even
if I am not good, people would believe that I was because I am
a lover of truth. My love of truth casts a momentary spell over
people. In order to know me, people should see the Ashram in my
absence. There would be no error and no injustice to me in
believing that all its deficiencies are a reflection of my own defi-
ciencies. It is but true that I have drawn the crowd which has
gathered in the Ashram. If, though living in the Ashram, they
have not been able to overcome their weaknesses but have, on the
contrary, developed more, the fault is not theirs but mine. The
imperfection of my spiritual striving is responsible for this state
of affairs. Nor is it that I do not observe or know about my
shortcomings. All that I can say is that they are there despite
my best efforts to overcome them. And, moreover, I am convinc-
ed that, because I am ceaselessly striving to improve the Ashram,
it has not, on the whole, fallen altogether from its ideal. I derive
some satisfaction from the thought that everyone of the three
Ashrams which I established served or has served its immediate
aim. I will not, however, deceive myself or anybody else with
this comforting thought. I wish to travel far and there are hills
and valleys to be crossed on the way. I am resolved, how-
ever, to continue the journey. And I rest in peace in the know-
ledge that there is no defeat in the quest for truth.
It is true indeed that the Ashram has not been able to attract
the learned class. The reason is that I don't regard myself as a
learned man. The few learned men who were drawn to the
Ashram joined it not in order to pursue their learned callings but
to receive and nurse something else altogether. They [ are] seekers
after truth. The quest of truth may be undertaken even by the
illiterate, by children and by the old, by women and by men. Lite-
rary education sometimes serves as the golden lid which covers
the face of truth. I do not, by saying this, condemn such edu-
cation, but only put it in its proper place. It is one of the
means [in the pursuit of truth].
We have selected most of the prayers from Sanskrit because
it is chiefly Hindus who joined the Ashram. We have no aversion
to prayers in other languages. Don't we use such prayers occa-
sionally? If, instead of a large number of Hindus, a large number
of Muslims had joined the Ashram, prayers from the Koran
would be recited every day and I would even join such prayers.
Does this answer your doubts? Does it satisfy you? If it
does not, ask me again and again. I shall not get tired. I wish to
satisfy you. Don't get tired.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10273. Also C.W. 6721. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
