54. LETTER TO SHAMBHUSHANKER
SABARMATI ASHRAM,
Jeth Sud 13, 1982, June 23, 1926
BHAISHRI SHAMBHUSHANKER 1,
I had your letter. I accept and applaud your decision about
salary. You will draw Rs. 50 p.m. up to the month of July,
so the change will take effect from August onwards.
I have
not yet received Bhai Jagjivandas's letter. You have not sent me
the copy of the agreement which has been sent to you for your
signature; but from what you write I can see no objection to
including the immovable property if you wish to bind yourself.
As I see it, the responsibility for paying the damages will arise
only for losses caused by your carelessness; not for other losses.
I also agree with you that there should be a worker to help you.
We should think over the conditions on which such a man should
be engaged. Let us hope that by the grace of God it would rain.
Think about and write to me of all the jobs that are usually
done during the rainy season and others that could be done. It
is better if you have a talk about khadi with Maneklal and
Chhaganlal. How much of such khadi could they have with
them? We have to think about it if it is much. The khadi
that Bhai Vajeshanker sells, in whose name does he get it made?
How much khadi has he got woven? Isn't he in Hanod on behalf
of the State? There is only one principle underlying the khadi
activity. In India crores of people do not have any occupa-
tion except agriculture. Sufficient livelihood for the crores cannot
be obtained from agriculture alone. Similarly, agriculture can't
take up their whole time. They must have some other occupa-
tion and that is hand-spinning. So we are propagating it every-
where. Khadi produced from hand-spun yarn is thus a means
of propagating spinning. We endure the various fraudulent prac-
tices of [some] spinners, ginners and weavers, etc., but when we
come to a stage when we can't bear such practices, we stop taking
work from them. The way you have suggested is the only way
to make them guileless. That is, we should ourselves become
guileless, pure, selfless and hardworking.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19634
