546. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Y.M.,
August 4, 1932
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I got your letter. I had been waiting for it. You must not
feel distressed that you could not meet anyone. It is a mercy
that even letters are permitted, for how can a prisoner expect
to be permitted to receive letters? Preserve the health with
which you have come out. Pranayama does benefit, particularly
persons with a lung disease. It must be remembered that
pranayama is not to be done in a hurry. How was the behaviour
of the jail officials? Was it courteous?
I have already conveyed to you that I have given up the
Magan charkha for the present. I could not go beyond 20
counts. I am not able to use both my hands. I cannot draw
the yarn with my left hand. I can therefore try only the right
hand. I have got adjusted to it. But since I have been permit-
ted to turn the Gandiv wheel with the left hand, I felt that I
ought to change over to it. I have acquired wonderful control
over it. Even on this I draw the yarn with the right hand and
have gone up to 35 counts. I am also picking up speed, though
it is still quite slow. It is around one hundred rounds, but I am
satisfied. There is very little wastage and even in such as takes
place, I am making small improvements. I have thus had to
postpone the Magan charkha experiment for the present. I will
of course not give it up completely. I enjoy spinning on that
too. Cling to the Divine Name like one possessed. When you
have no help from anywhere else, you will get it from the Name.
May your ambition of improving the Magan charkha be
fulfilled.
Do go to Almora. All of us agree with your idea of not
giving a big name to the Ashram at present. You may therefore call
it Shail Ashram. Of the five names all the three of us liked that the
best. We did not waste our time in thinking of another name.
Ultimately we are concerned with the work, not with the name.
The Ashram is certainly not to be filled only with invalids.
Some of course are bound to come. If Padma comes, she must
be received. You should get separate expenses for any such per-
sons who may come. There would of course be a budget for the
Ashram. I will not decide the figure for it. You may settle it
with Narandas. It is proper that the expenditure on you, too,
should be counted separately. This would be convenient for you.
What you write about your work there is also correct. You
should not take up too many things just now. You should proceed
slowly and only as much as your health permits. For the present
you should do only what you can on your own responsibility. I
would be happy if you could tempt Balkrishna. He would be
very good company for you. He may also improve in health and
the Ashram would gain in dignity. If Dhiru desires to join, it
should be with a firm resolve to be steady there. Let him join
if he does so on that condition. It would of course be excellent
if you could find some good hill people to join you.
You have mentioned having enclosed Krishna's letter but I
don't see it. Either you forgot, or the letter was left behind at
Sabarmati. Where is . . . 2 ?
Blessings from Sardar and Mahadev.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Gandhi Nidhi File (August, 1976). Courtesy:
Gandhi National Museum and Library
