309. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
[PHOENIX,
NATAL,]
April 8, 1914
DEAR MR. LANE,
I notice in the Union Government Gazette a Marriage Procla-
mation requiring those who want to have their marriages cele-
brated by their Mahomedan or Hebrew Marriage Officers to have
notices published of their intention so to do. I do not know
whether this proclamation is deliberate as showing the future
policy of the Government in anticipation, or whether it is a procla-
mation required for the Hebrews but necessitating reference to
the Mahomedans in terms of the Natal Marriage Law referred to
therein. If it is the former, I beg to draw General Smuts' atten-
tion to the fact that what has been submitted by me on behalf of
the Indian community is that past de facto monogamous marriages
celebrated according to Indian religious customs should be lega-
lised and that, in future, such marriages should be recognized as
legal. The Marriage Proclamation in question introduces the prac-
tice of the publication of banns, a practice which is totally op-
posed to both the Hindu and the Mahomedan usage; nor is any
such publication necessary, because of the respective religions them-
selves requiring an elaborate process which renders fraudulent
marriages impossible. I feel that, whilst the legislation to give
effect to the recommendations of the Commission is being draft-
ed, I should bring this matter to the notice of General Smuts.
I observe, too, from Mr. Burton's reply to Mr. Meyler that
the indentured Indians in the employ of the Railways Department
have deducted from their wages instalments in part payment
of the £3 Tax. I venture to suggest that a continuance of this
practice is hardly consistent with the attitude shown by the Com-
mission regarding the Tax. One of the chief points that the Com-
mission had to advise upon was the £3 tax, and it is submitted that
this deduction might have been stopped by the Government at
least pending the report of the Commission, and now that the
Commission has made such strong recommendations for the re-
peal of the Tax, I do trust that the officials concerned will be
advised, if they have not been already, not to insist upon this
deduction, for I assume that, if the Government bring in a Bill
for the repeal of the Tax, the arrears will be remitted.
I am,
Yours truly,
ERNEST F. C. LANE, ESQ.
OFFICES OF THE INTERIOR
CAPE TOWN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5957
