420. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
NEW DELHI,
September 17, 1946
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I am glad you have written a long full letter after many days.
I agree with your view as regards students. But who is
to bell the cat? Lilavati Munshi has discussed at length the
question whether they should give one year or more for public
work. But who will persuade the students! You yourself are
weak. Besides, you think too much and hence nothing tangible
is achieved by you. Others do not think, nor do they influ-
ence students. Those who can influence students believe in the
kind of work you write about and all of them honestly hold
the opinions they express. Such is the prevailing confusion.
And it is not confined to this country but prevails throughout
the world as one can see from the papers. Now tell me, what
we should do.
What you write about the happenings in Bombay and other
places is correct. But the idea you have expressed appears to
me to be rather immature. If there were two parties, one calm
and the other agitated, I have no doubt that the former
would stand to gain in the absence of the police and the mili-
tary. This you can say, that no one barring me would carry
on without the police or the military. Mine is a voice in the
wilderness. Indeed I need and I yearn for clearer vision,
greater penance and greater courage. But can it all come for
the yearning? Isn't it a fact that "the fifth and the last factor
is the Unseen"1? This is the truth. Let us therefore cling to
devout faith and hope for human effort and Divine grace. The
effort should be sincere. I can elaborate further. But where
do I have the time? Sushila will write about what she was
given to read. I don't let her have much time either. If I can
organize things better or if they settle down themselves, I shall
get some more time. There is much work to do. God's will
be done.
Are you keeping well? How are Santok and Radha?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
