387. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 23, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
Enclosed is a letter from Brijkrishna regarding the dissensions
in Delhi. Read it and tear it up. I have categorically stated
in my reply that, even if they ask me, I will not intervene in
this dispute. Every day I receive nothing but such complaints.
Everybody thinks only of himself and nobody thinks of the country.
I don't know how, in such circumstances, we can reach our goal.
I have received wires from Bengal, too, against Aney. I have
replied in plain words saying that nobody should doubt his Im-
partiality and that he should be fully trusted.
Malaviyaji has ordered The Hindustan Times to change its
policy on the question of the Award. Ghanshyamdas has resigned
because of this, giving reasons in his letter of resignation which
reveal his disagreement with Malaviyaji's views. Let us see what
happens now. I don't know what has happened to these two.
On receiving a wire from Rajendrababu, I have sent a state-
ment to the Associated Press. You will read it in the papers. If
a copy has been preserved, they will send it to you. It would
help if you also issued such statements from time to time from
Bombay. I had a wire from the Maulana asking me what the
formation of the Congress Nationalist Party meant. I have wired
back saying that it is the President who should reply to his ques-
tion, and that, though I would write about it to you, he should
send a wire to you. If you receive one, give him a suitable reply.
I received a letter from Rajaji today, which you should read.
Tear it up after reading it. If you wish, write to him. If you
regain sufficient strength to travel to Madras and if you can get
time, you may go there. I have not seen the cutting from The
Statesman. If I find it, I will send it too. Whatever it writes, how
can we hide the truth? Prafulla Ghosh has arrived here. He
has a painful tale to tell of the rot in Bengal.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 120-
