156. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 28/July 4, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your mail today. It is seven days today since I started
taking milk and fruit. I don't see any effect on the elbow. Per-
haps there may be none. I cannot say positively that they have
completely agreed with me. What had agreed perfectly is the
experiment of almonds, bread and vegetables. But I will continue
milk for the present. I feel slightly afraid of developing constipa-
tion. If necessary, I will add a little quantity of vegetables. There
is no cause at all for worry on this account.
What you say about Sitala Sahay is right. His letter is rude
and seems to have been written in anger. If his expenditure is
more, he should send you detailed accounts. If they are all right,
there should be no objection to paying him more. Hence, instead
of fixing an absolute limit of Rs. 60, it seems to me that the better
course would be to ask him to send accounts before paying him
more. I have explained other points fully in my letter of yester-
day, and, therefore don't touch upon them here. I need not write
more about the Giri family either.
If Dhiru and Kusum do less physical work and take enough
milk, their weight will increase.
Do you hear any time from Nirmala Joshi? She may have
some information about Lilabehn. Do you know her address?
Do what you think proper regarding Titus. If you are fully
satisfied with his work and his demand is in accord with his
requirements, it may be proper to pay him that much. It is
natural that the dependants of those who had joined the
March and who are no longer in the struggle but are emplo-
yed in some work will expect help from them. If, therefore,
we stick to the letter of their pledge, we may perhaps do them
injustice.
Parnerkar's action is highly improper. It is certainly not
right to go away without obtaining permission and send a message
1 A graduate of Higginbottom Agriculture College and trained by
Parnerkar at the Ashram
2 Dandi March in 1930; vide Vol. XLIII.
146
afterwards. However, since his motives are good and his mind has
become very weak, I don't wish to censure him. And his sacri-
fice also has been good. If, therefore, you think it proper send
some money to his mother. I know that strict justice will not per-
mit that. But very often cold justice becomes injustice. It is ex-
tremely difficult to look into the heart of any human being.
Hence, whenever it is a question of paying money, my inclination
is always to pay something if we can.
Where are Ramarao and Pratap at present? It is enough if
Father Elwin is satisfied. He would not expect from us the same
attention as Mirabehn could give, nor can we fulfil such an expec-
tation. Few persons would be capable of her careful attention to
details when she looks after anybody whom she loves. We cannot,
therefore, compete with her. It was very good that the matter of
Imam Saheb's tomb was settled.
You must have read what I wrote to Jivram regarding Anna-
purna. Sharat Chandra Patnaik, from what you write about him,
seems to be a good man. If he marries Annapurna, his motive
would be primarily humanitarian. However, Jivram should ap-
prove of him and Annapurna should be willing. If Sharat Chandra
knows the whole story of Annapurna's past and still marries her,
he would certainly have my blessings, but he would also deserve
compliments.
I suppose you have acknowledged receipt of the various trans-
lations of An Autobiography which you have received. I think Keshu
spinning 350 rounds of yarn of 50 counts is good speed. On
what type of spinning-wheel does he spin?
Even those rooms which contain only luggage should be
opened at regular intervals. It is a practice in big offices in charge
of buildings that the last date on which each building was cleaned
and the next date fixed for its cleaning are shown on some part of
it. Even if, therefore, the list of future works does not include those
items, the dates would be shown on the buildings. The staff would
inspect these dates as a matter of routine, so that, if persons have
been appointed to attend to such work, it would be carried out
in due time without anybody having to remember the dates.
For spinning yarn of fine count, besides good slivers the
spindle, the belt and the spindle-holder also are relevant fac-
tors. You cannot spin yarn of 50 counts even from the best sli-
vers with the type of belt and spindle in the Magan spinning-
wheel. The spindle of the spinning-wheel on which the Andhra
women spin yarn of 80 counts is extremely fine, like the wires of
an umbrella, and quite small. The belt also is very thin. That is
why those women are able to spin yarn of such fine count. Exa-
mine your spindle and belt from this point of view. My own
experience is that we cannot spin on any other type of spinning-
wheel as fine yarn and with as much ease as we can on the Gandiva
spinning-wheel, and the chief reason for this is the extremely thin
belt of the latter. My eyes tell me that such thin belt will not
work on a spinning-wheel which stands vertical. Moreover, we
can never achieve on the wheel of the latter the same control
as on the Gandiva wheel. For the same reason, a delicate spindle-
bearer like the one with which the Gandiva wheel is fitted will not
work on the other types. We ought to master the art of spinning
yarn of the finest count, and those who have very much more expe-
rience in this field than I should spin for trial on the different
types of spinning-wheels and examine them from this point of
view.
I went through your summary. I have said enough on this
subject in previous letters, and so I need not write anything here.
You need not continue to send such summaries every week. If
you make any changes after studying the figures, please inform
me about them. If information from more persons is received
and if you have any comments to make, please write. I will pre-
serve the register sent by you, so that, if you refer to it in ex-
plaining anything, I will consult it and find out the point of the
reference. Personally, I learn a great deal from such summaries
and they also help me to think clearly. You have done well in
giving details about every person which help me to identify him
or her.
I see from Panditji's letter that you observe five minutes'
silence in the morning too. If you have found the result of the
practice good, let it be continued. My own suggestion, however,
was only for the evening prayer. The inmates attend it after
tiring work for the whole day and, therefore, may require a little
longer time to concentrate their attention in meditation. Five
minutes' silence will help in acquiring such concentration. At
the time of morning prayer the condition is quite the opposite,
and so silence may not be necessary for the purpose I have explain-
ed. Panditji thinks that many of them doze during these five
minutes. I have here discussed the necessity or otherwise of five
minutes' silence from a general point of view. From the spiri-
tual point of view, the longer the period of silence during prayer
the better it is. But that is only for those who can benefit from
it. Please do not understand me to mean that the five minutes'
silence in the morning should be stopped. It is obvious that an
excellent practice which has been started ought not to be dis-
continued in a hurry. I have said all this to tell you that, if
you are of the same view as Panditji and would like to reduce five
minutes to one minute but refrain from doing so because you had
understood my suggestion to mean that I wanted five minutes'
silence at both times, you are free to make a change.
July 3, 1932
There was a hint in Panditji's letter, and Mahadev also tells
me, that children do not get enough sleep. They ought to get
at least eight hours' uninterrupted sleep. They can get that only
if they go to bed at 7.30 p.m., assuming that we want them to
get up at 3.30 a.m. I also believe that children should get at
least eight hours' sleep. It would be desirable if the grown-
ups also get as many hours of rest. One way of ensuring this
would be to start the evening prayer at 7 and finish it at 7.30
or rather at 7.20. Since half an hour is the minimum time re-
quired for the prayer, it should start at 6.50. Alternatively, [in the
morning] the bell should be given at 4 and the prayer should
start at 4.30. Still another way would be to have a separate time
for prayer for children, which should be at the commencement
of their class. There is, in fact, a prayer at that time. We
should be satisfied with that. Apart from that, the children
should form the habit of praying [either in the morning or in the
evening]. They may pray in the morning whenever they get up.
The general time for rising should not be later than 4 a.m. and
morning prayer ought not to start later than 4.30. And the
children must get at least eight hours' sleep. Taking these two
conditions as essential, you may make any changes that may appear
necessary. You will have to decide who should be counted as
children. Boys and girls who are neither children nor adolescents
may be counted as children if they wish. The rule for them
should be that they may continue to be counted as children for
one year at the longest. Those who are ill have always been
exempted from attending the morning prayers. Indu and other
boys like him should be exempted, whether or not they them-
selves wish. That is, a boy or girl who is losing weight should
not be put to the strain of getting up early. That Indu does
not get sleep before ten is certainly not a desirable state of affairs.
If his bed is made in the open near yours, he is bound to get
sleep. Even though he should be exempted from attending the
morning prayer, he must form the habit of sleeping early.
Think
over all this and make any changes you may think necessary.
Shamal seems to be troubled in his mind. I have advised
him to have a talk with you. Without waiting for him to come
to you, send for him and ask him what his difficulties are.
There is a letter from Manjula, in which she says that her
going to the Ashram has been postponed. Perhaps she has written
to you also. She has not given the reason.
There is no change in the condition of my left arm. It seems
that it will improve in course of time purely through rest. You
need not worry about it at all. I do take milk to please the
Superintendent, but at present at any rate I don't see that it has
benefited me much. However, I am continuing it for the present.
Along with it I take rotli, instead of bread, and a vegetable with
one of the meals. Just now it is the season for grapes in Karachi.
Lalwani therefore, sends parcels of them from time to time and
I eat them too. The weight has risen to 104.
About yarn, if you see Shardabehn perhaps you may be able
to get yarn spun by women for the yajna of spinning. We must—
if we can—discover some means of meeting the acute demand for
yarn.
How do Jamna and Purushottam spend their time in
Ranavav? If you know the details of their daily routine, let
me have them.
Inform Ba that I got only one letter written by her. Does
she get mine?
BAPU
July 4, 1932
I had written about a few rules for the Ashram and about
prayer. These articles do not seem to have been circulated
to all. Send copies of them to me. You will find in Mahadev's
cupboard a big French dictionary belonging to him. Send that
and the Urdu translation of An Autobiography along with the Urdu
books which I have asked Prema to send. Why has Nirmala
(Aunt) stopped writing to me? Mahadev desires you to tell Durga
that she has not said anything about money and her health in
1 Vide p. 120.
2 Chabildas Rochiram Lalwani, husband of J. B. Kripalani's sister
3 Shardabehn Mehta
4 Vide pp. 68- and Vol. XLIX, pp. 386-.
5 Mahadev Desai's step-sister
her letter, and that she should write about them in her letter to
him. The rotlis for me are made by Mahadev.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8236. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
