89. LETTER TO SANTOJI MAHARAJ
BANGALORE,
Aso Sud 3 [July 2, 1927]
SHRI SANTOJI MAHARAJ,
I have carefully preserved your questions, and with God's
grace I shall try to answer them now. I enclose the questions with
this answer so that you may not have to take the trouble of re-
calling them and I may not have to copy them. I have num-
bered them serially, and there should be, therefore, no confusion.
1. Only he can interpret the Gita correctly who tries to follow
its teaching in practice, and the correctness of the interpretation
will be in proportion to his success in living according to the
teaching. The Gita was not composed as a learned treatise. It
may be a profound one, but in my view the realization of its
profound quality depends on the depth of one's sincerity in put-
ting its teaching into practice. I have read Lokamanya Tilak's
and Shankaracharya's commentaries and tried to understand
them as well as I could. I am not qualified to pronounce judg-
ment on their learning. If we accept the point of view I have
suggested, the question of expressing an opinion on their learning
does not arise. The Gita is related to the Vedas and the Upanishads,
for it gives the essence of both.
2. The Gita teaches that one should cultivate the state of sama-
tva and explains with every manner of argument the means of
doing so, namely, bhakti accompanied with jnana that is, service
of every living creature without thought of reward.
3. The godly heritage, according to the Gita, is that which helps
one to attain self-realization. The sign of having acquired such
heritage is the weakening of one's attachments and aversions, and
the means of acquiring it is cultivation of bhakti for the Lord.
4. As far as I have been able to read and understand the teach-
ings of our sacred writers of past times, I don't think there is any
difference of view.
5. A Brahmin and a Bhangi [let us suppose] are stung by a
scorpion. I see that a vaid has arrived to help the former, and
another has been sent for. The vaid simply does not look towards
the Bhangi who has been crying for help. Both the vaid and the
Brahmin hear his cries. If the Brahmin has learnt to regard all
beings with an equal eye, he would ask the vaid to treat the Bhangi
first. If I were the vaid, I would run to the Bhangi, suck out the
poison from the wound and apply to him whatever other reme-
dies I knew. Having done that, I would offer my service to the
Brahmin, if he required it, and then attend to my other work.
To cultivate an equal eye towards all beings means to serve all
people in the world with equal regard.
6. It is not true at all that the Lord teaches in the Gita that
one may kill one's kinsmen. When Arjuna got ready to fight for
what he believed to be a just cause, and was overcome with igno-
rant attachment and weakness, through which he made a distinc-
tion between kinsmen and others, the Lord cured him of his attach-
ment and weakness. We can only guess what reply Krishna would
have given if Arjuna had protested and said that he did not wish
to kill at all, whether his opponents were kinsmen or others. It is
my humble view, however, that the Gita was not composed to
give a direct answer to that question.
7. I have felt that there is a greater spirit of universality and
liberalism in the sanatana Vedic dharma .
8. The question, which is the chief religious work, one can answer
only for oneself. For me it is the Gita. One distinction at any rate
among such works is based on the subject they deal with, namely,
those which lay down codes of conduct and others which state and
explain the nature of Godhead. If the question refers to anything
more than this, I have not understood it.
9. The differences between the rules of conduct enjoined by
the various religions will change from age to age, and as know-
ledge and the spirit of liberalism grow such differences will dimi-
nish.
10. I think this question is involved in question 9. But I shall
say this by way of further explanation. We should believe that the
practices and modes of conduct which we find represented in the
Koran, the Bible, the Vedas and other works were the best in those
times and those lands. If our reason cannot accept them in this
age, it is our dharma to change them or abandon them altogether.
Only fundamental principles are immutable.
11. In acting towards other people and understanding their
faiths one should follow the principle of regarding others as one-
self.
12. I think it almost impossible to decide which out of the many
interpretations of religious works represents undiluted truth. That
is why the Gita has convincingly argued that samanvaya is the best.
God alone represents perfect truth. Imperfect man, therefore,
should humbly believe that as one's truth is dear to one, so
others' truths are bound to be dear to them. Hence everyone
should follow his own path and others should not hinder him
from doing so. People will then follow, of their own accord, that
path which is found from experience to be the smoothest.
13. Till we come across a person of experience and of perfect
purity in conduct, we should observe the rules of conduct and
discipline enjoined in the religious work which we have accepted
as our scripture, read it regularly, reflect over it and put its teach-
ings into practice. Those who cannot do even this are ignorant
people. Such of them as cannot observe purity in conduct have
a protector only in God. I believe in the assurance given in the
Gita that even people of this class are saved somehow. Words cer-
tainly have a meaning, but there are ebbs and floods in the mean-
ing of words as if they had a life of their own.
14. As I understand the problem, without a belief in reincarnation
it would be almost impossible to prove that the world is govern-
ed by justice. Moreover, one soul cannot have [full] experience
of the world within the span of one life, which is but a mo-
ment in a vast cycle of time. I can practically say that I have
direct proof every moment of the truth of the belief in rein-
carnation.
15. Virtue and sin exist in the same sense that light and dark-
ness, happiness and suffering, truth and untruth, do. However,
just as there is an unknowable and indescribable Reality beyond
the categories of existence and non-existence, so also there is
something beyond virtue and sin of which this body can have
no experience. The descriptions given in Buddhist writings or
in those of the Nyaya and the Sankhya schools of philosophy
are not unalterable, but these too, can be understood and ac-
cepted from the respective viewpoints.
16. For the development of man's reasoning faculty, the right
influences are certainly essential. To put it scientifically, every
society solves the problem in every age for itself.
17. Violence means injuring a creature through bodily action or
speech or in thought, with the intention of injuring it. Non-
violence means not injuring any creature in this manner. The
doctrine of non-violence propounded in Vedanta literature, as far
as I have understood it, seems to me all right. But I cannot say
myself whether I have understood the Vedanta teaching correct-
ly, nor can I claim that my study of the Vedanta is deep.
18. For being able to observe brahmacharya, one must keep the
mind, speech and body constantly engaged in morally pure activity.
We can, therefore, say in a general way that a brahmachari
should do the opposite of what householders given to the enjoy-
ment of pleasures do. It is my experience that desires in the
mind are closely connected with the kind of food one eats, but
I know that such desires arise even when one's food is pure and
small in quantity. We may, therefore, say that right food is a
great help for the observance of brahmacharya, but that it is not
all. The purest food is fruit, which has naturally ripened, eaten
in solitude. I have no doubt about this at all. The chief thing
is that, if the palate could be controlled, the observance of brahma-
charya would become quite easy. We commit two errors in say-
ing that knowledge has reference to the mind and food is connec-
ted with the body, which is a material object. The body of a
living human being is not altogether inert. And the thing which
we call mind and which learns from experience is as closely con-
nected with the body as light is with the sun. A dead body is
one from which the mind has gone; such a body does not eat or
drink. Thus, it is the mind which eats through the body, and
likewise it is through the body that really speaking it acquires
knowledge.
19. The universal Soul in which all the souls exist is God. The
living creature which does not know that universal Soul and looks
upon itself as separate from other creatures is what we call jiva.
That universal Soul, though dwelling in all, is not directly expe-
rienced; that is its beauty, its miracle, its maya. The true end of
human effort consists in crossing that maya and knowing that uni-
versal Soul, which is the one source of all. It is not a thing
which can be experienced in a manner our reason can understand;
how, then, can there be any means of experiencing it? But any-
one who has the strength to forget the "I" in him and make him-
self a cipher can have a glimpse of this universal Soul, though he
cannot help someone else to have it too. Such a person is so
dazzled by the mere glimpse, and so utterly spell-bound, that he
merges in it. He feels no desire and no need to describe his
supreme bliss to anyone.
20. I have somehow found something for myself by combining
all the suggestions made by the authors of Shastras. It is, there-
fore, quite difficult for me to say which path is acceptable. Shan-
kara is dear to me, and so are Ramanuja, Madhva, Vallabha and
others—I have relished delicacies from all, but have not been able
to satisfy my hunger through what I got from any of them.
21. It may now be seen that the reply to this question is contained
in the replies to the preceding questions. Yajna2, dana tapas4, are
obligatory duties, but that does not mean that the manner of
performing them in this age should be the same as in ancient
times. Yajna, dana, etc., are permanent principles. The social prac-
tices and the concrete forms through which they are put into
practice may change from age to age and country to country. In
my view, for example, the supreme yajna for this country and in
this age is the spinning-wheel. The right gift which a seeker of
moksha in this country and this age may make is to dedicate his
all, body, intellect and possessions, to the service of the coun-
try. And, likewise, the right tapas for this country and this age con-
sists in burning with agony at the suffering of countless untouch-
ables and others who are starving for want of food or because of
famines. Anyone who performs these three important duties cer-
tainly becomes purified and he may even have a vision of God's
cosmic form which Arjuna had.
22. Saguna nirguna etc., belong to the speech of human be-
ings trying to express their imperfect knowledge which is sheer
ignorance. In truth God is beyond description. Even to call
Him nirguna is an utterly vain attempt to describe Him. Since,
however, He is a slave of His devotees, He can be described not with
a thousand but with an infinite number of epithets, all of which
can be applied to him from the point of view of the respective
devotees, and it is His supreme mercy that He tolerates them all.
There is no error, therefore, in saying that He exists as all bodies,
all sense-organs and all other things. We may thus confess our in-
ability to describe Him.
23. I wish to say in all humility that my fasts and other ordeals
are inspired by the desire to see God face to face. I fast in order
that, even if I go without food altogether, I may have a glimpse
of God such as I have described in these answers. But one cannot
force oneself to undertake a fast. One must have fitness even for a
fast. I am constantly striving for such fitness. But it is possible that
I may not acquire it in this life and may even die ingloriously.
This completes the list of your questions. If you have any
other questions to ask besides these, do ask them. You will notice
a certain positiveness in some or all of the answers. Please do not
put it down to presumption or pride. If I did not write what
I have done, I would be guilty of untruth, for it would mean con-
cealing my real beliefs through false humility. If, therefore, you see
impropriety in my positiveness, kindly forgive me for that.
The revered Malaviyaji Maharaj is here. I have discussions
with him on all manner of religious issues. I will tell him of
your desire too.
Yours,
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12323
