107. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, WARDHA,
October 15, 1933
As all the energy that I have been able to regain has been
given to the immediate work in hand, I have not been able
to write to you. There was nothing new I had to say and I
knew that you would not misunderstand any action that I took.
I, therefore, did not send my explanation believing that, if
anything I did required explanation, you would not hesitate to
demand it of me.
I have kept myself informed of your health, or rather want
of it, and I realized long ago that it was vain to plead with you
that you should take this change or that. In this as in other
matters you are a law unto yourself. I do, therefore, satisfy myself
with praying that God, who has taken care of you all these long
years and who has blessed you with energy of which the youth
of India may well be jealous, will continue to take care of you,
so long as He needs your services.
I write this letter with reference to your latest statement. My
own impression is that the All-India Congress Committee, if it
meets, will by an overwhelming majority pass a resolution en-
dorsing continuance of the civil resistance movement. That being
my conviction, I see no reason for convening a meeting for such a
confirmation, because the confirmation will not accelerate the
pace of civil resistance. It has to take its own natural course.
But, if you believe that the All-India Congress Committee will
adopt a new programme and give up civil resistance, there is ab-
solutely no reason whatsoever why you should not actively canvass
for a requisition, on receipt of which Jawaharlal is bound to
convene a meeting. And I would venture to submit that if you
would promote a requisition you should also in consultation with
the requisitionists chalk out a definite policy and programme
which you will prosecute unflinchingly.
If this is not done and
a mere requisition is sent the meeting will simply end in a desultory
discussion and ill-thought-out resolutions. Whilst I would gladly
attend any such meeting and say my say, I am not keen on at-
tending such a meeting and I would gladly refrain from attend-
ing it, if my absence was, from the highest motives, desired by
you or any body of responsible members.
PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
MUSSOORIE
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
