455. LETTER TO T. PRAKASAM
"VALMIKI MANDIR",
READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
April 3, 1946
MY DEAR PRAKASAM,
I have your letter. Most reluctantly I resume English in the hope
that I will now be able to convince you that you are in error.
The whole question arose out of my discussion with your secretary,
Shri Kala Venkatrao. I began a talk with him about you. I think I
enquired how you were able to carry on your practice and also public
work at the same time. He said you were not carrying on any practice
nor conducting a newspaper but that you were living on purses presented
to you by the public and added that he could see nothing wrong in
it. This news left a bad taste in my mouth. This was the genesis of
our correspondence. I think that it is an extremely bad example. If
it is multiplied, purity of public life will come to an end. I can understand
a public fund for the maintenance of public servants such, for instance,
as was raised by the late Jamnalalji for lawyers who had given up
practice in the heyday of non-co-operation. The nucleus of this fund
exists even now and some workers are being supported out of it.
Mahilashram is being conducted in Wardha for the education of the
families of the late Jamnalalji's friends who had become servants of
the public, relying for their maintenance upon Jamnalalji. Some of them
even go so far as to collect public funds which they hand over to
the public work for which they may have been collected. Of this they
render a full account and keep nothing for themselves. But I have never
heard of a single instance in which what you say has been done or
can be defended. All the papers that you have sent to the Sardar and
are now sending to me simply show how in my opinion you have been
instrumental, however unwittingly, in, as I would put it, corrupting public
life. I do not know what evidence you will put before me to convince
me to the contrary. It does not require conviction of friends who doubt
the wisdom of the course adopted by you. But it requires peremptory
correction of your thought and practice and retracing, so far as possible,
what has been done.
I advise your publication of all your doings from the very beginning.
It will be good for you and good for the public and the cause you
254
and I stand for. Finally, I would go so far as to suggest that you should,
if you do not accept my reasoning, obtain a ruling from the Working
Committee. The matter is too dangerous to be left undecided.
I am sending a copy of this to the Sardar.
Yours,
BAPU
SHRI T. PRAKASAM
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
