232. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
September 29, 1932 (1.45 p.m.)
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,
The orders you verbally conveyed to me at 12.30 this morn-
ing I interpret as follows: I am not to be allowed to see from
this date any visitors regarding untouchability or any other public
work, except Sjts. Ghanshyamdas Birla and Mathuradas Vasanji.
Secondly Mrs. Gandhi should be forthwith removed to the Female
Yard; all other visits to be regulated as before the fast, under
the general instructions that were conveyed to me soon after
my admission and amended thereafter. This means that I shall
not have the privilege of seeing Shrimati Sarojinidevi, whose
presence during my illnesses has produced a soothing effect on
me, nor of my son Devdas and his intended wife, nor of the
Ashram inmates who have been in attendance upon me during
this crisis. I must confess that I was wholly unprepared for this
very sudden and rude reminder that I was but a prisoner whose
body was entirely at the mercy of the Government.
I would
like, however, the Government to know that I am still considered
to be convalescent and under orders not even to move from my
bed. I had hoped that at least during the convalescent period
I would be saved all unnecessary shock to my nerves. However,
this need not be a matter of moment to the Government and
ought not to worry me overmuch, if at all. Indeed I am thank-
ful for the medical attendance that the Government provided
for me and the free attendance of visitors and friends during the
fast. But what I cannot understand is this sudden stopping of
all visits, even in connection with untouchability work, save those
of Sjts. Ghanshyamdas and Mathuradas. The Government cannot
be unaware of the phenomenal awakening that has taken place
in the country, nor of the repercussions of the fast whose limita-
tions have been but little understood and which is being blindly
imitated by enthusiastic young men. I therefore hold it absolutely
necessary that I should be left entirely free to see whomsoever I
consider necessary regarding untouchability. The Government
have not yet seemed to have revised their instructions regarding
correspondence. Needless to say what applied to visitors regarding
untouchability applies equally to correspondence. Nor need I
add that I should not have the slightest objection to Government
officials and interpreters attending any interviews I might have
with visitors and my correspondence being scrutinized. As this
is a matter of the greatest urgency, I hope that the Government
will favour me with their decision at the earliest possible moment.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3861. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(4), Pt. I, p. 191
