336. LETTER TO GOMATI MASHRUWALA
PANCHGANI,
July 3, 1944
CHI. GOMATI,
Wrote just this much on the 1st and the invasion of visitors began. Today
is the 3rd. I feel quite well here. If the place suits me, I hope to be again on
1 From the reference to Gandhiji being "in a clinic" at the time and his proposed
visit to Panchgani "after the 1st"; in June, 1944, Gandhiji was convalescing at
Dr. Mehta's clinic in Poona and thereafter went to Panchgani on July 2.
LETTER TO GOMATI MASHRUWALA
241
my feet. Whether or not I recover, I hope to be there in August, assuming of
course that no unexpected obstacle prevents me from going there.
I was glad that Kishorelal discovered the error. I was sure that he would
do so. Nobody in the world ever had a more sincere co-worker than him. I
at any rate, never had. It was distressing to me to discourage you in your
desire to come here but that was the right thing to do. It therefore hurts me
that my going to Sevagram is being delayed. I cannot give up the desire to
get perfectly well. How can I give it up? I have nothing which I may call my
own. Do not we sing every day : tena tyaktena bhunjithah? I had specially
invited Nathji to Poona. We met daily from [June] 20 to July 2. We have
never been together for so many days. Both of us were pleased. He stayed in
separate quarters. I am always surrounded by a crowd. It would have been
difficult for him to observe his rules in the midst of them all. Vasumati
and Amtussalaam have badly disappointed me. I placed both of them in
Dinshaw's clinic for treatment, but they did not like it. Now I see the matter
with the . . . .3 eye, and see no reason for disappointment. One is disappointed
only if one hopes. Is it not so? There was no reason for . . .4. My suggestion
may have been for their good, but even so, is it not a delusion for me to believe
that their good lies in doing what I wish? So they [may do] as they think fit.
Send this to them, so that I may not have to write separately to them.
I have received Kanchan's reply. I was glad that she exercised patience.
When I arrive there, she should spend with me as much time as possible. I
do feel like writing separately to her but control the desire. Though I meet
fewer visitors, I have a heap of papers to attend to and the treatment I am
taking for my health leaves me so little time that I cannot attend to them all.
Here is my schedule for today.
There is no light here from 11 p.m. to 5.30 a.m. From 7 to 7.30 prayer.
At 8, fruit juice and jaggery. Up to 8.30, work. Up to 12.15, walking, massage
and bath. At 1. 30 eating, reading or asking someone to read out to me.
Thereafter upto 3.30 in the water-closet, followed by a siesta and writing of
letters (for half an hour). At 4.30, mud-pack and reading or writing, lying in
the bed. I started writing this letter thus lying in the bed and it is now 4.45.
After finishing this, I wish to attend to nature's call and so might visit the
water-closet. After 5, I will spin. As far as possible, I spin for an hour. A
few days ago, I started observing silence while spinning. Today, of course, is
my silence day. At 6, I will have some curds and fruit. After that, there will
be prayer. I will attend to it, and then go for a walk and after that hope to
work for one hour. The fact is that my capacity for work is still limited. I
1 Addressee's husband, Kishorelal Mashruwala
2 Kedarnath Kulkarni, Kishorelal's religious guide
3, & 5 The source is blank at these places.
242
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
am using up what little strength I have gained. It does not seem proper not
to use it up in that way. Thus, I act as God prompts me to. If professing to
act in the name of God, I am in fact acting through ignorant attachment, it
cannot but . . . .1 Show this letter to all.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of Gujarati : S.N. 33128
