3. LETTER TO "THE TIMES"
[LONDON,]
October 22, 1906
TO
THE EDITOR
THE TIMES
[LONDON]
SIR,
I have seen the cablegram in your issue of to-day's date from
your Johannesburg correspondent in connection with the British Indian
Deputation that has arrived from the Transvaal to wait upon the
Imperial authorities regarding the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance
of the Transvaal.
I trust that, in fairness, you will allow us to correct certain mis-
statements made by your correspondent. He says: "The present Ordi-
nance provides for the complete registration of all Asiatics in such a
way that personation, in which the Asiatic is a past master, would be
made impossible." We deny that there has been any personation, and
we venture to state emphatically that the existing registration certificates
held by British Indians entirely prevent personation. These certificates
contain the names of the holders [and] their wives, number of children,
their age, height, [and] their thumb imprints. Whenever an attempt has
been made to personate, the culprit has been promptly brought to justice.
Your correspondent states that the present Ordinance will give a full
title to Asiatics already domiciled, and that it will extend greater privi-
leges to them. They have the full title to residence already, unless it is
to be snatch[ed] from them by fresh legislation. They hold permits
authorizing them to enter and remain in the Colony of the Transvaal,
also registration certificates above mentioned, which were taken out by
them as a voluntary act on the advice of Lord Milner who at the time
assured them that those registration certificates were final and complete.
That Asiatics will be absolved from the obnoxious registration fee is
a preposterous statement as they have already paid it, either to the
Boer Government or to the British. They will not be given a title to
their land and mosques, as your correspondent suggests. He is thinking
of the Draft Ordinance which contained a clause authorizing the
Government to give the British Indians a title to their mosques or places
1 This was published "in substance" in The Times, 25-10-1906. The letter was
reproduced in full in India, 26-10-1906, and in Indian Opinion, 24-11-1906.
2 Vide Vol. III, pp. 364-71.
of worship but not to their land apart from mosque premises. But this
clause does not now find place in the Ordinance as passed by the Legis-
lative Council, nor was it necessary, because the Supreme Court of the
Transvaal has decided that, in spite of Law 3 of 1885, Indians, acting
as a religious corporation, [can] hold fixed property for religious purposes.
British Indians in their wildest dreams have never claimed the right
of free immigration into the Transvaal. They recognize the several
prejudices against any such immigration, and have therefore accepted
the principle of restriction in vogue at the Cape, Natal and other British
Colonies.
The British Indians of the Transvaal respectfully but firmly oppose
the Ordinance because it imposes wanton, uncalled for and unjust de-
gradation upon them. It reduces them to a level lower than the Kaffirs.
It sets up a system of passes and identification applicable only to
criminals. Is it right that every Indian, irrespective of status, should be
called upon to carry a pass containing impressions of all his digits, to
be produced to every policeman who may choose to ask for it? Is it
right that babies in arms should be taken to an officer called the Regis-
trar of Asiatics, to give him particulars of identification in respect of the
baby and to have it provisionally registered[?]
Whereas Law 3 of 1885 requires registration of traders only and
registration certificates under it are merely a receipt for £3, the present
law requires registration of the above kind of every male Indian in the
Colony.
The statement that the first undersigned has been the principal
agent through whom Indians obtained permits to enter the Transvaal,
and that he has in the past established a large business on this footing,
is false. The large number of Indian refugees had already entered the
Transvaal at the time the first undersigned was required to settle there.
It is hardly necessary to deal with the personal element introduced
by your correspondent. It is felt that the British Indian community has
been much misrepresented and misunderstood.
Any influx of Asiatics into the Transvaal on a wholesale basis has
been all denied by the British Indian community, whose position to-day
is infinitely worse than it was under the Boer regime. The community
has asked for an enquiry into the alleged influx of Asiatics on a large
scale. We assert that the vast majority of the 13,000 British Indians
of the Transvaal are in possession of lawful permits and certificates. If
there are any without the necessary documents, the Peace Preservation
Ordinance is strong enough and severe enough to expel such people
from the country. Successful prosecutions have often taken place in
connection with such men.
It will therefore be seen that the British Indian community is pre-
pared to meet in a perfectly fair spirit [the fear] as to undue influx or
undue competition in trade; but it claims for the resident Indian popula-
tion the ordinary rights of citizenship, namely, freedom to hold landed
property, freedom of locomotion and freedom of trade under general
regulations, without class distinction.
We are, etc.,
[M. K. GANDHI
H. O. ALLY]
MEMBERS OF THE
TRANSVAAL BRITISH [INDIAN] DEPUTATION
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4385
