261. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION "1
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
I have received inquiries from many quarters as to why I sent
Harilal, my son, to gaol. I give some reasons below:
1. I have advised every Indian to take up hawking. I am afraid I
cannot join myself since I am enrolled as an attorney. I therefore
thought it right to advise my son to make his rounds as a hawker. I
hesitate to ask others to do things which I cannot do myself. I think
whatever my son does at my instance can be taken to have been done
by me.
2. It will be a part of Harilal's education to go to gaol for the sake
of the country.
3. I have always been telling people that satyagraha is easy for those
who can understand it well. When I go to defend those who have
been arrested, I do not, strictly speaking, defend them but only send
them to gaol. If we have acquired real courage, there should be
no need for me to present myself in Court. I thought it only proper
that I should make this experiment in the first instance with my son.
Accordingly, no arrangements were made for him at Volksrust, and he
was left to fall back on his own strength. Since there were others with
him in Johannesburg, I attended the Court, but asked for the maximum
penalty for him and for his associates. It was their misfortune that
they did not get it.
1 This was published in Indian Opinion under the title: "Why He Sent His
Son to Gaol: Mr. Gandhi's Explanation".
2 Vide "Trial of Harilal Gandhi and Others", pp. 405-.
4. I have often advised that no one should give his thumb-impression
on arriving at Volksrust. People have not followed this advice. I have
not insisted on the point, but the time has now come for me to insist
on it. Thumb-impressions are now asked for at Volksrust under the
obnoxious law, and they should not, therefore, be given. This [object]
also, I thought, I could easily achieve through Harilal.
I want every Indian to do what Harilal has done. Harilal is only a
child. He may have merely deferred to his father's wishes in acting
in this manner. It is essential that every Indian should act on his own
as Harilal did [at my instance] and I wish everyone would do so. Satya-
graha can be claimed to have been perfectly successful only if we do so.
I repeat that
(1) those who are prepared for imprisonment should go to gaol
without depending upon a lawyer or myself. That is not to
say that I go back on my promise of defending Indian satyagrahis
arrested in connection with the campaign against the law.
I shall go wherever I find my presence is needed. But the
best way is to have no lawyer and go to gaol straight away
and undergo whatever sentence is passed;
(2) every Indian, whatever his status, must go to gaol for the
sake of his country without giving much thought to what
the others do;
(3) no Indian should give his thumb-impression or finger-prints
on entering the Transvaal. Not doing so will mean imprisonment
for Indians. They must accept it rather than give thumb-
impressions or finger-prints or even signatures as signifying
[compliance with the provisions of] the law.
I remain,
Satyagrahi
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-8-1908
8-28
