278. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
SEGAON, WARDHA,
October 12, 1937
CHI. JAMNALALJI,
I have your letter.
Bahadurji is welcome.
I have learnt about Shriman's fever. It is a bad one.
It seems obstinate. I am hoping to go and see him today.
I am dictating this letter after the morning prayer. Because
of Shriman's illness, Mahadev and Kishorelal suggested to me
that the Education Conference be postponed. The suggestion
appealed to me. The responsibility of accommodating a hun-
dred persons ought not to be on you. I assume that you will
foot the bill. I don't mind that. But if the other people
cannot shoulder the burdens of managing such gatherings with-
out your help, I think we ought not to have them at all. Our
work in these gatherings will shine only if the others have
acquired the ability to manage them. I have, therefore, sent a
message to Aryanayakam that he should let the plan for the
Conference stand only if he has the necessary self-confidence and
ability. Otherwise it had better be postponed. The Conference
was Shriman's idea and I had depended on him alone. As
long as he was in normal health I didn't worry. I had assumed
that he would never fall ill. When, therefore, I heard about
226
his illness, I was upset. I have regarded your discovery of Shri-
man as a wonderful one. He has an unusual mixture of learn-
ing, maturity of judgement and humility. Without him the
Conference would give me no pleasure. But in accordance
with the principle that one should not abandon a task already
begun, I have insisted that the Conference be held unless
[Arya]nayakam's self-confidence gives way or you oppose its
holding. I would regard your opposition to be well-groun-
ded, for I have faith in your practical sense. You alone can
judge best whether, without you and the use of your bungalow,
the programme of the Conference can go through successfully.
If, therefore, you wish that the Conference should be postponed,
please tell me so immediately by wire. I will then postpone it.
I hope you are keeping fit. Savitri must be doing quite
well.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 190-
