345. LETTER TO HANUMANTRAO
July 17, 1918
I have been thinking of writing to you for a long time, but
my recruiting peregrinations have seriously interfered with my
correspondence. Today happens to be an off day, and is being
devoted to letter-writing. I thank you most heartily for all you
have done and are doing for Devdas. In everyone of his letters
Devdas has mentioned your affection for him. In his illness, he
tells me, you have been a real friend. I shall now select Hindi
candidates for Tamil tuition.
I knew that my recruiting campaign was bound to pain friends
for a variety of reasons, political as well as religious. But I know
that both are wrong in their condemnation. My views have been
before the country for a long time. But it is always one's action that
matters, rarely one's speech. But I may not therefore summarily
dismiss their objections. They are honest in their statement and they
criticize out of affection. It is my practice of ahimsa and failure
to get our people even to understand the first principles of ahimsa
that have led to the discovery that all killing is not himsa, that,
sometimes, practice of ahimsa may even necessitate killing and that
we as a nation have lost the true power of killing. It is clear that
he who has lost the power to kill cannot practice non-killing.
Ahimsa is a renunciation of the highest type. A weak and an
effeminate nation cannot perform this grand act of renunciation,
even as a mouse cannot be properly said to renounce the power
of killing a cat. It may look terrible but it is true that we must,
by a well-sustained, conscious effort, regain this power, and, then,
if we can only do so, deliver the world from its travail of himsa
by a continuous abdication of this power. I cannot describe to you
in sufficiently telling language the grief I often used to feel as I
watched my failure to carry conviction about ahimsa even to the
members of the Ashram. Not that they were unwilling listeners,
but I could perceive, as I now think plainly, that they had not
the capacity for apprehending the truth. It was like singing the
finest music to ears untuned to any music. But today practically
everyone at the Ashram understands it, and is aglow with the
expectation that ahimsa is a renunciation out of strength and not
out of weakness. It is not possible to make any distinction between
organized warfare and individual fighting. There must be an
organized opposition and, therefore, even organized bloodshed,
say, in the case of bandits. The noblest warrior is he who stands
fearless in the face of immense odds. He then feels not the power
to kill, but he is supremely triumphant in the knowledge that he
has the willingness to die when by taking to his heels he might
easily have saved his life. I do believe that we shall have to teach
our children the art of self-defence. I see more and more clearly
that we shall be unfit for swaraj for generations to come if we
do not regain the power of self-defence. This means for me a
rearrangement of so many ideas about self-development and India's
development. I must not carry the point further than I have
done today. You are an earnest seeker. I am most anxious that
you should understand this new view of ahimsa. It is not a fall
but it is a rise. The measure of love evoked by this discovery is
infinitely greater than ever it was before.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
