47. LETTER TO REVENUE SECRETARY
MOTIHARI,
December 19, 1917
TO
THE SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR AND ORISSA
REVENUE DEPARTMENT
[PATNA
SIR,]
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter No.
1 16-II-T-44-R.T. of the 6th December 1917, enclosing copy of
the Champaran Agrarian Bill and inviting my remarks thereon.
I beg to submit as follows :
—
(1) With reference to Section 4, I observe that although both
sub-sections (a) and (b) apply to the same transaction, sub-section
(a) covers a wider area than sub-section (b), I have not been
able to conjecture any reason for it. But I suggest that the
wording of sub-section (b) may be copied for sub-section (a) and,
therefore, the word "condition" occurring in the second line of
sub-section (a) be removed. And the words "Section 3" occur-
ring in line 3 thereof may be replaced by "sub-section 2 of
Section 3".
(2) With reference to Section 5, I beg to state that the
Committee's recommendations cover contracts between landlords
and raiyats, not their tenants as well as their tenants.
There are numerous cases in which raiyats enter into contracts
with zamindars who are not their landlords. It is necessary, there-
fore, to amend the wording "a tenant whether holding under him"
occurring in line 2 thereof by saying "a tenant whether hold-
ing, under him or otherwise", and by removing the words "grown
upon the land of his tenancy or any portion thereof" occurring in
lines 3 and 4 of the Section.
It is suggested that these last words are redundant. It is
intended that the Legislature should protect the raiyats in respect
of all contracts as between zamindars and the raiyats concerning
the sale of produce.
(3) With reference to Section 6, I fear that as it stands it is
calculated to produce results the reverse of what is contemplated
by the Government and the Committee. Under sub-section (1)
thereof, an agent who is a mere straw may be put up by an un-
scrupulous landlord to collect abwab. Such an agent, if he is detec-
ted, will unhesitatingly suffer the penalties prescribed by the Section,
as the landlord of the type mentioned by me will always make [it]
worth his while to do so. I, therefore, suggest that it is necessary
in every case to make the landlord liable. Sub-section (1), there-
fore, should be amended by removing the words "or his agent"
occurring in line 1 and by adding the words "whether directly or
through an agent" after the pronoun "who" in the said line. Sub-
section 3 of the said Section should be entirely removed. It is
possible for a poor ignorant raiyat to be in the right and yet be
unable to prove his case. It will be a gross injustice if such an
innocent raiyat is punished. Moreover, the existence of such sub-
section will act as an effective deterrent against any raiyats lodging
a complaint about abwab. It should be added that the power of
punishing complainants for lodging false complaints is to be sparingly
used. It requires a highly trained judicial mind to arrive at a firm
conclusion as to complaints being false. It is, therefore, a danger-
ous thing to give summary powers to a Collector who will not be
acting judicially. Lastly, a single abortion of justice under sub-
section 3 is bound to result in an unscrupulous landlord being bolder
in his exactions, for he will know that the raiyats after proceedings
under sub-section 3 will have been cowed down. Considering all
the above circumstances, I trust that the sub-section in question will
be removed. If, however, it is found difficult to carry the amend-
ments to Section 6 as proposed by me, I suggest that the whole
of the Section be withdrawn. I would far rather have the less
effective protection of Section 75 of the Bengal Tenancy Act than
have the doubtful protection of Section 6.
(4) I observe that cart sattas 2 dealt with by the Committee
have been covered by the proposed law. There are such sattas
running into anything between 7 and 20 years with the same rate
of payment throughout. Several planters in reply to questions
by the Committee not being able to justify the terms of their
sattas said that they did not enforce them as a matter of fact. I
venture to suggest that there ought to be a section declaring such
sattas to be void. New sattas, if necessary for short periods, may
be entered into after the rate of hire is fixed in consultation with
the Divisional Commissioner. I may state, even at the present
moment, proceedings for damages for breach of these sattas are
pending.
I have read the correspondence in the Press carried on by
Messrs Irwin and Jameson and I have read also the speeches
delivered by Messrs Jameson and Kennedy in the Council on the
Bill. Regarding both I wish merely to state that there is a complete
answer to everyone of the statements made by these writers and
speakers. I have refrained from saying anything about them for
fear of unnecessarily burdening the Government. But should any
point raised by these gentlemen require elucidation from me, I shall
be pleased to offer my views on any such point on hearing from
you.
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran
