253. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[TOLSTOY FARM,]
Shravana Vadi 1 [August 21, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Please write to me, if possible, at least once a week.
I have already sent you Anandlal's letter.
For the vegetables you sent we shall arrange to payout of the
[Satyagraha] Fund here. We would have to spend the same amount
if we brought here the quantity of vegetables you sent. You should be
able to know a cheaper method of sending the vegetables if you went
through the tariff book. It is, however, impossible to measure the
value of the sentiment behind your sending the vegetables. What is
important is the fact that people provide satyagrahis with whatever they
need. If people send these things jointly the railway fare would not be
much. Please explain to them that it would be shameful for those who
make big profits to be scared by the paltry cost of freight.
I have not seen anything sent by Babu Talewant Singh. We have
received groundnut and vegetables from Dhanji and blankets and
flannels from Raghavji. If any of these things are from Babu Talewant
Singh please make the necessary correction. I had a letter from Babuji
himself saying that the articles were from the persons mentioned above.
1 Of 11-6-1910
2 The gifts mentioned in paragraph 4 were acknowledged in Indian Opinion,
27-8-1910; in 1910, Shravana Vadi 1 corresponded to August 21.
3 Son of Amritlal Tulsidas Gandhi, Gandhiji's cousin
Harilal cannot go to India to escort Chanchi. We are poor and can-
not spend money like that. Moreover, a man who has joined the struggle
cannot thus go away for three months. There would be nothing
wrong if Chanchi goes to India in some good company. Many poor
women do so. We do not want our womenfolk to remain delicate. I
for one am a farmer and I wish you all to become farmers, or to continue
as such if you have already become farmers. My way of life has com-
pletely changed here. The whole day is spent in digging the land and
other manual labour instead of in writing and explaining things to
people. I prefer this work and consider this alone to be my duty. Ram-
das dug a pit, 3 feet broad and 3 feet deep, and half of another, working
till one o'clock today. If he continues to work like this he will be a very
good boy. Now I do not see him engrossed in thought as he used to
be in Phoenix. This is the result of manual labour. In pampering
this corpulent body that has been given to us and pretending that we
earn [our living] by our intellect, we become sinners and are tempted
to fall into a thousand and one evil ways. I regard the Kaffirs, with
whom I constantly work these days, as superior to us. What they do
in their ignorance we have to do knowingly. In outward appearance
we should look just like the Kaffirs. From this you may deduce other
reasons also for Harilal not going to India to escort Chanchi.
For your short temper too I think this is the cure. The body is
like an ox or donkey and should therefore be made to carry a load.
Then the short temper, etc., will be cured. I am constantly trying to
keep away the shortcomings of Phoenix from this Farm. That is why
a different standard of living has been laid down. If instead of each
cultivating his own plot separately all cultivate the entire land to-
gether, we can produce a larger crop more quickly. I do not think
this is possible there for the present. But I did make the suggestion
that it would be good if those who could co-operate cultivated their
plots together. That suggestion was made with [special] reference to
Purshottamdas and you. It has many other implications. However,
I have written this to let you know the current trend of my mind.
The proceeds from the sale of stock in the Press cannot by any
means be considered as profit. They can be credited to the capital ac-
count and nowhere else. We need not consider whether we have gained
or lost by giving up the job work; we are rid of a headache thereby.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4934
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
1 The letter is incomplete.
