75. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL JAIL,
February 12, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL JAIL
SIR,
I observe that some Mulshi Peta prisoners have been flogged,
as they are said to have refused to work and to have wilfully
done short task.
If these prisoners claim to be satyagrahis, they are bound to
obey all prison regulations so long as they are not humiliating
or unreasonable, and certainly to the best of their capacity do the
tasks allotted to them. If, therefore, they have refused to work
or do not work according to their physical capacity, they are com-
mitting a breach of their own canon of good conduct in addition
to that of prison regulations.
I am sure that the authorities do not desire to flog them, if
they can be otherwise persuaded to work, and that they would
wish prisoners to yield to reason rather than to fear of punishment.
1 While reproducing the letter in Young India, 6-3-1924, Gandhiji added the
following note: "The Superintendent, in reply to the foregoing, came to my
cell and said that he harboured no anger against Mr. Jeramdas. Whatever he
(Mr. Jeramdas) did was done openly, but he was bound to take some notice of
the breach of regulations. He could not punish me for instigation. I had not
left the boundary of my yard to talk to the satyagrahis and therefore he could
not punish me. Owing to Mr. Jeramdas's talk to the satyagrahis, an ugly
situation was prevented." About this episode, Jairamdas Doulatram says: "As
a result of Gandhiji's intervention through me, the Mulshi Peta prisoners res-
ponded and carried out the task imposed on them. The authorities had inten-
ded to give them the punishment of whipping in case they persisted in their
refusal. . . . This would have led to other developments and, I believe, might
have led to Gandhiji's intervention in a much more active manner, leading to
other consequences."
I fancy that the men will listen to me. I, therefore, request that
I may be permitted to meet in your presence all the Mulshi Peta
men who wilfully break prison regulations, so that I may ex-
plain to them their duty as satyagrahis if they claim to be such.
I am aware that it is not usual to permit prisoners to assist
or intervene in matters of prison administration. But I imagine
that considerations of humanity such as in the case mentioned
will be allowed to supersede those of administrative custom.
I remain,
Yours obediently,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 8021; also Young India, 6-3-1924
