295. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
[On or before January 31, 1920]
BHAISHRI NARAHARI,
I have your letter. Mahadev, it seems, has had to suffer
much. He deserves to reach the end of the suffering now.
Often, a person improves in health after an attack of typhoid if
good care is taken later. It is also true that some remain weak
for ever, Sundaram, for instance. He over-indulged his palate
subsequently and ruined his health. You did well in writing to
me. Your resolution not to let the Ashram inmates know is also
correct. We have no right to criticize anyone if we cannot tolerate
criticism by the other party. Hence it should be your vow to hold
1 This was read out at a public meeting held in Bombay on January
31, 1920.
2 Gandhiji wrote to Anandshankar Dhruva, as he says, in this letter,
on this date.
your tongue despite the charge levelled by Maganlal. It is nece-
ssary, however, to get out of this state of mind. We must draw a
person's attention even to those of his weaknesses which he will
not admit, unafraid that we might incur his displeasure by doing
so. If we see a serpent moving up to a bed, we must wake up
the sleeper though we know that he will kick at us. We do not
always get an opportunity for doing this through a neutral inter-
mediary. It is only on such seemingly trivial occasions that we can
test ourselves. Till such time as you can act in this way, you may
convey through me what you wish to.
I am writing to Anandshankarbhai about religious education
and shall see if he agrees.
I have been a little concerned on hearing that Miss Faering
has gone to Lilavatibehn's. Miss Faering is a very simple-minded
girl. She puts trust in everyone all too readily. Lilavatibehn will
befriend her for unworthy purposes. So let me know in more detail
what happened and why she went. If anyone makes unworthy
approaches to her, it would be a matter of shame for us. Do not
talk about this. I have dropped a hint to Maganlal and do so
to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11888
