16. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
January 11, 1933
RESPECTED RANCHHODBHAI1,
I was pained to read your letter. Is it not strange that you
should write to me in English? Or that you should frame questions
as if you wanted to catch in your trap a witness who was trying
to escape it? But, as an elder brother, you have a right to do
all that, for I could judge from our discussion that you believed
me to have completely forsaken dharma. However, if God grants
you a long life you will admit one day that I had not knowingly
done so. I will now reply to your questions.
Pranams from
MOHANDAS
1. You desire that each and every sanatanist Hindu should form and
express his opinion on this question according to the dictates of his con-
science.
I would welcome it if it were possible.
2. Is it not a fact that there are thousands of people who believe that
India cannot get real swaraj without you?
If it is so, I would regard that as a heavy responsibility on me.
3. Is it not a fact that there are thousands of people who value your
life more than what they consider to be their religion?
I would be much pained if this is true. I cannot endure any-
body giving up what he regards as his dharma in order to save
my life.
4. Where was the need of announcing your firm resolve to fast to death
if the Guruvayur Temple was not opened to the untouchables?
This I have discussed at great length in my articles.
5. Why did you not issue a referendum 2 without taking such a vow?
To this too my articles contain a satisfactory reply.
6. Did not the persons who were engaged in taking votes exploit your
vow?
What you believe is not altogether improbable.
7. Can you correctly ascertain the percentage of voters who voted in
favour of the entry on account of your vow before them?
It is impossible to reply to this without knowing what is in
the heart of the person concerned.
8. If your case is strong and the cause you advocate is just and reason-
able, why have you announced your vow to fast to death if His Excellency
the Viceroy does not sanction the Bill before him?
It is absolutely necessary to read my articles for a reply to
this question.
1 Statements which Gandhiji started issuing from prison from November
4, 1932; vide Vols. LI and LII.
2 In Ponnani taluk where the Guruvayur temple is situated. The Zamo-
rin of Calicut, a trustee of the Temple, being against temple-entry, the referen-
dum was taken amidst adverse influences. Vide Vol. LII, pp. 304-.
3 Two Bills were awaiting Viceroy's sanction, one for introduction in the
Central Legislative Assembly by Ranga Iyer and the other for introduction in
the Madras Council by Dr. Subbaroyan. On January 23, the Viceroy gave
his sanction to the introduction of the Untouchability Abolition Bill by Ranga
Iyer in the Assembly subject to the condition that the Government did not
commit themselves to accepting its principles and that the fullest opportunity
would be given to every section of the Hindu community to express an opinion
on its provisions. Sanction to Dr. Subbaroyan's Temple-Entry Bill in the Madras
Council was refused on the ground that it was too far-reaching in implication
for enactment by a provincial legislature. Afterwards Ranga Iyer drafted a
9. Do you know that this vow is being exploited for nourishing the
agitation in favour of the Bill being sanctioned?
No such thing has happened to my knowledge.
regarded as sanatanist Hindus-if they have the other characteristics
of such Hindus.
25. Are you in favour of intermarriages between the Brahmins, Kshatri-
yas and Vaishyas on the one hand and the untouchables on the other?
If the bride and the bridegroom are a suitable pair, if their
lives are pure and they believe in the ideal of self-control in
married life, I would certainly approve of such unions. But I do
not regard interdining and intermarrying between Harijans and
other Hindus as a necessary part of the movement for the eradi-
cation of untouchability.
26. Do you keep any idol or any picture of Shri Rama or Shri Krishna
when you offer prayers in the morning and at night?
No.
27. Are you a staunch believer in idol-worship?
Yes.
28. Do you believe that it is necessary to go to a temple for darshan
of the image for attaining emancipation and for acquiring supreme love for
God?
No.
29. How often have you visited the Hindu temples for the darshan
of the idols during the last sixteen years?
I have visited them so often in the course of my tours that
I cannot count the number of times.
30. What amount have you sent as bhet or samagri to temples from the
funds collected by you?
I had no right to spend anything on temples from the money
I had collected.
31. Do you believe that a Dhed, Bhangi or Chamar cannot attain
emancipation or acquire supreme love for God unless he gets an opportu-
nity to go into the Hindu temple for darshan?
I don't believe so at all.
32. If you think that idol-worship is essential for the untouchables, what
if separate temples are built for them with the idols of Shri Rama or Shri
Krishna?
Since I don't see any justification for the existence of a sepa-
rate class of untouchable communities, I would not be satisfied by
separate temples for them.
53-
33. Do you think that the worship of an idol in a public temple is more
efficacious than that of an idol installed in the temple built for untouchables?
No.
34. Has Mr. Kelappan or any Dhed, Bhangi or Chamar told you that
he has such supreme love for the deity, that he will lose his life if he does not
get darshan in a temple of the sanatanists?
No.
35. When you attended the Round Table Conference, you were under
the impression that the population of the Dheds, Bhangis and Chamars,
who are treated as untouchables, was six or seven crores.
No.
36. Were you under the same impression when you made a compro-
mise 2 with Mr. Ambedkar?
No.
37. Did you even take the trouble of studying the causes with a view to
ascertain the actual population of these three communities?
I don't follow the question.
38. Is it not a fact that the percentage of the population of such un-
touchables varies from 2½ to 4 per cent in Kathiawar and Gujarat?
This is not impossible.
39. Have you even now ascertained the actual population of the three
communities in India?
I do not know the exact number.
40. Is it not a fact that lakhs of high-caste Hindus who were touchables
became Mohammedans during the Mohammedan rule and Christians after the
advent of the British rule?
I would be surprised if this is true.
41. Can you give even approximately the number of the untouchables
who became either Mohammedans or Christians?
I can say that the number is quite large.
42. Are you for allowing any Dhed, Bhangi or Chamar admission into
the Hindu temples? If not, what conditions or restrictions would you sug-
gest?
All Dheds, Bhangis and members of other such communities
who observe the rules of cleanliness must be entitled to visit temples.
43. Who will frame these conditions and restrictions and who will en-
force them? Will this not cause constant bickerings?
These rules are still accepted, and I think it easier to persuade
Harijans to observe them than to persuade other Hindus to do so.
44. Has a large section of the Dheds, Bhangis and Chamars autho-
rized you to create this sort of agitation for securing their entry into the
Hindu temples?
No. The present movement is intended to persuade caste
Hindus to do their duty.
45. Do you know that most of them are deadly against your agitation and
say that it will widen the gulf between them and the caste Hindus, create
trouble and make their position considerably worse?
The truth is the exact opposite of this.
46. Are you prepared to issue a referendum for ascertaining wishes of
the untouchables in the different parts of India?
In the light of the reply to (44), your suggestion is unneces-
sary.
47. Assuming that you suggest a compromise and it is accepted by some
orthodox Hindus, do you think that it will be held as binding on all the un-
touchables and other orthodox Hindus?
The present movement is not a commercial bargain. It is a
purely religious movement.
It will show the path of dharma to
those who accept it as such.
48. Do you know that the sentiments of untouchability are rampant
even amongst the Rabaris, Bharavads, Kolis, Thakardas, Kanbis, Patidars,
Rajputs, and such other castes?
That is our misfortune.
49. Do you know that the Dheds do not dine with the Bhangis and
Chamars, and there are separate wells for them in almost all the towns and
villages?
That is another misfortune.
50. Can you say with some authority that the Dheds will allow the
Bhangis and Chamars to enter into their temples?
If I can persuade the so-called high-caste Hindus, I think it
will be easy enough to persuade the Harijans.
51. Have you got a written assurance from the bulk of the Dheds that
they will give up such sentiments if public temples are opened even to the
Bhangis and Chamars?
Many persons have given me assurances, though I have nothing
in writing.
52. You have been constantly preaching touchability after your return
from Africa? Will you state the number of temples in the towns and villages
which are opened to the untouchables with the consent of the local sana-
tanists?
I think the number must be about 500.
53. Do you not think that the Lion of India who once roared and laun-
ched non-co-operation movement against the British Government ought not
to seek help from His Excellency the Viceroy on this question?
If I reply to this question, I would be violating my promise
to the Government.
54. You propose to fast to death if the Viceroy does not sanction the
Bill. Is this by way of resentment against the Viceroy or the obstinate sana-
tanists?
The reply to this question is contained in the reply to ques-
tion 8.
55. You do not think that your identification with the question will
prejudicially affect reverence of the sanatanists for you and practically wreck the
Congress and strengthen hands of the British statesmen who are against giving
substantial rights to India?
I do not believe so.
56. Do you not think that the reverence for you is your real strength?
Whatever power I have is Rama's, not mine.
57. Are you prepared to face the human nature as it is?
That is what I have done all my life.
58. Do you really appreciate the practical difficulties in the way of ac-
complishment of your desire?
I think I am fully aware of the difficulties.
59. Can you suggest a practical way by which public temples may be
opened to the untouchables without creating a split or tension among the
Hindus?
1 Gandhiji was to eschew all politics during his incarceration, while he
was allowed to meet and communicate freely for anti-untouchability work.
I have certainly made my suggestions.
60. Can the Jains, who are not Hindus by religion, and the Hindus who
are against idol-worship, and who have therefore nothing at stake, ask the Vice-
roy to sanction the Bill?
No.
61. Has any of the so-called benefactors of the untouchables built or
offered to build any temple for the untouchables?
No.
62. What harm is there if separate temples, having due regard to local
needs, are built, and the question of the entry into the temples built and main-
tained by the sanatanists is shelved?
That will harm sanatana dharma itself.
63. Have you ever stayed long in places of pilgrimage with a view to cor-
rectly ascertain the depth of the religious sentiments of sanatanist males
and females?
Yes.
64. Is it not a fact that the heart, and not the body, is the seat of love?
It is so.
65. Is it a fact that the sacred books of the Hindus lay the greatest
stress on the mutual touch by heart?
True.
66. Is it not a fact that it is the lack of mutual touch by heart which creates
wars and disputes among families and nourishes civil and criminal courts?
Quite true.
67. You know that during the dire famine of Samvat 1956 1, numerous
sanatanists fed the needy and supplied clothes? Can you point to a single
instance of the untouchables having been denied that benefit?
There is no limit to that.
68. Do you not think that the non-touchability of the Hindu women in
menses is based on the principle of purity? Does it breathe any hatred for
them?
That is right. It implies no contempt.
69. Should a Hindu take his bath and wash his clothes if he touches a
corpse or any dead creature?
They should purify themselves.
1 1900 A.D.
70. You know that among the Parsis the women in menses are treated
as untouchables for eight days.
I have heard that it is so.
71. Do you know that no pious Mohammedan would go to a Masjid for
prayers if there be a drop of urine or pus on any of his clothes?
That is true.
72. Supposing that a majority of people in a particular village or town
believe that to drink is no vice, should the minority also drink?
Never.
73. Are you of the opinion that dharma should be defined according
to the notions of the majority in a particular locality?
Whatever the theory, the practice will remain what the majo-
rity does.
74. Do you know that about 80 per cent of the boys attending schools
and colleges, who wear a white khaddar cap, do not visit temples even once a
year; and most of them state that the sacred books of the Hindus should be
thrown into the sea?
I would be surprised and pained if this is true.
75. Have you ever advised these boys to visit temples for darshan at least
once a fortnight or a month?
No.
76. Do you not think that if the administration of India be entrusted
to the people of such views, they would follow in the footsteps of Russia,
whose policy is to make the country Godless?
I have no such fear.
77. Have you ever cared to ascertain the percentage of boys referred to
in Q.74, who offer prayers to God even once a day?
Generally all pray at least once every day.
78. Do you know that the ladies residing in the 'Vanita Vishram' and
numerous educated high-caste ladies do not observe menses?
I do not know.
79. Has not Shri Krishna said that dear unto him is one who causes
no udvega 2 to others? What are your notions about the ahimsa dharma?
I have replied to this question in many of my articles.
80. Can you point to two males or females having similar features of the
body, etc., from the population of 180 crores of the earth?
No.
81. Is it possible to expect all human beings to be of the same tempera-
ment or the same habits?
No.
82. Do you not think that the contact of high-caste Hindus with the
untouchables in their present state would do considerable harm to the former?
If the so-called high-caste Hindus really deserve to be called
high-caste, mixing with Harijans will, instead of harming them,
benefit both themselves and the Harijans. Even if they do not
possess the kind of heart about which you have asked a question
above, they will benefit by freely mixing with the Harijans be-
cause such mixing concerns the heart.
83. All tinctures contain liquor. Would you advise those who take them
to take liquor or to give up the tinctures?
Personally I would appeal to them to give up drinking tinctures.
84. Can you point to any Rajput ruler following the Buddhistic religion,
or to any Mohammedan ruler who had compelled the sanatanists to allow the
untouchables to enter their temples?
I don't know of any.
85. Do you think that if the British Government were to violate the
repeated sacred pledges of absolute non-intervention in religious matters, it
would contribute to their stability and to peace and contentment among men?
No.
86. Does Malaviyaji take meals or do Sandhya-Gayatri without taking
a bath if he has touched any untouchable person?
This question should be addressed to Malaviyaji.
87. If the sentiments of the Hindus who support you on this question
do not materially differ from those of our friend Mr. Shaukat Ali, is it not
open to him to say that he too is a sanatanist? And can he be our teacher as
to what the sanatana dharma is?
It is beyond my power to say what Maulana Shaukat Ali
can do.
88. Is it a fact that most of the Dheds, Bhangis and Chamars take beef
even now? Do you think that they can be all Harijans?
I know that all of them do not eat beef. Certainly all of
them can become Harijans.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4112. Also C.W. 2799. Courtesy:
Chhaganlal Gandhi
