317. LETTER TO W. B. HEYCOCK
BETTIAH,
May 22, 1917
DEAR MR. HEYCOCK,
I send herewith a further statement about Dhokraha fire which
speaks for itself.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
[ENCLOSURE]
BETTIAH,
The 21st May, 1917
This morning at about 10 a.m. some men came from Dhokraha and in-
formed Mr. Gandhi that some officers had been there. He was questioning them
on the occurrence, when one of them said that he had heard that the doors
of the kachahri had been removed by the factory men before the fire. I suggested
that a local inspection might give us useful information. Mr. Gandhi accepted
the suggestion and asked me to go to Dhokraha personally. Accordingly, I pro-
ceeded to the scene at once.
I reached Dhokraha at about 11.30 a.m. In the kothi I found only a cart-
man. He denied having been present during the time the fire was raging and
informed me that the chaukidar was. I asked him to fetch the chaukidar. Mean-
while I proceeded to inspect the kachahri.
This kachahri is situated inside the compound of the residential bungalow
of the manager of the concern. It consists of a single room about 21 feet by
15 feet roughly. . . .
The entire roof work has come down. The walls are made of bricks,
plastered with mud. The whitewash on the walls, both inside and outside, is
unaffected. Black was noticeable at the top at four or five places only. The
appearance of the upper portion of the wall gives one the impression that the
rafter of the roof must have been pulled away to prevent the spreading of the
fire. The roof was thatched with straw over which was placed a covering of coun-
try tiles. . . .At places in the heap of rubbish were noticeable charred rafters,
both outside and inside the room. There was found a heap of partly burnt
papers. I examined them. They were all siahas 2 and sattas. The siahas were
for the year 1313 Fasli and the year 1315 Fasli 3 . None of these were completely
destroyed. (
) . . .The doors as well as the frames of the three windows
were altogether untouched by fire. The door C was not found in the buildings,
nor was its framework there. This door is about 7½ feet by 5 feet. There were
clear indications of the framework of the door being removed. The plaster
had given way. The mud underneath the framework was quite clean. At the
door D, the framework was charred all along, but not damaged much. There
were a few hinges sticking to it. I examined them and the fresh removal of
the rust from them clearly suggested that the screws had been taken out of them.
One or two screws were found still in the holes. The door appertaining to this
framework was not there. There were no indications in the debris of the frame
or the door in their burnt condition. No panes were found at C. There were
about half a dozen small pieces of glass.
This room is said to have been formerly used as an office where rent was
collected. About 2 or 3 years back, it was stated, this office was closed and
all the papers of the concern were removed to Loheria. Only a chaukidar remains
in this compound. A house about a hundred yards away from the residential
bungalow is occupied by the kothi men.
The examination of the debris showed that the contents of the room when
the fire broke out could only have been meagre. I estimate the damage to be
under Rs. 200.
BINDHYABASINI PRASAD VERMA
B.A., LL.B.
Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran, No. 92,
weaving day by day; you should both devote yourselves entirely to
that work. Then alone will you succeed.
You may, if so inclined, send Chi. Chhotam to Ahmedabad.
Send him only if he is agreeable. It is necessary to win him over.
Don't force him to go. It is because he was very eager to go with
you that I allowed him. He will get along in Ahmedabad only if
he is himself willing.
I shall never approve of your going to South Africa. I see
nothing but harm in your submitting to Ratanshi's desire in this
matter. He keeps on writing but so far he has not sent a single
pie. If you go there, I think your life will be wasted as his has
been. If you wish, you may send this letter to Ratanshi.
I think weaving has a bright future, if only you two devote
yourselves to it.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 3421. Courtesy:
Revashankar Sodha
