341. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 16/21, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have your letter. The occasional delay in your getting my
letters can't be helped. "Make the best of today, for who knows
what tomorrow will bring?" This is true of our present circum-
stances too. If the men in charge of the factory at Bardoli have
not been arrested, what about the goods in factory? I read in news-
papers that they, too, were confiscated.
It was a matter of surprise that the Ashram had remained free
from malaria. At last it could remain so no longer. I think it can
be kept free from it. In the malarial season, one should take care
and see that one's stomach is light. Starchy and other indigestible
foods, like pulses, should be avoided. If those who have escap-
ed malaria so far take care, they will be able to preserve their
health. The water in the well should be disinfected with potassium
permanganate or chlorine. I think these can also be added in
the water fetched from the river. If a few drops of the solution are
poured into the river water where it is stored, it will acquire a
light rose colour. After a while, the colour will settle at the bottom.
You should consult a doctor for more information about this. I
will write a separate letter about Amidas, which is likely to be
posted only tomorrow. Inform me on what day you get it.
Inform Jamnalalji that I do not request the authorities to bring
anyone here. I did not do that even for Kakasaheb. Jamnalalji
or anybody else who wishes to come may do so by trying on their
own or through Government's kindness. I have been able to
arrange that Pyarelal should see me from time to time. There is an
element of selfishness in requesting to be provided with a compa-
nion and, therefore, I do not make such a request. What I should
like is to be kept with all the others. But how can I expect such
good fortune? Somebody who came to visit Kaka told him that
Mathuradas, too, had made a similar request. I have already
written to you about Giriraj. I don't feel that your decision is
wrong.
1 Vide p. 224.
239
Write to Rajaji and tell him that generally I do not write
to eminent leaders and, therefore, I will not write to him either.
But I remember him every day.
Ask him to give me news about Lakshmi and Subbiah's wife.
What state of health has he brought with him?
October 19, 1930
I see Prabhavati's name in your list of letters, but I don't
find her letter. I don't think they have kept it back here. Either
it must have been left out there or her name came to be included
this time just because she writes every week. Anyway I had a wire
from her giving me news about her health. She seems to be all right.
In Wardha they have been spinning on the takli very regu-
larly. You must have read a description of their work in Bal-
krishna's letter. Bhau's speed is 132 rounds for half an hour. This
is wonderful. You should find out how such speed can be acquired
and publish a detailed description. My satisfaction in regard to
the Gandiv spinning-wheel remains what it was; if anything,
it has increased. Read my letters to Mirabehn and Ishwarlal Vima-
wala on the subject. The latter has written to me saying that he
will send one more wheel to me too. Pay him for it and for the
wheels which may be received in the Ashram. Send me your con-
clusions after you have tested the model. Also send me the figures of
the count, strength and evenness of Kakasaheb's yarn received there.
Read what I have written in my letter to Maganbhai about
the spindle-bearer in use in Bardoli. My own experience is that
it is superior to the type fitted to the spinning-wheel in use in the
Ashram and in all other models. If this is true, we should fit our
spinning-wheels with the same type of spindle-bearer as they use
in Bardoli. If my judgment is wrong, I should be corrected. If
anyone prefers the type being used in the Ashram and if he has
had experience of that being used in Bardoli, he may write to me
about this matter. It is my belief that even from the point of
view of speed the Bardoli spindle-bearer would ultimately be
found superior to the others. If I get the necessary facility, I
will try to fit even the Gandiv spinning-wheel with that type.
I wrote to you last Friday about Amidas. You must have
received the letter. I may even get your reply before this letter is
posted. Send me a wire if you have not received that letter. I will
then discuss the matter again.
October 20, 1930
Read my letter about Kanta. It seems she wants to go out
for a few days at least. Think about the matter. From here, what
I feel is that she may go for a few days wherever she likes. She
is both truthful and brave. She will be able to look after herself.
She will also keep any promise she makes. This is my own expe-
rience, however. You should do what you think best. Find out
what she wishes.
Tuesday morning, Diwali,
October 21, 1930
My blessings to all the friends there. My Vandemataram and
due regards to everyone. May we be filled with greater spirit of
service during the next year, and become fitter instruments and
more awake to our duty in that regard.
We make frequent use of the word 'yajna'. We have raised spin-
ning to the rank of a daily mahayajna. It is therefore necessary to
think out the various implications of the term 'yajna'. 'Yajna' means
an act directed to the welfare of others, done without desiring any
return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritual nature.
'Act'
here must be taken in its widest sense, and includes thought and
word, as well as deed. 'Others' embraces not only humanity, but
all life. Therefore, and also from the standpoint of ahimsa, it is
not a yajna to sacrifice lower animals even with a view to serving
humanity. It does not matter that animal sacrifice is supposed to
find a place in the Vedas. It is enough for us that such sacrifice
cannot stand the fundamental tests of Truth and Non-violence.
I readily admit my incompetence in Vedic scholarship. But the
incompetence, so far as this subject is concerned, does not worry
me because, even if the practice of animal sacrifice be proved to
have been a feature of Vedic society, it can form no precedent for
a votary of ahimsa.
From this definition of yajna it follows that a primary sacrifice
must be an act which conduces the most to the welfare of the
greatest number in the widest area, and which can be performed
by the largest number of men and women with the least trouble.
It will not, therefore, be a yajna, much less a mahayajna, to wish
or to do ill to anyone else even in order to serve a so-called
higher interest. And the Gita teaches, and experience testifies, that
all action that cannot come under the category of yajna promotes
bondage.
The world cannot subsist for a single moment without yajna
in this sense and, therefore, the Gita, after having dealt with true
wisdom in the second chapter, takes up in the third the means of
attaining it and declares in so many words that yajna came with
Creation itself. This body, therefore, has been given us only in
44-16
order that we may serve all Creation with it. And therefore, says
the Gita, he who eats without offering yajna eats stolen food. Every
single act of one who would lead a life of purity should be in the
nature of yajna. Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are
debtors all our lives and thus for ever bound to serve the universe.
And even as a bond slave receives food, clothing and so on from the
master whom he serves, so should we gratefully accept such gifts
as may be assigned to us by the Lord of the universe. What we
receive must be called a gift; for as debtors we are entitled to no
consideration for the discharge of our obligations. Therefore we
may not blame the Master if we fail to get it. Our body is His
to be cherished or cast away according to His will. This is not a
matter for complaint or even pity; on the contrary, it is a natural
and even a pleasant and desirable state, if only we realize our pro-
per place in God's scheme. We do indeed need strong faith, if we
would experience this supreme bliss. "Do not worry in the least
about yourself, leave all worry to God,"—this appears to be the
commandment in all religions. This need not frighten anyone.
He who devotes himself to service with a clear conscience will day
by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure and will conti-
nually grow richer in faith. The path of service can hardly be
trodden by one who is not prepared to renounce self-interest and to
recognize the conditions of his birth. Any service rendered by
such a person will be tainted by selfishness. But, then, men of
such utter selfishness are rare in this world. Consciously or un-
consciously, everyone of us does render some service or other.
If we cultivate the habit of doing this service deliberately, our
desire for service will steadily grow stronger and will make not
only for our own happiness but also for that of the world at large.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 58 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
