63. LETTER TO GENERAL MANAGER, C. S. A. R.
[JOHANNESBURG,]
January 25, 1910
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
21st instant, and you have given me the privilege again of being able to
tender my thanks for the courteous tone of your letter and your full
reply. This fact embarrasses me in having to express dissatisfaction with
the result of our correspondence .
The Committee of my Association accept the situation that the
Administration has been compelled to make regulations with respect
to practically the whole of the conditions hitherto printed in the Joint
Tariff Book. My Committee thankfully accept your assurance that there
is no desire on the part of the Railway Board to embitter the feeling
in regard to the Asiatic struggle, and that the facilities that have
hitherto been afforded to the community represented by my Association
for travelling by the fast trains will be retained.
Your sympathetic attitude emboldens me to suggest that the
Resolutions may be revised by the Board, and that they may be so
framed as to remove the stigma that they undoubtedly put upon the
Asiatic communities. My Association will be prepared to co-operate
with the Board in the framing of regulations acceptable to the Asiatic
sentiment, and with the Administration in their proper carrying out. In
my humble opinion, the difficulty will be met, if the Administration
receives power to separate classes or races and to reserve compart-
ments for them for reasons that to the Administration may seem suffi-
cient. It will be admitted that a regulation of such a general nature
will arm the Administration with sufficient powers to deal with any
case, without giving the Asiatic and other Coloured communities to
understand that the Railway Regulations are based on the theory that
Coloured passengers are not entitled to travel first or second class,
and that such travelling on their part is allowed only by way of sufferance.
I am sure that that is not the intention of the Railway Board, and that
the intention is merely to meet the unfortunate prejudice that exists in
the Colony and, therefore, to provide separate accommodation. This
intention is entirely carried out by the suggestion I have ventured to
make.
I have, etc.,
A. M . KACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 29-1-1910
