176. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
AS AT KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 20, 1927
I have not written to you for the last two mails, nor is there
anything particular to say to you just now. But you will be glad
to learn that for the first time during my 12 years in India after
my return from South Africa, I had what may be called a fairly
prolonged real contact with Pandit Malaviyaji. Instead of going
to Ooty, he remained in Bangalore as long as it was possible for
him to do in view of the Reserve Bank Committee meeting at
Calcutta. Of course all the time we were under the same roof, and
we had discussions on many things. We reached one definite con-
clusion, and it was that there should be, just like the All-India
Spinners' Association, and All-India Cow-protection Association,
a definite body called 'All-India Untouchability Association'
brought into being with a definite constructive programme for the
uplift of the suppressed classes. I have no time just now to dis-
cuss the outlines of the scheme. But I am now looking for an effi-
cient secretary to believe in the work and who would give his
whole heart to it to the exclusion practically of every other acti-
vity. A further stage will be reached as soon as I can find such a
secretary.
Jamnalalji showed me your circular letter to friends. I see
how your mind is working in that atmosphere. I would warn you
against using the same scales and weights for two different mate-
rials. Eyes are well adapted for examining and inspecting a
drawing-room furniture. Do they serve the same purpose for
examining the furniture in the blue vault overhead?
I have resumed gentle touring. I do not know whether I have
been wise in resuming it so early. But I am daily taking a mea-
sure of my capacity.
If Lalaji is with you, please give him my love and tell him
that there shall be a violent quarrel between him and me if he
does not give himself full rest and return with full vigour for
tackling the work that lies in front of him.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 14192
