358. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
January 17, 1941
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have before me your letter of 30th October received yes-
terday. I do not write because I know not whether my letters
will reach you at all. When they do they may be even out of
date. And now one never knows what one may write. I do not
mind the Censor reading what I write but I do mind his sup-
pressing what one writes. And yet war is war. One must not
grumble. Warriors want to win and they will not tolerate what
in their opinion hinders their efforts. Knowing this, I am pa-
tient. I do not know what you can do. Here I am hampered
at every step. I wrote what I thought was a good letter to Herr
Hitler. It has been suppressed. Of course I could secure publi-
cation at once. But I do not want to do so. I must bow to
the Viceregal judgment. Evidently, he thinks it will interfere
with their war-effort. Since open publication is possible only by
their permission, I have deemed it proper not to seek publicity
through defiance which must be initiated surreptitiously.
But they have gone a step further.
They are interfering
with local publication of my statements which are necessary. I
am, therefore, devising a method of securing publication. But
no matter what hindrances are put, the struggle will continue.
I can give you this assurance, if you need it, that nothing
unworthy, nothing that may be even remotely called violent will
be knowingly done. I have absolute faith that this non-violence
will finally triumph. It must not be allowed to be suppressed.
The M.P.s' appeal has fallen flat. It takes no note of the truth.
Hindu-Muslim differences do not stand in the way of an hon-
ourable agreement. The will is not there. The old custom will
not give way. They need not be blamed. They go on and, if they
can, they do not stop to consider whether it is right or wrong.
That is not rulers' way. Theirs is but to rule.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
I am attending to your advice about Andrews's sisters.
From a photostat: G.N. 1517
