208. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
July 13, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
You will please excuse me for worrying you again over my
troubles. Major Bhandari told me yesterday that, in answer to
my letter of the 9th instant, he was to inform me that there was
no delay either in your office or Major Bhandari's in attending
to my correspondence as soon as it was received from the Gov-
ernment. This I knew. My inquiry was exactly about the Gov-
ernment's procedure. I have been permitted to write letters to
friends outside and fellow-prisoners, including those at Yeravda
whether male or female. I have written to the latter as regu-
larly as to my people at the Ashram. There is no use my writing
to the fellow-prisoners in this Jail if my letters and theirs are not
exchanged quickly. The letters naturally relate to mutual welfare
and the welfare of those in whom they and I are interested.
The same thing applies to the Ashram letters.
Some of the letters I receive from others are from my stand-
point important. Whether they are regarded by the authorities as
important or otherwise, I should not like to lose them.
My experience of past imprisonment is that when the corres-
pondence goes to the Government, it takes time to receive atten-
237
tion. In 1930, in the commencement my letters were sent to
the Government and I know that they took nearly six weeks be-
fore I could get the first batch given to me and this after repeated
requests. Subsequently Major Martin, the then Superintendent,
was empowered to deal with the correspondence and naturally
there was no delay. Of course I can have nothing to say as
to who examines my correspondence. What I am concerned
about is:
(1) What are exactly the revised instructions about my
correspondence?
(2) How long shall I have to wait before I receive my
letters and before what I write is posted?
(3) Shall I continue to receive back those letters which may
be rejected, and as before be given the reasons for rejection?
(4) Will the letters and parcels withheld from me be treated
as my property and cared for and delivered to me whenever I
may be discharged?
I shall thank you to forward this letter to the Government and
procure for me an early reply.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40), Pt. I, p. 257
