342. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
April 8, 1932
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),
I got your letters. I did get Pyarelal's letter, and had also
replied to him. You should now learn to pronounce Sanskrit
words correctly and learn the grammar too. This in addition to
spinning on takli. Do you suffer from constipation? You should
improve your health. I had liked the first part of Saraswatichandra
very much, but you ought to read all the four parts. You should
also read the four parts of Kavyadohan. Besides, you should read
Karanghelo and Vanaraj Chavdo, as also some writings of Narmada-
shankar and Manilal Nabhubhai. If you read these works, you
will have a complete understanding of the nature of the Gujarati
language. Perhaps you yourself can collect these books and send
them.
I didn't know at all about the Raleigh bicycle having come to
India. I will write to Kingsley Hall. I got Rolland's books. I will
read them. Taradevi is here. I had even a letter from her. She
and the other women are quite happy. She has asked for a copy
of the Ramayana. I will send one to her. I got two letters from
Sushila.
If she could pick up enough courage to write, she
wouldn't be Pyarelal's sister, [would she?]
The book about
Lancashire has gone to [Chhaganlal] Joshi. I will read it when
it comes back to me, and give my opinion. I have not collected
many books this time. But I do receive some from time to time.
I have not yet come across any which I should like to send to
you. I have received the volumes of Ruskin's Fors Clavigera; if you
wish, I may send them to you. Pyarelal will hardly get anything
new even from them. I get letters from Muriel, Agatha and
Horace. My weight remains what it was, that is, 106 lb. This is
the food which I take: almonds crushed into paste, dates, toast,
lemon-juice and a boiled vegetable with one meal. So far I have
been able to do without milk. This time I don't suffer from
constipation at all. The hours of sleep have increased. I see that the
weakness of the hand persists but I feel no pain. I read only for
a little while. Just now I am reading Ruskin's Fors. As for writing,
I have finished the remaining discourses on the Gita. I have now
taken in hand a history of the Ashram. I dictate to Mahadev.
The letters to Ashram inmates take a good deal of my time, parti-
cularly because I write with the left hand. Spinning takes from
one and a half to two hours. Because of the trouble with the hand
I deliberately do not spin longer. I have made it a rule to
spin 375 rounds in two days. I have not carded any cotton so
far. I have still a stock of the slivers which Mira left with me.
Mahadev has started carding.
I was going to ask you about Harilal1, but meanwhile you
have picked up courage to question me on the subject. I wished
to ask you what you had done, and now you have turned round
on me. My condition remains. Why cannot you write? You
should write what you can; it will be for me to revise and pass
what you write. You should overcome your hesitation and start
writing. It is probably out of lethargy that you do not try at all.
If so, overcome your lethargy. If you do this, I will keep my pro-
mise of writing a foreword. The book cannot be published just
now, but it is very desirable that the writing should be over. I
may not perhaps be able to write the foreword after I am released.
I hope you realize that there is a reason for my insisting that you
should start writing. There will be no grace in publishing the letters
without your essay. You ought not to do that.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1834
