140. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
SEVAGRAM,
January 31, 1945
CHI. KANTI,
I got your letter. I understand your need. I should advise
you to write to Devdas about the books, too. If you are positively
disinclined to do that, you may write to Kamalnayan. He will
consult me. If I go and tell him, he will not refuse me. You
should either send a list of the books to Kamalnayan or tell him
the amount you need. A list of books with their prices will look more
respectable. I would like you not to take any help from Amritlal
Sheth. He will certainly send you whatever you ask for. Your
present need shows that this is not going to be your last request.
This is significant for me, for it shows how costly present-day edu-
cation is. And at the end of it, you won't earn anything more
than your livelihood. I have heard of many doctors who are
unable to make both ends meet. Only a few have made good
on their own strength. A good many have had to resort to
influence even after passing their examination. In writing this it is
not at all my purpose to persuade you to give up your study.
You must finish it now. I do wish to suggest, though, that the
knowledge you acquire at such a great cost should be used for
service of the people.
I am glad that you are keeping Suru from the lure of orna-
ments, etc. It remains to be seen how long you will succeed.
Let Bali pay a visit to you, though I cannot bring myself
to approve of it. It will mean unnecessary expenditure over a
long journey, with no benefit except momentary satisfaction. But
she has done a great deal for you. She is a very affectionate
woman. Do, therefore, welcome her. I tried to dissuade her by
suggesting, instead, that she should come here. I have, however,
permitted her to go to you.
You may come whenever you wish and live here as long as
you like.
You have been doing excellent work as regards spinning, etc.
Keep up your strictness. Sincere men, however few, are the
best.
I should certainly like to go there, but somehow I do not feel
the urge.
If Kanu wishes to go there, I will let him. I do not know,
though, what help he will give you.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am well. I observe silence the whole day.
Give up the idea of going to Bombay. Personally I should
like you to remain where you are and learn all the four languages
of the South. You will perhaps be the only one from the North
to have done so. But what if there are others too?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 7370. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
