493. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
Unrevised
December 4, 1934
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. If I gave wise replies to your questions,
would they necessarily be a sign of real wisdom in me?
None of you would know the [strength of] anger in me. I
alone can know it. I wouldn't describe as anger what Lilavati or
Gangabehn may have observed in me. I suppress most of the
anger which I feel. Gangabehn and others could have seen only
what remained of it. If I did not let them see even that, I would
be a hypocrite or ruin my health and become a mere skeleton.
That does not happen because I make a conscious effort to con-
trol my anger and tread my way through the problems. Because
I don't think it necessary to be careful with people who are
intimate with me they occasionally get a glimpse of the anger in
me, but, being kind to me, they forget it.
Prabhavati will send to you whatever yarn is still lying with
me. My calculation has turned out to be wrong. Prabhavati is
in Bombay at present.
She has gone there to be of help to
Swaruprani and to meet Jayaprakash.
What you believe about . . .3 is probably not correct. Be
extremely careful about believing any story against a person.
It would be better not to listen to such a story at all.
What can be done about a worker like Dr. Hardikar? His
views and aims are different from ours.
The Government will
not permit him to carry on the activity which is dear to his
heart, and he cannot take interest in the other activities which
are going on. A person can participate in popular activities only
if he can adjust himself within their framework. A person like
Dr. Hardikar should take up some occupation and do what ser-
vice he can while engaged in it. I have been advising many
people to do this.
People who follow an occupation honestly also serve the
country. Those who claim to be servants of the people may in
fact be a burden on them whereas people who earn a livelihood
by following an occupation may be true servants.
You are right in what you say regarding your letters. You
can write "Private" on letters intended exclusively for me. As
regards letters which you leave to me to deal with, I shall dis-
pose of them as I like.
I rarely preserve the letters which I
receive.
You may do what is possible regarding crafts.
I hope Deo will not change your place of work too fre-
quently. You can do some work only if you remain steady
in one place. If the place where you are living now is but a
suburb of Poona, you will not be able to do much useful work
there. However, since you have been working there, I hope you
will not be asked to leave it too soon. But don't attach much
importance to my advice in this matter. If you think that
it was a mistake to have gone there, you certainly need not
cling to the place. A mistake must be rectified when it is
realized.
Who am I to secure swaraj for the country through ahimsa?
If I have real ahimsa in me it cannot but prove infectious.
I
have little faith in myself, but my faith in ahimsa is unshaka-
ble. The world has recognized it as a great principle, but it
has rarely been acted upon.
I daily get a fresh experience of
its sweetness, for to me it is the only wish-fulfilling tree. No
other way is possible for me, for I have found no other means
of attaining Satyanarayana and life without the prospect of attain-
ing Him has no meaning for me.
Hence the path of ahimsa,
whether difficult or easy, is the only one that I can follow. If
violence breaks out after my death, you may conclude that my
ahimsa was very imperfect or was not real at all—but not that
the principle of ahimsa was wrong. Or it may also be that we
shall have to cross the river of blood in which the wicked suffer
for their sins before we reach the goal of ahimsa. Ahimsa came
into politics in the 1920s. But didn't the Chauri Chaura and
other outrages occur after that, and hasn't the Government gone
to extreme lengths of repression? I am sure, however, that des-
pite all this violence, ahimsa has had a profound effect on people.
But it has been no more than a drop in the ocean. My experi-
ment continues and is ever growing in its scope. May your
faith never waver!
Our senses do not always perceive the truth.
Very often
what they perceive is utterly false. That is why the path of
non-attachment was discovered.
To cultivate non-attachment
means to rise above the senses. One can do that only by over-
coming one's attachment to objects of the senses. If we believe
the evidence of the eyes, would it not prove that the earth was
flat? And doesn't the sun seem to be only a golden disc? If
the Prema that my eyes see was the true Prema, what a wretch
would I be! And suppose you believed all that you heard against
me!
I think I have written enough. Mirabehn's alarm has
sounded. The bell for prayer will soon be given. You may draw
from this whatever picture you can [of my state of mind]. I
am thinking of going to Delhi after the 15th. I intend to stay
there for a few days in the Harijan Ashram.
So far as I can see at present, I think I shall be in jail at
last.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10363. Also C.W. 6802. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
