417. LETTER TO R. M. MAXWELL
As AT SABARMATI,
June 6, 1931
DEAR MR. MAXWELL,
Reverting to your letter of the 13th May, at practically the
same time that I received your letter in Simla I received the
news that Syt. Rajawade was discharged although the letter under
reply left me no such hope. I was thankful to receive the tele-
graphic news which was conveyed to me by Mr. Emerson. I
have now received the papers about Syt. H. D. Rajah and on a
perusal of the papers I can find no incitement to violence. The
speeches themselves are not before me because I am told that
they are not to be found in the record of the case, but the evidence
of the Crown witnesses and the Judge's summing up bring out
the most relevant parts of the speeches, which though highly discour-
teous and equally seditious, contain no incitement to violence.
On the contrary, the judge himself refers to the profession of
non-violence by the accused but dismisses it as lip service. In the
absence of any direct incitement to violence I cannot see how it
is possible for a judge to infer mere lip service when there is a
direct assertion of non-violence. But I have not relied upon my
own opinion. I put the thing before three legal friends, one of whom
has kindly reduced his opinion to writing, copy of which I enclose
herewith. In the circumstances I request His Excellency to reconsi-
der his decision and beg to point out that under Cl. 13 of the
Settlement there is no option but to discharge the civil disobedience
prisoners who might not be guilty of offences involving violence
other than technical violence or incitement to such violence. I
venture to suggest that where there is no incitement on the face of
the evidence it is not open to the Government to deduce such
incitement.
Then there is the case of Ratanji Dayaram of Bardoli
Taluka. I have now studied the judgment and evidence in this case.
There is certainly no violence as contemplated in Cl. 13 of the
Settlement. It is also moreover incorrect to say that the accused
burnt his tenant's crop. The accused burnt his own crop which
he owned jointly with the complainant Devalia Jagla. If the
complainant suffered any damage it was open to him, as it is even
now, to bring a civil suit against the accused. But where, on the
evidence itself and the finding of the judge admitted by the
Government, the crop was burnt in order to prevent the Govern-
ment officials from collecting revenue from selling the crop, there
was no question of intending to damage the partner. And may I
point out the inconsistency of the Government in releasing the
co-accused, Ranchhod, who had no ownership in the crop and
keeping Ratanji Dayaram who was admittedly joint owner of the
crop. I must, therefore, for the same reason as in the case of
Syt. H. D. Rajah, ask for Ratanji Dayaram's discharge in terms of
the Settlement.
With reference to your second letter of 30th May last, I can
only say that the position taken up by His Excellency causes me
deep pain. The reasoning given for refusing to return the press
seems to me to be extraordinary. It is giving back and not tak-
ing back. Cl. 16 throws the burden on the Government of re-
turning and not on the party dispossessed of going to take back.
The reasoning given in the third paragraph of your letter causes
still greater pain. I was unprepared for the interpretation that
is sought to be put upon the Ordinance. I cannot question the
interpretation but I do question the propriety of putting an irri-
tating interpretation in connection with a document of peace.
What the Government seek to do is to justify wanton destruction
of property by Government officials. But in order to bring with-
in the smallest compass possible points of dispute between the
Government and myself as representing the Congress, I have ad-
vised the owners of the motor-car and bicycle to remove them,
if they chose to do so. So far as the press is concerned I am
sorry to say that I must ask for due fulfilment of the terms of the
Settlement. If the Government seriously question my interpreta-
tion I am quite willing to submit the question for decision to the
Chief Justice of the High Court of Bombay or any other impartial
authority.
Yours sincerely,
Encl. 1
R. M. MAXWELL, ESQ.
PRIVATE SECRETARY TO H. E. THE GOVERNOR OF BOMBAY
MAHABALESHWAR
A.I.C.C. File No. 4, 1931, Part I Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
