415. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
POONA,
November 6, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,
I could not write to you yesterday but I kept mulling over things.
You can have anything you like under the Trust, but I would say that
we cannot start anything at Sinhgadh right now. It is another matter
if I think of something to start there. The Bombay centre will have
to be closed down. I would advise you to keep it for your own diversion
and as a source of income. I cannot afford to have it under the Trust.
I have still not received the figures about your personal expenses. If
you are provided board and lodging and Rs. 500/- per month from here,
in my view, you should not think of making extra money from nature
cure. But here you must ask your own conscience. If this is a bitter
pill, then you must live in Bombay and carry on your practice. If you
put it in the Trust, it may be closed down soon after. You do not
have to worry at all about the expense here. I shall manage. I am
anticipating that there will not be a single rich patient left here by the
end of December. The facilities here will solely be for those whom
I send.
The person I send to manage things here will stay here. Meat will
be cooked in the kitchen for only Maji and any members of your family
who may be visiting but not for any patient. My dharma tells me that
non-vegetarian food, such as mutton, liver, etc., have no place in nature
cure. I do not suggest that those things have not benefited or cannot
benefit anyone. All I say is that in my view they cannot be included
in nature cure. The entire portion I am occupying at present will be
reserved for you and Gulbai and it should not be necessary at any
time to vacate it even for me. Whenever I come, I can live anywhere
on the upper floor. It will not be difficult for me even to stay in the
room which Saralabehn is at present occupying. If it rains I can settle
in the bathroom. But it is not the least bit fair for me to occupy the
portion especially built for Gulbai.
A 'stock list' should be prepared for the Trust. Perhaps it cannot
be done till Bhimnag comes, though of course I have with me so many
people here that I can easily get the stock list and such other things
prepared. But your method of getting work done is altogether different.
231
I do not like it. That way there are many things that I do not like,
but I put up with them. If you take up the responsibility, most of the
things here can be settled while I am here. I consider it wrong that
you do not get patients to work. Vanamala is capable of doing a lot
of work. All the patients would not be bed-ridden. From now on, only
the poor must be admitted. If there is any rich patient, he will be brought
only by me and he will serve some purpose. I may even take money
from him and he will stay at my pleasure. It irks me that you have
not trained even Gulbai properly. No one here seems to be getting
any training. I do not even see the three-year training being given here
which you thought was necessary. That is not correct. But in this matter,
I have got to be content with whatever you can easily provide. If you
think that there by the whole thing would completely change and if
it is not proper for me to interfere to such an extent, you can remove
me. If I were to involve myself in the matter, I would let things continue
as they are. I receive letters from people from all over. They are willing
to help in this or even join in. Some of them I must admit are very
good. But till such time as I see you as a votary of nature cure and
know who will be the right people to work with you, I would not like
to admit any nature cure expert. If I run this workshop I would like
to pass on its benefits to the thousands of people outside. For that,
I would naturally need to have a large number of workers. Only when
that happens, can we at last have something like a university.
Give some thought to this. I have not kept a copy of this letter.
Return it to me after reading. I shall have it copied and then give
it back to you. I have written down my thoughts as they came while
I was still in bed in the morning.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
