31. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR
POST ANDHERI,
May 15, 1924
DEAR MR. KELKAR1,
Here is the reminiscence for Mr. Bapat. I wish I could give
more because there are many. I ask you and Mr. Bapat, however,
to have pity on me. I have really not a moment to spare. I must
choose some other occasion and another medium when I have
opportunity for reducing all the reminiscences that I have of the
Lokamanya .
I am not writing separately to Mr. Bapat, as yours was the
last letter in this matter.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. N. C. KELKAR
POONA
[ENCLOSURE]
REMINISCENCES OF LOKAMANYA TILAK
I have the most vivid recollection of my very first meeting
with the Lokamanya. This was in 1896 when I was almost total-
ly unknown in India. It was in connection with the cause of
Indians in South Africa that I went to Poona to organize a public
meeting. I was an utter stranger in Poona.
I knew the public
men only by names. Mr. Sohoni whom I knew as my brother's
friend and who had given me shelter took me to the Lokamanya.
After putting me at ease, he asked me the cause of my visit. I at
once told him what my mission was. The Lokamanya said: "I
see, you are a stranger in Poona. You do not know the public
men. Nor do you know anything of local differences. I must,
however, tell you that there are two political bodies here. One is
1 Narasinh Chintaman Kelkar (1872-1947); journalist, politician and a
close associate of Tilak; sometime Secretary of the Indian National Congress;
helped Gandhiji in revising the constitution of the Congress in 1920; a leader of
the Swarajist Party
2 Bal Gangadhar Tilak (1856-1920); political leader, scholar and writer,
popularly known as 'Lokamanya'; one of the founders of the Deccan Education
Society, Poona, and of the newspapers the Kesari and The Mahratta
3 The source has 1894, but the correct date is 1896; vide Vol. II, p. 136.
the Deccan Sabha, and the other is the Sarvajanik Sabha. Un-
fortunately, the two bodies do not meet on a common platform.
If the meeting is organized by anyone body, everybody must
sympathize with your cause. Therefore, it must not be identified
with anyone political body. It is well that you have seen me.
You must also see Mr. Gokhale who belongs to the Deccan Sabha.
I am sure he will give you the same advice that I am giving you.
You must have a public meeting which is attended by all sections.
You may tell Mr. Gokhale that no difficulty will be raised from my
side. For such a meeting we must have a neutral chairman, who
is also well known and carries weight. Dr. Bhandarkar is such a
man in Poona. If you, therefore, see him too, and invite him to
become president, telling him what I have told you and what Mr.
Gokhale tells you. He has almost retired from public life. You
must press him even if he hesitates. Your cause is very just. It
is sure to commend itself to him. If you secure him as chairman,
the rest will be easy. Do tell me in good time what happens.
You may rely upon full assistance from me. I wish you every
success."
I could not conceive any greater encouragement from men
occupying the position that the Lokamanya did to a young man
he had never met. It was a memorable meeting in my life, and the
first impression that the Lokamanya gave me of himself persisted
throughout the many meetings which I was privileged to have with
him.
From a photostat : S.N. 8803
