69. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 13, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
You must have read in the papers the news about my in-
definite fast. I assume that it has not created a panic among the
inmates of the Ashram. If they see the matter in the proper light,
this should be for them an occasion for rejoicing. A total fast is
the ultimate and the highest ideal of the Ashram, but very few
persons ever become worthy of the privilege of undertaking it.
Such a fast is not an everyday occurrence. Only a rare person
on a rare occasion is entitled to undertake it; I believe that I
am on this occasion. If I am wrong, people will judge my step as
a sign of false pride and an instance of demoniac self-mortifica-
tion. I claim nearly half a century of ceaseless effort to purify my
mind completely so that I may be able to hear the voice within.
I believe that as a result I can now hear it with some dis-
tinctness. I have taken the present step in obedience to that
voice. The 20th is still a little way away. At present the deci-
sion to fast is only a resolve. I am writing this letter to explain
that resolve, and to tell all of you that nobody there should get
panicky, but that the news should make everybody more devoted
to his or her work, purer and more awake. I am sure you your-
self do realize that nobody should follow my example and under-
take a similar fast. Explain that to the others, too. I hope nobody
there will wonder why I kept my intention to fast to myself and
did not let it become known beyond our circle of three. It is a
rule for prisoners that they must not make public the fact of such
correspondence. If I even wish in my heart to make it public
indirectly, I would disgrace my satyagraha and there would be a
blot on the purity of my vow of truth. The value of that vow
lies in the perfect purity in its observance. I got your weekly
packet. I believe that this time at least I shall be able to send
the replies. I am slightly doubtful because during the days which
remain the work is likely to be heavier. If there is any develop-
ment about which I can write to you, I will do so. You can show
this letter to all persons who have connections with the Ashram.
Tell Anandi that I intend to write a long letter to her. I liked
hers very much. She should have no fear. You should teach all
53
girls to be fearless. If people there are in the habit of whispering
among themselves about any girl, it is a bad habit. What is fated
to happen to us and the girls will happen. We should not feel
suspicious about them all the time and fill them with fear. When
we see cause for cautioning any of them, we may do so and then
should not think about the matter further. The girls should never
feel that they are being suppressed in any way. Any restraints
which are put on them should be explained to them and should
be imposed in such a manner that they willingly accept them.
Personally, I think you have done the right thing in permitting
Hariyomal to return. I hope Baba has completely recovered now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8251. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
