424. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SODEPUR,
January 1, 1946
I did send you a longish letter. I have asked S. to send you a
copy. I have before me two letters from you. The one about Dharmadev
Shastri has been sent to Bapa. It would be a sad thing if he proves
untrue. But you know what havoc rumour works. Your long letter covers
many points. I do not wonder at the bitter experience about Vaidyas.
Many of them are impostors. You should write to Chandiprasad about
the person sent by him. I do hope you will come upon a good man.
I would have none but a proved man. That that man has proved a
failure is bad and that the cow he brought has proved a burden is
also bad.
237
Then you do not get a good worker. How will you pull on ? I
do not know that all this does not point to retracing your steps or at
least so ordering your life as to enable you to live there without anxiety
or worry. I would advise you to have a servant or two to carry out
your instructions and look after your pony and a cow if you must have
one for giving you pure milk. I would even go without either and be
content with the good milk you may buy there. You should move away
to a cooler place in summer. This should be easy. Do not think of
having a summer haunt for yourself. You must not use up the last
penny and then feel compelled to come to Sevagram or go elsewhere
as a failure which you will be if you have to give up your place after
using the last pice. Do not regard this as a doleful picture. If it is
unwarranted by facts as you see them, throw it away.
About P. I must not say anything. I am prejudiced. I only hope
that God will be your guide in this as in everything else. Only in the
latter case I might offer helpful criticism.
Of the atmosphere what you say is about right. But the things will
shape themselves right. Anyway I am trying my best. Here I am daily
witnessing a mighty change. I had this evening a meeting attended by
probably a lac of people. I was able to have prayer in perfect silence.
It would have done your soul good to witness such a scene. This
commenced at Sodepur. My first meeting was somewhat boisterous.
As days went on things were changed. And yet I build nothing on
this. Only this experience is a balancing factor.
I do hope Punditji and his wife will come to you. My love to them.
Love.
BAPU
SHRI MIRABEHN
KISAN ASHRAM
MULDASPUR
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
