251. LETTER TO SIR CLAUDE HILL
ST. STEPHEN'S COLLEGE,
DELHI,
April 26, 1918
DEAR SIR CLAUDE HILL,
It was not without considerable pain that I had to decline
the honour of serving on any of the Committees that will be ap-
pointed at the eventful Conference or speaking to the main resolu-
tion .
I feel that the Conference will be largely abortive with the most
powerful leaders excluded from it. The absence of Mr. Tilak,
Mrs. Besant and Ali Brothers from the Conference deprives it of
any real weight. I must confess that not one of us who were present at
today's meeting has the influence of these leaders with the masses.
Refusal to have them at the Conference shows that there is no real
desire to change the attitude hitherto adopted by those who are
holding the reins of Government. And without any real alteration
in the spirit all your concessions will lose their grace and force and
will fail to evoke genuine loyalty from the masses. If I understand
the purpose of the Conference aright, you wish to work upon the
masses. How to evoke in the Indian the loyalty of the Englishman
is the question before the Indian leaders. I submit that it is im-
possible to do so unless you are prepared to trust the trusted leaders
of the people and to do all that such trust means. So far as Ali
Brothers are concerned there is no proof of their guilt before the
public and they have emphatically repudiated the charge of
having corresponded with the enemy. Most Mahomedans think
what the Brothers think on the situation.
I feel that for other reasons also I could not effectively serve on
the Conference. I have just read the Home Mail papers. They
deal with the secret Treaties. The revelations make painful reading.
I do not know that I could call the Allies' cause to be any longer
just if these treaties are truly reported. I do not know what effect
the news will produce on the Mahomedans of India. The Govern-
ment will best serve the Empire if they were boldly to advise His
Majesty's Government to recede from the false and immoral position
they placed themselves in by these treaties. No one will be more
glad than I would be to find that my reading of the papers is
totally incorrect.
There will be no domestic peace in India so long as local
officials administer affairs as they have been doing in Kaira. I
am sure the Viceroy does not wish that the people should not resist
injustice and tyranny. I do hope that the contemplated spoliation
in Kaira will be stopped at once and the just demand of the
Kaira people will be complied with.
I would like to warn the Government against accepting or
initiating conscription. I hope it will never flourish on the Indian
soil. But, in any case, it ought not to be introduced until all volun-
tary efforts have been honestly made and failed. You will admit
that the leaders have with remarkable self-restraint hushed all the
tales of the forcible recruitment that is reported to have gone
on hitherto. I venture to think that the danger point has been
reached.
Lastly a thorough education in Home Rule has now so widely
penetrated the masses that nothing short of very substantial evi-
dence of the near advent of Home Rule will secure the real co-opera-
tion of the people.
You will now understand and perhaps appreciate my reluc-
tance to speak or to serve on the committees. I can best demon-
strate my good wishes by abstaining from the Conference.
Will you please place this letter before the Viceroy at the
earliest possible opportunity?
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
