560. LETTER TO N. G. RANGA
SRIRAMPUR,
NOAKHALI,
December 18, 1946
MY DEAR RANGA1,
I have your letter of the 11th instant and the enclosures. You ask
me not to wade through the latter but ask my Secretary to go through
them and bring to my notice the most important things. You do not
know what I am doing and where I am staying. If you did, you would
not have dictated that letter, but I see that you are too busy to look
at the daily papers or my poor doings in this part of the world. Well,
I am in an out-of-the way village hamlet where many dwellings have
been burnt down and the contents looted. I have deprived myself of
secretarial assistance. I have a Bengali professor who has elected to
become my interpreter and teacher and even gives me massage, etc.
Parasuram of Malabar is with me by accident, and as he came to
me as an expert short-hand writer and typist I make occasional use
of him for taking down letters such as this. But generally he is in the
charge of everything pertaining to my personal wants and I am sorry
to confess that this business is so taxing and exacting that it takes
the bulk of his time. But he is an uncomplaining, tireless worker, and
as he had not had the opportunity of coming in personal touch with
me during the two years he has been with me he loves the work that
he is doing now and I love him. Other fellow-workers have been
distributed at the peril of their lives in various burnt and looted villages
in the attempt to bring the two warring elements together and bring,
if human effort can, peace to this unhappy portion of India. I confess
that it is not the only unhappy portion of India, but Destiny chose it
for putting me or rather my ahimsa and truth on their trial and here
am I undergoing that stiff but self-imposed test. Therefore, you see
that either I must myself wade through your papers or neglect them
for the time being. But I dare not take the second course for the reason
that I invited the task, and I must not complain. I am half through
the long documents. It is deeply human and interesting and for the
love I have towards you I will like to give much more than cursory
attention to the papers you have prepared with such elaboration.
1 President, All-India Kisan Sabha; President, Andhra Provincial Congress
Committee; Member, Congress Parliamentary Party; Founder-President, Swatantra Party
324
As so many trustworthy servants of the nation are up against
you, I wish to suggest that you should, for the time being, neglect me
and go your way honestly and therefore fearlessly, reposing the fullest
trust in your honesty rather than on friends like me of doubtful value
because of their national preoccupations and limited capacity for
grasping and understanding facts, figures and statements. I however
promise that I shall pursue such inquiry as I can during the moments
that I can snatch from my present work, and if I can say anything
useful I shall write to you. You on your part will not hesitate to give
me all the facts you can.
Yours,
BAPU
PROF. N. G. RANGA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy:
Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
561. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
SRIRAMPUR,
December 19, 1946
1. As to the National Flag, my opinion is that whilst we are part of
the British Dominions it is but right and proper that in the Ambassador's
Office in America the Union Jack is flown side by side with the National
Flag. In view of the Muslim League revolt, I would go so far as to
question the prudence of flying in America the Congress flag as our
National Flag. But it is a ticklish question and you should ask, on this
and the other questions, for the instructions of the Interim Government,
not merely of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. Every Ambassador carries
written instructions within which he is bound to act. These he can neither
diminish nor extend.
2. As to the second, India as she is at present cannot omit the Union
Jack in foreign countries. Take instructions.
3. As to the third, there is a new British National Anthem, omitting
all the objectionable words. I have no doubt that what was done in
England only recently can be safely done by the Indian Ambassador
in America. Whether we can sing Vandemataram or Jai Hind or
the Tricolour song at the same time should be decided by the Interim
Government.
1 The questions were asked by Asaf Ali, who had been appointed Ambassador
to the U.S.A. and were sent through Pyarelal; vide pp. 321-.
4. The Ambassador's speeches where audiences are purely or
predominantly Indian should be in Hindustani first and he can translate
the same into English whenever occasion requires it. For pure American
audiences speeches should be only in English. It would be pompous
and unreal to deliver before American audiences speeches first in
Hindustani and then translations in English.
It should be remembered that the most polished Ambassadors have
read their speeches which they have prepared or have been prepared
for them in advance.
From a copy : Asaf Ali Papers. Courtesy : Aruna Asaf Ali
