258. LETTER TO ESTHER FAERING
DELHI,
[On or after January 16, 1920]
MY DEAR CHILD,
I was sorry to leave the Ashram as soon as you came. I wanted
so to have a long chat with you and to comfort you if you were
anxious about anything. I felt more sorry when Devdas told
me you had not enough to cover yourself [with]. I hope you asked
what you wanted or that someone anticipated your wants.
You know the changes that have been made regarding
cooking. Bhuvarjee will be out of the kitchen. I would like you to
help Ba in the kitchen. But you shall not do so if it costs over-
much patience. Ba has not an even temper. She is not always
sweet. And she can be petty. At the present moment she is weak
in body too. You will therefore have to summon to your aid all
your Christian charity to be able to return largeness against petti-
ness. And we are truly large only when we are that joyfully. I
have known friends being generous in a miserable spirit. Their
generosity has become a kind of martyrdom. To rejoice in suffer-
ing, to pity the person who slights you and to love him all the
more for his weakness is real charity. But we may not be able to
reach that stage. Then, we should not experiment. And so, my
dear Esther, if you find Mrs. Gandhi trying your nerves, you must
avoid the close association I am suggesting to you. On no ac-
count shall I have you to lose your inward peace and joy. I want
you so to order your life that the Ashram gives you greater joy,
greater happiness and finer perception of truth. I want you
to be a greater Christian for being in the Ashram. You were with
me the whole of yesterday and during the night. I shall pray that
you may be healthier in mind, body and spirit so as to be a
better instrument of His service.
And I want you to befriend Deepak. He is another big experi-
ment. Mahadev will tell you who he is. I have not the time for
writing more.
You may share this letter with Mahadev if you wish to. This
has come to me in answer to prayer. Early this morning I wanted
to send you a word of cheer. I feel for poor Mahadev just the
same. He has an unequal burden to carry and thank God he has
a most sensitive conscience that is unforgiving towards him. But he
is fretful. He has not that abundant experience of the divine in
him and so he worries. Help him please and derive help from him.
Write to me of your experience of your Madras visit and tell
me how you felt there.
With deep love.
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat of the handwritten original in N.A.I.; also My Dear
Child, pp. 39-40
