160. LETTER TO J. KER
NADIAD,
June 8, 1918
DEAR MR. KER,
I addressed a big meeting in Nadiad and explained the
settlement. The speakers got up one after another and then
said that executions and forfeiture orders still continued. I could
understand this as your orders might not yet have been passed
on to the Mamlatdars. But I trust that you will be good enough
to order the stopping of executions, whilst the people are paying,
to instruct Mamlatdars not to charge chothai when the people
make voluntary payments whether there be execution pending
or not and to cancel forfeiture orders when voluntary payment
is forthcoming. I have asked the cultivators to be very strict in
asking for suspension on the ground of poverty. May I ask you
to ask the Mamlatdars to be generous in dealing with such cases?
In Wadthal three writs have been recently issued for the collection
of chothai to all intents and purposes. It is claimed that the first
proceeds of a sale were credited in the chothai column. Surely this
was wrong. If you restore this to the revenue column there is
nothing due. Should these executions not be withdrawn?
In three cases in Wadthal forfeiture notices have been issued.
Two men are ready to pay the assessment. Should not these
orders be cancelled against payment? In the third case the
holder is dead. The holder was in strained circumstances. The
heir is still less able to pay. I trust that in this case forfeiture
will be cancelled and suspension granted on the ground of po-
verty. I have approached the Mamlatdar regarding these cases.
He says he cannot grant relief without your orders.
In Nadiad a holder owed only two annas on account of
principal. He tendered the amount and asked for return of his
pots which were distrained. The Mamlatdar refused to restore
the pots unless chothai was paid. The holder has paid the cho-
thai under protest and prevented the threatened sale of his pots.
Should not chothai be refunded in this case?
Orders of forfeiture have been issued in Sinhaj also and
payments offered after the date of settlement have not been ac-
cepted.
I am going to Bombay for the Conference. I hope to return
by the 16th instant. Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel will be at your
service meanwhile.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10698. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
