85. LETTER TO GAURISHANKAR BHARGAVA
March 13, 1933
MY DEAR GAURISHANKAR,
I have your letter together with resolution of the Rajasthan
Oppressed Classes Conference. I fancy that I missed the Times
of India report. Anyway, I have no recollection of it. Neverthe-
less, I am glad you have drawn my attention to it as also to the
feelings of the Harijan friends there. I wish you would explain to
them the origin of the word 'Harijan' as it is given in the
earliest issue of the Harijan. The word has had a mixed reception.
The majority of those who have written to me rather like the
name. After all, it was adopted at the suggestion of some Harijans
themselves, and those who suggested the name were themselves
representatives.
So far as the suggestion that the whole movement should
be "left in the hands of the depressed classes" and that the
Board or Boards should only assist them by their guidance, [is
concerned], it is not practicable in that the penance has got to
be done by caste Hindus, therefore, it is they who have to prove
their sincerity by conducting the movement. No doubt it should
meet with the approval of Harijans if it is at all possible to secure
it. But the penance has naturally to be done by the penitent him-
self and not by deputy. I can well understand a parallel move-
ment of reform by Harijans and it should be there. It must also
be the natural consequence of sincere penitence by caste Hindus.
As to the third suggestion, I do not know whether Sjt. Sarda
is a proper representative of the Board or not. As to that, you
should write to the Central Board.
Lastly and fourthly, the programme of the anti-untouchabi-
lity movement is in no way confined to the temple-entry, but it
is designed to improve the economic, social and educational
conditions of these classes. Temple-entry is a part of the pro-
gramme, and it is contended that it not only ensures for Hari-
jans religious equality but it conduces to the acceleration of the
pace of economic, social and educational programme. You will
please explain this to all the Harijan friends and others whose
misgivings you have expressed in your letter. You were quite
right in bringing to my attention the various points.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20562
