260. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 21, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
There is of course no sin if one has to go to answer calls
of nature during the hours for manual work, but it is certain-
ly a bad habit. A boy or girl who feels interested in such work
should attend to calls before joining it. Moreover, one who has
a fixed time for such calls would always go at that time. If the
hours for manual work come together, then a person would cer-
tainly have to go during that period. For this reason, manual
work is never prescribed for more than four consecutive hours.
Spinning is primarily an education, for it arouses in us a
sense of the duty of service, we learn in it a very useful occu-
pation and there is beautiful art in it.
One never goes to join any work unless the wish is there. But
children who are not properly trained never feel the desire to do
a good thing. The best rule, therefore, is to join in good work
whether the desire is there or not. A child who does this regu-
larly comes to like the work in course of time, that is, he feels a
desire to join it. If we always follow only our desires, we would
become self-indulgent. We should try our best to save ourselves
from that fate. You may say of me that my favourite subjects
were languages and geometry.
You can come when Narandas permits you to do so, but it
would be good if you control your desire to come. Remember
that we are poor, wish to remain so and aspire to vie with our
starving countrymen.
I will now narrate an incident.
I see here with my own eyes something I had formerly heard
about. We have here a cat which, when it wants to answer
nature's call, goes to a place where it would not be observed by
anybody. It finds for the purpose a dusty spot and, after answer-
ing the call, scratches the ground and covers up the faeces with
earth. After doing that, the cat sniffs at the spot and, if there is
the slightest smell, it throws more earth on the spot. On see-
ing this, I asked myself: 'Do all of us cover up the excreta as
carefully as this cat does?' We daily bow to Mother Earth and
ask her forgiveness for walking on her with our feet; but do we
cover up the ground after spitting, blowing our nose or passing
urine, etc.? Those who have not been observing this rule should
start doing so immediately.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8982. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
