296. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
THE EDITOR
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
I have been so overwhelmed with wires from different parts
of the Union expressing sympathy with my wife and myself re-
garding the death of my brother in India that it is impossible for
me to thank severally the Associations and individual senders.
Numerous messages have been received from Durban, Maritzburg,
Johannesburg and other places. I thank all most heartily for their
sympathy. Whilst doing so I would like to say just a word. To
me as a passive resister and as a firm believer in the oneness of
the Soul, my brother's loss should occasion no greater pain than
the death of Nagappen, Narayanasamy and Hurbatsing, who were
just as much my brothers as my blood brother whose loss so
many friends are mourning with me. Valliamah Moonsamy's
untimely end is, if possible, a greater stab from the hand of
Death than my brother's end. Yet I share the common human
failing, and the thoughts that arise in the mind from the loss of
my brother, who was in the place of father to me and to whom,
next to my dead mother, I owe all I am in life, are more vivid
than those that arose in me when those three brother passive
resisters and the sister passive resister died. The idea that is upper-
most in my mind just now is that death should cause no fear in
us, if we have lived in the fear of God and have done nothing in
violation of the voice of our conscience. Then, indeed, is death
but a change for the better and, therefore, a welcome change which
need not evoke any sorrow. Such a change, I feel, my brother's
death must mean for him. And we in South Africa, especially those
who are passive resisters, must learn not only not to fear death
but must be prepared to face it and welcome it when it comes
to us in the performance of our duty. So have died Narayan-
samy and his three successors. I wish for no better end and I
am sure no other passive resister does.
Finally, may I ask those friends who have overwhelmed me
with their sympathy in my bereavement to help me, if the points
of passive resistance are satisfactorily settled in the near future,
in my desire to return to India to fall at the feet of my brother's
widow and to take charge of the domestic cares of five widows in
my father's family, in which the hand of death now leaves me the
responsible head, according to the Hindu usage.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 18-3-1914
