10. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
CHAMPAPURHAT (UTKAL),
May 22, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter the day before.
It is about three o'clock
just now. Everybody in the . . . Ashram has fallen. We arrived
here yesterday (Monday).
Our good friend Masani of the
Socialist Party is with us.
He is returning to Bombay today.
Agatha also is with us. She will leave in about four days. Ceresole
will join today. He will remain with me for three or four days.
Muriel4, too, is coming. She will stay for two days. I don't give
the names of the other local workers who are accompanying
me. This tour on foot will end in Balasore on the 12th. It has been
decided that after that we should stop walking and I should
spend a few days in each province, doing the work from a fixed
place. The programme is as follows: I should reach Bombay on
the 14th and from there go to Poona on the 17th. Thereafter I
go to Ahmedabad on the 26th and from there proceed to Sind.
I will spend three days in Sind and three in Lahore and then go
to the U. P. I am enclosing a copy of the programme. It is, how-
ever, subject to changes. I had called workers from all provinces
to meet me in Patna. They were of the view that I must visit
every province. It was finally decided that I should visit every
province and stay in one place for a few days.
It will be the
time of the monsoon then and walking will probably be difficult.
You have already read about the decision taken at Patna. Please
rest assured that what has happened is the best. That is what the
people desired, and they were only waiting for me to agree. But
acute differences arose as soon as the first step was taken. There
is no limit to the goodness and patience of Ansari and Mala-
viyaji and to Dr. Roy's overbearing temper.
Let us see what
happens now. I will send with this a fine word picture drawn
by Sushila. Probably Om also will write. I will ask Agatha to
write, too.
Ba has been released. She will first go to Wardha and Delhi
and then join us somewhere.
I wished to spend Rs. 5,000 from the Flood Relief Fund for
Harijan victims of similar calamities but I was told that you
had given instructions not to spend any amount from that
Fund. I, therefore, got only Rs. 1,000. I thought it necessary to
ask you before drawing more. Please write and tell me what in-
struction you remember to have given or what your wishes are.
Surendra is fasting in Wardha. He is doing so only for the
sake of his health. The jail food has broken the health of even
stalwarts. Narandas suffered from bleeding nostrils and came
out of jail an old man. Swami's iron constitution also has bro-
ken down. The same thing happened to Surendra. A diet of pure
starch and fat was not adequate. I see that milk and curds are
essential. Manilal's Sushila has given birth to a son. Manilal
hasn't informed me at all about this. I have lost all interest
in this growth of the family-tree. My only feeling is one of pro-
found sadness. However, who can thwart Nature? Or we can
adopt the European way (birth-control) and sing: "Come, let us
enjoy ourselves, Beautiful-eyed One, but prevent the natural
consequence of our indulgence." I can't help feeling that we
shall not gain spiritual knowledge if we follow that path. So long
as Death remains unconquerable, nothing that Man does will
avail him. Hence the first verse of the Ishopanishad. Do you re-
member it? I used to recite that Upanishad every day in jail,
trying to memorize the verses. If you don't remember them
and if you wish, I will send you a copy of the Upanishad. It
contains only 18 verses. The author has compressed all know-
ledge within that short compass. There is no difference between
its teaching and the Gita's. What is present in it in the form of
a seed has become a beautiful tree in the Gita. I will stop here
now.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 102-
