290. LETTER TO AMIRCHAND C. BOMBWAL
[Before November 18, 1924]
DEAR FRIEND,
Though I think we have never met personally I know you
through Pandit Malaviyaji. He spoke to me of you in glowing
language and told me how brave, honest and self-sacrificing you
were. He told me also that you counted your health of no cost
in serving the refugees. This is however to tell you, and through
you the refugees, how sorry I am that I cannot come to Rawal-
pindi at the present moment. My objective was Kohat. That
having fallen through for the time being, I was in no hurry to go
to Rawalpindi. I knew also that Panditji was in close touch with
you and I knew also that I could be of little assistance in bringing
about reconciliation unless I could go to Kohat and that too in
proper company. But I see that my presence is considered neces-
sary even in Rawalpindi, but it has not been possible. I will,
however, come at the first opportunity and not later than the first
week of December. I dare not delay my departure for Bombay.
Meanwhile I would like to give you my own opinion on the situa-
tion as I understand it from this distance. The Kohat situation
should be treated as an all-India question. For the whole of India
is interested in what happens to the refugees.
The latter should
therefore inform the Government that they would be guided by the
advice that they may receive from Hindu and Mohammedan leaders
and that therefore the Government should invite them and settle
the matter through them. I hope that the refugees will not be
frightened by threats of arrests and the like. I am hoping that
Panditji and Lalaji will be with you tomorrow or the day after.
You may place this letter before them, and if they do not agree
with my opinion, it should be dismissed from your minds. If
Panditji and Lalaji disagree you need not place my opinion before
the refugees at all.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
