92. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
October 2, 1941
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have your letter. Today the Ashram is teeming with people. They
just keep coming. The spinning-wheels are plying. I too gave an hour
to it.
I have understood about Mother. Now it is for you and me to decide.
Even if this building is handed over for the hospital, Mother can still
stay in your room. What does she herself desire ? Is she willing to
come ? Is she enthusiastic ? Discuss it with her and write to me.
In whatever is done, we have to think of what will be convenient to
you and Mother. What inconvenience can it cause me ? If I think
of all these people at the Ashram as an inconvenience, then Mother
too would be an inconvenience. Ultimately, she has to come here.
Hence, in taking a decision do not assume that she may be a burden
to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar
52
93. STATEMENT IN COURT
WARDHA,
October 3, 1941
It is no pleasure for me to appear before this court for the third
time except the natural pleasure one derives from the performance of
one's duty. But for the peremptory call of duty I should not have
reappeared before this court.
Deep meditation for which jail life provides an ample opportunity
has convinced me more than ever of the correctness of the Congress
resolution to offer civil disobedience in vindication of the right of free
speech to the extent of inviting those who listen to oppose the war
in every shape or form.
The rivers of blood that are daily flowing in this war which is without
parallel in barbarity and ferocity should convince even the confirmed
sceptic of the utter immorality of the war. Except for hypnotism which
hardens even the sense of perception, there should not be any difficulty
in perceiving the crime against humanity which the present war means.
It is difficult to strike the balance between the right and the wrong.
The right can only belong to the party that washes its hands clean
of blood-guiltiness and dares the aggressor by accepting the law of
self-suffering through non-violent action to do his worst.
Though seemingly the Congress fight is in defence of the right to
preach against association with all wars or at least this war, it is none
the less an effort to convince the world of the immeasurable superiority
of non-violent action over the violent resistance even in a cause
considered just.
Let no one attribute ineffectiveness to the studied mildness of the
Congress action. Actions appearing insignificant have led before now
to astounding results. Those of us who are privileged to take part in
the struggle have a living faith that our civil disobedience will lead to
a result fraught with the greatest benefit to mankind.
The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1941
1 Drafted by Gandhiji for Pyarelal who filed this after the charge was framed
against him for offering individual satyagraha. He was awarded 12 months' simple
imprisonment; vide also p. 51.
53
