382. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[ON BOARD SHIP,]
Shravan Sud 6 [July 28, 1914]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Go on writing to Nayak about the money due from him.
Take Motilal's help as well. I am writing to Nayak.
It is only today that I write this letter. The note above was
set down lest I should forget the thing. All three of us are keeping
excellent health. Ba behaves wonderfully. She gives no trouble
about food. She has reduced the intake of wheat to a minimum.
She lives for the most part on raw banana, boiled groundnut and
milk. After the wheat bati brought from there has run out, she
is inclined to give up even wheat for the present. For one hour
I teach Gujarati to Kallenbach and for one hour, at seven in the
evening, I explain the Gita to Ba and read the Ramayana to her.
She attends to both with great interest. I do not feel any of the
inconveniences usual in the third class, but see many advantages.
We do not come into contact with other passengers and that saves
us plenty of time. We have framed time-tables and the fixed routine
is never upset. The Company has stocked all fruit so that we get
bananas, oranges, etc., in plenty. It also supplies almonds, etc. If
any cooking has to be done, it is attended to by Mr. Kallenbach.
The party who were to leave for India must have done so
and, therefore, I address nothing to them.
The separation this time was a very painful experience. I
received much love in Phoenix. "The creeper of love I have plan-
ted and watered with tears." I can utter this from my own ex-
perience and rich has been the harvest I have reaped.
I am sending plenty of material and you will see that I have
not finished. I shall send more after leaving Madeira, that is, post
it from Southampton. I hope I shall not let you run short of matter.
I have kept you with me from your childhood as though it was
through divine inspiration that my eyes rested on you. So far, I
have not been disappointed in you. I pray God to give you strength
so that I may never be. Strive to observe the five yamas all your life.
Win everyone's love in Phoenix. That is the way of daya (charity).
Think over the deep implications of daya. I have just finished
reading Yogadipaka. I read in it that the atman advances through
action that is natural to it and falls back through action that is con-
trary to its nature. I found this definition of swadharma more
convincing [than the usual one]. I would very much like to go on
writing, but my time-table will not permit my doing so. You will,
however, be able to develop these ideas further.
This letter is for all three of you to read. I shall be content,
therefore, with much shorter letters to Raojibhai and Pragji.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6048
