89. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
June 23, 1932
MY DEAR HORACE,
I have your two letters. It was just like you to remind me
about Lauri. I remember her quite well. She appealed to me
at once as a beautiful character. And then it was Charlie who,
I think, brought her to me. I wrote to her at once and sent
my letter by air mail. At least I asked the authorities to send it
so and wrote it in time for the air mail. I know that she is brave
enough to face all the illnesses that may be in store for her and
death.
We are all three keeping well and quite fit. Mahadev and I
pass the time spinning, reading, writing; Sardar in reading and
envelope-making out of scraps of paper that come to us by chance.
I call this healthy wealth-production in the name of and for the
sake of all.
I wanted to write to you earlier, but somehow or other it
escaped me. You will be pleased to learn that at the Ashram
the minute of silence has been increased to five minutes. From
the letters I was getting from the Ashram I saw that the con-
centrated labours of the inmates made them high-strung and
therefore I felt that it was likely that those who were not used
to such concentrated work might not be able to follow the pray-
er with required serenity. If therefore they had five minutes'
unbreakable silence to compose themselves and put themselves
in tune with the Infinite, the prayer would be more fruitful. This
was introduced now nearly a month ago or a little longer. And
Narandas tells me that the silence has done much good.
I have not yet got Charlie's book. I expect it every week.
We constantly think of you all at the Settlement . It was a
happy time you gave me at Selly Oak. Olive is a great remind-
er to us all in faithful devotion and utter cheerfulness in spite of
frail condition. Mahadev says he does remember the conver-
sation she had with him and many other sweet things at Wood-
brooke. We both wish her many more years of loving service.
With love from us all to the whole family,
Yours,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1413
