166. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[August 12, 1930]
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the packet sent by you in time. If you have there the guide book to
the Singer sewing machine, send it here. Kakasaheb has got interested in the
machine and wants to know all about it.
As regards Hasmukhrai, read my letters to him, to Lilabehn and to
Bhansali. I like your suggestion. Do serve Lilabehn so long as you can. If
she decides to marry, she certainly cannot stay.
The English translation of my discourses 2 is not good. What I read in
1 The discourse on 'Control of Palate' with which this letter concludes is already
included in Vol. XLIV, pp. 79-81 and bears the date August 12, 1930. It is therefore
not being reproduced here.
2 On the Ashram vows written every Thursday morning and therefore called
'Mangal Prabhat' in Gujarat, the phrase meaning 'Auspicious Morning'. The discourses
commenced with the letter to the addressee dated July 22.
LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
129
the Bo[mbay] Chro[nicle] is not at all good. I think the practice of translating
the discourses should be stopped, or, the translations should be really good.
There is no need at present to give the people the translation of the discourses.
Draw Kumarappa's attention to this, or Premabehn's if she has done the
translation. The quality of the English also does not do us credit. Keshu's
health is bad and causes concern. If he needs change of air, arrange for it.
Sheela and Rambhau must have again got back on their feet. Read the letter
to Kashinath. You do get problems to solve but you are quite upto the task,
and so I do not worry. Consider all this as no more than my ideas and
opinions and do what you yourself wish. Go on doing fearlessly what you
can and what your conscience permits you to do. I have no right whatever to
guide you from here. You have wakened up Somabhai, Vithal and the others
very well indeed. The letters meant for Kakasaheb should not be put into the
packet meant for me. If there are any letters which he should see, they should
be addressed separately to him. Everyone has Kakasaheb's blessings of course.
I have not written separately to each of you. Kakasaheb keeps quite good
health. This time, too, there is some increase in his weight. It has increased
at least by one pound. This increase should be considered solid since it has
taken place in spite of his taking exercise. He can digest about two and a
half seer of curds. He takes less of butter. At present, he is living on fruit.
I am unable to report improvement in my health. There is some information
in the letter to Mirabehn. There is nothing to worry over.
I have been reading with Kakasaheb, Vinayak Ode's third Marathi book.
It contains some fine stanzas by Ramdas Swami in the ovi meter. I give below
for you all an extract on how to write a translation which has been seen by
Kakasaheb.
How to Write?
The characters should be round, easy to read, well-formed and as black
as if written with lamp-black. The lines should be so pleasing in appearance
as if the characters forming a line were so many pearls smoothly moving
forward. All the characters should be of uniform size, clear, neither too large
nor too small, and there should be sufficient space between two characters.
The kana the matra the ref, and the veiaali (the sign for 'e') also should
be clearly formed. All the characters from the beginning of a book to its end,
should be so formed that they appear to be written with the same nib. The
1 A measure of weight current before the introduction of the metric system,
approximately equivalent to two pounds
2 A vertical line after a letter as a sign of the long 'a' sound
3 A bent above a letter as a sign of the sound 'e' as in 'hen'
4 A circular mark 'c' as a sign of an indistinctly pronounced or'
5 A verticle line half bent at the top as a sign of either the 'i' or 'ee' vowel sound
130
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
blackness of the characters, the thickness, the bent and the corners of the
nibs used, also should be of uniform quality. The lines should not touch each
other. The ref and the matra should not be so marked that either might be
higher than the other. The line below a vertically long character, should not
touch its lower end. A line should be drawn with a pencil across the sheet and
then the characters should be written along that line. The space between the
lines should not be uneven. There should be no corrections anywhere. If examined,
not a single error should be found . . . . 1 Kakasaheb cannot understand the exact
meaning of this ovi. If Balkrishna, Shripatrao or anybody else knows its meaning,
let me have it. One should be very careful in childhood when learning to form
the characters. They should be so formed as to be pleasing to the people. When
one is young, one should not form the characters so small that when one has
grown old, one cannot decipher them at all. One should cultivate the habit of
forming medium-sized characters. One should leave blank spaces as margins on
both sides of a line and form clearly visible characters between them. Let the
sheet of paper used for writing crumble into pieces when it will, the characters
should remain as clear as when they were formed.
RAMDAS
It is not as if we did not know all this. My purpose in reproducing it
here is to show the great importance Ramdas Swami attached to the subject
that he composed avis on it . Good characters are like an ornament to one.
Our ancestors wrote pearl-like characters. The art of printing had not been
invented then and writing was a fine worldly accomplishment . It should be
so even today. I stress all this because I myself painfully suffer [because of
my deficiency in this respect]. I made no effort at all to improve my
handwriting, and now I feel reluctant to spare time necessary for the effort.
It seems to me that I cannot at present afford to expend the necessary energy
for that. Let everyone take a lesson from my miserable deficiency in this
respect and try to improve his or her handwriting as much as he or she can,
while they have the time to do so.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 52 letters in all.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33961
