310. LETTER TO NARAHARI PARIKH
BETTIAH,
Vaishakh Vad 11 [May 17, 1917]
BHAISHRI NARAHARI,
I have your letter. I went through it carefully. I do believe
that you have done nothing wrong in taking the step you have
taken. I am writing to Chhaganlal straightaway to pay you
Rs.75 a month. It would be a great thing if you can live in such
a way as to be able to carry on without needing more. You will
have to exercise enough self-control even to do so. I see that the
time has not come yet when we have people who will manage with-
out money or with the barest minimum of it. For that a change
in the entire atmosphere in every family is necessary. This criti-
cism is especially applicable to Gujarat.
I doubt whether you will be able to bear the combined
burden of your teaching work and translating Gokhale's speeches.
My ideas about education are very exacting. If we want to pour
our souls into the pupils, we should constantly exercise our mind on
how to teach them. We should not get angry with them. Pass-
ing on to them in the best possible language from day to day
whatever we wish to give them, will take up much of our time.
Moreover, we must for the present think of teaching methods as
well. Everything will have to be taught in a new way. All the
same, you have no option now but to finish the translations. I say
this only to point out your future responsibilities and those of
all other teachers.
I have not treated Geography as a separate subject. That is
why I have said that those who teach History should also teach
Geography. However, if you think that they should be treated as
separate subjects for the time being, you may do so. We will make
what changes we find on experience to be necessary.
The teachers will have to come together at least once a week
to exchange ideas and make such changes as may be called for.
The intelligent students should be consulted and their suggestions
invited about methods of teaching.
The students' health is the collective responsibility of the
teachers; the main responsibility, however, will rest on the teacher
in charge of hygiene.
The teachers should read up the subjects in the curriculum
which they do not know. Especially Hindi. I can see from
my work here how very essential Hindi is. I find that I shall
have to ask for volunteers from other places. Difficulties will arise
about those of them who do not know Hindi. I see it proved every
day that education is altogether incomplete without Hindi.
It would be good, I think, if Anandshankarbhai or Keshavlal-
difficulties which the teachers experience from day to day in ex-
plaining certain things. These pillars of the Gujarati language
will also be better enlightened in this way and have occasion to
think about some matters to which they have given no thought.
The teachers' technical vocabulary will become uniform and
points about spelling, etc., will be settled. At present, each of
us has his own rules, or has no rules at all, to go by.
No doubt you will show this to the other teachers as well.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 6355
