256. LETTER TO ROY
148 RUSSA ROAD, CALCUTTA,
[Before February 4, 1921]
DEAR MR. ROY,
I have been in correspondence for some time with your
daughter as I have been with many other girls and boys. I
have had the pleasure too of meeting your daughter and her com-
panions more than once. As Kumari Lalita has often referred
to your attitude about her desire to withdraw from her college,
I would like you [to] know my advice to your daughter. In my
opinion no self-respecting boy or girl can possibly receive edu-
cation in institutions in any way controlled or dominated by a
Government so wicked as ours. If I were a student, and had to
choose between education under the influence of such a Govern-
ment and no education, I would not hesitate to choose the
latter. Whilst I have pressed this argument upon your daughter
as on every other student, I have advised her to be largely guided
by your advice and if it were a matter of choosing between your
advice and mine, certainly to prefer yours to mine. But I have
also added that if she is really convinced about the wickedness
of the Government and therefore the necessity of withdrawing from
her college, she could not fail to secure your consent and blessing in
following the voice of her conscience. I write this to you as I
am most anxious, being a parent myself, to respect to the utmost
extent the susceptibilities of parents especially in the case of girls.
You will perhaps permit me to say that I feel for your daughter
as I would for my own. It has been a pleasure to me to read
in all her letters a scrupulous regard for her parents. And I need
hardly assure you that I would not be guilty of undermining the
duty of children towards their parents. Your daughter has, I may
inform you, given me her valuable bangles for the Swaraj Fund.
I would like to have a line of your approval of her gift. As I
have come in close contact with your daughter I would like to
make your acquaintance and understand your wishes in the matter.
Yours truly,
From a photostat: S.N. 7330
