93. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
BORSAD,
June 30, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
I have your letter of 23rd inst. setting forth objections raised
against the recent resolution of the Working Committee on boycott
of foreign cloth. I have re-read the resolution in the light of
the objections raised and I have come to the conclusion that the
objections are based on an insufficient reading of the resolution
and ignorance of the previous history of the Congress policy in
the matter. Long before the civil disobedience campaign and
ever since the Bengal Partition days, boycott of foreign cloth and
especially British cloth and general British goods became the
policy of the Congress. In 1920 boycott of British goods was
dropped at my instance and replaced by boycott of foreign cloth
on predominantly economic grounds and ever since it has so
remained. Whilst I was in Yeravda jail between 1922 and '24
a resolution adopting boycott of British goods was passed at one
of the sessions of the Congress and since then, boycott of foreign
cloth and boycott of British goods have run on parallel lines. Dur-
ing the last struggle these assumed an aggressive political character
and became practically merged. As a result of the Delhi Settle-
ment, boycott of British goods was discontinued and the effect of
discontinuance was so immediate that within a week of the Settle-
ment orders for British machinery and other goods were freely
sent. Boycott of foreign cloth however remained not as a politi-
cal weapon but as an economic necessity. Thus complete prohi-
bition of the sale of foreign cloth as an economic necessity has
been the settled Congress policy since 1920. It was torn from its
original anti-British setting. A mere pursuit of this policy can in
no sense be interpreted to mean interference with the liberty of
action of the individual unless the policy was enforced through
violent measures. But the history of the methods adopted by the
Congress since the Settlement, I think, furnishes sufficient evidence
to show that both the letter and the spirit of the Settlement have
been adhered to in the vast majority of cases by Congress organi-
zations and prompt measures have been taken wherever any depar-
ture from peaceful methods has been detected.
75
Objection has been taken to the use of the word 'permit'
in the resolution in question. Of course the word has reference
only to those who put themselves under Congress discipline and
so long as the Congress retains the influence it has over the people,
the use of the word 'permit' is not only legitimate but necessary
if the Congress resolutions are to convey the intention of the authors.
So long as the Congress policy remains what it is, it is not open
to Congress organizations to permit all those under their influence
importation of foreign cloth even if individuals desired it.
As to disciplinary action the words of the resolution are surely
quite clear. Disciplinary action contemplated is "against the
Committee or the individual as the case may be" and Committee
or the individual means only a Congress Committee or its indi-
vidual members. That all the obligation that is imposed by the
Congress is purely moral and devoid of any violence is abundantly
clear from the fact that breaches of pledges given to the Congress
continue to be reported, the Congress remaining helpless. At
the same time it is to be confessed that in a majority of cases
the moral authority of the Congress is felt and accepted by the
people.
Lastly, I entirely endorse your remark that "it is most un-
desirable that there should be any ground for misunderstanding
as to the attitude of the Congress in this matter." And I assure
you that members of the Working Committee are most anxious
to avoid any misunderstanding, their desire being, for the good
name of the Congress if for nothing else, to be meticulous in the
performance of all the obligations undertaken on behalf of the
Congress in the Delhi Settlement.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 33/6,1931. Courtesy; National
Archives of India
