135. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
August 6, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
1. Write in brief. Number the paragraphs on the different
subjects, so that no point may be left out in the reply.
I am sure you will have realized by now that one has to
reply to points which strike one's eye.
2. Since you are the Manager, you should treat nothing as
private.
3. This reply is meant for all. If you wish, you may treat
your letter as private.
4. Instead of compelling the women to attend the prayer,
you should explain to them their dharma and then leave the
matter to them. You cannot claim greater right or control
over Kanchan than over the other women. If you look upon
Kanchan as your wife and wish to have children by her or gra-
tify physical or mental craving through her, you should resign as
Manager, notwithstanding your many other virtues and endow-
ments. That is to say, you should treat Kanchan as completely
independent.
5. Utilize Pushpa's services to the full. She must learn
to recite the Gita with correct pronunciation. She can sing too.
In that case let her sing bhajans at prayer time. She knows cooking
and can do all domestic chores. She will do whatever work she
can. If you take her help, she will find salvation. She will
become a devotee.
6. Hoshiari is illiterate, but she is firm, brave and does not
shirk work.
7. Kambale may have faults, but he certainly has some
virtues. He is a Harijan. It is our duty to serve him. This
does not mean that we should spoil him. It will be a great thing
if you are able to understand the secret that we can raise him
without spoiling him.
8. Omprakash is capable of great progress. He seems
to be a good man. It is necessary to understand him. I have
been training him. If you do not think he may be a lustful
man, you may let him teach the women, not where he would be
alone with them but in a big room, or on my verandah or, if
Sushila Gandhi permits, in Ba's room. Even if a man is a perfect
brahmachari, he should never be alone with a woman.
9. Ramnarayan will have to pay all the expenses. Since
the girls are to be given modern education outside, he will
not be considered an Ashram inmate. If he himself, however,
wishes to stay here till he gets a house outside, he may pay
nominal rent and stay. But he should not have a separate
kitchen. Lanterns too should be shared as far as possible. Even
if he is ready to pay for them, we cannot give any just now.
It is desirable that we should make some arrangement for light
on the paths. Discuss this with Kanaiyo and Mohansinh. All
those who wish to read should do so silently round one or two
lamps. And the same for writing. We must economize on kero-
sene. Issue a ticket for Ramnarayan. He should not be made
to carry too heavy a financial burden. All the expenses must be
managed within Rs. 150. Everyone should be given local fruit
and Bombay fruit should be reserved for the sick. I intend to
make some arrangements. Estimate the cost of fruit from Bom-
bay. You should exercise discretion, moderation and gentleness
in this matter.
10. In order to know a man's nature we must learn to
tolerate his weaknesses as we expect the world to tolerate ours.
If the world did not tolerate our weaknesses it would kill us.
This applies to all, but it applies especially to the Manager who
has embraced ahimsa.
11. After you have finalized the set-up to your satisfaction,
hand it over to somebody else to administer according to plan.
Let the person you have in view get trained from now on, not
for exercising authority but for service. I believe that such an
administrator can be, ought to be, a woman. Any upright and
hard-working man or woman can run a well-planned organization.
Take it that those who cannot do so have some shortcomings.
12. About the trees Parnerkar says that there has been no
negligence. There has been some miscalculation, of course.
That is, the heat has harmed four or five trees more than was
expected. The rest are coming up. Exposing the trees to heat
was deliberate, so that they might bear finer and sweeter fruit.
You should patiently understand this point from him. He says
he has consulted someone. Learn more about manure. If I get
time, I will try to learn something.
13. I am trying to arrange about Dr. Kelkar. About the
others, as time may permit.
Write if anything is left out. I have not revised the letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5910. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
