401. LETTER TO NANALAL K. JASANI
August 19, 1932
BHAI NANALAL,
I was waiting for a letter from you as we wait for rains
in the months of Jeth and Ashadha. I remembered you im-
mediately the day I received the cable about Doctor's last sleep,
and also wrote to you. I even wished at that time that you
were with me, but I did not know you were in fact so near me.
I did not even know where you would be, and so I enclosed that
letter and another for Khimchand with my letter to Manilal. In
my letter to you I asked for your help and in the letter to
Khimchand I cautioned him. I mentioned my distrust of him
and other people's too, but told him that Doctor had great trust
in him and expressed my hope that he would not betray it.
Maganlal had written me two long letters about Khimchand
about the time he went to England, and I had also written to
Doctor on the basis of those letters. Doctor had assured me in
reply that Khimchand had turned over a new leaf and that
there was no ground for distrusting him. You should not feel
any hesitation now in taking a hand in the affairs of the family.
It is your duty at this juncture not to wait to be asked to inter-
vene. Doctor's trust in you can be seen even in his last instruc-
tions. Chhaganlal writes to me. His letters have been very
good. He has promised to abide by my advice. He has ex-
pressed his own views, too, but he does not insist on their being
acted upon. My letters are not likely to reach there before
the 13th [proximo]. Hence, without knowing what I want he
has sent me a copy of the note which you had sent [to him].
All the letters and cables which I have received up to date from
Chhaganlal after the passing away of Doctor can be described
as perfectly satisfactory. If he seems to have an ulterior motive
behind them, you should guide me. I am proceeding with full
trust in him. Ratilal Desai has written to me and told me that
he does not share my trust. I have as yet made no suggestions
beyond asking him to bring the accounts up to date. For the
present, I am collecting all the relevant facts. I sent wires to
Ratilal, Champa and Manjula and dissuaded them from rushing
to Rangoon. I wished to restrain Maganlal too, but I knew that
he would not have that much patience, and also that he did not
trust Chhaganlal. My own attitude has been that the shares of
the three brothers should be separated. From what Chhaganlal
writes, Doctor's property seems to be very much less than I had
thought. He says that there is practically no cash, and also ex-
presses his distrust of Mayashankar . I think we should treat the
last instructions of Doctor as his will. If, however, the total pro-
perty is as enumerated by Chhaganlal and if there is no cash,
how can we pay immediately the sums specified by Doctor?
Please write to me frankly and in detail about all these matters.
I feel unhappy that I am in jail at this juncture. But our wishes
are not always fulfilled, and, therefore, we should do our duty
as best as we can in the circumstances in which we are placed.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9462
