335. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
August 7, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I got your letter. I have preserved your letter about the cup.
At present all three of us are trying our best to spin fine yarn.
Mahadev has reached nearly 80 counts, while Sardar and I are
between 30 and 40. When we have reached our target, we will
use the cup and I will then let you know the result.
The following points should be considered in regard to dress-
making for yajna. (1) What kind of clothes can be stitched in the
shortest time. (2) What kind of clothes will be sold most. (3)
What kind of clothes women can stitch more easily and what kind
of clothes men can stitch more easily. (4) Whether this scheme
includes embroidery and knitting. (5) Whether to cater to the needs
of the rich also or only of the poor. (6) Scope of machine-sewing
and of hand-sewing, etc., etc. The subject is an interesting one
and is also of practical benefit. It requires very careful thinking.
If at present, however, you concentrate on spinning, pay less atten-
tion to sewing. Think over it when you have no other work and
make experiments yourself.
Mithubehn and Perinbehn have
done very good work in this field. But I know that your plan
is much wider than theirs. If it can be implemented fully and if
people respond to it, no cloth can compete with khadi. But at
present your work is improvement of spinning. Give as much
time to sewing as you can spare for it. Concentration on one
work helps one to attain moksha, but to attempt many things at
a time is self-indulgence.
As regards your relations with Motibehn, you should first exa-
mine your own mind. Do you still wish to enjoy pleasures of the
flesh? If you have firmly resolved in your mind that you do not
wish to do so, you should inform Motibehn and other friends about
your resolution. That will certainly shock Motibehn, but your
firmness will have an electric effect on her. Firmness means that
you will remain steadfast in your resolution even if Motibehn
loses her reason or dies. You should also be convinced that the
good of you both lies in such firmness on your part. If, how-
ever, you have not reached this degree of firmness, give up arguing
with Motibehn and silently live with her as other husbands live
with their wives and exercise what self-control you can while
doing so. If you do that, nobody will have a right to criticize
you. Everybody can advance only within the limit of his capacity.
In any case you will deserve criticism if you remain undecided
and deceive yourself, your friends and the world. If you save
yourself from such a position, everything will be well in the end.
Do not think too much and get confused. You have spent a
good many years in thinking. Come to a definite decision without
further hesitation, and you will then enjoy complete peace of mind.
This is the meaning of the Gita verse: "The attitude, in this
matter, springing, as it does, from fixed resolve is but one, O
Kurunandana."
Think over it and the verses which immediately follow. You
will understand this letter more clearly then.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3756
