416. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
August 19, 1933
THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
POONA
DEAR SIR,
Col. Martin has kindly given me a copy of your reply to my
letter of the 17th instant addressed to him. I regret to observe
that your reply realizes my worst fears. Where I thought there
was a possibility of a more favourable construction on some of
the points, your reply now makes it clear that there was no warrant
for any such construction.
It therefore becomes unnecessary for
me to take up the various points in your letter.
But I have now understood through Mr. Andrews that the
difficulty in the way of Government carrying out the orders of the
Government of India to which I have already referred is that
instead of being a State prisoner I am now a convicted priso-
ner. If that be the cause for a radical departure from a policy
explicitly laid down by the Government, not by way of concession,
but as the Government of India have admitted, "because it is
necessary that he (I) should have freedom in regard to visitors
and correspondence on matters strictly limited to removal of un-
touchability", "there being no restrictions on publicity", I cannot
understand how what was considered to be necessary for me be-
comes any the less necessary now, by reason of my being a
convicted prisoner. Just as Government have recognized my
physical wants and satisfied them in spite of my being a convict,
even so, I venture to submit, do my spiritual wants regarding un-
touchability demand full recognition from Government.
The last paragraph of your letter grieves me. The reminder
contained in it comes as an added injury to my wounded soul,
for I have stated to Government more than once that civil dis-
obedience under circumstances like the present is a part of my
creed. But I recognize that what I consider as a perfectly lawful
and moral activity, Government consider as unlawful and pro-
bably even immoral. I must therefore be content to be their pri-
soner not merely for the natural term of the present confine-
ment, but for such time as India comes to her own if I live long
enough to see that day-if, that is to say, there is any possibi-
lity still left of Government fulfilling their solemn obligation and
my coming safely out of the ordeal through which I am going.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3906; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (14), Pt. V, pp. 109-11
