13. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
7, BUITENCINGLE [STREET,
CAPE TOWN,]
April 7, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
Please tell Miss Schlesin that I have had no letters from there
during the last two days. I take it she did not write on Monday
& Tuesday. I have just a suspicion that the letters may have
miscarried.
Herewith my letter to Lane. I had a long chat with Lane
yesterday. He suggested alterations in the draft I had taken.
The copy I am sending you is the result. You will be pleased
to learn that the typing has been done by me. I have borrowed
Hiranand's typewriter. I am finishing this letter in Lane's office.
He suggested the dropping of the last sentence which he thought
meant a threat. I told him it could not be dropped and I told
him plainly that I could not rest so long as women were taxed,
Indians could not hold landed property in the Transvaal, &c. I
told him pretty plainly that if the Gold Law prosecutions in
Klerksdorp were proceeded with, I would not hesitate to advise
& raise passive resistance. We have been talking to each other
with the utmost freedom. You will see the revised letter signed
by me. In it there is no material change. The second copy
was typed in Lane's office. He tells me quite confidentially that
the alternative solution will be accepted though he adds that
J. C. S. is still in treaty with the Free Staters. He was most eagerly
waiting for my letter which I brought to him somewhat late as
I was engaged last night with Smartt who gave a very patient
hearing. In the morning Campbell Anderson interrupted me.
Up to the time of writing this, I am sanguine of the 2nd pro-
posal becoming law in the course of a few days.
As I made mention about the approval of the whole commu-
nity, I have wired you for approval, though really the thing
has been approved already there and here & [in] Natal. Natal
went out of its way to wire approval of the Cape resolutions.
In the circumstances I am not leaving at all for the time
being. As a matter of fact I could not have, even if I had your
permission, until I had finished seeing the members.
I enclose [a] cutting from The Times. You will notice Smuts
already foreshadowing a new solution.
I hope I shall get the English mail tomorrow noon.
Abdurahman introduced me to Smartt. They two seemed to
be rather intimate. I met Col. Crewe also though the former
did not stay for the interview.
I take it you will explain the letter to the leaders there.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5428
