42. LETTER TO SURENDRA SINGH
BARDOLI,
April 26, 1931
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter as also a copy of the speech you
would have made at the Sikh League . With some parts of your
letter I can heartily agree and I wish that we were rid of the
slightest communal taint. But it seems that, if there is any settle-
ment in the immediate future, there would be at least some com-
munalism about it.
I have never been able to understand the nationalism which
remains nationalistic only if all the rest do so and otherwise be-
come uncompromisingly communalistic.
I have not the dread that you have of adult suffrage.
Every
form of suffrage will be liable to abuse, adult suffrage perhaps
the least so. And I have an effective antidote that might, to a
certain extent, obviate the mischief. But I need not dilate upon
it at the present moment.
I am also in agreement with you that we should have educa-
tion on the widest scale possible of the masses, not so much of
children as of grown-up men and women who will presently be
armed with great powers for good or evil. That education, I think,
the Congress has given not always successfully, not always well,
but on the whole undoubtedly successfully and well.
I do think that the association of high salaries with efficiency
and public honesty is an hypnotic effect produced by the rulers.
The sooner we get out of it the better it will be for us. The
present civil service is open to influences which are far more subtle
and deadly than open bribery. Nor do I consider the administra-
tion to be efficient except in so far as it guarantees at the point
of the bayonet safety for the lives of the European population but
certainly not of the masses. I think that we have patriotic men
and women enough in the country who, when we come to our
own, will gladly give their services for maintenance money that
will easily bear comparison with the average income of the toiling
but starving millions. Poverty, if it is due to ignorance, is no
less due to heartless unparalleled exploitation.
Thus though we have differences of opinion I have valued your
letter and the enclosure, both of which I have read with a great
deal of interest. Do please therefore favour me again whenever
you have anything of importance to tell me.
Yours sincerely,
SARDAR SURENDRA SINGH
PUNJAB CIVIL SECRETARIAT
LAHORE
From a photostat: S.N. 17016
