157. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
POST ANDHERI,
March 15, 1924
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I have your letter, and I had your and Mahomed Ali's tele-
grams regarding Panikkar. Your letter embarrasses me a little.
I have not intended, nor do I intend now to form any decided
opinion about making appointments, fixing salaries, etc. As I
shared Joseph's opinion that he should be by his wife's side when
she was so much troubled, and as the Sikh friends who came to
see me seemed to be very anxious to have a substitute for Gidwani,
a substitute who could also edit their paper Onward, I was on the
look-out for one. They wanted Sundaram who used to be on the
Independent and suggested that he could do both the things-publi-
city and editing. On my arrival at the retreat near Andheri, I
saw Panikkar who had come to see Mr. Andrews in order to dis-
cuss the advisability of an offer that was made to him by the
Indian Daily Mail. He had hesitation in accepting the offer because
the Mail politics were not his. I then thought of the publicity
work and asked Panikkar whether he would shoulder the burden,
and as I did not know him well, I consulted Mr. Andrews too,
and when Panikkar was prepared to go to Amritsar if you wanted
him and as Mr. Andrews thought that he would make a very good
substitute for Gidwani, I wired. But I had no desire that you
should be influenced in any way by the wire because it was from
me. If I was well and could acquaint myself with all the details,
I should certainly have given my advice and opinion as to the
selection, but for the present beyond interesting myself in the few
things in which I must, I really do not want to tax my energy.
With reference to the salary the position was this. Panikkar
was in the Swarajya office at Rs. 700/- per month, but as the paper
is not self-supporting, it has not been able to pay him a few
months' salary. He left it because he could not hit it off with
Mr. Srinivasa Iyengar. He has to discharge a debt of Rs. 900 in
Madras. He needs Rs. 300 per month. I therefore thought that
if he was paid Rs. 900 in advance, he could discharge the debt
and proceed to Amritsar. He would still want his expenses [to
be met] at Amritsar. For this Rs. 100 monthly should be paid
to him by way of loan. At the end of 3 months' service, therefore,
he will be owing to the Congress Rs. 300. This may again be
deducted from his salary at the rate of Rs. 100 per month. That
means that he has to serve for 6 months in order to discharge the
loan he would be receiving. I am now perturbed because I gather
from your letter that he may not be wanted for that length of
time. I would not like to be the instrument of useless expense to
the Congress. I propose, therefore, to place the whole situation
before Panikkar, and he will probably agree that if his services are
dispensed with before 6 months, he should be liable for the un-
paid balance of the loan. He is not here at the present moment,
or I should have sent you a more decisive letter.
I do not feel that you would want me, if it was possible, to
cancel the engagement with Panikkar and am therefore letting
it stand and sending him to Amritsar tomorrow. In accordance
with your latest telegram, he will be going direct to Amritsar.
Please authorize the Treasurer to reimburse to me the amount
that I shall be paying Panikkar.
Indeed, if I was minded to influence you, I should ask you to
reconsider the question of each appointment for two reasons:
(1) Should the Congress spend money on non-Congress work?
(2) What should be the maximum the Congress should pay its
servants?
So much for business. My wound is completely healed, but
the affected part is yet tender and requires care and attention.
The seaside convalescence is likely to suit me. I propose, if all
goes well, to stop here for 3 months. During the time I shall be
doing as much writing work as I can and conferring with the
leaders upon the Council-entry, etc. Father, Hakimji and others
are expected here by the end of the month. You need not hesitate
to come down for consultation whenever you wish. I expect in
any event to see you on the 20th prox. as I understand the Work-
ing Committee meets on that date. I do hope you are keeping
well and taking care of yourself.
Panikkar has seen this letter and he will hold himself ready
to be relieved whenever you think it necessary and would be
liable for repayment of the loan.
Yours sincerely,
PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
From a photostat: S.N. 8503
