309. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
SODEPUR,
December 16, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
Your second letter written on the 12th arrived here on the
15th. You must have received the following wire which I sent
you yesterday :2
The description you have given is quite good. I am sure
that as the problem about beef was solved so will the other also
be solved through patience and love. I entrusted certain jobs
to you as being the most important, but since I have already
accepted responsibility for all other arrangements except medical
attention I should certainly like you to take up that work also.
So do take up whatever work you can without coming into
conflict with anybody.
Though I shall not be there on January 1, from that day
the institution will be run only for the poor and on behalf of
the poor. From that day the management of all departments
except the medical will be considered to have become my
responsibility. I trust you will take up the responsibility on my
behalf. But you must assume the responsibility for only as much
work as you can easily attend do. Let me know what jobs you
are not able to take up.
After January 1, there will be no wealthy patients there.
If there are any, they will not be treated as wealthy men.
Dr. Dinshaw had said that he would himself see about the
furniture. He wanted it for his clinic in Bombay. There will be
very few poor indoor patients for the present. Maybe there will
be none. Hence, though we shall keep facilities ready for a large
number, the hospital is not likely to get filled in the immediate
future. We shall have to use our judgment in the matter of
furniture. Ascertain Gulbai's wishes. Don't insist on ordering
things which the two do not want.
From among the patients there, those who wish to leave
may be permitted to do so. From January 1, really speaking,
the only patients will be Balkrishna4, Vanu and Zohra. You
will have no difficulty in looking after them. You must have
realized by now that it is no easy job to shoulder the re-
sponsibility of that institution. The task would easily test the
capacity of any man.
I wish you not to worry about Kanchan.
Blessings to everybody there.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 8614. Also C.W. 7194. Cour-
tesy : Munnalal G. Shah
