192. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
November 22, 1929
CHI. KISHORELAL,
I am writing this after the prayer. As I cannot find my pen,
I am making do with a pencil. We are camping in a village in
a heath in Bundelkhand, where there is a khadi centre. Our
dwelling is an ancient fort. It is said that in 1857 women of the
royal household had taken refuge here. But it is not about this
I want to write. I want to write about the mischief done by
your allopathic doctors. I know only one doctor who would
never cheat-though even in this I may be mistaken-and he is
Dr. Ansari. The trouble is regarding the substance from which
medicines are made. I have tried to ascertain that about the
medicines I need. I suggest the same to you. These days doctors
have made it a practice to prescribe medicines with non-
vegetarian content. But even after acquiring such knowledge and
learning to be cautious, we shall have to go by faith.
I had written so far when the workers of the khadi ashram
came to see me. I have now returned after travelling 56 miles.
It is ten o'clock. I have found my pen. This description will
give some idea of my tour. Do not think from this that I am
tired. If I were tired, I would not sit down to write to you so
promptly. I sleep even while travelling. I therefore remain fresh.
Now the most important thing about medicines is that you
should keep as far away from them as possible. But for that
purpose you must be acquainted with modern remedies. There is
certainly some good in the established medical system. But
I have no doubt that on the whole it is devilish. The new dis-
coveries which cultured, religious-minded men are making are
godly and morally pure. Hence, though they are often imperfect
in their reasoning, they are worth thinking over and adopting.
They advise simple natural remedies accessible to all. All this is
not unknown to you. But I am stressing this so that you may
study the subject for your need and patiently try such remedies.
You will be able to examine and ascertain your needs better
than others can advise.
Let us understand Bhai Karsandas's mistake. I think Surajbehn
has finally remained in the Trust. That is all right. What is she
doing now? I am reaching Sabarmati on the 25th and will leave
on December 6th morning for Wardha.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 10716. Courtesy : Gomatibehn
Mashruwala
