277. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
CARE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE,
MOTIHARI,
April 16, 1917
DEAR MR. MAFFEY1,
I have come to this district to learn for myself whether there is
truth in the allegations of the ryots against the planters. I saw the
Secretary of the Planters' Association and then the Commissioner of
the Division and sought their co-operation. Both politely rejected
my advances and dissuaded me from my pursuit. I could not
accept their advice, and have been proceeding with my work. The
Magistrate has served upon me an order asking me to leave the
District. The grounds for the order are such as I cannot subs-
cribe to. I have therefore been reluctantly obliged to disobey the
order and tell the magistrate that I shall suffer the penalty for the
breach.
My motive is national service and that, too, so long as it is
consistent with humanitarian dictates. I understand, because my
South African work was considered to be humanitarian that I
was awarded the Kaisar-i-Hind Gold Medal. So long as my
humanitarian motive is questioned, so long must I remain unde-
serving of holding the medal. I am therefore asking my people
to return the medal to you, and I shall feel honoured to receive it
back if it is returned to me when my motive is no longer questioned.
As to the question itself, so far as I have been able to examine
the evidence, given to me, it shows that the planters have successfully
used the Civil and Criminal Courts and illegal force to enrich
themselves at the expense of the ryots, and that the ryots are living
under a reign of terror and that their property, their persons, and
their minds are all under the planters' heels. One man graphically
said to me : "We belong to the planters, not to the Sircar . Thana
is nowhere, the planters are everywhere. We take what they
allow, and we keep what they permit." I had hoped that a deeper
examination would have toned down the impression formed by me.
Had I been left free, I would have concluded my studies and placed
the results at the disposal of the authorities. I wish that His Excel-
lency would consider the matter serious enough to have an indepen-
dent inquiry made. The local administration admit that they are
sitting upon a mine so dangerous that they cannot tolerate my
presence. And yet they manage to be satisfied with the slow inquiry
of a settlement officer. Everything will depend upon swiftness and
the proper choice of the members of the Committee of Inquiry.
This is the least that the ryots are entitled to. Will you please
place this before the Viceroy and ask for his forgiveness for sending
such a long letter in the midst of many imperative calls upon his
time. The urgency of the matter is the sole excuse for this letter.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the original: C. W. 7596. Courtesy: H. S. L. Polak
