409. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKER PATTANI
Aso Sud 1 [October 14, 1928]
SUJNA BHAISHRI,
I have your letter.
There is no question of one confined to bed spinning. Even
your pledge exempts you from that obligation during illness. If
you give up spinning through lethargy or on the pretext of being
too busy, I would certainly have some harsh words to say, would
even consider employing satyagraha against you provided I loved
you enough for the purpose. I would not make any such un-
reasonable demand on you that even during illness you should
continue spinning. If, moreover, Lady Pattani is now spinning,
as you say, with sincere faith, to me it is as good as your spin-
ning. But I have doubt about her spinning with such faith. I
regard your certificate as partial, so that I myself should test her
sincerity. You also tell me that she does not always wear pan-
koru. If one has sincere faith, would one omit to wear it any
time? Pankoru is a household word among us. She may wear
pankoru of any thinness she likes; I don't take this word to mean
necessarily coarse cloth. It means cloth made from yarn of what-
ever quality spun by our sisters and daughters. It is in your hand
to spin yarn that is fine. Well, I have addressed this letter to
Ramabehn, it seems.
Here are a few of the things I expect from you. You should
provide in your budget for expenditure on things manufactured in
your State, as you provide for expenditure for collecting revenue.
At present, that expenditure is borne by me. But how much
longer can I afford it?
Please prepare and send me a report, for public or for my
information, of the results of the law enforcing prohibition in your
State.
The State should run a model dairy in accordance with the
principles explained by the Government Dairy expert in his articles
in Young India. I am sure you will incur no loss through it in the
end.
You can take up these things even while you are bed-ridden.
After you have been able to attend to them, you may ask me for
more suggestions.
But one thing I should say above all else. Leave the bed.
You will think this a difficult task and so do I. But to succeed
in that, along with doctors, you should consult a few quacks too.
One of them is Kuvalayananda. It seems you know him. I have
not been able to assess the value of his work. There is one other
quack like him. He does not know anything about yoga and
employs water-treatment. If you wish to collect persons of that
kind round you, all I can do to help you is to inquire about
them. After you have heard them, follow any of their treatments
which appeals to you and seems harmless. There is no reason why
you should remain bed-ridden. Am I also not one of these quacks?
But at present I am useless. In any case, Rama is there, the
greatest Vaid. If my efforts to know Him had succeeded, I would
have certainly sent Him to you. But, alas, will I ever see such a
lucky day?
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 3217. Courtesy: Mahesh Pattani
