518. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
December 10, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter of 19th November. I have not been able
to understand it, in spite of the help I sought from Charlie
Andrews.
I have no hesitation in agreeing with you that any solu-
tion of the present deadlock should be just and creative, and
that it should be neither imposed nor extorted; in other words,
it should be an agreed solution honourable to both the coun-
tries. I know too the suffering of India and the suffering of
Lancashire. But if the juxtaposition of the two is meant to
imply that the cause of the suffering of either is identical I
would dissent from any such view. The suffering of India is
imposed upon her; the suffering of Lancashire is due partly to
world causes and partly to its own shortsightedness and selfish-
ness. So far as it was possible for me to suggest an alleviation
of the suffering of Lancashire through India's help I had made
a definite offer when I was in England in 1931. But my offer
proved to be of no avail. The offer was this: If there was a
free settlement between England and India, a favoured-nation
clause was quite possible, in so far as India might need any
foreign cloth in order to supplement her output of cloth, whe-
ther through the village spinning-wheel or through her mills.
I do not know how far such treatment is possible today for,
even during the short period that has elapsed since the meet-
ing of the Round Table Conference, India has become better
organized for the manufacture of all her clothing requirements,
in spite of the fact that she is importing fine-count calico both
from England and Japan. The chief point, however, is not how
Lancashire can send its calico to India, but how the whole of
England can benefit in every way by the benefit that India
must derive from attainment of complete freedom, political and
economic. The more I study the villages of India the more
intensely do I realize that India has no need to be a pauper
country if she can get the chance to grow without the fetters
that today prevent her natural growth.
Your last paragraph seems to imply that there is no longer
any repression in India. I can only tell you that repression is
there to be seen by anyone with the naked eye. I do not know
of any single repressive law that has been repealed. The Press
is effectively gagged, there is no such thing as freedom of move-
ment in Bengal as also in the Frontier Province.
If you hear
nothing of imprisonments and lathi charges it is because civil
disobedience is suspended and the Congress has resolved, in
furtherance of the spirit of non-violence, to submit to re-
pressive laws in so far as it is humanly possible to do so. On the
top of all this comes the Parliamentary Committee's proposals
for a new constitution. It is, as I read it, a barefaced denial
of freedom. I see in it no scope for expansion. I would any
day prefer the existing state to the crushing burden that threat-
ens to overwhelm India and tighten the British hold upon her.
My own power of endurance is being tested beyond my capa-
city. My way to the Frontier Province is blocked.
But, in spite of the blackness of the horizon, I have no sense
of despair in me. I believe in the existence of a beneficent
Power that overrides and upsets all human plans. It ever pro-
duces order out of chaos, and redresses wrongs in spite of the
tyranny of tyrants.
India must come to her own one day. But she will do so
chiefly if her own sons and daughters behave themselves and
prove worthy of her freedom. We must exert our utmost to prove
our worth, and you, friends of the Conciliation Group, will,
I know, do your level best according to your lights to help a
just solution.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
CARL HEATH, ESQ.
INDIAN CONCILIATION GROUP
FRIENDS HOUSE
EUSTON ROAD, LONDON, N. W. I
From a photostat: G.N. 1027
