351. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
CALCUTTA,
December 27, 1928
Being in the midst of all turmoil I have not much time to
send you a love letter much as I should like during this Christ-
mas week. Tucker has been constantly with me and was anxious
to join the morning prayer on Christmas day and give appro-
priate hymns, but could not as his friends failed him at the last
moment.
I am dictating this just for one thing, and that is Lalaji's
book. After very careful consideration I have come to the conclu-
sion that it is unnecessary just now to publish an abridgement
of Unhappy India. Lalaji's wish about the circulation of a thou-
sand copies in Britain should be respected, not by presenting
copies gratis to anybody except those who may want it but by keep-
ing a stock there for sale. The third edition printed here is a
well-got-up volume attractively bound. It may be sold even cheap.
But it is the Indian copy which should be circulated there.
I do not attach much importance to replies to Miss Mayo's
calumny, however able and true they may be, and certainly not
much importance will be given in the West to an Indian contribu-
tion. What must however be done is to present the West with a
very brief and attractive volume containing the life and selec-
tions from all Lalaji's writings. Such a volume will illustrate
the truth that the most forward nationalists of India have not
been haters of the West or of England or in any other way narrow
but that they have been internationalists under the guise of
nationalism. Such were Lalaji, Tilak, Das. I hardly need to men-
tion many others. It may serve the cause of humanity if the
truth can be brought out that the men who have been persecuted
and practically done to death by this wicked Government had
deserved a better fate.
I have perhaps not yet made absolutely clear what I want to
say. But I have no doubt you have understood it.
Ba, Mahadev, Subbiah, Pyarelal, Krishnadas, Chhaganlal,
Jamnadas, Keshu, Jamnalal and Rajagopalachari and several
others whom you know intimately are with me.
C. F. ANDREWS, ESQ.
112 GOVER STREET
LONDON W.C. 1
From a photostat: S.N. 15128
