142. LETTER TO JEHANGIR PATEL
SEVAGRAM,
August 8, 1946
BHAI JEHANGIRJI,
You could not catch hold of Munnalal but I had also
spoken to you about another man called Ramprasad. He is not
physically as sturdy as Munnalal, but is just as hard-working.
He is conversant with book-keeping. He has been trained under
Bapa whom he has served well. He is married and has a
child. If you decide to have him, he will for the time being
come alone. He certainly needs Rs. 150 but I think he
should be paid Rs. 200 if possible. There will be no question
of raising this amount. If he does not need the whole amount
he is honest enough to return the surplus. His child however is
delicate. He himself is of course delicate, and so is his wife.
Hence I suggest Rs. 200, so that in the event of a contingency
arising he should not be without resources. I want to see to it
that he is not obliged to economize on his food. I think your
association ought to provide him residential accommodation.
If he were to fend for himself and pay the current market rent
he would hardly be free to move around. And as your work
progresses he might have to run around a bit. Ramprasad's
knowledge of English is rudimentary. Of course he under-
stands it. He may also write it but will make mistakes.
Gujarati, however, he knows well. He understands Marathi. He
has an elementary knowledge of indigenous medicine. His wife
is a nice lady full of the spirit of service. And she has become
one with Ramprasad. In her own life she does not harbour any
prejudice. She is simple. I rarely have English-knowing women
around me. This one knows absolutely no English. She can
read and write Gujarati. Please let me have an early reply
to this if possible.
Remember that Ramanama is the unfailing remedy for
eradicating malaria. Having become a trustee of a nature-cure
institution you have got to appreciate this thing. And Rama-
nama is the same as Ahurmazda.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
