286. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 29, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
At last I have decided about Dr. Mehta's offer of a scholarship for
Manilal, of which I wrote to you, I think, some time ago. I told you,
then, that I asked Dr. Mehta to let me use this scholarship for any other
person belonging to Phoenix whom I chose. He accepted my proposal,
but when he made the offer, I know he made it simply because he felt
that he would like to undertake the education of at least one of my sons.
Today, however, he is almost as good a passive resister as you and I,
and he agrees with me entirely that he should defray the cost of educat-
ing some other Phoenixite.
I decided upon Chhaganlal, and I have already written to him by
the outgoing mail this week. I wrote to him last week a letter embodying
1, & 3 Villages in the former Baroda State, now in the Surat District of Gujarat.
The last name should be Ghalan.
4 & 5 These letters are not available.
my suggestions, but that letter was sent to Phoenix. I subsequently
learned that he was to have left for India on the 15th. By the time this
reaches you, he will probably, therefore, be with you. I will not go into
all the reasoning that has led me to the following conclusions. After
having remained with you there for some time, he should come to London,
say to reach here at the latest about the end of March. He should join
one of the Inns of Court. The question whether he should actually be
called to the Bar or not to be decided later (the odds are that, by that
time, we would not want him to be called to the Bar at all). Simultane-
ously with his legal studies, he should join an English class in one of the
institutions here. He should, before embarking, take a definite and for-
mal vow of poverty. He should also take the vow that he will not use
the learning acquired here as a means of livelihood, the latter being al-
ways found from Phoenix, and that he should dedicate his life to a reali-
zation of the Phoenix ideals. He should stay in some vegetarian family
(I am finding out information about all available vegetarian families in
and about London). He should live, if necessary, in a house in one of
the suburbs and there do his own cooking and everything. If he feels
confidence in himself at the end of the year, we should send one or more
from Phoenix at a time for training in London. These will be able to
live with him in the house, and he having formed a desirable circle of
friends and acquaintances, those who live with him will be able to get
all the advantages of English associations, without having to live in English
families, where the cost will be necessarily somewhat greater than if they
were living with Chhaganlal. At the same time, if it were considered
desirable, they could live in one of the families for just a short time.
Chhaganlal should, during his stay, seek contact with every Indian student,
in fact, force himself on their attention and, after insinuating himself in
their favour, should present both in his life and by conversations, the
Phoenix ideals to them. His being here would enable us to pass on, from
week to week, correct information as to the progress of the struggle, and
he would, in some very slight degree, fill in the gap that would be left
by Ritch's withdrawal. I see nobody here who is capable of replacing
Ritch, but there are some who, whilst they may do nothing without a
spur, would be glad enough to assist a man like Chhaganlal. If we are
not committed to Chhaganlal being called to the Bar, he need not even
stay in London for a full three years, he might—if the exigencies of
the situation require it—leave London temporarily.
There is no fixed scholarship to be taken from Dr. Mehta; he will
simply defray the whole of the expense of Chhaganlal's stay. Chhaganlal,
on his part, will naturally consider himself to be a trustee for the funds
he will receive, and will be living a life of almost perfect simplicity. The
cost therefore will be minimised.
I have placed all this before Chhaganlal. Please let him see this
letter also. If he agrees to all the suggestions I have made, it rests largely
with him and somewhat with you, whether he should come here in March
or earlier. It is much better that he remains with you for some time,
comes in touch with the people, knows them and studies the question a
little more fully. He must bring with him a fair stock of Gujarati
books, some Sanskrit books, a Urdu Primer and some English books,
which may not be obtainable here or which may cost a great deal.
He need not stint himself as to books, because the books will be of use
to the other students here. In the choice of books you should consult
Dr. Mehta also. I would like Chhaganlal to give Gujarati tuition to
Dr. Mehta's son, as also Hoosen and any other Gujaratis who may be
in London.
Of course, the above will have to be sanctioned by the people in
Phoenix.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5100
