141. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL
AGRA,
September 14, 1929
CHI. RANCHHODLAL,
The desire for more and more of everything is not confined
to the labourers but has spread in the whole society. The labou-
rers have only been infected by the example of those considered
affluent. The argument that labourers should be given higher
wages only if they reform their lives and use the increase in wages
for improving themselves is like the condition that we can get
swaraj only if we reform ourselves. The only relevant considera-
tion for deciding whether the labourers should get more is whe-
ther what they are getting at present is enough for their subsist-
ence. If it is not, they must get more. It is for their servants,
that is, the Majoor Mahajan, to see that the increased wages are
used well by the labourers. I may not have told you, but I am
trying to do something exactly like that. If the arbitrators re-
commend building of houses for labourers in lieu of cash increase
in wages, personally I would sign the award. I know that this
would lead to many complications. The house assigned to a
worker should in the end become his own property. But once
the mill-owners become servants of the workers, all complications
will automatically be resolved.
Now for an ideal mill:
It will take ages for our workers to be able to run an ideal
mill. Why do you think it a futile hope that an unselfish capi-
talist may set up an ideal mill? Cadbury has opened an ideal
factory.
Lever Brothers have built an ideal settlement for their
workers. Some such effort has also been definitely made by Narot-
tamdas at Sholapur. Tata certainly laid the foundation of such
a settlement at Jamshedpur. It is unfortunate that the person
who laid that foundation is no more.
Your own effort, even if it be on the very smallest scale is
in the same direction. If the mill-owners and the workers are
not to be permanent enemies of each other, ideal capitalists have
got to arise. I think it to be quite easily practicable. The be-
ginning may be gradual. We can discuss this further when we
meet.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32578/13
