229. LETTER TO SIR DINSHAW MANECKJEE PETIT
POST ANDHERI,
March 27, 1924
DEAR SIR DINSHAW,
Perhaps you have heard of the late Sorabji of Adajan. As
you know, he was in South Africa for a long time. He was one
of the satyagrahis who suffered the longest term of imprisonment.
After he qualified as a barrister, he went to South Africa to do
public work there. His expenses were paid by a friend. He has left
a widow and a daughter. Mr. Pallonjee is a near relative of the
Sorabjee family. The widow and her daughter are at present
living in Bombay for the sake of the daughter's education. The
mother has to pay a very high rent. She tells me you have some
decent houses for poor Parsees at a very cheap rent. I do not
know the terms under which these tenements are let. There was
very little left by Mr. Sorabjee. I think it was under Rs. 1,000.
This was all paid to the widow before I went to prison. If you
can, consistently with the terms under which the tenements refer-
red to are let to poor people, give a lease of one of them to
Mrs. Sorabji, you will confer a personal favour on me. The late
Sorabji was one of the dearest among my comrades. Among
my many Parsee friends he was one of the most selfless. Mr. Gokhale
himself was so much struck by the beauty of his character that
he implored him to become a member of his Society, and had he
lived and come back to India and had Mr. Gokhale also lived,
it is highly likely that he would have joined the Society. I relate
this not to influence your decision, because that would have to be
arrived at in terms of the conditions guiding the lease of these
tenements, but I mention the fact to show why I am interested
in everything connected with the deceased. And, could I have per-
suaded the widow to throw in her lot with me at Sabarmati, I
would not have troubled you; but I can well appreciate her desire
to give her daughter a training such as is given to the general body
of Parsee girls. For this I have no provision in the Ashram where
we only turn out spinners and weavers and endeavour to find the
inmates as good a surrounding as is humanly possible for the for-
mation of character. The literary training occupies but a subordi-
nate position.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
SIR DINSHAW MANECKJEE PETIT
From a photostat: S.N. 8598; also C.W. 5157
