337. LETTER TO THE PRESS
LONDON,
November 5, 1909
SIR,
The Transvaal British Indian deputation arrived in London on the
10th day of July last. The enclosed statement of the British Indian case
in that Colony was prepared immediately after the arrival in London of
that deputation, but it was not issued as delicate negotiations with a
view to arriving at a quiet settlement were in progress. We have now
learnt that these have proved abortive and that the position remains
unchanged. It has therefore become necessary for us to inform the public
as to how the matter stands and what the struggle of the British Indians
in the Transvaal means.
The ex-Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal during its administration
as a Crown Colony, writing in a magazine in South Africa in the month
of February last, thus correctly summed up the question:
The position of the Indian leaders is that they will tolerate no law which does
not put them on an equality with Europeans in regard to restriction on immigra-
tion. They are willing to see the number of Asiatics limited by administrative
action. . . They insist on equality in the terms of the law itself.
That is still the position.
Mr. Smuts, the present Colonial Secretary of the Transvaal, offers
to repeal the Registration Law around which the struggle has been
raging for the last three years, and to concede to a limited number of
British Indians, other than former residents of the Transvaal, certificates
of permanent residence. Were the objectaimed at by the British Indians the
admission into the Colony of a few more of their brethren, this concession
would be material, but the object they have had in view in agitating
1 Vide "Speech at Farewell Meeting", pp. 539-43.
2 Vide "Statement of Transvaal Indian Case", pp. 288-301.
for the repeal of the Law being to secure legal or theoretical equality in
respect of immigration, their purpose is by the proposed maintenance
of the legal disability not advanced a step. We are not aware whether
the above modification of the present law proposed by Mr. Smuts will
take place irrespective of the continuance of the passive resistance at
present being offered by the British Indians of the Transvaal, but we
are in a position to state that the proposed concession will not satisfy
passive resisters. The struggle of the Indian community of that Colony
was undertaken in order to obtain the removal of the stigma cast upon
the whole of India by this legislation, which imports a racial and colour
bar into the Immigration Laws of a British Colony for the first time in
the history of Colonial legislation. The principle so laid down, that
British Indians may not enter the Transvaal because they are British
Indians, is a radical departure from traditional policy, is un-British and
intolerable, and if that principle is accepted even tacitly by British Indians,
we consider that they will be untrue to themselves, to the land of their
birth, and to the Empire to which they belong. Nor is it the passive
resisters in the Transvaal who in a matter of this kind have alone to be
considered. The whole of India is now awakened to a sense of the insult
that the Transvaal legislation offers to her, and we feel that the people
here at the heart of the Empire cannot remain unmoved by this departure,
so unprecedented and so vital, from Imperial traditions. Mr. Smuts'
proposal brings out the issue in the clearest manner possible. If we were
fighting not for a principle but for loaves and fishes, he would be pre-
pared to throw them at us in the shape of residential permits for the
small number of cultured British Indians that may be required-for our
wants, but because we insist upon the removal of the implied racial taint
from the legislation of the Colony, he is not prepared to yield an inch.
He would give us the husk without the kernel. He declines to remove
the badge of inferiority, but is ready to change the present rough-looking
symbol for a nicely polished one. British Indians, however, decline to
be deluded. They may yield everything, occupy any position, but the
badge must be removed first. We, therefore, trust that the public will not
be misled by the specious concessions that are being offered into the
belief that British Indians, because they do not accept them, are unrea-
sonable in their demands, that they are uncompromising, and that, there-
fore, they do not deserve the sympathy and support of a common-sense
and practical public. In the final reply received by us from Lord Crewe
the following is the position that is taken up:
His Lordship explained to you that Mr. Smuts was unable to accept the
claim that Asiatics should be placed in a position of equality with Europeans
in respect of right of entry or otherwise.
Herein lies the crux. Legal equality in respect of the right of entry, even
though never a man does enter, is what British Indians have been fighting
for and, according to the reports we have received from the Transvaal,
is what some of them, at least, will die for. The only possible justifica-
tion for holding together the different communities of the Empire
under the same Sovereignty is the fact of elementary equality, and it
is because the Transvaal legislation cuts at the very root of this principle
that British Indians have offered a stubborn resistance.
It would be contrary to fact to argue that no relief can be had in
this matter because the Transvaal is a self-governing Colony, and because
now South Africa has got its Union. The difficulty of the situation is
due to a mistake committed at the centre of the Empire. The Imperial
Government are party to the crime against the Imperial Constitution.
They sanctioned when they need not have, and when it was their duty
not to have sanctioned, the legislation in question. They are now undou-
btedly most anxious to settle this troublesome matter. Lord Crewe has
endeavoured to bring about a satisfactory result, but he is too late. Mr.
Smuts, perhaps very properly, has reminded His Lordship of the fact
that the legislation in question had received Imperial sanction, and
that he should or could not now be called upon to retrace his steps,
because the British Indians in the Transvaal had undertaken to disregard
the legislation, and to suffer the penalties of such disregard. His posi-
tion as a politician and as an aspirant to high office in " a white South
Africa" is unquestionable, but neither the British public nor the Indian
public are interested in his position, nor are they party to this crime
of the Imperial Government.
We may add that, during the last four months, arrests and imprison-
ments have gone on unabated. The leaders of the community continue
to go to prison. The severity of the prison regulations is maintained.
The prison diet has been altered for the worse. Prominent medical men
of Johannesburg have certified that the present dietary scale for Indian
prisoners is deficient. The authorities, unlike their action during last
year, have ignored the religious scruples of Mahomedan prisoners, and
have refused to give facilities for observing the sacred annual fast which
millions of Mahomedans scrupulously undergo from year to year. Sixty
passive resisters recently came out of the Pretoria Gaol emaciated and
weak. Their message to us is that, starved as they were, they are ready
to be re-arrested as soon as the Government wish to lay their hands on
them. The Acting Chairman of the British Indian Association has only
just been arrested and sentenced to be imprisoned for three months with
hard labour. This is his third term. He is a Mahomedan. A brave Par see,
a well-educated man, was deported to Natal. He re-entered, and is now
undergoing six months' imprisonment with hard labour. He is in gaol
for the fifth time. A young Indian, an ex-Volunteer sergeant, has also
gone to gaol for the third time on the same terms as the Par see. Wives
of imprisoned British Indians and their children either take up baskets
of fruit, hawk about and earn their living in order to support them-
selves, or are being supported from contributions. Mr. Smuts, when he
re-embarked for South Africa, said that he had arrived at an understand-
ing with Lord Crewe that would satisfy the large body of British Indians
who were heartily sick of the agitation. His prophecy has been totally
disproved by what has happened since.
We remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
HAJEE HABIB
[ENCLOSURE]
SUMMARY OF STATEMENT
The British Indians in the Transvaal have been suffering for the
past two years and six months untold suffering in order to secure:
Repeal of a Transvaal law called the Asiatic Registration Act
(2 of 1907) which its authors claim to be a measure merely for
effecting the identification of the British Indians entitled to remain
in the Colony, but which is regarded by the British Indians themselves
as most objectionable, because, in reality-
(1) The Act wounds their religious susceptibilities and
degrades them in many ways; and
(2) Read together with another law of a later date (called
the Immigration Act), it constitutes an impassable barrier to
the immigration of Indians, however highly cultured, on the
score of their race and colour.
The desired relief can easily be granted by repealing the Registra-
tion Act and slightly amending the Immigration Act, without in any way
endangering the colonial policy of preventing an influx of British Indians.
The practical effect of such repeal and amendment would be the removal
of the racial insult, and would at the most involve the entry of the few
Indian new-corners necessary for the spiritual and intellectual needs
of the resident community.
The Indians at present actually residing in the Transvaal number
about 5,000.
The population of Indians domiciled in the Transvaal is about 13,000.
The difference means that nearly 8,000 Indians have been driven
away, for the time being, from the Transvaal, being too weak to undergo
the physical suffering of gaol life.
Over 2,500 British Indians have passed through the Transvaal
gaols, all but 150 having been imprisoned with hard labour. Sentences
have ranged from four days' to six months' hard labour. Hundreds of
British Indians have been ruined in the struggle. Several families have
been supported from public subscriptions, the wage-earners being in the
Transvaal gaols. Indians both young and old have suffered and are
still suffering imprisonment. Many leaders are at present in the gaols,
including the Mahomedan Chairman of the British Indian Association
and a Parsee gentleman who is renowned for his philanthropy through-
out South Africa. Fathers and sons have been in gaol at the same time.
About sixty Indians have been deported to India, where they were
landed penniless and friendless.
A band of noble Europeans in the Transvaal, headed by Mr. Wm.
Hosken, M. L. A. of the Transvaal, have formed themselves into a commit-
tee for securing justice.
Hindoos and Mahomedans, Parsees and Sikhs are fighting shoulder
to shoulder. The struggle to-day is being continued to maintain the
honour of the three hundred millions of their fellow-countrymen, and is
absolutely selfless. The sufferers have no personal interest to serve.
The Indians contend that General Smuts, the Colonial Secretary
of the Transvaal, is under promise to repeal the Asiatic Registration
Act of 1907. If that Act had been repealed, the question of educated
Indians would have been automatically adjusted, because, without it,
the Immigration Law above referred to would not have prevented the
entry of highly educated Indians. General Smuts contends that, whilst
he discussed the question of repeal of the Act with Mr. Gandhi, he does
not remember having made a definite promise. Mr. Gandhi has made
an affidavit swearing that such a promise was made and has produced
documentary evidence in support of his contention. General Smuts holds
that the Indian demands are in effect satisfied in that he wishes to treat
the Registration Act as a dead letter and is prepared to admit educated
Indians on sufferance and on temporary permits, which may be exten-
ded from time to time. Indians hold that they are under a solemn obliga-
tion to secure repeal of the Act above-mentioned, and that, if it is a dead
letter, it can be of no use to the Government. They further contend
that the admission of educated Indians on sufferance is useless because
the struggle is not so much to secure the admission of a few individuals
as to conserve national honour. It is the unnecessary legal racial disability
which makes the situation so degrading, and affords an abiding source of irritation
to the whole Indian nation. This legislation is the first of its kind in the
history of the Colonies. No other self-governing Colony possesses legis-
lation containing the racial taint, described by Lord Morley as the
"bar sinister".
British Indians do not desire an indiscriminate influx of their country-
men into the Transvaal. They submit that, by a judicious administra-
tion of the Immigration Act, all but a few — say six highly educated
Indians per year — may be prevented from entering the Colony. The
Cape, Australia and other Colonies have solved the question of Asiatic
immigration without resort to racial legislation.
From a photostat of the printed copy: S. N. 5180
