171. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
April 17, 1914
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
How curious! No matter how intimate I may be with Gokhale or
Andrews or anyone else, you will always be you and you alone to
me. I have told you you will have to desert me and not I you. So
that I should like you finally to dismiss that fear from your mind. If
I am called upon to enter Gokhale's mansion or Andrews' without you,
I will refuse to enter. Only my own movements may become too hot
for you and you always wishing to go the whole length with me may
not be able [to] and may fall back. Our joint life does not demand
coincidence though that is what you are bringing about. If I can lie
on a stone bed and you cannot, you should certainly have a mattress
underneath. And though you may lift a ten-stone weight, I shall certainly
not attempt to do any such thing myself and still not feel ashamed
to be your companion. I shall put up with you and love you just the
same notwithstanding what you may call your limitations, even as you
have to do likewise to me. We can therefore but go forward - as
far forward as our legs will carry us and no farther - and still be
together, one soul and two bodies. Please therefore be at ease so
far as my side is concerned. Take care of your own and everything
else will follow.
I have not received the letters you say you are enclosing.
Death for Mrs. Mayo can only be welcomed by her friend. She
will go to a higher state and we must not form attachments for the
sake of the bodies of people. Through the body we learn to know them
but we do not need their bodies to continue to love them.
I shall have the inscription copied as you suggest.
I suppose I need not repeat here the information about the changes
here that I have given to Manilal.
Mrs. Gandhi is decidedly better. It remains to be seen whether
the change continues.
Some members of the Theosophical Convention visited Phoenix on
Tuesday. They were 9 in all. Miss Pillenbury was one of them. I have
asked her to describe to you the visit. They dined here. It was the
simplest style, no strange food was given them. Indian marrow,
1 Mrs. Mayo died in the second week of May 1914; vide Vol. XII, pp.
415-.
183
rice and potatoes and rice pudding cereal, coffee and fresh lemon drink.
Old Nelson was one of the party. They seemed to be pleased. I had
sent the message that those who cared could come and visit the
Settlement.
With love,
[PS.]
Gokhale has cabled inquiring whether I would visit him in London
before going to India. I have answered I might if absolutely necessary,
Mrs. Gandhi's health permitting. We shall see.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
