211. LETTER TO J. A. NESER
[JOHANNESBURG,]
September 28, 1907
J. A. NESER, ESQ., M.L.A.
P. O. Box 22
KLERKSDORP
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 27th instant, and to tender to you the thanks of my Association for
your very courteous, frank and full letter. The greatest stumbling-
block in the way of a proper solution of the Indian question has been,
undoubtedly, a great deal of apathy on the part of public men and
consequent want of knowledge about the question.
I am deeply thankful for the sympathy you express for my
countrymen who have vested interests in this Colony, and it is because
the fight is entirely for the protection of such interests that I see in
your attitude a common meeting-ground.
1 (1874-1908), who, in December 1907, founded the Nationalist Party in Egypt
Not only does my Association sympathise with the objection to
wholesale immigration from India, but it has recognised its validity, in
view of the very general prejudice against such immigration, and has
always offered to co-operate with the Government in attaining the
object.
The ground is now clear for an examination of the Asiatic Act
on its merits. I venture to draw your attention to the fact that, when,
in the September of 1906, objections against the draft Ordinance,
as the Act then was, were framed, finger-prints were not even so
much as mentioned, although it was understood that the Govern-
ment intended to insist on finger-prints. The attitude of my Associa-
tion would not, therefore, have been in any way altered, had signatures
been substituted for finger-prints. It is the sting of compulsion run-
ning throughout the Act that offends and bears so heavily on the com-
munity. The finger-prints do not offend any religious susceptibility,
but the exception made in the Act in favour of Turkish Christians and
Turkish Jews does most emphatically wound religious feelings.
The Act bristles with severe penalties for breaches of the varied
requirements thereof, but it is not the fact of the penalty or the severity
of it that is resented, but the underlying assumption that Indians,
as a class, are capable of impersonation, fraudulent transfers of per-
mits, and fraudulently bringing unauthorised immigrants into the
country that is most strongly and, I think, rightly objected to. When-
ever in a country exceptional penalties are provided for a particular
offence, the general existence of such an offence in that country is, as
you are aware, presumed. Knowing well that British Indians, as a
class, have not been guilty of the practices above described, they man-
fully struggle to avoid the presumption which the Act has made
tacitly and which the framers of the Law publicly declare as their
conviction. It should, moreover, be borne in mind that this Law is a
class measure of an obnoxious type, and is calculated to degrade
British Indians in the estimation of Malays, with whom many of
them are nearly related, Cape Coloured men, with whom they come
in close contact, and the Kaffir races, who are largely employed by
them as their servants. While all these three are, in common with the
other inhabitants of the Colony, exempt from any such restrictions
on their personal liberty, Asiatics have been especially singled out.
The obvious answer to the last objection is, naturally, that it is
the competition of the Asiatics that is feared and not that of the
Coloured races, and it is because my Association recognises this that
voluntary identification or registration has been suggested in place of
the compulsory measure. Such voluntary registration will not insult
Indians by separating them from the rest of the community, will
satisfy the European objection wholly, and will protect vested rights.
You seem to think that voluntary registration will leave untouched
dishonest Indians, whose existence I do not deny, but that is, I beg to
state, a mistake. Under the voluntary offer, it has been submitted to
the Government that by a short Bill, passed by consent, the Act can
be made applicable to those who do not comply with the offer. Indeed,
at a stated period, all Indians or Asiatics may be examined simul-
taneously, and those who are found to be without the new identifica-
tion certificates may be bundled out of the Colony under the Peace
Preservation Ordinance or under a General Immigration Law that
may be passed, in the place of the Peace Preservation Ordinance.
I will not trespass further upon your time, but will conclude by
saying that, while my countrymen have honestly endeavoured to
examine and meet reasonable objections raised by Europeans, the
latter have, as a body, entirely failed to reciprocate, but have simply
persevered in their policy of prejudiced opposition without caring to
examine the Indian position. As you have been, in your professional
capacity, very largely connected with British Indians, I may not be
wrong in asking you to step into our shoes and look at the whole
position from our standpoint, and see whether a reasonable compro-
mise is not possible by the exercise of a little patience and some co-
operation.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 5-10-1907
