152. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[November 29, 1928]
BHAISHRI CHHAGANLAL,
I have finished the letter to be read in the presence of every-
one. Since you have succeeded in obtaining cow's ghee, I now wish
to take no hasty step.
On a day such as Lalaji Memorial Day, may we not reckon
the wages for all forms of labour at the same rate? It would be
better to apply this rule to items where it can be easily applied.
For that purpose, a register such as I have suggested should be
maintained. That is, the wage per hour should be fixed at one or
three-quarters of an anna, and the register should show the quantum
of work per hour for each kind of labour. For instance, for spin-
ning 300 yards per hour, or any other figure that you may fix, and
similarly for grinding grain, weaving, digging, cleaning gram,
cleaning land, weaving pati', carpentry, etc., calculation would
become easy if we had such a table. Everyone maintains a diary,
so that we can count up the value of everyone's work for our in-
formation. My point is that, if we accept the principle I have
suggested, we can thus scientifically examine its working.
I have been thinking about Krishnamaiyadevi. You will have
to play a prominent part in this matter. You should speak to her
if she shirks work or does anything improper.
It is necessary that you should write to me about what you
hear concerning Shardabehn. Sometimes the stories we hear are
false. What is the nature of Gangabehn's discontent?
I like the idea that one day in the week everyone should work
for a fixed number of hours. There should be no dirt anywhere in
the [Udyoga] Mandir.
I shall have a talk with Mirabehn. The issues of "Mandir
Samachar" for both the weeks have been got up so badly that it
is impossible to read them.
I see no harm in drawing Shamalbhai's expenses either from
the Mandir or from the Vidyapith. Kaka may do what will give
him better peace of mind. I believe Kaka cannot join in the ex-
periment of living within Rs. 12 [a month]. For one thing, he is
not an expert in experimenting with his body so that he can
take any kind of liberty with it.
There is no letter from Bal. I was taken aback to learn what
he had demanded. I was ready to be told that he had asked for
something more than Rs. 12, but not as much as Rs. 20. You
need not hurt him. I shall thrash out the point with him.
I understand what kind of an agreement we should have
with the Spinners' Association. I shall now write to Shankerlal.
You need not worry on this account. You are also doing right in
collecting opinions. Think about all aspects objectively.
Cultivate such health that you should never catch cold or any
such infection.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro - 7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 14-.
1 Bed-tape
