362. LETTER TO N.
April 6, 1933
MY DEAR N.,
I have your letters of 31st March and 2nd April together.
You were quite right in accepting Sreenivas Rao's gifts and
asking him to send you whole wheatmeal and dried fruit. It is
a great handicap that you can get no fresh leafy vegetables. But
you know that leafy vegetables are grown in no time. I had an
English friend living with me in South Africa who grew sufficient
cresses in a fortnight's time. You should get some seeds, have
just a little plot of land, fence it in, dig it well superficially and
beat up the earth well. You can use the manure that the ani-
mals around you may give, and sow lettuce seeds, tomatoes and
any of the leaves that grow easily there. You should make some
explorations also in and about Chitaldrug. I cannot imagine all
that place being without leafy vegetables known as bhaji.
I
would ask you not to abstain from milk and butter at least just
now. You may take only a little quantity if you like, but I am
afraid that you will become weak in due course if you do not
take these two things, for you are not having enough fresh fruit
nor wheatmeal.
You need not write anything to Durgadas about your state-
ment, but write it out yourself from memory and let me have it.
I understand what you say about pulses for S. As he is very
active according to the description you gave me here, perhaps
there is no harm if he is given a moderate quantity.
I shall send you the book on village sanitation. I am
writing to the Ashram, but let me give you the substance of
Poore's method. The theory is that 18 inches of the surface of
earth is all filled with germs which do the work of scavenging
for all the creatures that reside on it. These germs can work on
all the filth that the creatures deposit on the surface of the earth
from day to day. Poore having known this and having under-
stood the most economical use that the Chinese make of human
excreta developed his method and said that all the excreta, both
liquid and solid, should be buried not more than 12 or at the
outside 18 inches below the surface of the earth. He therefore
does not suggest movable latrines nor the ordinary deep-pit latri-
nes. He suggests receiving the excreta in buckets, each person
covering the excreta with earth, which is ready in the closet, so
that the closet remains clean and sweet-smelling all the time. Th-
ese buckets are emptied in the squares, dug up and kept ready, not
many yards away from the latrine itself, and then the earth, which
is heaped up on the edge of the square, is taken up and the ex-
creta covered with it. No more excreta should be heaped upon
the deposit just made. Ample earth is thrown on each deposit
so that dogs and other animals may not dig out the thing. In-
side of a fortnight all that excreta is worked upon by the germs and
turned into fine manure and the ground is ready for cultivation.
We have followed this plan most successfully at the Ashram
for 17 years, that is, since its inception. The whole of the per-
formance takes no time and there is no smell emitted out of
these squares.
I hope you will have no difficulty in following what I have
said. This is the cheapest method of dealing with human and
other excreta. All the kitchen refuse is also dealt with in the
same manner, only this cannot be mixed up with the excreta,
because the work of the germs done upon vegetable rubbish is
different from the work done upon the excreta. But the process
is the same in all other respects. We have found in the Ashram,
by observation, that wherever we have made use of this excellent
manure, our crops have been much richer in quantity and quality.
If you have any difficulty in following this, please ask.
Of course you are quite right in asking the Municipality to
give you all the assistance you need. If they give it, well and
good; if they do not, you won't worry or fidget. For the time
being, you have your work cut out for you amongst the Hari-
jans, and what is more, in mending yourself.
Now about the dress. You need three articles only-a loose
vest somewhat after men's shirt with short sleeves reaching up to
the elbow only, skirt reaching 2 or 3 inches above the ankles,
and a kuchh like mine but not so long and smaller in size. If
you want to go to the trouble of sewing, you can have something
after the style of men's shorts. This makes the simplest dress.
The bawis, that is, the female mendicants, wear something like
this. Your saris can be turned into vests or shirts. The skirts
you have should serve the purpose, and very probably you have
something answering knickers or shorts.
Yours sincerely,
[PS.]
As to your addressing me Bapu, you are wrong. You will
address me as such when you have confidence in yourself that
you will inspire me with trust in you and will never deceive me.
I am trying to trust you by signing myself Bapu.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20849-a
