178. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised by me
SEGAON,
July 15, 1936
DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
(1) I hope you got my wire about The Times of India
letter. I procured it yesterday and read it through. Nobody
has ever written to me about the subject-matter. My reading
of the letter confirms my view that you should take legal notice
of the libel.
(2) If you will not misunderstand me, I would like you
to keep me free of the Civil Liberties Union. I do not like
for the time being to join any political institution. And there
is no meaning in a confirmed civil resister joining it. Apart
however from my joining or not joining the Union, maturer
consideration confirms me in my opinion that it would be a
mistake to appoint Sarojini Naidu or for that matter any
civil resister as President. I am still of opinion that the Presi-
dent should be a well-known constitutional lawyer. If that does
not commend itself to you then, you should have an author of
note who is not a law-breaker. I would also ask you to restrict
the number of members. You need quality, not quantity.
(3) Your letter is touching. You feel to be the most in-
jured party. The fact is that your colleagues have lacked your
courage and frankness. The result has been disastrous. I have
always pleaded with them to speak out to you freely and fear-
lessly. But having lacked the courage, whenever they have
spoken they have done it clumsily and you have felt irritated.
I tell you they have dreaded you, because of your irritabi-
lity and impatience of them. They have chafed under your
rebukes and magisterial manner and above all your arrogation
of what has appeared to them your infallibility and
superior
knowledge. They feel that you have treated them with scant
courtesy and never defended them from socialists' ridicule and
even misrepresentation.
You complain of their having called your activities harm-
ful. That was not to say that you were harmful. Their letter
was no occasion for recounting your virtues or your services.
They were fully conscious of your dynamism and your hold over
the masses and the youth of the country. They know that
you cannot be dispensed with. And so they wanted to give
way.
I look upon the whole affair as a tragi-comedy. I would
therefore like you to look at the whole thing in a lighter vein.
I do not mind your taking the A. I. C. C. into your confidence.
But I do want you not to impose on it the unbearable task of
adjusting your family quarrels or choosing between them and
you. Whatever you do you must face them with accomplished
things.
Why do you resent their majority being reflected in all
subcommittees, etc.? Is it not the most natural thing? You
are in office by their unanimous choice but you are not in
power yet. To put you in office was an attempt to find you
in power, quicker than you would otherwise have been. Any-
way that was at the back of my mind when I suggested your
name for the crown of thorns. Keep it on though the head be
bruised. Resume your humour at the committee meetings.
That is your most usual role, not that of a care-worn irritable
man ready to burst on the slightest occasion.
How I wish you could telegraph to me that on finishing
my letter you felt as merry as you were on that New Year's
Day in Lahore when you were reported to have danced round
the tricolour flag.
You must give your throat a chance.
I am revising my statement. I have decided not to pub-
lish it till you have seen it.
I have decided that nobody should see our correspondence,
besides Mahadev.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
63-10
