411. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 20/21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your heavy mail. There was a bitter letter from
Champa. I immediately wrote a postcard in reply, which you
should get on Sunday or Monday. Now that Narmada has been
saved, we owe an especial duty to her. I think her education has
been poor. Her handwriting is extremely careless. If she has the
good fortune now to observe brahmacharya for the rest of her life, I
think she will have to know things. See, therefore, if you can give
her more help (by way of time) and educate her. If she does not
work with sincere enthusiasm to make good use of the time which
you give to her, you may stop the help. About Liladhar, what you
have done seems all right. If you can, try and make Jaisukhlal's
daughters forget Amreli. What is the name of Indu's maternal
uncle? What is his occupation in Palitana? Kusum cannot take
up nursing as long as she is not completely free from the danger of
tuberculosis. It would be very bad if she joins and returns in a
month or so. She ought to realize that nursing is a very strenuous
work. A sincere nurse has to be on her feet the whole day. She
can hardly find time even for a hurried meal.
Ratubhai's condition is pitiable. Why does he let his children
remain in college when he is in debt? I can easily see that he
will not be able to go to Rangoon. Will not any of his children be
ready to come and stay in the Ashram? A boy who is truthful, in-
dustrious and healthy can rise as high as he wishes in the Ashram.
Maybe he will not get there the education which he gets in a
college. But, after all what is the value of that education?
You are doing a very good thing in keeping Ratilal from
going. I had fine letters from Chhaganlal, so that I am now rela-
tively free from worry from that source. I got letters from Nana-
lal and Manilal, too. Manjula has been writing regularly. She is
rising higher in my esteem every day.
I have been having novel experiences in regard to my food.
Eating bananas did not cure my constipation completely as long
as I was drinking milk. I, therefore, stopped milk and ate bana-
nas only for some days. For the evening meal I had bread and
vegetable. This relieved the constipation to some degree. But,
396
being eager to eat the same food as 'C' class prisoners do, and
remembering that in 1930 I had tried rotlas of bajri and that
had cured my constipation, for the last three days I have been
eating in the evening one rotlo with vegetable. That has cured the
constipation completely. But on the last occasion the continued
consumption of bajri had resulted in more than the disappearance
of constipation, and so I had to give it up. It is possible that the
same thing may happen this time. I have not decided to exclude
milk completely for the present.
I, therefore, intend to take
it with bajri as soon as I am free from the fear of constipation. I
have given all these details so that, if anybody there wishes to
make the same experiment for constipation, he may do so. But the
essential condition for the success of this experiment is that there
should be no oil or ghee in the vegetable, nor should any ghee or
milk be taken with the bajri cake. In 1930, when my constipation
was cured, I ate only bajri and vegetables. I did not eat fruit, nor
almonds. I had added the latter after the constipation was relieved.
But I did consume sour lemons. The vegetables should include
some greens.
If the doctor advises, Parasram should be got operated upon.
You are doing right in permitting Premabehn to go out fre-
quently. She will take time to become steady. I do write to her
letters to calm her.
I also can understand about the wire from Darjeeling. You
have done quite right in taking no action on it. You should give
a few details of the wire to Mahavir and ask him what the pur-
pose behind sending that wire was. You should also write to Agam-
giri and ask him the same question.
If anybody asks for permission to publish a German trans-
lation of Vratavichar1, you may tell him that we claim copyright
for none of our publications and that, therefore, he can translate
it, but also tell him that it is essential for such a book that a
translator should not depart from the original in any point.
When you say that Shankarbhai's arm will require treatment
for a long time, I hope you don't mean that some defect is likely
to remain. Or, is some other complication feared? Is the arm
being examined by anybody from time to time?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8246. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
