281. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 22, 1930
CHI. KISHORELAL,
All the three types of people mentioned by you can Join
this struggle. But discussing these distinctions in Navajivan at
present is likely to confuse people's minds. I think everyone has
understood the broad meaning of the Working Committee's
resolution. Almost all men and women here have sent in their
names. All of them cannot understand the distinctions suggested
by you. But I think they all have faith in non-violence and
understand that no Englishman should be harmed or permitted
to be harmed in any way. They believe in non-violence not as
an expedient but as a creed. Who can say how far their ahimsa
will endure when the testing time comes? What can we say
even about you and me? Peter who was as hard as stone turned
out to be soft as wax at the moment of crisis. And those two
women who were only guided by their faith remained as firm
as rock. If you have any questions pertaining to the articles I
am writing these days, do place them before me. Read the rules
about satyagraha carefully and let me know if you notice any
omission in them.
And now for the monthly periods. A couple of women who
had not during their periods joined others for meals for fear of
criticism followed Mirabehn's example and joined. That gave
rise to some discussion. The matter had been settled earlier. It
had been agreed that any woman who, like Mirabehn, wished
to join others for meals during her periods could do so. She
must observe three rules : she should not enter the kitchen for
the four days of menses; even from outside the kitchen she
should not look at the food being cooked or at the water used
for cooking; she should not touch the cooked food. This decision
was arrived at after correspondence with Nathji through
Panditji. But a couple of women were in panic after a woman
in menses had joined at the meals. Therefore, benefiting from
Nathji's presence the conditions necessary for preserving the
sacredness of mantras have been ascertained and clarified. We
167
have among the inmates some persons who practise mantras and
such persons also constantly visit the Ashram. I believe that it
is the duty of the Ashram for the sake of such persons to
observe as fully as possible the conditions for preserving the
sacredness of the mantras. If I can understand the purpose of
the conditions better, I shall help in their still stricter observance.
I had asked Ramniklal to get one or two points clarified by
Nathji. But he does not seem to have been able to do so. Is
milk polluted by the look or touch of a woman in menses?
From the papers I have with me it seems that it is polluted by
touch. In Nath's opinion, even if a person practising mantras
does not know that a particular sample of milk has been touched
by a woman in menses, the fact of the touch itself has the
power of nullifying the effect of the mantra, to some extent at
least. This means that a person practising mantras should practi-
cally live without milk, because whether in the Ashram or
outside, particularly outside, women in menses do happen to look
at milk. We can think of hundreds of ways of milk being
polluted by look. Hence the question of milk needs to be care-
fully considered. I understand that uncooked grain is not
polluted either by touch or look. Is it not the same with regard
to ghee and oil? At what stage can look or touch affect water?
For I understand that the water meant for cooking is affected
both by look and touch. Nath says from experience that cooked
food is affected both by the look and the touch of the woman in
menses. But he is not able to explain the reason. Have you
thought about the reason? If you have, send me your opinion
on it and also on the other questions above after discussing
them with Nathji or independently if you can.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy:
Sabarmati Sangrahalaya
