64. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
YERAVDA MANDIR,
July 23, 1930
DEAR MOTILALJI,
My position is essentially awkward. Being temperamentally
so built, I cannot give a decisive opinion on matters happening
outside the prison walls. What I have therefore given to our friends
is the roughest draft of what is likely to satisfy me personally. You
may not know that I was disinclined to give anything to Slocombe
and wanted him to discuss things with you. But I could not resist
his appeal and let him publish the interview before seeing you.
At the same time I do not want to stand in the way of an
honourable settlement, if the time for it is ripe. I have grave
doubts about it. But after all, Jawaharlal's must be the final voice.
You and I can only give our advice to him. What I have said in
my memorandum given to Sir Tej Bahadur and Mr. Jayakar is the
utmost limit to which I can go. But Jawahar and, for that matter,
also you may consider my position to be inconsistent with the in-
trinsic Congress policy or the present temper of the people. I should
have no hesitation in supporting any stronger position up to the
letter of the Lahore resolution. You need therefore attach no weight
to my memorandum unless it finds an echo in the hearts of you
both.
I know that neither you nor Jawahar were enamoured of the
eleven points brought out in my first letter to the Viceroy. I do
not know whether you still have the same opinion. My own
mind is quite clear about them. They are to me the substance of
independence. I should have nothing to do with anything that
would not give the nation the power to give immediate effect
to them. In restricting myself to the three only in the memoran-
dum, I have not waived the other eight. But the three are now
brought out to deal with civil disobedience. I would be no party
to any truce which would undo the position at which we have
arrived today.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: P. N. Sapru; also S.N. 19976
