16. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
December 20, 1934
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have your doleful letter. The situation does not disturb
us here as much as it disturbs you. The thing is you do not
know Sir Samuel Hoare. The Indian Government has always
been a one-man rule. Sir Samuel Hoare's philosophy demands
that Indian wishes should not be consulted, much less respected,
except when they reflect those of his advisers. The latter have
made up their minds that the White Paper1, now the J. P. C. Re-
port, is the last word. The Congress has decided that nothing is
acceptable unless its wishes are taken into account. The Congress
also recognizes that Sir Samuel holds the power and that the
Congress must not use the little power that it has got. There-
fore you friends on your side should, if you can, resolutely say
that the existing state should remain till time has arrived for a
change by consent of the 'governed'. Not that even your effort
will succeed. But you will at least have the satisfaction of know-
ing that you had done the right thing. If, on the other hand,
the friends over there think that they cannot conscientiously take
up that attitude and that they must accept the Report if it can-
not be changed, you must prosecute that plan. If I were they,
I should sit silent, since I could not represent the Indian view.
The friends at least may be no party directly or indirectly to
'imposing' by force a constitution on India, which would be the
case if the constitution is passed.
Read Chintamani's warning
enclosed. Not that it means much. The Home Member was
quite clear on the point. But his being clear was a cruel reminder
of India's present helplessness.
My case is pending. There also the story is the same. They
have made up their minds. But I may not anticipate. C. F.
Andrews is in Calcutta. He is fighting like a Trojan against the
heaviest odds and he will presently give you all the latest news.
Meanwhile you and other friends should rest assured that I shall
take no hasty step. Ample warning will be given of my inten-
tions. But what are my intentions worth! Man proposes, God
disposes. Let His will be done, not mine, nor yours.
I have no time to tell you the story about the paper or the
ink or the pen in which and with which this is written.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1483
