510. LETTER TO DR. HIRALAL SHARMA
April 19, 1933
DEAR DR. SHARMA,
I like your letter very much. It does you great credit. You
have pictured to me the ideal physician. Yes, by all means
wash Amtussalaam's clothes, if necessary. Though in the Ashram,
she is solely under your care. Do please insist on her taking proper
rest and the prescribed diet.
I would like you critically to examine everything in the
Ashram and give me your impressions. Study the health of every
inmate who will let you examine him or her. Of course you will
frankly tell me of cases that may be beyond your skill. I would
like you to examine Kusumbehn. She is today under Dr. Tal-
walkar's treatment. But I would like you to tell [me] what you
would have her to do, if she puts herself under you. Then there
is Jamnabehn. She is a chronic asthmatic. She can be treat-
ed by you now if she will put herself under your care. Then there
is Ramabehn. She has an enlarged shoulder-bone. I do not yet
visualize her trouble. Possibly her case is beyond your province.
If it is not, please tell me what you would have her do. Lastly,
there is Anandi who has just had an operation for appendicitis.
She is having my treatment only, as the others do more or less.
These are the special cases I would like you to see as soon as you
can and tell me all about them. There are others, too, who
require attention.
Now about yourself. While I would like you to throw
yourself into the Ashram routine, you must not go beyond your
strength and [you] will take everything easy. Have your special
needs supplied. I would feel deeply hurt if, for want of care, your
own health was endangered. You will make me feel at ease, if
you will treat the Ashram as your home and express your needs.
I would like you to accompany Bhagwanji once and see Hari-
Jan quarters and examine the ailing ones there and their sanita-
tion.
I wish your children had both accompanied you. But that
now later, if all goes well.
Yours,
BAPU
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, pp. 30-
