282. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
April 7, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have received the parcel through Mr. Bean. I wish you would
make use of Hemchand and instruct him to write to me on official matters.
It is very necessary that I should be kept informed. I am quite aware
of the pressure under which you are labouring, but it is for you to relieve
the pressure by taking advantage of the help that may be at your dis-
posal. Surely you can even ask Gokuldas to drop me a line. All the
matter I send ought to be acknowledged, so that in the event of mis-
carriage I may send more if in time. I am most anxious to learn your
views about Mrs. MacDonald. They can be expressed also through
Hemchand or Gokuldas or Anandlal. There are so many details to be
attended to by me which I cannot without information from you. Motilal
writes to me saying that there is a new arrival from Bombay. His name
is Dhoribhai. He says he knows the press work well. He offers his ser-
vices at £4 per month and free lodgings. It is worth while knowing
him, if you think that there is pressure. Whatever happens, three things
are absolutely necessary:
(1) Books must be kept up to date;
(2) The paper must not be starved;
(3) You should not be over-worked.
Neglect any of these things and there will be a catastrophe. One
result of your trying to do too much is disregard of official correspon-
dence. For instance, you should have quoted the rates immediately. I
would therefore like you to consider this carefully and put the matter
right. It is for this reason that I have suggested Mrs. MacDonald. She
is a most excellent worker, methodical and in industry quite a match for
you or Mr. West, and I have no doubt that she will be able to keep
the books. I shall probably be there next week. I want to take my ticket
before the Easter holidays are over, but I am anxious to decide about
Mrs. MacDonald before I go there, so that, if necessary, I can bring her
with me. I am sending some Gujarati matter today and I hope it will
be received by you on Monday. If both you and Mr. West and others
can come to some decision, I should appreciate a telegram from you in
this matter. You should consult Anandlal, Maganlal and Sam. If you
get the Weekly Star or the Weekly Leader or the Weekly Rand Dairy Mail
in exchange, please pass [it] on to Mr. Isaac.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
TO
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
c/o Indian Opinion
PHOENIX
From a photostat of the original: S.N. 4347
