336. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
[October 1938]
CHI. LILA,
I hope you are bringing credit to me and yourself there.
Give no thought to my experiment. I have started the experi-
ment to be able to render greater service to womankind. That
includes you. In a note written in jest and a little anger, I
called you 'Lila'. You liked it. Your father used to call you
'Lili', and so you demanded that I should also call you 'Lili'.
For, you had started showing me the same affection as you did
for your father. That alone would make your love for me great-
er than that for your father. If you cannot understand this,
ask Mahadev. Replying to one of his letters, I had told him
that I would call you 'Lili' when I had qualified myself to do
that. This experiment is also to gain that eligibility because
you are also a woman. While being there, think that you are
with me not because you have gone there to do your work, but
because I have sent you there to do my work. And my work means
that you should relieve Mahadev's burden as much as possible.
Hence, do not waste Mahadev's time talking about your happiness
or unhappiness. Your duty is to go on doing unquestioningly
whatever work Mahadev or Durga may entrust to you or what you
can carry out yourself. And you will do your work silently because
I cannot give you here what you would be able to learn there.
It is true that you cannot gain there what you can gain here.
But since I have sent you there to do my work, you will easily
get the benefit of having stayed with me.
Eat well and build up your body. If you do that you can
occasionally come here for a brief visit. But do not keep
waiting for opportunities to come here. Devote yourself to put-
ting things in perfect order there. You have got to give time
to Bablo. Do write to me whenever you wish. And whenever
you write, try to make your handwriting beautiful. Do not write
with a pencil. And do not follow Mahadev's example of writing
with a fountain-pen. I tolerate Mahadev's fountain-pen because
Mahadev is a scribe. You are not a scribe and are not going
to be one. So, I shall not, and I should not tolerate the
fountain-pen in your case.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 11289. Courtesy : Lilavati Asar
