218. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
LAHORE,
July 16, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I never expected that you would be released.
The Govern-
ment and we both have been following our own ways independently
of each other. That is good in a way. People will know what both
of us mean. After you have studied the whole situation I will
ask for your view as an impartial judge. You may seem to agree
out of loyalty as a co-worker, but the truth is that the habit of
195
agreeing with all that I do is not likely to have been cured by
a few years of imprisonment.
I like your decision to come only after you have got your
nose trouble completely cured. Your presence at Benares is cer-
tainly necessary, but we will do without you if the condition of
your nose does not permit you to come.
It wouldn't have been advisable to refuse to visit . . .1. Our
workers also desired that I should go. He will gain nothing by
my visit. It is true, however, that the atmosphere at Ajmer and
elsewhere is full of violence. You will hear echoes of it even there.
I found Lalnath to be the best man in that part. He is
brave, too. He always kept his word. But of course he did criti-
cize and abuse me. Everybody has a right to do that.
This is
not the first time that he was assaulted. His men also have been
assaulted. But he has never lodged a complaint with the police.
Generally he and his men do not even ask for police protection.
Moreover, he has good control over his men. If I had not kept
strict control over our workers, Lalnath and his men would have
sustained serious injuries and our cause would have suffered. Only
today I received a letter from somebody who says he had played a
part in inciting people against Lalnath. He wants to know what
he should do to atone for his lapse. He is one of our best workers.
He is a writer and a poet.
Tell me now, was I not right in
announcing a fast? Whom should I consult in such matters ? And
where? If a person is bitten by a snake, would a physician who
knows the remedy argue about its merits with other people or
would he apply it straightaway? Surely it can give me no pleasure
to take such steps without consulting co-workers. But I find myself
helpless in such cases. Ghanshyamdas had wired to me requesting
that he should be consulted before I took any decision. I, therefore,
wrote to him. He left the decision to me. Devdas suggested a four-
day fast. Jairamdas felt that a fast was necessary, and advised
that, if I did fast, it should not be for a period of less than seven
days. Bapa did not oppose the idea. As for Chandrashankar,
poor man, how could he oppose me? Kaka couldn't find any argu-
ment to oppose me. The great task on which we have embarked
cannot be accomplished without undertaking such fasts. There is
no limit to the awakening among the people.
In Lahore and other places I see crowds such as I have
never seen before.
I do feel convinced about one thing. You should force me to
stop travelling by rail and car, let me stay at one place and tour
on foot-if, that is, I am out of jail-which I shall be during
August. After that Rama alone knows.
Andrews will arrive here on the 25th. Swami will give you
enough news and Chandrashankar also will write.
I am going to Calcutta, purely for cleaning our house there.
But I had a letter from Dr. Bidhan Roy telling me that most
probably I would have to see the Governor. That possibility was
certainly there. Agatha and others had strongly pressed for a
meeting. Now it seems to have become a certainty. The discussion
will be exclusively about the terrorism in Bengal. More after the
meeting. And since Mahadev is with me now, you will get all
the news you want.
Mani should get very strong again. This time, however, her
health does seem to have suffered fairly.
She is only putting on
a brave face. I am not writing to her separately today.
Blessings from
BAPU
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL
SHRIRAM MANSION
SANDHURST ROAD, BOMBAY
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 112-
