186. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
October 31, 1933
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Rama and Vimala arrived yesterday. Since you have seen
them only recently, I do not write anything about them.
I
understand from Rama that you get the letters written to you
and that you are eagerly expecting a letter from me. You are
certainly entitled to expect one. But I did not write any, thinking
that, when Rama herself could write very few letters, it would
not be proper on my part to claim a share in the number of
letters which you are permitted to receive. However, as Dama-
yanti asked even trees for news of Nala, I used to inquire about
you from anybody and everybody whom I met and managed to
get some news.
You must, of course, make a return for having stayed with me
for such a long time, and you have done so handsomely enough.
Mahadev also has done that and is still doing it. But, as the sun
always carries its shadow as it moves, so also is the shadow
always followed by light. Similarly, Mahadev finds peace of mind
through something or the other. That seems to be true about
you also. You get the company of good books, and now you have
been permitted to get butter from outside. What more could
you want to keep you happy? You have imbibed over the last
many years the teaching of the Gita that one should remain
cheerful in all circumstances. If, when the time to put that
teaching into practice comes, we fail to do so, surely we would
feel ashamed of ourselves. I, therefore, don't worry about you,
confident that you will certainly not fail in the test. I even
hope that you will pass with first-class marks.
Kaka has undertaken a fast. His vow was for a seven-day
fast. It will end on the day after tomorrow, that is, on Thursday.
The fast is for the sake of . . .1. He is extremely cheerful. The
fast seems to have had no adverse effect on him. Of course, there
is bound to be some weakness. He sleeps in the open air. He
gets good sleep. He can drink plenty of water. In that respect,
he can do much better than I. Darbari, who regards himself as
Kaka's disciple, and Surendra attend on him. You can, therefore,
easily understand that he is being looked after very well. Prabhu-
das works as his secretary. He takes down a few letters which
Kaka may wish to dictate, and reads to him from the Gita, the
Upanishads, etc. Swami also is here at present. Kishorelal and
Gomati arrived today. The weather here is bound to be beauti-
ful at this time of the year. The Wardha Ashram has become
a girls' Ashram. There are more than 40 girls staying here just
now.
Lakshmibehn has been working extremely hard, and
Dwarakanath helps her. Recently, we have engaged a musician,
but the prayers are conducted by Lakshmibehn herself. I knew
that she possessed a sweet voice, but I did not know that she
knew nearly a hundred bhajans. Two prayers, the evening prayers
on Thursday and Friday, are conducted by Mathuri and Yoga
joins her in singing the ghazal on Thursday.
We celebrated Prabhudas's marriage a few days ago. The
bride belongs to North India. Her name is Amba. She is in
her 25th year. The choice was Prabhudas's own, and the discovery
1 The name has been omitted.
2 Lakshmibehn Khare's daughter
3 Narayan M. Khare's brother's daughter
also was his. Amba's simplicity surpasses Prabhudas's. She has
plenty of courage, too. Prabhudas is very happy. The two will
stay here at least as long as I am here. My tour begins on the
8th. Nobody, neither Kashi nor Chhaganlal nor any other re-
lative or friend from outside, was invited for the marriage. The
bride also was accompanied by only six persons. One can, there-
fore, say that this was the simplest wedding we have celebrated.
The marriage ceremony was performed by a priest from Wardha
under the guidance of Kaka.
Among the girls whom you know, Chandrakanta also is here,
and so is Vidya Hingorani. She will stay here at least for a year.
Vinoba, as you know, stays in a village (of Harijans) about a
mile from here. But the moral responsibility for this girls' Ashram
is his. Anandi, Babu and Bachu had come here with me, but
they have returned now. You will be surprised to know that
the girls do not like to go to Sharda Mandir for education.
They want arrangements to be made at home.
I am in search
of suitable persons. I don't think there will be any difficulty.
Besides them, there are Vanamala, Mohan, Mani and Bablo. All
of them live in the Harijan Children's Ashram run by Anasuya-
behn. They went to it quite willingly. Of course they find it
a little difficult to get used to the food, etc. The food for
Harijan girls is bound to be quite simple, and they get very little
milk and ghee, too. If we insist on bringing up our children on
food like theirs, they would soon grow thin. I am, therefore,
thinking what arrangement to make so that the children, even
while they stay in that Ashram, may get proper food.
In the
mean time, they somehow manage to get the food which they re-
quire. Amina's children also are staying in this same Ashram.
Unlike our children, they feel perfectly at home there. They play
and enjoy themselves the whole day. A munshi has been enga-
ged to teach them the Koran and Urdu.
You must have heard that finally the [Sabarmati] Ashram was
given over for Harijan work. It has been decided to send Tota-
ramji to the Ashram. Hariprasad also will go there. Both of them
are here at present. Pannalal intends to start an independent
dairy. I have written to him to come here. At present he is
with Nanibehn and Gangabehn in Ahmedabad.
Our dairy is
being run by Titus near the Kankaria lake under the supervision
of Shankerlal. I think it is running very well. We have no
responsibility even for that.
I suppose you know that the Ashram and the Vidyapith
libraries have been handed over to the Ahmedabad Municipality.
Raojibhai and Mohanlal Bhatt are expected here in a day or
two. Ba is preparing to reach the Mandir. Manu is here. Dhiru,
Balabhadra and Indu may be said to have decided to stay on in
Bhavnagar. Dudhibehn also has been living there with her
children. Nila Nagini's Sirius is in Sharda Mandir.
I am sure
you recognize this handwriting. I think I have now given you
plenty of news. I can give still more, but I have no time. Swami,
therefore, will give the rest.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5513
