393. LETTER TO DR. M. S. KELKAR
NANDI HILLS,
May 28, 1927
DEAR DOCTOR,
I have your letter. Though I do not propose to trouble you
to come over here, I would like you definitely, if you can, to
write out what you will have me do, and I shall incorporate as
many of your suggestions as it is possible for me.
I cannot get distilled water in Nandi. I know that it can be
made by oneself. But I have not got the proper tubes and uten-
sils for it here. When I go down to Bangalore, I shall see whe-
ther I can procure distilled water.
As it is, I take raw milk diluted with boiling water. This
seems to agree with me better. I am taking 30 ounces of raw
milk and about two ounces of whole-meal flour turned into
bhakhari to which is added a little butter, soda and salt. I take
also one vegetable well boiled and added to it a tea-spoonful of
fresh butter from goat's milk. I add to the morning milk the
juice of 10 full-grown leaves of neem tree. I sleep well and I
do about four hours' dictation daily, one hour's writing and
at least one hour's reading. This is fair amount of work for a
patient who is convalescing. In addition to this, I have half an
hour's fairly brisk walk in the morning and half an hour in
the evening. And I retire at 9 in the night and get up at 4 in the
morning. Of course the morning and the evening prayers are
there. I do also deep-breathing morning and evening. I sleep
about an hour and half during the day with an earth bandage
on the head. Now you may make any suggestions you like.
Now about yourself. I am really most anxious to help you.
But, in spite of all the goodwill in the world, I have not been able
to enthuse over your treatment. I think it is wrong to say
that all the patients I placed at your disposal were those who had
passed through many doctors and had almost been given up.
You had Prabhudas, you had his grandfather, you had Gomati-
behn, you had Navin, and many others whose names I can re-
call if I tax my memory. Your insistence upon eggs and your great
partiality for astrology are two serious drawbacks. I respect your
insistence upon eggs. But they don't suit my religious sense. I
respect also your partiality for astrology. But I cannot get rid
of my scepticism about it. Therefore I can only make a limited
use of your attainments.
I wonder whether you have studied the use of asanas as part
of treatment of disease. My attention has been recently drawn to
them. But as you have a fair knowledge of physiology, I would
like you, in the light of that knowledge, to examine the claims made
on behalf of the various asanas. Have you also studied the newest
researches made about vitamins?
Yours sincerely,
DR. M. S. KELKAR
342, SADASHIV PETH
POONA CITY
From a photostat: S.N. 14131
