458. LETTER TO NIRMALA B. MASHRUWALA
January 2, 1933
CHI. NIRMALA,
I did not get from you as many letters as Sushila spoke of. I
was wondering why there were no letters from you.
Write the
following letter to Kishorelal
"I am able to take up today, the Silence Day (January 2),
your letter of December 6, which I had kept aside for replying.
For the present the fast has been postponed, as it seems that the
law stands in the way of the temple being thrown open to Hari-
jans and has to be amended. Necessary steps are being taken for
that purpose. However, all your arguments are correct. Those
who are directly taking part in the movement for temple-entry
should be people who are entitled to visit the temple concerned.
The votes of only such people were taken, and the result was ex-
cellent. Nobody can enter a private temple without the proprie-
tor's permission.
It is acknowledged on all hands that the
Guruvayur Temple is a public temple. In this matter, I am
scrupulously following dharma according to my lights. The issue
raised by Appa's demand was clear and that is why the problem
was solved so soon. It might be regarded improper if I write
more on this point. You will learn everything in future.
"I can see Jamnalalji from time to time. He is better. His
weight has been increasing and the ear is all right.
"Ranchhodbhai told me that your asthma was cured by the
use of fenugreek seeds. If the report is correct, the remedy was
quite cheap. I find no time at present to read the remaining
chapters of your book about the Gita and the other things, as
Harijan [work] takes up all my time. You probably know that
Chhaganlal Joshi is with me. Vinoba has gone to live in an
Antyaja hamlet near Wardha. Kaka is coming in a day or two
to see me. He seems to be keen to take up Harijan work. I
neither encourage nor dissuade anybody. Manilal and Sushila
seemed a little reluctant to return to South Africa, but I felt that
it was their duty to resume their work there, and so they have
left. There is no change in the condition of my elbow.
I have started the massage methodically from today. There is no
reason at all for worrying."
Write to Gomati as follows:
"You must be hearing everything about me. There is no
reason for any anxiety for the present as the fast has been post-
poned. Even otherwise, there was none. Tell the other women
there to write to me when they can. I should get all news.
Jamnalalji is quite well. I see him frequently. Chhaganlal Joshi is
with me. I don't read anything at present. The Harijan [work]
takes up all my time. Even spinning has been stopped because of
the elbow, but you need not worry on that account."
Blessings to all from
BAPU
SHRI NIRMALABEHN
C/O BALUBHAI MASHRUWALA
TOPIWALA BUILDING, SANDHURST ROAD, BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1006. Courtesy: Nirmalabehn
Shroff
