290. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
7, BUITENCINGLE,
Sunday, Phagan Sud 10 [March 8, 1914]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I hope you are sending six copies of Indian Opinion to
Mr. Andrews at 44 City Road, Birmingham. After the next issue,
send him the six copies to his address, Santiniketan, Bolpur, Ben-
gal. It would be good to send one copy to Mr. Pearson at the
same address.
In my letter to Raojibhai, I have given expression to some of
my reflections on Nepal being burnt to death. If you have
not read that letter, please take it from him and read it.
Here is a list of persons going with us [to India]. I cannot say
whether all those mentioned will go or not. We have still to
decide about those whose names have a question mark against
them. I have written to Kuppu. You may ask him again to con-
sult his father and decide. Discuss things with Chhaganlal. Other
names also may have to be added to the list. I take as certain
all the names except those against which I have made a question
mark. I know this is all perhaps like building on sand. Perhaps,
the settlement may not come off; other things also might happen.
Nevertheless, we want to leave as soon as a settlement is reached;
it is therefore necessary to make all the preparations. Banana
flour is made here. There is ample facility for getting it made
and bananas are always available. I believe if we have biscuits
made of banana flour with us on our voyage, nothing else
would be required and we can carry on even if bananas are not
available. We should get carpets made out of gunny bags for all
of us. They will be useful in India also. Get these stitched and
washed ready for use. It is necessary to hem their borders also.
Two carpets for each would be preferable. They can be used
one above and one below. It would be still better if these
could be given some sort of coating. Do think about this. We
should have something like the jug I have brought for [carrying]
water. If we can get the empty tins of olive oil lying with
us, repaired so that they can be corked, they would perhaps be
cheaper. Get them so repaired that they might be useful in
India also. Each one will have blankets, to be sure. They must
have at least two, at the most three. It is not desirable to carry
much luggage with us. I want every child to land in India with
Indian-style clothes on. The very young should have a lungi, a
shirt and a cap like the round one of velvet we have and the
others should have a dhoti, a shirt and a cap. The grown-ups like
you should wear a safa and a long coat. But you will decide this
by yourselves. It is not quite necessary that you should do ex-
actly what I want. I see no need for the boys to have shoes.
However, if they have sandals they may keep them. I think new
ones should not be made. But I am not particular about this
thing. You may consider this also. It would be good if everyone
learnt to eat with one hand only (the right one) and that too sitting
cross-legged on the floor. It is desirable that they do not have
to be taught to do this after they are in India. They should
not take the plate on their lap. This applies to all who are
to go. I therefore see no harm if all squat on the ground to
dine. If you do so you will have to clean the floor with a
wet cloth thrice a day. But that I think is desirable. Think of
this also. They should also know how to make obeisance to the
elders. What we want the youngsters to do, we elders should
demonstrate by doing ourselves. This may cause a little incon-
venience in the beginning, but it is worth while suffering it.
They should learn to distinguish between the pure and the im-
pure. We should make all necessary preparations irrespective
of whether we go or not. We had stopped for some days the use
of toilet paper in the latrines by the boys but we became slack
again. I think we should stop its use again. We should explain
patiently to the older boys the whole significance and object of
making the changes. It would also be well if they knew the geo-
graphy of Bombay Presidency. The boys, I think, should start
wearing dhotis on the steamer. Consider what foodstuffs and how
much should be taken with us, and also how to carry them. Try
to take as few enamelled utensils as possible. Drinking glasses or
cups and such other things, made of brass, would serve our pur-
pose. As we may have to use lemon, we shall take with us the
enamelled cups that are already there. But we want to dispense
with them as far as possible. In the manufacture of these
vessels many a man is ruined. In comparison to the loss [of
life] due to kicks and the lathis or sticks, the workers' health has
been affected to a greater extent [in this manufacture]. Consider
this aspect and then decide.
I see good improvement today in Ba's health. If she sur-
vives, take it for certain that our [nature cure] remedies and
faith in God have saved her. She has come to realize that the doc-
tor's medicine was the cause of her breakdown. She was tempted
by a desire to take the doctor's treatment and I did not interfere.
The punishment she received was severe and so the lesson learnt
was equally valuable. Ba showed infinite capacity for patience.
She did not trouble me at all. The Gools showed great love. The
doctor is a generous man. He does not interfere much with what
I do. We wanted very much to satisfy him, but Ba later showed
great firmness. I always read the Ramayana to her and sing
prayer songs. She appears to listen to these attentively. I repeat
Ramanama also. The intention behind all this is not that she
should survive; it is that, whether she lives or dies, her mind
should be pure and tender. I have made all preparations and
inquired about everything in case she dies. There is a cremation
ground here equipped with the necessary facilities. It is four
miles away.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5765
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
