472. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 9, 1927
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDASJI,
This is the fourth letter I am writing to you after your
departure from Bombay. Jamnalalji has sent me your cablegram.
Hence this letter in English. I must not yet try to write letters
myself. In order to conserve my energy, therefore, I am dictat-
ing most of my correspondence, whether in English, Hindi or
Gujarati.
Malaviyaji is with me today. He is on his way to Ooty
to recoup himself. He came this morning and was to have left
this evening; but on my telling him that the day after tomorrow
is the Mysore Maharaja's birthday and suggesting that he should
go to Mysore to give his blessings before proceeding to Ooty, he
has sent a telegram to the Dewan. He has suspended his journey
forward and will probably leave for Mysore tomorrow. Of course,
I have been in regular correspondence with him and he has been
replying by wires. He is looking much pulled down, but he is as
hopeful as ever about everything. There is nothing wrong with
his body. It is simply weakness caused by ceaseless wear and
tear. He promises to take about a month's rest in Ooty. He
has Dr. Mangal Singh with him, and, of course, a cook. Govind
was with him as far as Bombay but has been obliged to go to
Allahabad as he could not get a postponement of his 'crow case'.
I wonder if I suggested to you that you should see Miss
Muriel Lester who is working in the slums of London. She was
in India for some time last year. She was at the Ashram for
one month. She is a most enthusiastic and able worker. She is
working in the cause of total prohibition and is trying to culti-
vate public opinion there. Her address is : Miss Muriel Lester,
Kingsley Hall, Powis Road, Bow, E. 3.
I hope that your health has improved and likewise Lalaji's.
I descended from Nandi last Sunday. I am making fair progress.
Doctors here are of opinion that I will be able to resume a
moderate amount of touring next month.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From the original: C.W. 7877. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
