24. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 31, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have all your letters delivered in good time. The postal ar-
rangements are extraordinarily good. Nothing has miscarried
in spite of this incessant travelling.
We leave Bihar tonight not without regret on my part. Bihar
has its own charms for me.
I must write a summary letter as there is much to write during
the time I have.
You may take the following vow after calling together the chief
friends there so that they may not be upset. Restrict yourself to
three meals only the last not to be after 7 p.m. No ghee to be
smeared on bhakharis1, vegetables only plain boiled with or with-
out salt. Milk unsweetened, no more than two vegetables at a
time, no more than three fruits at a time, no limitation on drinks
of water with lemon, honey, sugar, salt, soda. The vow to last
till 20th March for the time being. This does not exclude any-
thing taken for medicinal purposes. The whole is subject to
alteration in the event of illness.
I think the above restrictions should answer the whole pur-
pose. We must discuss the desirability of extending the period
when we meet.
No occasion to worry about feel[ing] over-healthy so long as
you do not become so fat as to make you unfit for brisk work.
There is no danger of that happening. But in any event the vow
obviates the remotest risk.
I had taken a mental note of your judgment against guru-
kuls but did not intend to say anything about [it]. Criticism of
everything one does not approve stifles independent judgment or
its expression especially when that criticism comes from loved
ones. But I am glad of your own correction. Only you will not
unnecessarily agitate yourself about these things. Self-correction
should result in exhilaration.
No more can be written now as I must walk out to the station,
three miles, just time enough to catch the train comfortably.
With love,
BAPU
[PS.]
Here are the chief places of pilgrimage. There are three per day.
2nd Gondia
3rd Wardha
4th Wun
5th Yeotmal, Berar
6- Akola
The other places not quite fixed, but for letters to reach me
after 7th, unless I advise to the contrary, address Khadi Bhandar,
Jalgaon, G.I.P. Rly.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5201. Courtesy: Mirabehn
