273. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Asadha Vad 10, August 3, 1926
CHI. DEVDAS,
I got your letter. I don't know when Dr. Ansari is likely
to come here. His speech was reported in the papers and I
read it. I think the speech was an emotional outburst. I have
no doubt at all about his noble views. But he cannot devote
himself whole-heartedly to anything except his professional work.
Similar is the case with Hakim Saheb. His heart is in the right
place, but he lacks the strength to sacrifice everything for the
sake of the cause. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad is indeed a
Maulana. I do not set much value on the manifesto. A mere
seven hundred cannot help our cause. In a situation in which
the truth cannot come out, what can we hope from goodness?
One cannot take interest in parliamentary activities and also
work for Hindu-Muslim unity, for the two are incompatible with
each other. I certainly do not want that the Maharaja or the
Maharani of Nabha should do only one thing, spin on the charkha,
but I think that, if they are at all likely to take up such work,
it would be better and easier to teach them to spin on the takli.
If afterwards he gives up the takli, we would not feel hurt, but we
would if he gave up the charkha. If you think differently, how-
ever, let me know; I will send you a charkha.
The present political atmosphere is quite disgusting. Mithu-
behn herself had asked me to send khadi to her place. You
will easily be able to sell that quantity. I know what prices
she will pay for the different varieties of khadi.
I have already written to you about your coming here. I
certainly think you should. But I will not object if you decide
to stay on there for some time longer. It is a wrong idea that
there is no work to be done here. There is so much of it indeed
that the workers are never free. All the same, if it is necessary
also for the sake of your health to stay on there, you may cer-
tainly do so. I had a letter from Vithalbhai. In that at any
rate he says that, if you do not go there, he will reconcile him-
self to your decision.
SHRI DEVDAS GANDHI
THE OAKS
MUSSOORIE, U.P.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12233
