111. LETTER TO SARALADEVI CHAUDHRANI
BEZWADA,
August 23, 1920
Either the night or the day has been passed each day in the
train. The nights have been always disturbed by crowds. Thank
God we have nearly finished this exhausting tour. Considering
everything I have kept remarkably fit and strong.
Your letters have your usual self. Some of them decidedly
despondent and sceptical and suspicious.
You still do not understand Mathuradas. He and the others
who surround me are superior to us, if you will allow me to in-
clude you. They are certainly superior to me. And it is as it should
be. It is my claim that I have selected as my companions my
superiors in character, superiors, that is to say, in their possibility.
My progress can only be little. Theirs is still illimitable. They are
jealous of their ideal which is my character. I and (if you are
mine in the purest sense of the term) you must give everything to
retain or deserve their love and affection. There can be no yield-
ing only on principle. For that we must forsake all and everything.
But I would surrender all the world to deserve love so pure and
unselfish. Their love uplifts me and keeps me on the square.
They are my sheet-anchor as I am theirs. You should be proud
of their jealousy and watchfulness. They want to run no risks and
they are right. You and I are in duty bound to satisfy every
lawful requirement. And we shall have well met.
Yes, if you remain at your post in Lahore it would be quite
all right. You can gain little by coming to Calcutta during the
week of turmoil and stress. The pilgrimage to your mother may
take place in quieter time and after you have perfected your
spinning-wheel and Hindi and put our Lahore work on a sound
footing. You see I say Lahore in preference to the Punjab. I want
you to lay the surest foundation and therefore I want intensity
rather than extent.
You ask for a reward of your great surrender. Well, it is its
own reward.
With deep love,
Yours,
L. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
