130. LETTER TO J. GHOSAL
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
February 26, 1918
DEAR MR. GHOSAL,
My co-workers and I have so far completed our investigation
of a number of villages covering all the talukas. I attach hereto a
list containing the names of such villages with the annawari
found by us and hope shortly to send another containing the re-
maining villages. I have already explained to you the method
adopted for finding the annawari. The rabi and the kharif
now standing furnish tangible material enabling one to arrive at
absolutely accurate results. I do not know that it is contended
by any of your Talatis that the harvested kharif crops were in any
but the rarest cases more than four annas. It is submitted that the
crops still standing in the majority of the villages will not yield
more than a four-anna harvest and I do hope that if you are not
satisfied with the first-hand testimony of myself and my co-workers,
you will, whilst there is yet time, secure an independent valuation
by appointing a joint committee of inspection.
I observe that hundreds of villagers have paid the first
instalment as they say under pressure brought to bear upon them.
Many have been made, so it appears, even to pay both the instal-
ments at once. Many believe that they have been obliged to sell
their cattle and other personal effects for paying the assessment.
I am sure that you do not desire to collect on such terms. I
hope, therefore that you will be pleased to grant full suspension
in the cases of the villages in my list against which the annawari
is put down at four annas or under. I am aware that half sus-
pension has been granted in some cases.
Mohwa trees in several localities are being destroyed on a
wholesale scale, partly on account of the Mohwa Act and partly
also because of the prevailing scarcity. Whatever may be the
cause I am sure you will agree with me that such destruction
should be prevented so far as possible and you will make it
possible by granting the relief suggested by me. In this connection
I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the villagers fall
back, especially in times of scarcity, on the fruits of their
trees for food. They should therefore be allowed at least for the
current year unrestricted use of Mohwa flowers.
An additional and strong reason for granting suspension is
to be found in the ravages being made by the plague in the
Kaira District. Thousands, as you are aware, are living in
sheds erected at, to them, no small cost. Many families have
lost their wage-earners. The villagers' ordinary activities have
been interrupted for the time being.
I fear there will be within a very short period great scarcity
of fodder. I have no doubt that this matter has not escaped your
attention. In view of the suspense under which everybody in
Kaira is living I shall be obliged if you could let me know as
early as is convenient to you your decision regarding the recom-
mendation submitted by me. I need hardly add that I am at
1 Regarding this the addressee replied that the question was to come up
before the Council for consideration.
your service should you desire my presence. I should perhaps say
that I may have to leave for Delhi first of March.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10637. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
