58. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 15, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
All your letters seem to have been delivered to me. For how
many days did Chimanlal try the fenugreek seeds? Jamna
may try them along with any other medicine which she is taking.
But she should take care that she does not get constipation.
About Mahavir, I can think of no other way. The whole
family must leave. I have given up the hope of their observing the
rules. This is my view. If, however, you wish to let them stay,
I can have no objection. But have no doubt that misplaced
kindness is a form of violence.
I also feel worried about Prema. I am pained and surprised
that she cannot see her weakness which everybody else can see.
I had hoped that I would be able to open her eyes. It seems I
have been wrong, for the present at any rate. But she is a thought-
ful lady. Hence I do not give up hope altogether. Her language
was certainly full of hatred, but she denies it. That means that
she does not know when one's language may be described as
full of hatred. She does not even have faith in me to trust that,
when my loving heart feels the presence of hatred anywhere, it
must be there. I am partial to her and stress her virtues as out-
weighing her faults. If, then, I see a weakness in her, instead of
getting angry with me she should be humble and try to under-
stand her weakness. If I am committing an error, she should
point it out to me. This is how I feel. I may die any day. Ulti-
mately the burden will have to be shouldered by you. Therefore
do what you think best. If I am doing injustice to anybody
in any matter, do not hesitate to tell me so. And if you are con-
vinced that my view is correct, do not hesitate to tell her so
emphatically. I certainly do not wish to crush her individuality
in any manner whatsoever. If the individuality of any person
in the Ashram is crushed, that would harm the Ashram itself.
But I think Prema misunderstands the meaning of individua-
lity. I understand her problem, but I feel helpless before her
obstinacy.
I understand what you say regarding Liladhar. Has he
abandoned his plan of going to Zanzibar? If you decide to take
him back, have a frank talk with him before doing so.
If the harassment by the Chharas has stopped, is it because
our people have started going in their midst or does it mean some-
thing else?
I have discussed everything with Prabhudas. Your letter did
not give the statistics of people's weights.
BAPU
[PS.]
NARANDAS,
Durlabhji Sampat and Sitaram, two brothers, are prisoners
in this jail. Durlabhji is married. After he is released, he wishes
to stay in the Ashram for two months or so and have experience
of the life there. And so does Sitaram. I have told them that there
will be no difficulty in admitting them. They will write to you.
If you can accommodate them, admit them.
Did anything happen between Balwant, Prabhashankar's
son, and you? How is Ratilal? I hope Totaramji is completely
all right now.
Read all my letters to the Giri family.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I Also Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, pp. 14-
