104. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
January 23, 1909
[SIR,]
As one-time Secretary of the Indian Association, and as a merchant,
I beg to congratulate Mr. A.M. Cachalia on the most self-sacrificing
step he has taken. In my opinion, he deserves the best thanks of the
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, as in the case of Cachalia's com-
munication, was signed and addressed to his creditors by E. M. Aswat; later, he
became the Acting Chairman of the British Indian Association in place of Cachalia,
who was imprisoned.
2 Vide "Representation at Meeting of Cachalia's Creditors", p. 157.
3 This was presumably drafted by Gandhiji and signed by E. M. Aswat.
British Indian community and, more especially, of the British Indian
merchants, for having pointed the way out to them. The best manner
in which I can express my approval of Mr. Cachalia's action is to follow
him, and I have, therefore, placed myself in communication with my
creditors.
I notice that the morality of the step taken by Mr. Cachalia has
been questioned, and that it has been construed into a desire on the
part of the British Indian merchants to coerce European wholesale
houses. As to the morality or immorality of the step, it is largely a
matter of opinion. According to the view taught by my religion, a
merchant who does his best to pay his creditors 20/- in the £, and warns
them of any danger in which their goods may be placed, is considered
to have performed a meritorious act deserving of warm approbation
from the community in which his lot is cast. With reference to coercion,
I am sure that those who have used the term have done so hastily. It
is quite clear that if [the] British Indian merchants do not take out licences
to trade, they must be very properly prosecuted for trading without
licences. The Government have every right, as they consider that
their position is just, to impose every form of hardship on those traders
who trade in disregard of the Licensing Law. What is an Indian debtor
with a large stock on hand and with a conscience to keep to do? He
has not cash enough to payout his creditors immediately. He cannot,
with any regard for his creditors, and without their consent, sell his
goods by auction. He finds he has assets enough to payout his creditors.
Apart from any political considerations, I cannot but think that the
only honourable course for a debtor, placed in the position above
described, is to take his creditors into his confidence, and place himself
at their disposal, telling them that, short of compromising his conscience,
he is willing to do everything that the creditors may consider desirable
in their interests. That my action will bear a political interpretation
is unavoidable, for the simple reason that it is based upon the situation
created by the Government; but, speaking for myself, I can assure the
public that the action that I have taken is irrespective of whatever the
European wholesale houses may do, so far as the political aspect is
concerned. My desire is simply to protect my creditors, and certainly
also to frustrate the design of the Government, in so far as they wish
to receive monetary aid from me in order to bend me and my other
countrymen to their wishes, which I hold to be unjust, immoral, and
unrighteous.
Indian Opinion, 30-1-1909
