353. LETTER TO HAMIDUDDIN AHMED
December 27, 1946
DEAR HAMIDUDDIN SAHEB,
Nirmal Babu read to me your writing in the Azad of the
14th instant. It staggered me and I asked him kindly to give
me its literal translation. If there is any incorrectness, you will
please send me your correction. I say it staggered me, because
you had left an impression on me that you had entirely
realized my sincerity and my usefulness not merely for the
Hindu inhabitants of the district but equally for the Muslim
inhabitants. Assuming the accuracy of the translation, your
article is an indictment against me. Indeed, most of us were
under the impression that while Shamsuddin Saheb was leaving
for a few days to meet the Chief Minister, you would be stay-
ing behind to continue his work and help the Peace Committees
that were just then being formed. But the next day, I learned
with sorrow that owing to some affliction of your eyes you had
to leave abruptly with Shamsuddin Saheb. What had happen-
ed in the meanwhile to warrant what I have called your in-
dictment I do not know. Why do you in common with many
advisers advise me to leave Noakhali and go to Bihar or some-
where else?
I have not come to East Bengal to hold an enquiry. I
have come to make my humble contribution to a lasting and
heart peace between the two communities. I think that I made
this statement during the speeches I had made in your pre-
sence. Why then the sudden change betrayed by the article
in question? Do you not think that after the exuberant regard
you showed for me, I had the right to expect from you a friend-
ly and personal enquiry from me, to inform me of the change
and giving the grounds for the change? Perhaps, on reflection,
you will discover in your very article valid reason for my
longing to be in Noakhali in preference to Bihar. How can I
test the efficacy and soundness of my ahimsa except in a place
where even the loudest protestations of trust in my professions
can be so short-lived as in your case?
You are right when you say: "In Mr. Gandhi's opinion,
the condition in Noakhali is not yet such that Hindus can
shoulder the responsibility of returning to their homes." I have
chapter and verse to show why the Hindu refugees who proved
themselves deficient in personal courage are reluctant to go
back to their homes. The Peace Committees which you left in
the process of formation are not in working order.
The Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries would not re-
turn to their work of seeing the Committees doing their duty.
I urge you for the sake of the League Ministry in whose effi-
ciency and goodness I am at least as much interested as you
ever can be. Believe me, I have not come to East Bengal for
the purpose of finding fault with the League. I have come in
order to induce it by my conduct to shed its complacency and
give solid work for the sake of itself and India. For I believe
that if you and I can produce in Bengal the right atmosphere,
the whole of India will follow.
You say, again: "If he (Gandhi) had issued a statement
about the real nature of the happenings, perhaps the atmos-
phere would have cleared to a large extent. His silence with
reference to this matter raises suspicion in the minds of many."
Why this insinuation when the fact stares you in the face that
I am not in a position to speak in praise of what has been
and is being done on behalf of the Bengal Government? If
you will care to study the thing, you will appreciate restraint
instead of coaxing me to speak.
You are again right when you say: "Mr. Gandhi does not
wish to leave for Bihar." But your reasons for reluctance are
wholly wrong. My "trusted Bihari followers" have indeed kept
me informed of the happenings there. The information they
give is wholly contrary to what you believe. In common with
all, the Bihar Government deplore the tragic happenings. But
they claim that they have acquired control over the turbulent
elements and are straining every nerve to give satisfaction to the
afflicted.
It will not serve the cause of peace if I went to Bihar and
found the Bihar Muslim League's report to be largely imagi-
nary and the Bihar Government's conduct substantially honour-
able, humane and just. I am not anxious to give them a certi-
ficate of good conduct as I am to give you, much though you
may not want it. My spare diet and contemplated fast, you
know well, were against the Bihar misdoings. I could not take
such a step in the matter of Noakhali misdoings. It pains me to
think that you, a seasoned lawyer, should not see the obvious.
I assure you that I am not guilty of "importing number-
less volunteers from outside to serve his (mine) object". In the
first place, I have not imported numberless volunteers. In the
second place, my object is not what you have been pleased to
insinuate in the same paragraph. Let me tell you that for the
fulfilment of my object, I do not need any volunteers here ex-
cept myself. If you really think that their presence is a me-
nace to the peace of Noakhali, the Government have but to
say that they are a danger and to serve a notice on them to
quit, and I assure you that without a murmur they would leave
this district. From this undertaking, I and one of my com-
pany, whose name I need not disclose at this stage, are ex-
cepted. You will be astonished to learn that, dear as they are
all to me, and valuable as I count their services to the nation,
I told them in this mission of mine I had no need to have any
associate with me; for the quickest way to fruition required
no protection or co-operation save what God sent. Such is my
conception of the working of ahimsa. I hope that before the
Government takes the adumbrated action they will depute an
officer of their choice or trust to find out from me or them
the kind of work they are doing. Their life is an open book.
There is nothing hidden or underground about their activities.
Permit me to give you my impression that your writing
bristles with unprovable and reckless statements without regard
to facts. I have noticed only some of them.
As it is, my letter has become much longer than I had
sketched in my mind but as I proceeded I could not shorten
it if I was to give you some conception of my deep grief. If
you will know more, I suggest to you that you should take the
trouble of coming to me and passing with me half an hour
or so and cross-examine me on the charges you have framed
against me.
This letter is not an open letter as yours is. I have written
only for you, cherishing the hope that it may perhaps appeal to
you as coming from a well-wisher open to conviction.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 123-
