485. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 16, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter.
Send Ramabehn to Baroda to be examined by Manekrao.
If he undertakes to treat her, let him. If Manekrao does not know
what to do in her case, she should come to Poona. There is a
vaid here who is a specialist about diseases affecting bones. I will
get Ramabehn examined by him and do whatever is necessary.
Even ordinary medical help will be available here. If ultimate-
ly an operation is found necessary, I will consider whether it should
be performed in Ahmedabad or at some other place. It will
be better if the children remain there. If they cannot, they may
accompany her. Najuklal and others are there in Baroda and
I believe that they will look after them. I don't know what faci-
lities he has in his house. She will be able to stay even at Abbas
Saheb's house. The place is not full just now.
I don't know
whether Deshpande Saheb's house has sufficient accommodation.
Ramabehn should go to Baroda after you have written to Manek-
rao and received his reply. If he is not in Baroda or if he is not
ready to undertake the case, she may come to Poona. Here in
Poona Prof. Trivedi's house is open to every visitor. Don't
mind if our debt to him goes on mounting. He likes to be
troubled. His house does not seem to be full just now.
My opinion is definitely in favour of giving the machine to
Keshu. I haven't thought about how much he should be charged.
You and Keshu alone can know that. I think that breakages
and other charges also should be debited.
Madhavji's letter is excellent. He, too, has written to Cal-
cutta and asked them to send the children to the Ashram.
I follow what you say regarding Jeki's sons. I have got the
impression that they are well-behaved.
And now your problem. Our ideal is Rama. There were
people who criticized him too. How, then, can you or I hope
to be spared? We should learn from the criticism. Chhagan-
lal's criticism and suggestions are enclosed with this. Most of the
suggestions are old. If you think Premabehn will be able to read
without being upset what he has written about her, let her
read it.
I think that his suggestion about . . .1 is improper. No-
body can tell a father how he should treat his daughter. I have
sent Chhaganlal's criticism as it is without making any corrections
because I thought it would be better for you to know what is in
his mind. There are other things which seem to me to need cor-
rection but the letter would become too long if I did so. I did
not know Chhaganlal outside jail as closely as I have come to
know him here. I am sure that he is a man of transparent
sincerity and tries to cultivate the spirit of renunciation, but he is
a child. His intellect is not well developed.
His power of ob-
servation is very imperfect, he does not possess a methodical mind,
his memory, too, is weak, and his mind wanders after too many
things so that his capacity for concentration is limited. And he
is not aware of all these limitations of his. All the same, he is very
eager to improve himself and to grow. He has no ill-will against
anybody, but because of an imperfectly developed intellect his
conclusions are one-sided and erroneous. I don't think this analysis
is mine only, though I have not discussed these impressions with
anybody, except a little with Kaka. I have not told Chhaganlal
what I think about him. He will know that for the first time
from this letter. It became necessary to say it today because I
don't want you to form a wrong opinion about him. You may
detect ill will in his remarks. But if you can you may trust that
my observation of him is correct. If you do so, you will be
able to see something in his criticism and suggestions which
is worth accepting. In any case do give me your replies to his
criticisms and suggestions. If you wish to show them to other
co-workers, I will not object, though I don't see any need for
that.
You are working as a secretary because I believe that you
possess many of the virtues, and possess them in good measure,
which you would like to have. I am not in the least dissatis-
fied with your work. My opinion about you remains unchanged,
and I would be surprised if others have not formed the same im-
pression that I have. N. says in his letter that he has not. Ch-
haganlal thinks that others, too, have not. But nobody has com-
plained to me.
However, as I write this, I think of Bhagwanji. His com-
plaint had produced no effect on me. I know his nature very
well. But we should listen to persons on whom we have produced
an unfavourable impression. We may find it easy to secure the
co-operation of those who think well of us, but we learn nothing
from them. Only our critics serve us as sentinels. You may,
therefore, learn as much from N. as you wish to.
If you think it proper, you may show . . . 's and . . . 's
letters to Totaramji, Panditji, Narahari, Lakshmidas and Mathu-
radas, and hear them if they have anything to say. If Tota-
ramji and Panditji offer to take charge, hand it over to them
and, if they wish, work under them and look after the accounts.
I look upon Totaramji as the fittest person to be regarded as
father of the Ashram. We need somebody as a father. We re-
gard the Ashram as a family. If I stayed there, I would consider
myself as father of the Ashram. Even if Totaramji does not accept
that place, I would not think it improper at all to treat him as
one and unhesitatingly follow his advice whenever a difficult pro-
blem arises. Lakshmidas possesses all the virtues necessary in a
secretary of the Ashram, but I do not know whether at present
he can live there. Narahari certainly cannot do so, since he is
not free, so far as I know. Chimanlal's health is much too poor
for the task. Mathuradas has still to acquire experience. These
are my views about all the co-workers whom I can think of.
Vinoba cannot be shifted from Wardha. His responsibility is con-
fined to Wardha. In fact he has left even Wardha and lives in a
hamlet of Harijans. He had my full consent for doing that. He
may ultimately go and live in a hamlet still more exclusively
inhabited by Harijans. You must, therefore, carry on as
you are.
I have written all this merely for you to think over. In
entrusting the welfare of the Ashram to your care when leaving
it, I did not offer you a place of authority but burdened you
with responsibility, and the position is still the same. I have
observed nothing to persuade me to take away the responsibility
from you. Nor can you give it up. You should, therefore,
implement only those suggestions of mine which you find accep-
table, having due regard to your responsibility. I cannot express
any definite opinion from here. Whatever happens to the Ash-
ram, good or ill, you will be the means. We should be thank-
ful that I am permitted to write to you. If I was not permit-
ted, wouldn't you act according to your own judgment? There-
fore always do what seems best to you, regarding my letters and
views as of no consequence. My duty is over when I have put
before you what I hear and think. I want you to remain un-
affected in the midst of all this, in the sense explained in the
Gita.
Let this period not be one of worries for you, though it is
certainly a time of test for equanimity. See that you never
lose it.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8356. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
