36. LETTER TO C. RAMACHANDRAN
May 1, 1935
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRAN,
I have deliberately refrained hitherto from replying to your
letter regarding Kanti. I am now able to give you the reply.
The girl should know nothing about our intentions till she
grows to maturity. Kanti may harbour and the age of matu-
rity hold any communication with her directly or indirectly [sic].
He may write as he is already writing to your sister but nothing
of what he writes should be secret from you. All his letters should
be accessible to you if and whenever you desire. Each has to
be worthy of the other. If, therefore, the girl has to be prepared
for Kanti, Kanti has to prepare himself for being worthy of her
and you. If when the time for marriage comes, Kanti is found not
to have progressed along the right lines, you are free to withhold
the girl from him assuming of course that when she comes to
maturity, she will listen to you. For you and me the proposed
union can be tolerated only if it becomes a pattern for others
to copy. It must therefore be developed in the spirit of service.
Development along this line must mean greater simplicity, great-
er self-abnegation, greater advance towards truth and ahimsa,
uttermost brahmacharya in thought and word and deed. The
contemplation of the girl must mean to Kanti exclusion of every
other woman from his thought for the gratification of his sexual
impulse.
If these conditions are fulfilled, I should welcome the union.
There is nothing wrong, as it seems to me, from the inception.
Kanti honestly confessed as soon as he felt drawn to the girl. His
subsequent conduct too has appeared to me to have been free
from reproach.
This will be seen by Kanti who will send it to you. If there is
anything in my letter of which you disapprove please let me know.
I am asking Kanti to send a copy of this to Devdas. Of course
Mahadev will see this as also Harilal. Enclosed is for your
sister.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 9742. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
