152. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 22, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I can't understand how you received on the same day the
letters handed over by me on different days. I will inquire of
the authorities. Henceforth, whenever you receive a letter from
me mention in your next letter the date on which it was posted,
the date on the letter itself and the date on which you received it.
If you let me know every time these dates as you have done this
time, I can ask the authorities here to be more alert.
I got [today] the letters posted by you on the 20th. The letters
posted on the 19th were received yesterday.
I am convinced that we shall gain nothing from Krishna-
maiyadevi's connection with the Ashram. If it seems proper to
you, you may fix a monthly allowance to be paid to her for some
time. During that period, Mahavir should secure a job. The
mother and the daughters also should work. I would have no
objection to their being paid Rs. 50 a month for four months plus
railway fare from Ahmedabad to the place where they decide to
go and live. These are my personal views. If, however, all of you
there have discussed the matter and come to some other decision,
you should abide by it and implement it.
I still advise you to
write to the persons who have lent them money. We shall there-
by know, we ought to know, what the facts are.
You may derive what consolation you can from the fact that
. . .1 has harassed me more than he has done you. And he has
crossed all bounds in his behaviour to me this time. All the same,
we should go on doing our duty by him. I may even have made a
mistake in permitting him to join the Ashram. I also doubt
whether he really suffers from tuberculosis. However, I never re-
gret such mistakes. Anybody who tries to follow ahimsa is bound
to commit them. How can we judge a man's worth? Does he live
in the Ashram now?
I hope Indira has recovered. How does Ramnik behave?
If Bhikhabhai lives in the Ashram, does he take his meals at
home or in the Ashram kitchen?
As for the land cess to be paid by the Ashram, you may do
what you think right. I am writing to Mama about khadi. I have
more of it here than I need.
There is no harm in Amtussalaam going to Delhi. She has
faith in Dr. Sharma and the latter is confident. Just now the wea-
ther in Delhi will also be lovely. She seems to be very eager to
come and see me. Do what you think right about that.
I got Prema's letter. I, therefore, don't write about the mat-
ter here. You may know my views from the letter which I will
write to her.
BAPU
[PS.]
In all there are 24 letters, stitched together.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I.
