519. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 20, 1933
Begun at 3 finished at 4 a.m.
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter containing your views of the conduct of the
Ashram came in yesterday, i.e., Wednesday.
There is a difference in our ideal [s] perhaps. I contem-
plate a composite society at any rate for some long time to come.
The ideal should be what it is. Some will reach it more and
some less. You will find that the only ideal that can be fully
reached according to the definition is that of Truth. For Truth
is what everyone for the moment feels it to be as such, there being
no room left for deception. It will always be non-physical, where-
as every other vow has its direct physical aspect and therefore neces-
sarily has grades. Take ahimsa. One person will be satisfied with
its mere observance with the non-killing of man and beast. An-
other will extend it to the insect life, yet others to the vegetable
and so on. We do not consider it an unpardonable crime to kill a
snake or a scorpion. Take non-possession. Even you and I have
no common line. I may possess a fountain pen, you may discard
it. I may possess ten yards of khadi, you may have twenty. There
is no such thing as full and equal observance of these other vows
which admit of a physical expression. They subserve the one and
only grand purpose and ideal, Truth. Kusum lying on her death-
bed (maybe) and requiring hundreds of things I may not want,
as fully lives up to the Ashram ideal as I, if both of us think, speak
and act truthfully.
If you have followed me hitherto, you must at once perceive
that we do not need, we must not have bifurcation. Living the
composite life, each must grow to his or her full height. If I
cannot even at the age of 64 live up to the life of brahmacharya, I
must humbly own it and retire from the Ashram without the finger
of scorn being pointed at me. I must get credit for having
courage to think, speak and act the truth. There is then hope for
my brahmacharya but none for say . . . if he has outwardly quite
correctly lived a life of physical brahmacharya but has lusted after
a girl or girls. . . .1 has disgraced the Ashram, not I.
Therefore if we will practise charity and Truth we can only
have one institution wherein you must have the fullest scope for your
growth and Kusum the invalid for hers or . . .2 the butterfly for
hers, provided that none of you deceives for one single moment
and each believes in and strives to reach the Ashram ideal.
Now comes in, in a different or modified form, your pro-
posal. A separate institution or institutions. There is one at
Wardha with Vinoba at its head. He is part of the parent insti-
tution and is working out the ideals to the best of his capacity.
Did I tell you that with my full consent, he had run away from
Wardha and settled in a Harijan village hardly two miles from
Wardha? He may leave a landmark there and go fifty miles or
more away from any railway line with or without a companion
still in fulfilment of the ideal of the parent [institution] and being
an integral part of it. He is in no way superior to . . . 3, assum-
ing always that . . . 4 is as truthful as Vinoba and is as much carry-
ing out the Ashram ideal as Vinoba. Are you able to perceive
this fully?
There is another branch shooting out in Almora far away
from the haunts of men and a long way from a railway line.
Struggling Prabhudas is today in physical charge of it. But
how ultimately it will shape, I do not know. It may become a
sanatorium for the invalids or may become a retreat, permanent
or temporary, for those who want isolation for their growth. And
if we succeed in continually throwing out untruth from the
Ashram and learn to live only truth and for it and nothing else,
we may have a million branches, none superior, none inferior, all
being an expression of the hardy parent and required for it. I
do not know whether I have expressed myself so as to enable you
to understand me. Follow it up as much as you like. No letter
going to Ba this week.
Love from us all to all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Last week's post was handed in on Friday and sacred cards
were sent by registered book packet.
C.W. 9675. Courtesy: Mirabehn
