288. LETTER TO SIR GEORGE BARNES
SABARMATI,
June 2, 1918
DEAR SIR GEORGE BARNES,
I believe matters affecting the status of emigrants to the Colo-
nies fall under your department. If so, I beg to invite your at-
tention to the attached papers.
You will note from the papers that the Union Government is
again succumbing to the white prejudice against colour and that
what is claimed to be a war for principles and for the defence of
weaker nationalities has produced but little impression upon the
whites of South Africa.
The problem, I know, is difficult. Prejudices cannot be removed
by legislation. They will yield only to patient toil and education.
But what I fear is that the Union Government, instead of holding
the scales evenly between conflicting interests, is itself feeding this
race prejudice. If my view be correct, it is a question as to how
far it can use the protection of the Union Jack in its anti-Imperial
course. Might not the Government of India effectively move the
Imperial Government to make an energetic protest against this
indecent exhibition of pride and race prejudice?
I suppose you are aware that the small Indian colony in South
Africa has rendered and is still rendering, as is admitted by all,
much useful service during the war. A bearer corps has been serving
in East Africa from the time that General Smuts proceeded there.
The papers are divided into two parts. One part deals with
the newly framed railway regulations which speak for themselves.
It is unthinkable that an Indian should have to confine himself to
a reserved portion of a station platform, reserved carriage, a re-
served ticket-office, etc., etc., and even then depend for a first
or second-class ticket on the caprice of the booking clerk who is
authorized to refuse to issue a ticket to an Indian if, in his opinion,
the latter is not becomingly dressed.
The second part shows how, by the ill-judged action of the
Union Government, Indians, born in Native States and domiciled
in South Africa, have been deprived of valuable legal rights. If
the Supreme Court's decision is sound, the law is clearly bad and
should be altered. If it is unsound, the Union Government should
have it set aside by supporting an appeal to the local Privy Council.
Thousands of Indians from the Baroda State have settled in South
Africa for years. The Government must have known when they
resisted the application of the aggrieved party that they ran the
risk of endangering the just rights of Indians who are, to all in-
tents and purposes, British subjects.
I do hope you will set the cable in motion and take the neces-
sary steps to undo the wrong referred to in the papers herewith
presented.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
N. A. I.: Commerce and Industry: June 1918: No. 5
