294. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
AHMEDABAD,
August 3 [1929]
MY DEAR MILLIE,
I am writing this as I am watching the glorious rain descending
in torrents before me. It will gladden the hearts of millions of men
and women. There was a great dread of a most severe famine
overtaking Western India. In the twinkling of an eye, all that fear has
gone. It has given place to boundless joy. This rain is a veritable
deliverance for millions upon millions of cattle. There is probably no
place on earth that is so dependent on rain as India. You will now
understand what part this rain must have played in giving me health.
I have suffered agonies — all due to my own follies. The punishment
was adequate to the wrong done by me to the body. Through a faulty
experiment I was suffering from dysentery. Whilst I was getting over
it, I ate when I should have refrained and that brought on the inevitable
crisis. I am so reduced in body that I have now to build up anew
but there is no cause of anxiety. I am convalescent and regularly taking
some nourishment and daily increasing the quantity and I hope to be
able to walk alone in ten days' time. You ask me about nursing.
Everything that human love can do, has been done for me. It was
my privilege and my pain to be on the sick-bed, privilege to find so
much love rained on me, pain that I should need it all through my
weakness and folly. This rich experiencing of love makes an added
call on such service as I may be capable of rendering to humanity.
But service to humanity is service of self and service of self is self-
purification. How shall I purify myself ? It is the one question that
has been agitating me throughout my sickness. Pray for me.
1 From the reference to dysentery caused by Gandhiji's experiment in uncooked
food; Gandhiji began to suffer from dysentery in the first week of August 1929 and
gave up taking uncooked food from August 15, 1929; vide Vol. XLI, pp. 294, 301
and 306-.
With love,
Yours,
BHAI
[PS.]
Please pass on this letter to Henry as I shall not be dictating a
separate letter to him.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
