193. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 31, 1928
MY DEAR SHANTIKUMAR,
I have your letter. The terms that I think the mill-owners
should agree to are as follows:
(1) The prices should be regulated by a special committee
representing all interests.
(2) The production both as to kind and quantity should
also be regulated by the said committee.
(3) Mills should cease to sell any mill-cloth under the name
of khadi and should cease within three months at the outside of
the date of acceptance of terms to manufacture any cloth that is
likely to compete with khadi and to this end the committee will
specify from time to time what the mills may not manufacture.
(4) Mills will organize not only the sales of mill-cloth but
they will sell khadi also through the agencies thus organized.
(5) Mills should use no foreign yarn, no foreign silk, no
foreign wool nor artificial silk.
(6) Mills should whole-heartedly identify themselves with
the boycott of foreign cloth movement and to this end should put
forth all their energy towards gaining control over piece-goods
merchants, other middle men and cotton market in so far as it
may be possible.
(7) If a clear understanding is arrived at with mills, khadi
depots will naturally become agencies for the sale of mill-cloth
under terms laid down by the said committee.
(8) Mills should hand to the said committee such funds as
may be required from time to time for propaganda. This, in my
opinion, may not exceed one lakh of rupees.
This letter is being hurriedly dictated. You will therefore please
supplement these conditions with those stated in the two issues
of Young India if there is any omission. You will not publish this
letter in any case, and, you will please remember that these are
only my own personal views, and if anything substantial is to
come out of these talks, [th]ere will have to be a formal meeti[ng
of a]11 concerned.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SJT. SHANTIKUMAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat: C.W. 4787. Courtesy: Shantikumar Morarji
