6. LETTER TO T. A. V. NATHAN
January 11, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter enclosing three cuttings for which I thank
you. I take them in order of their dates.
That of the 28th December calls for no reply.
That of the 29th, that is, the one on the postponement of the
fast has led you to grant me an indulgence, because you have been
averse to the method of the fast. But I must not exist on in-
dulgences from friends, especially in religious matters. Fortunately
for me, your indulgence is due to an oversight of a material con-
dition, whose happening was to automatically postpone the fast,
and this was some legal difficulty which could not be got over
within the time. This difficulty came in the shape of the want
of Viceregal sanction. If I had taken the fast on the 2nd of
January, I am afraid that you would not only have condemned
the fast as such but you would have condemned it as coercion
against the Government of India. So, you see that the fast is
postponed, not because I have realized its uselessness, but because
I have realized the sinfulness of taking it in spite of the superven-
ing of a contingency that had been contemplated and provided for.
Your last article, that is, of the 4th instant, calls for a fairly
large reply, but I shall not attempt it, if only because I have to
economize time just at present. I see in my proposal no surrender
whatsoever of principle. In this campaign I have endeavoured,
as much as a Harijan by adoption can, to put myself in his posi-
tion, and I say to the objectors: 'If you are polluted by my
presence or by my touch, I am quite prepared to consent to a
separate period being reserved for you to offer worship by your-
selves. I give you the same credit for sincerity that I claim for
myself. You are as much entitled to worship in the temple as I
think I am. Therefore you offer worship in your time, and I shall
1 In which the addressee had written: "I feel you have let down the refor-
mers by your compromise formula, and I hope you will excuse me when I
say that the impression in enlightened circles in South India is that you have
played into the hands of orthodox Brahmins."
2 Vide Vol. LII, pp. 303 and 305.
6
offer worship, along with the reformers, during the period reserved
for us, and since by tradition you have been taught to think that
the efficacy of the idol is diminished by my entering the portals of
the temple gate, though I do not believe in it myself, let the priest
perform the purification ceremony.'
This is how I rehearsed the whole thing to myself before I
made the proposal to Pandit Panchanan Tarkaratna. Of course
the proposal would not be worthy of consideration if there was not
a big assumption underlying it, namely, that the objectors would
be in a negligible minority.
My proposal, therefore, is an effective and acid test of the
sincerity of all concerned. If the objectors including the Shastris
are sincere in their protest on behalf of what they consider to be
sanatana dharma, they would jump at the proposal. If the reform-
ers and the Harijans are sincere, they should hail the proposal with
joy, and if it is accepted, regard it as a vast step towards the frui-
tion of the reform. If it is found by experience that the caste
Hindus who offer worship during the joint period are themselves a
negligible quantity, it would be a defeat for the reformer, and it
would be a sign that the Harijans should abstain from entering those
temples where they are unwelcome visitors. They would not then
have to go to the temples as beggars before caste-men. They will
go, if they go at all, as fellow-Hindus, welcomed by an overwhel-
ming majority of caste-men who would not consider themselves in
any way polluted by the touch of the erstwhile untouchables.
Any other solution would be tantamount to compulsion. You
will recall what I said in one of my previous statements that wher-
ever the majority of the temple-goers are against the admission of
Harijans those temples should not be visited by them, and where
the majority was composed of reformers, the possession should go
to them along with the Harijans and that the minority should
build another temple for themselves, if they so choose; but in the
course of argument with Pandit Panchanan Tarkaratna, I discovered
a flaw in that proposal. It is an undoubted fact that-whether it
is right or wrong is not the question-thousands of people attribute
particular sanctity to their favourite temples. That sanctity is for
them an untransferable thing. Sanctity handed down from ancient
times cannot be imparted to a new image and a new temple by
the mere will of man, and therefore the proposal I have now
published dawned upon me, and the proposal to be of any value
has to carry with it the consent to purification, again out of scru-
pulous regard for the religious sentiment of the minority.
You will sympathize with my reasoning, even if you may not
agree with it, when you realize that ahimsa is a fundamental creed
with me and enforceable under every conceivable circumstance.
That I may fail miserably in reducing my creed to practice on all
occasions does not detract from the creed, and is irrelevant to the
discussion; and my non-violence would not permit me to do
violence to the feelings of a single devotee who has been accustom-
ed to visit a particular temple.
I would also ask you to
remember that, whatever may be said to the contrary, for
me the whole of this campaign against untouchability is a purely
religious campaign. It is a movement of a big reform in Hinduism
which, as I have said so repeatedly, must die if untouchability as
we know it today is not eradicated. I must also confess that I have
a profound reverence for the Hindu Shastras as I have conceived
them; but I cannot impose my conception upon others by
force. I must let it work its way in the midst of competing inter-
pretations and conceptions. Therefore wherever possible, my atti-
tude would be to make provision for all other conceptions and
interpretations.
If you would bear these things in mind, you would not only
understand my position but you will support me whole-heartedly,
and I want your support. I want the support of every Hindu.
Your paper represents I know a very large body of advanced
Hindu opinion and since you are taking the trouble of trying to
understand me, I am not going easily to give up the attempt to
enlist your full support.
You have asked me quite unjustly "whether he (i.e., I) would
be willing to satisfy the conscience of conservative seekers in
England who want that political reform in India should be postponed
to some later period". I will not insult your intelligence by showing
you that there is no analogy between the position underlying your
question and the position with reference to temple-entry, especially
in view of what I have said in the foregoing paragraphs.
Lastly, you cavil at the use of the word 'Harijan' for untouchables.
Evidently, you do not know how the word came to be used in the
first instance. It was suggested by certain untouchable friends who
do not like to be called 'untouchables', and it was suggested be-
cause a saintly poet of Gujarat, according to their interpretation
of one of his hymns, used it in connection with 'untouchables'. I
immediately seized upon the word as also otherwise most fitting, for
the most despised people are the most favoured of God.
I fail to see any slave mentality about the origin of the use of
the word or its continuance, and let us hope that when untouch-
ability has a decent burial, we shall all strive to become Harijans,
that is, pure men of God.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. T. A. V. NATHAN
EDITOR, "THE JUSTICE"
14 MOUNT ROAD, MADRAS
From a microfilm: M.M.U./XXII
