130. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
October 30, 1940
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I have to thank you about your letter of the 24th instant.
As to the first paragraph of your letter, I have already
given you my reaction to the notices referred to by you.
The second paragraph is astounding.
Reducing your lan-
guage to simple terms you tell me that I must be punished if I
do not behave myself. I hardly needed to be given the warn-
ing. But I do not mind it. The language used by you shows
the pains you have taken to conceal your meaning in as gentle
words as the English language and your exalted office will let
you.
But I was wholly unprepared for your assumptions. I have
nowhere said that I desire freedom to conduct a civil disobedience
movement in a way that commends itself to me and that for
that purpose I wish to enjoy unrestricted access to the public
through the ordinary channels of publicity.
You will see from
my statement1-copy of which is hereto attached-that I have
claimed that civil disobedience can be conducted without
publicity through newspapers. This statement was published
before your letter reached me.
Indeed, if civil disobedience
depended for its conduct upon the mercy of the Government
against which it was directed, it must be poor stuff, utterly
worthless for the purpose intended. It seeks through self-suffering
to convert the opponent.
You then say:
Although, however, you evidently wish me to believe that this
movement which you have initiated will be more dangerous if you do
not enjoy these facilities, I must credit you personally with the desire
that it should succeed in its avowed object, that of persuading the
public to withhold all support from India's war effort.
There is no warrant in my letter for the belief entertained
by you. The whole purpose of my letter has been missed. It
was to commend to your sympathetic attention the fact that
I was taking extraordinary precautions to ensure non-violence,
and the further fact that to that end I was restricting the move-
ment to the fewest possible typical individuals. I had hugged
the belief that you would, as a friend, be pleased with the in-
formation and, recognizing the fact, you would not put your-
self in the wrong by passing the wholly unnecessary drastic
gagging ordinance you have passed. You have by that ordinance
demonstrated to the world that you could not conduct the war
through India except by stifling public opinion. I had hoped
that you would be satisfied with such aid as the Princes, moneyed
men and professional warlike classes could give you. They could
not come under my or the Congress influence.
I am sure you will not compare India with Britain. In Brit-
ain you have the Houses of Parliament through which the nation
acts. Here you have powers derived not from India but from
Great Britain that no single individual in the wide world
enjoys over so many people. I had hoped that you would use
them with restraint. It was for that purpose that I had sought
the last interview and stayed beyond my time so that I might
not be said to have rushed you.
For the moment the hope
has been dashed to pieces.
I ask you to believe me when I
tell you that, in every single step I have taken, I have thought
of you and your people as your and their true friend. One day
you will feel the truth of this remark if you do not today.
But I accept your verdict for the moment. I do not want
to conduct the movement secretly. Nor can I allow non-violence
to perish by default. I might, therefore, give the only thing I
have in me to give-my life. I told you about the possibility
of a fast, prolonged or unto death. I was waiting on God to
find what is to be the case. I am trying hard to avoid it but
I may not be able to do so.
You will have another letter
from me when I have come to the final conclusion.
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru has been with me. I had invited
him to be the next resister.
He had consented.
Your
ordinance came after. And the fast idea possessed me. He
has an open mind on the fast. But he thinks, and I have agreed
with him, that the contemplated resistance by him should be
completed before entertaining the idea of the fast. Therefore
the very next step is to be his civil resistance. As soon as the date
and place are finally decided, I shall let you have them for your
information.
I hope you will not resent this letter. I have written as a
friend to a friend and not as a member of the public to you as
the Viceroy. I have not written to seek publicity or to make
a point against you. I will not publish this letter or any part
of the recent correspondence between us without your consent.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 7855. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
