17. LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE
January 15, 1932
DEAR SIR SAMUEL1,
I had not expected to write to you, at any rate not quite
so soon from a prison.
I had promised to let you know before I took any serious
step. But the events came upon me with such a sudden rush
that there was no time or choice left for me. I have no doubt
you have seen the telegrams exchanged between the Viceroy and
me. I tried my best to keep up co-operation but failed in my
opinion through no fault of my own. I cannot help feeling that
the Viceroy was wholly in the wrong in refusing to see me except
on impossible conditions. I have just written a personal letter to
Lord Willingdon urging him to reconsider his position.
I can assure you that I reached Bombay with every intention
of co-operating. Your letter, for which pray accept my thanks,
cleared one difficulty. And I had hoped that a heart to heart
talk with the Viceroy would clear up the difficulty about the
ordinances and administration in the interim. Indeed I had
planned things about Hindu-Muslim question and other matters
with Sir Akbar Hydari who was on the same boat with me and
in ignorance of what was happening in India. I had given, as
you might have seen, the day before landing, a hopeful message
to Reuter's representative on board. But the events I saw happen-
ing in India did startle me. I at once sought an interview with
the Viceroy with the result you know.
Let me add this: cruel suggestions have appeared in the
Press that my colleagues forced me to the position I took up.
There is no warrant whatsoever for them. The initiative for every
step was mine and it was a logical outcome of my creed of satya-
graha. I cannot wish for more loyal colleagues. In matters of
satyagraha they yield to my judgment as to an expert's. I don't
expect you to reply to this letter. I thought I should just tell
you what I think about it all. Whatever happens, I shall always
retain happy recollections of our meetings.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: C.W. 9556. Courtesy: India Office Library
