61. LETTER TO PRESIDENT, MYSORE STATE
CONGRESS
April [24,] 1938
DEAR FRIEND,
B. Chandrasekhara, D. Chandrasekharayya, B. Ramachan-
dran have seen me with reference to the recent unfortunate
arrests that have taken place in Mysore. I am sorry that Sid-
dhalingaiya and seven other friends are in jail over what has
been called the flag satyagraha. I had hoped that after the
full talks I had with friends including Siddhalingaiya at Delang
there would be no friction between the State and the Congress.
With the concurrence of these friends and their hearty approval
I had given Sir Mirza a fairly full summary of the conversation
they had with me. Sir Mirza has been writing to me about
developments, but I was loath to intervene unless I had heard
from the State Congress.
I must also admit that my preoccupation in Bengal would
have most probably prevented my doing anything even if you
or any member had written to me. Today I had a full discus-
sion with the friends above named. I feel that there has been
some misunderstanding or some haste on the part of overzealous
workers. Thus I had clearly advised at Delang that the
confining of membership of the Mysore State Congress only to
primary members of the Indian National Congress was wholly
wrong and that in effect it made the State Congress an Indian
National Congress organization even though it might be un-
affiliated. In my opinion that is contrary to the spirit of the
Haripura resolution on the subject and, what is more, calcu-
lated to defeat the end you have in view. And as Sir Mirza
was in possession of my opinion, the action of the State Cong-
ress in spite of my advice was evidently the first cause of mis-
understanding and the hoisting of the flag was evidently
interpreted as a challenge to the State and the State flag. I am
quite clear in my mind that such was not the intention of the
authors of the demonstration but we may not expect the State
authorities to go behind our action and interpret it in terms
of our intention expressed or implied. On the contrary they
would infer intention from action. I, therefore, suggest that
necessary change is immediately made in the State Congress
constitution and an unequivocal declaration is made to the
effect that the hoisting of the National Congress flag is in no
way intended as a hostile demonstration or insult to the State
flag. If Mysore is an integral part of India, as it is, it should
be equally proud of the All-India national flag as it must be
of its own.
It will also be necessary for you to make it clear that you
will not hoist the national flag on ceremonial occasions where
persons other than registered Congress members are admitted,
unless you also at the same time hoist the Mysore flag. Re-
member, you are not in a state of rebellion against the Maha-
raja. So far as I understand you do not aim at the destruc-
tion of the Principality of Mysore. You aim at radical re-
forms. If such is the case, you may not ignore the Mysore flag
on ceremonial occasions, if you have also the all-India flag.
If, therefore, you could see your way to adopt my advice
I should think that the State authorities will release the prisoners
as they should. When the operating cause ceases there is no
meaning in keeping political prisoners in jail. Please remem-
ber that satyagraha has to be full in thought, word and deed.
If I have understood the situation correctly, I must confess that
in the highest sense of the term there has been a departure,
albeit entirely unconscious, from both truth and non-violence.
Truth demanded the carrying out of what I had understood
would be done and I had conveyed to Sir Mirza. I know it
was open to the State Congress to reject my advice.
But in that case I should have been told so that I would
have informed Sir Mirza accordingly. There was a flavour of
violence because any hasty or thoughtless action is a breach of
non-violence. I am well aware that such meticulous observ-
ance of non-violence and truth is not to be expected from
the rank and file. But then satyagraha cannot be launched by
the rank and file. It has to be launched by responsible pers-
ons who are versed in the law of satyagraha.
I understand there is to be a black-flag demonstration. It
savours of violence. I hope if there has been any such idea, it
will be abandoned.
I need hardly say that my letter carries no authority save
what it may possess on account of my supposed expert know-
ledge of satyagraha. You are at perfect liberty to reject the
whole of my advice if it does not commend itself to you and other
members of the State Congress.
If you can get permission, you should see Siddhalingaiya
and other prisoners and if it is at all possible arrive at a unan-
imous decision.
The Hindu, 7-5-1938
