113. LETTER TO DEV PRAKASH NAYYAR
CALCUTTA,
August 26, 1947
CHI. DEV,
Your three letters of the 17th, 18th and 22nd are lying in
front of me. Mridulabehn may not be able to return at pre-
sent. She has been sent to Amritsar. Mahesh should remain
where he is most useful. I have had a talk with General Shah
Nawaz. About the refugees I shall try to send someone from
here by and by. But some officer from there ought to meet the
officers from here.
Perhaps the problem of sanitation is very difficult all over
India. Whatever is possible should be done.
I shall consider both aspects of Saran.
I have read both the Muslim League's memorial and the
reply that you sent to me.
I shall be here till Sunday at any rate. I do intend
leaving for Noakhali on Monday but one cannot say what will
happen. And from there on to Bihar, and of course the trip
to the Punjab in between. But my going or not going to the
Punjab depends upon the news coming from there. If I have
to go my programme will change.
Sushila is still at the Wah Camp. Things are happening
contrary to my anticipation. It means it was very good that I
left behind Sushila because people were very much afraid and
their fear proved right. Thus Sushila's stay has been all to the
good.
Now for your reply to the League memorial, I find it weak
at several places. Of course I have not been able to go deep
into the matter. Probably such a lengthy reply was not even
required. On page 9 you have stated about Rajbir that
Hindus had committed no great crime. Some youths had done
something and the Hindus extinguished the fire. Then why the
collective fine of Rs. 5,000? Similarly in the fourth column you
say there was insufficient evidence. But a fine was imposed. There
are similar inconsistencies at some other places too. Perhaps
there is no occasion for such a lengthy reply now. For whom has
the memorial been drafted?
I shall be able to answer your query about non-violence
only after looking up the book. I shall try to obtain the book.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
