124. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 22, 1910
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 19th instant in reply to my letter of the 23rd ultimo addressed to
the Colonial Secretary, on the subject of the treatment of Mr. Parsee
Rustomjee and other matters. I beg to thank you for the exhaustive
information given to my Association.
As to Mr. Rustomjee's letter to the Press, he was seen leg-ironed
by many Indians, and the matter was reported to my Association on the
very day that he was seen in that condition.
As to the Medical Officer's opinion, I venture to draw attention
to the fact that the Medical Officer at Volksrust did prescribe a special
diet for Mr. Rustomjee. That the language ascribed to the Medical
Officer at Diepkloofby Mr. Rustomjee was used by him is beyond ques-
tion, if a host of passive resisters discharged from Diepkloof are to be
believed. Indeed, most of them have complained of unbecoming lan-
guage used by that Officer.
It was only at a later period that special instructions were issued
that Mr. Rustomjee might be allowed to take exercise. A certificate
from the family physician of Mr. Rustomjee has been produced because
it became necessary to challenge the opinion of the Prison Medical Offi-
cer; and I may state that Mr. Rustomjee is still far from well, and is
undergoing treatment.
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was signed by A. M. Cachalia,
Chairman, British Indian Association.
2 Reproduced in Indian Opinion, 26-3-1910
3 Vide "Letter to Colonial Secretary", pp. 160-.
4 Vide Appendix II.
In my humble opinion, the question of the religious necessity of
wearing a cap is one which Mr. Rustomjee is best able to decide. The
gravamen of the complaint is, however, not that Mr. Rustomjee's spe-
cial cap was taken away, but that he was compelled to take it off when-
ever the Governor and other officers appeared, instead of being allowed
to retain the cap, as was done in Volksrust and Houtpoort, where a
salaam was accepted as an equivalent.
The loss of weight complained of by Mr. Rustomjee is not during
the period of incarceration at Diepkloof alone, but includes the Volks-
rust gaol also. Mr. Rustomjee was undoubtedly grateful that his obesity
was reduced, but reduction took place at very great risk to his general
health.
My Association is deeply grateful for the fact that passive resisters
are translated to Diepkloof in order that they may be left entirely to-
gether. But, if that be so, may I ask that the special provision as to
the prisoners at Diepkloof receiving a visitor and being allowed to cor-
respond only after three months may be withdrawn, and that they
may be, as in other gaols which are not penal settlements, permitted to
correspond every month, and to receive visitors also likewise?
As to the sanitary services of the prison, regard being had to the
special prejudices of British Indians in this matter, before passive resis-
tance commenced, Indian prisoners were exempted from sanitary
service. It was only after their removal to Diepkloof that this hardship
was imposed upon them, and, if it is not the intention of the Govern-
ment to subject passive resisters to special harassment, the Committee of
my Association would once more venture to ask that this requirement
may be waived.
In his statement to the Governor of the Gaol at Johannesburg,
Mr. Rustomjee undoubtedly expressed his thanks for the better treat-
ment that was accorded to him at the Fort and the consideration that
was invariably shown to him by the Governor himself.
Regarding Mr. Bawazeer, I notice that his complaint is practically
admitted by the Government. In his case, the seriousness of the com-
plaint lies in the fact that his disease was ignored and his complaint was
pooh-poohed until after the discovery that he had a high temperature.
My Association has once more to report that the passive resisters at
Diepkloof continue to send messages through discharged prisoners that
they are insufficiently fed, and that the want of ghee is felt as an addi-
tional punishment.
My Association is glad that your Department recognise the mis-
take made about Mr. Joseph Royeppen and his fellow-prisoners having
been made to walk bareheaded and barefooted and sent without any
breakfast.
In conclusion, I venture to trust that the outstanding points re-
garding the supply of ghee, the sanitary service and correspondence by
and visitors to passive resisters will receive the attention they deserve.
Indian Opinion, 26-3-1910
