810. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
WARDHA,
December 2, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,
I have your letter. It pains me that you are distressed. You
have misinterpreted my advice about forgetting Prabhavati. All
I had meant was that you should forget her for just one year,
as you had to do while you were in America. I knew nothing
about leave of absence.
Prabhavati is not here for a job. If you cannot feed her and
nor can I, Brijkishore Babu certainly can. If she is staying here,
it is for future service.
Maybe I am to blame for Prabha not being free in her
thoughts. But our society is more to blame. However, how many
people are free in their thinking? The poor Hindu woman never
considers herself a free person. I have rarely seen a woman, even
an old widow, who thinks of herself as free. Then why do you
blame Prabha and why do you blame me?
Since our ideals are different I can understand your
finding the Ashram routine repugnant. In fact I am pleasantly
surprised that you nevertheless permit Prabha's remaining in
the Ashram.
I am in a quandary. Prabha does not wish to leave either
me or the Ashram. How then can I push her out? I want that
Prabha should follow you about and the differences which have
cropped up between you two should be patched up. But if Prabha
cherishes certain ideals, those ideals are apparently different from
yours. For this I am certainly responsible. Having lived with me,
my ideas and my conduct have certainly made an impression on
her. Now I do not know what it is right to do.
Swaroopraniji asks for Prabha's services. If Prabha returns
there you will have a talk with her. The matter of her return-
ing I have left to her and Jamnalalji. I write this at 3.30 in the
morning. In the course of the day Prabha will discuss the issue
with Jamnalalji and decide.
You must understand that I do not consider myself a
Mahatma and I do not think of the Ashram as something great.
I am fully aware of the faults of the Ashram and of those who
reside here. There certainly is some work being done. But it
hardly deserves any special acclaim on that account.
lt does not seem possible that I shall be able to help you
in the matter of your loan. I had thought of engaging you in
some activity and thus helping you repay the loan. But it does
not appear likely that you will be agreeable to this. It has
never seemed to me right for anyone to go begging for loans. I
had explained to you certain suggestions I had and also written
to you. Please tell me what you would have me do.
lt will be good if you can improve your health while you
are there. There is someone who practises nature cure there.
Would you like to try his treatment? If you are so inclined
you may write to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy:
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
