233. LETTER TO MARSHALL CAMPBELL
110, FIELD STREET,
DURBAN,
January 1, 1914
DEAR MR. MARSHALL CAMPBELL,
I am much obliged to you for your letter of the 30th ultimo,
and for frankly expressing your feelings. I see that recent events
have caused a breach between my friends and myself which must
be left to time and future uniform conduct on my part to heal.
I can only give you my assurance that I know of no agent who
has been permitted to encourage or advise violence. It is the
essence of passive resistance to be free from violent methods even
under circumstances the most provoking. I know you will permit
me to say that neither Mr. Gokhale's acceptance nor the Indian
Committee's acceptance of your hospitality can be allowed to inter-
fere with what Mr. Gokhale or we here might consider to be our
public duty.
The strike and the subsequent courting of imprisonment were
not intended to be a protest against the general treatment of in-
dentured Indians, but against the Government's breach of promise
given to India's greatest representative, and the injustice of per-
petuating a cruel tax which has been so universally condemned.
Passive resistance, which your letter seems to condemn in un-
measured terms, has been the only weapon of the community for
securing redress of grievances for the last six years, and whilst each
stage of it in its commencement has evoked such condemnation as
you have seen fit to pronounce, reflection that, as time went on,
public men were able to give to the struggle, justified it in their
estimation. In a large measure it brought about the relief for which
the weapon was used. This time it has covered a larger range,
it has caused much greater suffering both in intensity and extent,
and has, therefore, called forth a great, though not unexpected,
outburst of indignation, especially from parties immediately affected.
It is hoped that the Government will, in deciding upon the pro-
posals submitted to them after the utmost consideration, be guided
by wisdom and justice rather than by expedience. Should it, there-
fore, be otherwise, and should they reject our prayer, much as
I dislike it, I fear that a recrudescence of the struggle is inevitable.
Posterity alone will be able to judge as to the wisdom or otherwise
of those who are at present guiding the Indians.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 5-1-1914
