279. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
January 31, 1933
DEAR BABOOJI,
The shorter form is more affectionate than the longer. Any-
way I use it as such.
I wish I could induce you to follow my rule-not to publish a
newspaper unless it becomes self-supporting. If the public want
a newspaper, they should pay for it, and when it does not pay for
itself, it shows that it is not wanted. For such a paper naturally
there are no advertisements. There is no padding. It contains
only that which the editor cannot help giving and the staff of such
newspapers will also be chosen for its spirit of self-sacrifice. You
at least may not be party to a paper that exists on charity. Of
course you will throw these ideas in the waste-paper-basket of your
mind if you have any rigid notions about the conduct of news-
papers and if these ideas find no echo in you.
I take it that as editor of the supplement you have every right
to add your own comments to any of the opinions you may be pub-
lishing in the supplement.
I am now torturing my brain and heart to yield to me the
right method of dealing with the situation that has arisen from the
Viceregal decision. My statement is but the prelude to the action
that is developing.
The suggestion you make does not appear to me to be prac-
tical in the sense that the people require prolonged training for
its adoption. The vast mass of those who are today in the habit
of attending temples fervently believe in darshan and its spiritual
benefit. They will not deny to themselves a spiritual benefit for
the sake of others who might be deprived of it and from their own
standpoint they will be right. If they could be persuaded to be-
lieve that there can be no spiritual benefit to be derived from a tem-
ple whose trustees perpetuate injustice, it would be a different
thing. That is the lesson we are trying to drive home, but we have
not yet succeeded to the extent we would like to.
I never knew that Sri Prakasa was a stickler for the proper
spelling of his name in the Roman character. His name in Deva-
nagari can only be spelt in one way. Rendered in a character with
defective phonetics, it cannot be a matter of much consequence
how it is spelt. However I shall respect his weakness.
I had a letter some time ago from Shivaprasad which led me
to think that he was making steady headway. But your letter seems
to point the other way. I would therefore like you to give me
an accurate account about him when Sri Prakasa returns.
Of course if you can get the permission for the publication
of my opinion of your book, if I succeed in sending one, I should
have no objection whatsoever. Of course my private letters do
find their way to the Press. That's no concern of mine. What I
have to guard against is sending of opinions on books for publi-
cation or messages to newspapers for publication apart from un-
touchability.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19275
1 Earlier Gandhiji used to spell his name as "Shri Prakasha".
