102. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
BOMBAY,
February 9, 1919
DEAR MR. SASTRIAR,
I have just read your forcible speech on the Rowlatt Bills.
This is none too strong. The Bills coupled with the Viceroy's,
Sir William Vincent's and Sir George Lowndes' speeches have
stirred me to the very depths; and though I have not left my
bed still, I feel I can no longer watch the progress of the Bills
lying in the bed. To me, the Bills are the aggravated symptoms of
the deep-seated disease. They are a striking demonstration of the
determination of the Civil Service to retain its grip of our necks.
There is not the slightest desire to give up an iota of its unlimited
powers and if the Civil Service is to retain its iron rule over us and
if the British commerce is to enjoy its present unholy and privileged
position, I feel that the Reforms will not be worth having. I
consider the Bills to be an open challenge to us. If we succumb
we are done for. If we may prove our word that the Government
will see an agitation such that they have never witnessed before,
we shall have proved our capacity for resistance to autocracy or
tyrannical rule. When petitions [and] resolutions of gigantic
mass meetings fail, there are but two courses open—the ordinary
rough and ready course is an armed rebellion, and the second is
civil disobedience to all the laws of the land or to a selection of
them. If the Bills were but a stray example of lapse of righteous-
ness and justice, I should not mind them but when they are clear-
ly an evidence of a determined policy of repression, civil disobe-
dience seems to be a duty imposed upon every lover of personal
and public liberty. I wrote yesterday to Panditji suggesting on
the part of all the Indian members or so many of them as would
do so resignation of their positions on the Select Committee and a
resignation of their positions even on the Council, if they would take
the latter step also. I think their resignations will shake the
Government's confidence in its ability to disregard public senti-
ment, and will be an education of great value to the people. For
myself if the Bills were to be proceeded with, I feel I can no longer
render peaceful obedience to the laws of a power that is capable
of such a piece of devilish legislation as these two Bills, and I
would not hesitate to invite those who think with me to join
me in the struggle. It is possible that you will not see eye to eye
with me in the position I wish to take up. But I know that you
would not like me to stifle what may be to me the voice of con-
science. Naturally I would like to secure the approbation of the
very few friends whose advice I value. If, therefore, you have the
time, I would like you to drop me a line telling me what you think
about my contemplated step. I want to give this assurance that
I shall do nothing in haste and I shall do nothing without giving
a previous confidential warning couched in as gentle language
as I can command.
I hope you will keep sound health during the very critical
times that are ahead of us.
From a photostat: S.N. 6433
