52. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
CALCUTTA,
August 14, 1947
CHI. SUSHILA,
I had received your letter, but could get no time at all to
reply to it. I am writing this after the morning prayer. I am
being fairly severely tested here. Instead of going on to Noa-
khali, I have got stuck here. Yesterday I came here to live
in a Muslim's house. This one fact, however, will not give you
a complete picture of the situation and I have no time to write
more.
You are unnecessarily taking things to heart. Manilal's letter
is so transparent and so innocent. He has only poured out his
heart in it. You had a right to draw the inference you did
from the previous letter. Notwithstanding his own desire he
had no objection to your staying on in Akola. But that letter
did not reveal all he had in mind. You should now join him
at the earliest opportunity.
Sita will have what is destined for her. I don't know what
I shall be able to do. This time my train passed through Bana-
ras. But it was late by four hours and Sita could not have come
to the station at that time of night. But I think you yourself
will be in a better position to think over the matter and decide.
It is useless to come and see me. Rama alone knows where I
shall be tomorrow. It looks like I shall be here. But if I am
not here, where will you go wandering after me? If you need
the advice of an elder, Kishorelal is there. You are bound to
benefit by following his advice. What does it matter if our
views do not agree? Each individual thinks differently. May-
be in this matter both of us think alike. But that need not
worry you. You should do only what seems right to you. I
have made the above suggestion in case you cannot do that.
Manilal's letter is enclosed. Though it was in my file, nobody is
likely to have read it. Everybody abides by the restrictions I
place on them. The file is not likely to fall into any stranger's
hands these days. There are only three persons with me, Bisen1,
Abha or Radha (Manu). But what does it matter who is with
me? What can you have which you might want to keep pri-
vate? Manilal's and your letters are never sentimental. I, there-
fore, think that anybody who reads them is bound to learn
something from them.
Remain calm and take every step after careful thinking. If
you have any attachments overcome them.
If you reply to this letter, address it C/O Khadi Pratishthan,
Sodepur.
Krishna wasn't there either in Kashmir or Lahore.
I am getting a copy made of this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C. W. 1426. Courtesy: Sushila Gandhi
