404. LETTER TO DURLAB SINGH
SEVAGRAM,
November 14, 1944
DEAR SARDAR DURLAB SINGH1,
This is my answer to your questions:
(1) My association with Rajaji in his formula could not
affect the Sikh position in the slightest degree, even if Quaid-e-Azam
Jinnah accepted it. The Lahore Resolution of the Congress refer-
red to by you stands. The result of Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah's accept-
ance would have been that both of us would have gone to the
Sikhs and others interested to secure their acceptance. I had made
this clear in my letter to Masterjee.
(2) I cannot understand the Akali indignation. My meeting
a deputation was unnecessary in view of my absolute assurance.
If Masterjee had wanted to bring his friends to me, in spite of
my assurance, I would have gladly seen them as I did other
friends who sought clarification from me.
(3) Maulana Saheb explained the implications of the Jagat
Narain Lal's Resolution which please see. But supposing that it is
inconsistent with the Rajaji Formula and the Congress accepts the
latter, there is nothing to prevent the Congress from rescinding
the Resolution.
(4) How could I favour a contrary opinion when I have
always given the closest collaboration to Sikh friends? Those Sikhs,
who do not accept the Congress creed, naturally refrain, like
many others, from joining the Congress.
(5) I know nothing about the Sikandar7-Baldev Singh Pact,
much less about the Congress High Command's association with
it. Nor do I know the details of the Azad Punjab scheme.
I could never be guilty of blessing anything which is con-
trary to the national interest. You can certainly have the assurance
that the interests of the nationalist Sikhs, as also of all nation-
alists, are safe in my hands, also, I presume, in the Congress hands,
though as you know I have no authority to speak on behalf of
the Congress.
There are many inventions about me going the round. I
would warn friends against giving credence to any of them with-
out reference to me.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Indian Annual Register, 1944, Vol. II, p. 222
