424. LETTER TO SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
Wednesday, January 8, 1947
CHI. JAJUJI,
Your letter of December 9 reached me around the 19th. Manu
read it out to me. But it remained unanswered for lack of time.
In the meanwhile I received another letter yesterday—it is dated
December 30—and it was also yesterday that I embarked on my
walking tour. During the tour the correspondence is to be reduced
to the minimum. For the past few days, I have been waking up
daily at 2.30 or 3 in the morning and writing or dictating. In no
other way can I cope with my work. I know that this method of
working is wrong but I have no choice. If God wishes to save
me, He will. If I restrict myself to the work here and completely
stop letter-writing, there will be no need to wake up too early.
Maybe I shall have to do that. Another way is that I should
appoint old workers and sit back myself. But this seems wrong
to me. There is no doubt that it was the proper thing to entrust
independent work to the old co-workers. A great deal depends
on how much burden Manu can bear. Enlisting someone else
will go against my resolve. Throughout the tour I have to face
the conflict between dharma and adharma. Manu sleeps in the
same bed with me. When I get up I wake her up and dictate
to her. So far she too is pulling along well. So much for the
background—it was necessary to give some, otherwise I could
have saved this much time.
Now I come to the letter of December 9. From the latest
I heard about your health from V. Lal it would seem that it is
improving. Keep up the improvement and remain fully absorbed
in your work. My work should not be a hindrance to anyone.
You may ask me whatever you wish to. I am carrying on a
pleasant correspondence with Prakasam about the work in
Madras; whatever will be will be. I am rendering some help.
We ourselves will have to act as experts. He will not be able to do
it. What he can see to is that there will be no obstruction from
the Government machinery. The Textile Commissioner it would
appear is a competent man. The final result is in the hands of
God. Regarding Saraladevi what I want is that she should be
appointed without delay. She is a very neat and efficient worker.
I believe Dastaneji is already carrying on some correspondence
with her. If I am unable to give a final verdict, obviously the
Board of Trustees must do what it deems proper. About the
Punjab developments I feel that if things reach the point of
fighting we should fight. But I think the occasion will not arise.
You should keep writing to Rajkumari. If there is an opportunity
I shall write something.
Your second letter is brief. There is nothing more to be
said about the exhibition in Madras. I say this much for the
future that if the Provincial Government or the Central Govern-
ment or even the Congress itself adopts a policy contrary to
that of the A. I. S. A., we must follow our khadi policy even at
the risk of leaving the Congress. There is no doubt that we shall
render true service to the Congress and the nation by acting in
this manner. We are entitled to hold an independent opinion,
which means that the public is quite awakened and enlightened
regarding our policy.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have gone through the statement of the A. I. S. A. I got up
at 3 o'clock, had it read out to me and read some of it myself.
I am sending a wire today. You will have got it. I do not
think that the statement needs to be revised. On the whole it
reads well. You should regard me as useless for such work till
my work here is completed. On reading it I was convinced that
we should have decentralization as soon as possible. I think I
did write upon this matter. We must produce experts. We had
better grant Dhiren Mazmudar the amount he wants. Rajkumari
is probably in Delhi. She will not come here now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
