573. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Thursday [May 4, 1927]
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have been wanting to write to you for a good many days,
but can do so only now. Hardly a day passes when I do not
talk about you or think of you.
You had asked Pyarelal to find out about Nandi. In my
opinion Nandi will not suit you. It is not a place where you can
stay throughout the year. The weather changes greatly within
24 hours. And the variations are too great in winter and sum-
mer. All provisions have to be secured from the plains. The
season is over by June. So I think only Panchgani would suit
you.
It is another question how long we should occupy the bun-
galow at Panchgani. This season is already past. So it is all right
to spend the monsoon there. Then perhaps it will be better for
you to go to Mahabaleshwar. From October onwards the wea-
ther there is said to be very good. If we have to undergo the
same sort of thing next year also we have time enough to decide
what to do.
Revashankarbhai lives in Solan. I have asked him to let
me know how things are there.
My health is gradually improving. Hence there is nothing
to write on that score.
I can see that Taramati will not write unless she is pro-
voked. Tell her in my opinion she is lazy.
I want her fully to
benefit physically, mentally and spiritually by her stay at Panch-
gani. Dilip appears to be deriving the fullest benefit from stay-
ing there.
This morning Pyarelal started out on his way to join you. I
now have your wire, and so I have sent a telegram to Pyarelal
at Bangalore to stop him.
From your letter it appears that I alone was responsible
for detaining Pyarelal. I wanted to keep him with me for a few
days. After your telegram yesterday he asked my permission to
leave and I gave the permission.
Now I will wait for your letter. And I will do whatever is
proper.
You had wished that I should stay at Panchgani. But that
was not possible. Work demanded that I should be in this pro-
vince. Once my health is normal I shall certainly finish the
work. True, it will be done in a somewhat novel manner.
Are you reading anything?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
