533. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS TANDON
PANCHGANI,
June 13, 1945
BHAI PURUSHOTTAMDAS TANDONJI,
I received your letter yesterday. If I understand correctly
what you write, you and other lovers of Hindi should welcome
my new viewpoint and help me. But this is not happening.
People in Gujarat are in a dilemma and are asking me what
they should do. A son of my own nephew and many others
like him are doing both Hindi Prachar work and Hindustani
Prachar work. This creates difficulties. You know Perinbehn.
She wants to work for both. But the time has now come for
one of the two to be given up. If what you say is right, then
the need for this should never arise. In my view, it should be
possible for a person to be the President or Secretary of both
the Hindustani Prachar Sabha and the Hindi Sahitya Samme-
lan. That he may not be able to do so because the work
would be too heavy is a different matter. And if your letter
means, as it should mean what I also say, then there can be
no reason for any difference of opinion and I shall be greatly
delighted. I have gone through your statement that you sent
me. In my view the Hindustani Prachar Sabha is doing only
your work and therefore deserves your thanks. And you at
least should become a member of it. I had requested you to
be its member but you refused saying that you would keep out
so long as Dr. Abdul Haq did not come in.
Now my re-
quest is that if what I write is correct and if we both are of the
same view, then this should be clarified by the Hindi Sahitya
Sammelan. If this is not necessary I shall not insist on it.
But at least it should be made clear that there is no difference
of opinion about it between you and me. It is no light matter
for me to get out of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan. But just as
I withdrew from the Congress in order to serve it the better, in
the same way if I leave the Sammelan it will be to serve the
Sammelan, that is, Hindi, the better.
What you call my new ideas are not really new. It would
be more correct to say that I am now only putting into prac-
tice what I had said when I first became the President of the
Sammelan and what I clarified further when I became its
President for the second time. I shall decide finally after re-
ceiving your reply.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
[From Hindi]
Rashtrabhashake Prashnapar Gandhiji aur Tandonjika Mahatvapurna Patra Vya-
vahar, pp. 4-5; also Rajarshi Abhinandan Granth, p. 91
