235. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
March 9, 1906
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
You asked me to send a list of those who have not paid regarding
Mr. Nazar's estate. Did you not make a list of the whole thing? I don't
know what £15/ represent. I have an impression that you told me
you had made out all the bills. If you haven't a list, I would be able
to send you one, but would not know who had paid and who had not.
You are to collect undoubtedly from Thanu Maharaj. You need not
bother Bhatt, Subhab, but there will be at least that dividend to be paid
to them. From Mr. Miankhan you should collect. I return the paper.
I have not received the correspondence you refer to in your Gujarati
letter received to-day. I have now received it.
I shall write to Osman Amod.
Of course, we do not want to make extracts from the Islam Gazette.
I received your telegram saying that you will be able to do the Thea-
trical job. I should have been quite content if it had not been done.
All I would want you to be careful about is having made a promise to
keep it. I may send you work rom here without knowing whether you
will be able to do it or not, but you have always the right not to do
it if you can't.
If you cannot get satisfaction from Osman Amod, you should refuse
to accept work. Make the position perfectly clear to him that we have
to pay for work done outside in hard cash. We have to do nothing in
fear. We want to please in a reasonable manner only and if we fail to
please, the blame won't be ours. All, therefore, we have to do is to
put ourselves to inconvenience for others, be always courteous, and to
suffer when necessary. Further than that we are not called upon to go.
I have not yet received Coovadia and Patel's letter[s], but as soon
as I do, I shall reject them but will give you a note in reply to their
correspondence.
We cannot, and we do not want, to ask the Congress or the Bri-
tish Indian Association to defray the expense of complimentary copies.
It is a pity that we have no cable from Maganlal.
We do not wish at this stage to give Mr. Dowd Mahomed's photo-
graph, but you should give Mr. Abdul Cadir['s], even if it is next week.
You have sent me no bill for the restaurant except the handbills.
My instructions were to send me the bill also. Please let me have it.
You should be always careful to send bills whenever you execute orders.
1 This sentence is added in Gandhiji's own hand.
I was to have received cash against delivery. How can I if I have not
got the bill from you[?]
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosures
C. K. GANDHI, ESQ.
C/O Indian Opinion
PHOENIX
From the photostat of the original typescript signed by Gandhiji : S.N. 4321
