27. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
DURBAN,
February 2, 1897
THE EDITOR, The Natal Mercury
SIR,
I venture to offer a few remarks on the Indian famine,
regarding which appeal for funds has been made to the British
Colonies.
It is not perhaps generally known that India is the
poorest country in the world, in spite of the fabulous accounts
of the riches of her Rajas and Maharajas. The highest Indian
authorities state that "the remaining fifth (i.e., of the population
of British India), or 40,000,000, go through life on insufficient
food". This is the normal condition of British India. Famines,
as a rule, recur in India every four years. It must not be diff-
icult to imagine what the condition of the people would be at
such a time in that poverty-stricken country.
Children are
snatched from their mothers, wives from their husbands. Whole
tracts are devastated, and this in spite of the precautions taken
by a most benevolent Government.
Of the famines of recent
times, that of 1877-78 was the most severe. The famine commi-
ssioners thus report as to the death-rate:
It has been estimated, and, in our opinion, on substantial grounds,
that the mortality which occurred in the Provinces under British ad-
ministration, during the period of famine and drought extending over
the years 1877 and 1878, amounted, in a population of 197,000,000
to 52,50,000 in excess of the deaths that would have occurred had the
seasons been ordinarily healthy.
The total expenditure during the crisis was over £11,000,000.
The present famine bids fair to beat the record in point
of severity. The distress has already become acute. The worst
time has yet to come, when summer sets in. This is the first
time, I believe, that the British Colonies have been appealed
to from India, and it is to be hoped the response will be gener-
ous. The Central Famine Committee at Calcutta must have
exhausted all the resources before deciding to appeal to the Colo-
nies. And it will be a great pity if the response is not adequate
to the urgency of the appeal.
It is true that the outlook is not particularly cheerful even
in South Africa, but it will be admitted that there can be no
comparison between the distress in India and that in South Africa.
And even if there should be a call on the purse of the Natal
magnates on behalf of the South African poor, I venture to trust
that that would not deter them from dipping their hands deep
into their purses on behalf of millions of their fellow-subjects in
India, who are on the verge of starvation. Whether it be in the
United Kingdom or in the Colonies, I am sure British philan-
thropy will assert itself, as it has on previous occasions, on behalf
of suffering humanity, no matter where and how often.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 4-2-1897
