451. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NANDI HILL,
May 11, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,
I have just got your letter. We reached here yesterday safe
and sound. It was Sunday and so though I thought of you, I
dismissed the talk of a wire. Those who try to approach the
villagers have to forget that there is such a thing as telegrams. A
weekly post is all they have and often not even that. In Segaon there
is supposed to be a weekly delivery but I am told the postman
in Wardha hands the letters to any Segaon man whom he comes
across and whom he trusts! ! !
Your letters are all torn [up] after I have read and answered them.
I hope you got my letter written on the train in pencil
hand. It was posted at Madras.
I walked up the hill from the base. It took me 2½ hours,
the distance covered was over 5 miles. I walked very slow.
Hence there was no fatigue. It was Dr. Ansari who wanted the
Sardar to pass the summer on a hill. And he himself is no more.
Evidently his death was quite sudden. For me it is a very per-
sonal loss. I relied upon his advice in so many matters.
The pressure put upon you not to resist your nomination to
the Jullunder Municipality, I quite understand. Idiots being
honest people and therefore impartial, are always in demand. How
could it be otherwise—you, a princess among them—not the
hereditary one but by right of merit.
I do not mind your trying to make Simla less insanitary.
Only don't you catch the infection. Why don't you move the
Municipal Committee? Of course, what is true of Segaon and
Sindi must be true of the black town of Simla. I suppose you
know that the old Indian part of Madras is to this day called black
town. It has not occurred to any of the city fathers to change that
name, though they give patriotic names to some of their streets.
We cannot all of a sudden develop sanitary habits because we
heave up to Simla heights. But the M. Committee can, if it
will, enforce proper sanitation. Many things are enforced over
there. Sanitary enforcement will be least open to objection.
Well, Nandi Hill is really a model of sanitation, of course
enforced from above. The air is beautiful. The calmness is divine.
No cars or carts or even rickshaws. Only 30 families can live
here comfortably. More are not allowed. I do not know a more
secluded, cleaner, quieter hill. Sardar is in raptures over the still-
ness. I know you will love it, if you were here.
Ku. reaches Wednesday.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3571. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6380
