162. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
GORAKHPUR,
Silence Day, October 7, 1929
CHI. KISHORELAL,
I do not remember to have written to you about your note
on the Gita. I liked it. I am of the view that the Sanskrit text
need not be printed along with the translation. This translation
is not intended for those who wish to read the Sanskrit. They
will manage somehow. This attempt is meant for those who do
not know Sanskrit or know so little of it that it cannot help
them to follow the meaning. Nevertheless, we can make a
pocket edition available to those who wish to go to the
Sanskrit text after reading this translation. We should free our-
selves from the slavery to Sanskrit. If the path of the Gita is
for women, Vaishyas and even Shudras, it should be possible to
explain it, and it should be as intelligible in any other language
as in Sanskrit. Hence, in my view, one part should consist
only of the Gujarati translation, the second of a concordance
and the third of the Sanskrit text. Anyone who so wishes can
buy all the three parts together or only one. Kaka has discussed
this idea at some length with Mahadev and Swami. It is my
impression that Kaka and Swami have fully understood my
point of view. I believe that Mahadev has some reservations.
Vallabhbhai also has taken some interest in this matter. He has
opted for a separate Gujarati edition.
What is relevant is this : is the translation of a literary
quality, simple and intelligible ? If not, it should be consigned
to the flames. I would not feel unhappy if it was. I had intended
to attempt something like the present translation for my own
amusement and better understanding. To add to it, Swami was
after me that I should give a translation that would reflect my
views and should only venture to put forward my explanation
of the teaching of the Gita. I had no right [to talk on the
subject] till I did that. I was convinced by this argument of
his. My experience proved its correctness, and I have therefore
reaped the fruit of my effort. It would now be an additional
reward it we publish it for the people. If necessary, you may
still consider the matter from this point of view also. Interest
Nath also in the subject. Ask him to pay at least a flying visit
to the Ashram when he has the time. Mahadev has taken away
your note with him. You may have known about it. He and
Kaka together are vetting the translation.
How is your health and Gomati's ? So, Surendra has stayed
on there. Has he calmed down? You must be keeping an
eye on Giriraj.
God keeps my cart trundling along. If you ask me how
it does, I cannot answer. It is certainly not doing so through
my strength. What wonder, therefore, that my faith in God
daily grows stronger ?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C. W. 10711. Courtesy: Gomatibehn
Mashruwala
