472. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
3 p.m., October 23, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Ghelabhai's wire about Punjabhai having passed away
reached me yesterday at 9 p.m. Who is this Ghelabhai? I will
expect detailed information about him. I am sure all the inmates
of the Ashram attended the funeral. I will give my reminiscences
of Punjabhai in a separate article.
Read my letter to Champa. What is her problem? If Kot-
wal comes and stays with her, it will certainly be good. A letter
for him also is enclosed. Champa writes in her letter about her
desire to go to Rangoon. Think over this.
The Ashram does not seem to be a fortunate place for
Jamna. She seems to be keeping all right in Rajkot. Why, then,
should she not continue to live there? Those who live outside the
Ashram but follow its rules, really live in the Ashram itself. On
the other hand, those who live in the Ashram but follow its
rules unwillingly and only in their letter, and who in their
thoughts live outside the Ashram, do not really live in the
Ashram. It would be far better that Jamna, instead of living in
the Ashram and remaining ill all the time, should keep good
health outside and do what service she can. I am not writing
a separate letter to her today. But both of you should think
over what I have said and do what seems proper.
I duly got both your postcards regarding Mohan. I should
have received Anandi's postcard earlier, but I got it at the
same time as yours. We should not feel surprised at such things
happening here. I was glad that Mohan was out of it soon.
We should thank God if there is no relapse. That Kusum,
Navin, Dhiru and Manju, all four of them are ill is a terrible
thing. I have already explained my ideas concerning them. Do
what you think best.
Read my letter to Bhau. That letter made it necessary for
me to write to Talwalkar. Read the letter which I have written
to him also. Pass it on to him if you approve it and think it
is all right. Bhau should see whether the facts are stated cor-
rectly. If you do not approve of the letter, tear it up.
Where was Joshi arrested? Where is he at present? Is
anyone permitted to see him?
Anandi may take the injection. I see that your list does in-
clude a letter from the Jain muni. I had replied to him directly.
If you have got his address, drop a postcard to him and tell him
that I sent a direct reply to him. I have advised him not to give
up his muni's dress.
I don't remember having seen Ramniklal's letter. It must
have been left behind there. Ask him to write again.
I get a letter from Mirabehn every week. She has stopped
visiting me in order that she may be permitted to write to me
as frequently. She is quite cheerful now. Her letter had given
me the impression that she must have been in a daze during my
fast. She was of course working, but could not concentrate on
anything.
I see that your list includes a letter from Chhaganlal Joshi
also. I did not get that letter either.
I saw your list of primus stoves. It took me aback. We cer-
tainly live in no ordinary style. However, it will be enough now
if the women agree that only men may light these stoves. If they
don't, they should be ready to sacrifice one victim at least on
the altar of this demon-god. The Ashram has no licence of exemp-
tion from such accidents. In this age of freedom, I should be satis-
fied with this warning.
Read my letter to Lilavati.
I don't seem to have received the postcard from Wardha.
Read my letter to Prabhudas. You should certainly be strict.
He must live within his budget. If it is absolutely necessary to
spend more, he should get your previous permission. If there is
no provision in his budget for a gardener, I think we should
make it.
Manilal's and Devdas's visits have not been stopped. They
can come whenever they wish to.
My food is practically the same. I ate bread for two days and
then stopped it. The weight has increased by three-quarters of
a pound. That is, it is 99½ pounds.
Enquire about Kusum.
You should read the Gita daily for many hours during the
fast.
There are 45 letters with this.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8261. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
