92. LETTER TO REVASHANKAR SODHA
January 27, 1919
I have your letter. I like your desire to acquire know-
ledge. I wish to respect it, too, but at the moment I shall have
to restrain it. The desire for knowledge has sometimes to be re-
nounced. Personally, I feel my inadequacy in Sanskrit, and my
eagerness to study Marathi, Bengali and Tamil is more than I
can describe. And yet I have had to check my greedy desire,
thanks to the tasks which fell to my lot one after another.
I often wish to give Chi. Devdas ever so much knowledge. He has
a gift for learning and I am confident that he would turn his
learning to good account. Even so, I have stopped his studies be-
cause the work he is doing, teaching Hindi to our brethren in
Madras, is more important. Take the case of Chi. Maganlal him-
self. His deficiency in the matter of education has no limit. I think
we would all admit that, if he could study further, he would make
excellent use of his knowledge. I often realize his lack of ad-
equate education. Despite this, ever since he joined me, I have
had to employ him on other tasks and therefore I could not let
him study further. I could recount many more instances, but I
have given enough to satisfy you. Just at present we have so many
things to be done through the Ashram that we must set every avai-
lable person to work. And so I think that, for the present,
you must attend, with single-minded devotion, to whatever work
is entrusted to you and give full satisfaction in it. I shall always
keep in mind the question of your studies and, when I feel that
the time has come for it, I shall not let the opportunity go. If
this reply does not satisfy you, write to me whatever you would. I
want to take work from you after satisfying you.
Take good care of your health. My health, it seems, is im-
proving. When the doctor's treatment here is over, I intend to visit
the Ashram before going elsewhere. But that may well take a
month. Hence you may write to me whatever you want to. Do not
put it off, thinking that we shall talk things over when we meet.
You must write with the utmost freedom.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. V
