95. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
Unrevised
June 30, 1929
BHAISHRI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
Your three letters are before me. I would have no right to
be in this lovely, secluded spot surrounded by snow-clad moun-
tains, if I had no special work to do here. The special work was
revision of the translation of the Gita, which had remained unfinished
at Wardha. I could complete it only in seclusion. I just sat down
here for the purpose. I have postponed all other work that could
be postponed till I could finish this job. That is the reason why I
have not replied to you earlier. The work on the Gita is now over.
Now regarding Keshu. His father's hope and mine has been
that ultimately Keshu would choose the Ashram life and dedicate
himself to khadi work. But I do not wish to put any pressure
on him. And now he is in your hands. You should take from
him such work as he may be willing to do and as may be for his
good. You should look upon him as your own son and train him.
You have trained numerous young men and I have been
informed and I believe that many enterprises of the Birla family
were started by you.
What shall I say about khadi when there is the opportunity
of using your talent for the sale of khadi? The khadi stock is all
sold out. Still, it is bound to accumulate again. I shall then use your
ability. At present we shall let the business run itself. I hope the
khadi being "unasked for" does not mean I sent it without permis-
sion? As for production, it is true that here I cannot make
much use of your assistance. We are making what efforts we can.
What happened about the dairy?
I have not fasted. Since I began to look upon death as my
great friend I have given up fasting on account of death. I did
not fast on the death of Maganlal and Rasik. Death now has ceased
to hurt or, say, it hurts very little.
The experiment with uncooked food is continuing.
The meaning of [faddist] can be understood as 'dhuni' in
Gujarati. I am unfamiliar with the word 'sanaki'. 'Chakram' of
course will not do.
These days I try to write something every week for Hindi
Navajivan. If you don't happen to read it now, begin to do so
and give me any suggestions that you deem fit about the subject-
matter and language.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I shall reach Delhi on July 5 and the Ashram on 6th.
From Hindi: C. W. 6174. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
