373. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
October 31, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,
I am glad you have expressed yourself freely on the question
of 'vows'.
You seem to me to misunderstand my meaning. No fault of
yours. You have not the original before you. I have not seen
the translation. The word 'vow' is also an unsuitable equivalent
for the original '<{(I'. But the best thing for me is to explain what I
mean and then leave you to find the exact word if you endorse
my position. If you contest it, you should continue the corres-
pondence till we have thrashed the subject out.
You seem to think of vows publicly administered to audiences.
This mayor may not be good. The 'vow' I am thinking of is a
promise made by one to oneself. We have to deal with two
dwellers within: Rama and Ravana, God and Satan, Ormuzd
and Ahriman The one binds us to make us really free, the other
only appears to free us so as to bind us tight within his grip. A
'vow' is a promise made to Rama to do or not to do a certain thing
which, if good, we want to do, but have not the strength unless
we are tied down, and which, if bad, we would avoid, but have
not the strength to avoid unless similarly tied down. This I hold
to be a condition indispensable [to] growth. I grant that we are
higher than the sun, how much more necessary for us to be at
least as true and faithful as the sun if not truer and more faith-
ful? If in matters of commerce, a man who vacillates is useless,
why should he fare otherwise in matters spiritual which carry with
them infinitely greater consequences? If you hold that I must speak
and do the right thing at any cost, you grant my whole position and
so you also do if you grant that, at the peril of my life, I should be
faithful to my wife or friend. You can easily multiply such instances.
For me Jesus was pre-eminently a man of unshakable resolution,
i.e., vows. His yea was yea for ever. A life of vow is like
marriage, a sacrament. It is marriage with God indissoluble for
all time. Come let us marry Him. Verb Sap.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10081
