114. LETTER TO B. F. BHARUCHA
[After July 7, 1927]
I have your letters. I shall now reply to them as far as
I can; but for a completely satisfactory reply you must run down
here, as you usually do. Take it that the replies I give are for your
benefit only. If, however, you wire me asking for my permission
to publish my replies, I am not going to decline it; just the same I
should like to say that you have committed a blunder in pub-
lishing my last letter. I had not written either to disturb the
satyagrahis or to check them, but merely for your information and
as a warning to you. When you solicited my permission, I thought
you approved the substance of my letter and that you intended to
stop the struggle and therefore you wanted to make use of my
letter. Instead, you did just the opposite. If you had not under-
stood my reply or if you did not approve of it there was abso-
lutely no need to communicate it to the satyagrahis. I cannot
understand how and why a rift was created among them. But it is
no use crying over spilt milk.
Now that's all over. But I must say this: It is your duty and
of other friends who regard the Nagpur struggle as a satyagraha
to continue it. If you must have the sanction of the Congress,
you must strongly refute my views and obtain its sanction. And
know that I am not going to take it amiss if you do so. And if
you obtain the sanction of the Congress I shall not be sorry; in-
stead, I shall congratulate you. But let me strike a note of
caution that before you do anything, make sure that you have
correctly understood my views. The answers to your other ques-
tions are as follows:
1. It was not my duty to offer unsolicited criticism of the Nag-
pur satyagraha.
2. I did not think it proper to say anything beyond refuting what
can convince me that resorting to arms can come within the scope
of satyagraha should I not let him do so? How can one pronounce
judgment without knowing the facts? Then if you would ask
me why I wrote that letter to you, let me tell you that it is a
common practice for friends to exchange ideas, that it is only
rational to be willing to modify one's own ideas in the process, if
possible. For instance today I do believe that God exists but I do
not refuse to listen to the agnostics.
7. Won't you now agree that the answer to your seventh question
is included in my answer to your sixth1? If you do not, then let
me know so that I shall find time and answer it again.
8. I think this too is covered by my answers to the earlier
questions.
9. When you say that the calm atmosphere necessary for satya-
graha is not there, you make an observation applying to the whole
of India. But there are a number of other conditions for satyagraha
and when I talked of the general atmosphere in the country, you
sought to limit your view to the local atmosphere. Here again
you misunderstand my article .
10. If I tell the Congress President who has proffered help that a
certain satyagraha is no satyagraha, although you are associated
with it, what is there to be embarrassed about? Certainly you
are no stranger to the well-known dictum: "There are as many
ideas as there are heads."
11. I have a number of other ideas which the [Congress] Presi-
dent, Patel, Bharucha, Mahadev and Ba do not know and even
I myself do not know. Do not therefore be unhappy when you
come across some of my hitherto unknown ideas. And whatever
regrets I felt on account of your support, I withdraw so that I
may relieve you of yours.
12. I do want swaraj.
13. There is absolute need of self-protection.
14. For that my weapon is satyagraha. Because I realized the
futility of weapons fashioned out of such gross material as wood,
iron, electricity, etc., I invented the invisible substance of satya-
graha and sought refuge in it. But that does not mean that every-
one should have recourse to the same invisible weapon. Others
may well obtain swaraj and defend it with arms.
In my scheme of swaraj there is a place for such weapons too,
but it is of no use to me, as it cannot go with satyagraha.
15. I think the answer to this question is covered by my answer
to the fourteenth question.
16. The answer to this question too is practically covered by
my answer to the fourteenth but, for the sake of clarity, I would
say that those who do not understand satyagraha or in spite of
their understanding it cannot digest it, will definitely take up
material weapons and they have a right to do so. The State will
have to provide training for it.
You ask to be excused for your long article. Now this is
violence like the Western practice of deliberately committing an
offence and then seeking to get out of it by formal apology. If
you must apologize for writing a long letter, why write one at
all? But you wrote it all the same and also apologized. We are
at present under Western domination. Submitting to your vio-
lence, therefore, I forgive you because my satyagraha is none
the worse for it. If you feel sorry you will not be excused; not only
that but I shall have to launch satyagraha against you. If you
can convey my message to Awari, send him word to eat, drink
and be merry. His going to the jail has not pained me in the
least. I regard him as a man of courage. But I also know that he
is immature. There is no limit to his goodness as to his stub-
bornness. I put up with his lack of understanding and his haugh-
tiness and praise his goodness, his courage and his patriotism.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
