611. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
WARDHA,
September 20, 1935
MY DEAR AGATHA,
I have not been able to write to you for weeks though I
have succeeded at times in asking someone to write to you for
me. All this of course apart from what Mahadev and Chandra-
shanker may be writing to you. Your work in connection with
Jawaharlal's release was prompt and glorious. As you very pro-
perly say, it was more humanitarian than political. I am glad,
too, that the authorities rose to the occasion and lost not a
minute in granting adequate relief. At this end, too, our machinery
was set in motion. The whole thing ended so well. This
release of Jawaharlal stands out prominently as the one bright
spot on the black and mournful surface. I know you do not
want thanks. You may have them by the train-load if you want
them. I know this, that it would have been a severe disappoint-
ment to me if you had not acted as you did. You have accustomed
me to look for such prompt and decisive action on your part.
Do please, however, thank all those who helped you and made
your difficult mission so completely successful. You did well in
flying to Badenweiler.
I am eagerly looking forward to your
description of the visit. There can be no doubt that, if we really
ever succeed in disturbing God's plans and if God has any plans,
these efforts resulting in Jawaharlal's reaching there have pro-
longed Kamala's life. I am old-fashioned enough to believe that
not a blade of grass moves but by His will. Then, too, I can
derive ample satisfaction in the knowledge that you and other
friends conspired to fulfil God's purpose and therefore whilst you
were doing your duty angels above were saying, 'well done, well,
done'.
Ghanshyamdas had to leave this morning abruptly, for he
received a telegram yesterday that his mother was suffering from
fever. He would otherwise have stayed here at least four days
longer. He was able, however, to give me a fair summary of his
doings there. Charlie must have told you all about the situation
here. I can add nothing to what he must have said. I hope he
benefited by the voyage. He needed rest badly. I wish so much
that he would abide by the plans made here, namely, that he
would live in Cambridge or some such place and busy himself in
writing work of a permanent nature, holding himself at your dis-
posal when there might be something on which he alone could
throw light or give guidance. I hope that you would encourage
this plan. I know what a weak spot he has for you. Therefore
you can always successfully act as the temptress if you chose. I
must stop now.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1492
