180. LETTER TO S. E. STOKES
POST ANDHERI,
March 19, 1924
DEAR FRIEND,
I got the registered packet on Sunday, and yesterday being
my first Monday of silence after admission to the Sassoon Hospital,
I was able to read both the papers. The written memorandum I
am sending up as desired by you. I found both to be useful and
instructive as giving me the mentality of one of whose impartiality
I am certain and whose opinions I value. If I could but accept
your premises and your view of non-co-operation, there is not
much with which I should disagree. I entirely endorse your opinion
that, if there is any Council-entry at all, it should not be for mere
obstruction. On the contrary, we should take advantage of every-
thing good that may be offered by the Government measures and
endeavour to do our best to correct the evil in them. Accepting
your reasoning, I would also endorse your view that the embargo
upon lawyers and law-courts should also be lifted. But I think
that, perhaps, there is a fundamental difference between us as to
the interpretation and implications of non-violent non-co-operation
and, therefore, what appeared to you to be a dismal outlook on your
coming out of prison would not have set me thinking of other
means of getting rid of the paralysis which you felt and saw had
overcome all Congress activities. I would have regarded it as a
necessary stage in the evolution of the public life of the country.
It would have been for me a rare opportunity and still rarer
privilege for redoubling my efforts and testing my faith in the
programme. You have cited your own personal experiences and
naturally concluded that there was something wrong about the
programme in that the work that was patiently built by you and
your co-workers had been almost undone in a moment. But there
is a saying among lawyers that hard cases make bad law. Properly
applied, it is a sound truth. Paraphrased in religious terms, it means
that because, under some exceptional circumstances, departure from
religious truth may appear to be advantageous, it furnishes no
ground for losing faith in the truth. In your own case I would
1 This contained "memorandums which put the case for Council-entry
more completely".
have reasoned to myself: This undoing of the work must be
regarded as the people's sacrifice in order to get the real thing.
And what is that real thing? For the common masses to rid
themselves of the fetish of power. For ages they have been taught
to look to a Government to do everything for them, to protect them.
The Government, instead of being regarded as an instrument in
their hands for their advantage, is looked up to as something be-
yond and apart from them which, like a deity, whether benignant
or malignant, has got to be propitiated. Non-co-operation as con-
ceived by me is ceasing to co-operate with that idea of Government
and teaching the people to feel that the Government is their creation
and not they creatures of the Government. I should not therefore
wonder that many of the so-called advantages that we have hitherto
enjoyed through the instrumentality of such a Government have
to be sacrificed. If the non-co-operation was not non-violent, we
would seek, as all nations in history have sought, to beat Govern-
ments with their own weapons, that is, force of arms. In such a
fight it would be folly not to make use of the whole of the Govern-
ment machinery. People in a violent struggle do not expect to
sacrifice though they are prepared for it and, if they have at their
disposal arms superior to those possessed by the Government, beat
it down without any sacrifice. But in a non-violent struggle resort
to arms is eschewed, and sacrifice for the moment is a necessity
of the case. In practice, too, in our own struggle, ever since the
September of 1920, we have been sacrificing. Lawyers, school-
masters, schoolboys, merchants, every class of people who have
realized the implications of non-violent non-co-operation, have
sacrificed to the measure of their ability and understanding. I
know men who have lost money because they would not go to a
court of law. I know cases in which the Government officials
have chuckled with pride and pleasure that men who before used
to gain advantages through their instrumentality were losing, but
those who lost with a full knowledge of the struggle counted their
loss as gain. It is my firm conviction that you cannot enter the
Councils at the present moment with the present system and the
administrators with their present mentality without participating
in violence of an extremely bad type which is the basis of the
Government of India. Take again the history of the other Govern-
ments of the world. By way of illustration I cite the Egyptian
Government. They are in a fair way to attaining to what they
1 Vide Vol. XVIII.
want. They have resorted to ordinary means hitherto adopted.
The Egyptians are trained for the use of arms. It was open to
them to take part in the Councils and all administrative machinery
because they were able and willing to vindicate their position by
force of arms. In India we have a state of things, so far as I am
aware, without a parallel in the world. The people as a mass are
neither willing nor able to take up arms. If you go to the Coun-
cils and are defeated in your purpose by the Government, you
must be prepared for raising a rebellion. It cannot be successfully
raised in India. Nor are the present Councillors men who can give
that training to the people. My endeavour was and is to find a
substitute for ordinary rebellion, and that is civil disobedience.
The Councils are no training-ground even for the Councillors for
civil disobedience. They believe in the "tooth for tooth" law. The
sophistry, evasion and even fraud of the Government benches are
returned in [their] coin. Their manifest purpose is to embarrass
the Government. Their appeal is to fear. The non-co-operator's
manifest purpose is never to embarrass, and his appeal must al-
ways be to the heart, therefore, to love and trust.
You evidently seem to think that mystical and religious non-
co-operation can run side by side with the purely political non-
co-operation of the Councils. I hold that the two are mutually
destructive, and my faith in religious non-co-operation is so im-
mutable that, if I find that it would not answer the needs of India
and that the masses would not respond to it, I should be content
to be alone and rely upon its ultimate invincibility to convert even
the masses. Indeed, I see no escape for this world except through
the acceptance of non-violence as the predominant and ordinary
rule of life. The present society is ultimately based upon force.
That is violence. My endeavour is no less than to get rid of this
worship of force, and my conviction is that, if any country is ready
for assimilating the doctrine in its entirety in a large and work-
able measure, it is India. And having that conviction, I have no
other remedy for the needs of our country.
I think I have already said more than I wished to. It is
possible to amplify what I have said, but I have no doubt that
you will yourself dot the i's and cross the t's. I am almost im-
patient to express my opinion upon the Council-entry and kindred
matters, the more so after reading your memorandum, but I am
under promise to Motilalji, Hakimji and other friends not to
give public expression to my views till I have met them again
and discussed the whole thing. When I am free to say all that
I have in view on this question and if you have time to spare
from your writings, you will see the development of the outline
I have sketched above.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
S. E. STOKES, ESQ.
KOTGARH
SIMLA HILLS
From a photostat : S.N. 8527
