70. LETTER TO INSPECTOR-GENERAL
OF PRISONS, BOMBAY
DETENTION CAMP,
February 18, 1944
THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS
POONA
SIR,
Vaidyaraj Shri Shiv Sharma regretfully informs me that
having put forth all the resources at his disposal, he has been
unable to produce a condition in Shri Kasturba so as to give
him hope of final recovery. As his was simply a trial to see
whether Ayurvedic treatment could yield better result, I have
now asked Drs. Gilder and Nayyar to resume the suspended
treatment.
Dr. Mehta's assistance was never suspended and
will be continued till recovery or the end.
I want to say that the Vaidyaraj has been most assiduous
and attentive in the handling of this most difficult case, and
I would have willingly allowed him to continue his treatment,
if he had wished to do so.
But he would not continue
it, when his last prescription failed to bring about the result
he had expected. Drs. Gilder and Nayyar tell me that they
would like to receive the benefit of the Vaidyaraj's assistance in
the matter of sedatives, purgatives and the like. These have
proved effective both from the doctors' and the patient's point
of view.
I hope that the Government will have no objec-
tion to the Vaidyaraj continuing to come in for the purpose.
Needless to say, under the altered circumstances, he will not
be required for night duty. I cannot refrain from regretfully
saying that had there not been the wholly avoidable delay in
granting my request for allowing the services of the Vaidyaraj
and Dr. Mehta, the patient's condition might not have been
so near the danger point as it is today. I am well aware
that nothing happens outside the Divine Will, but man has no
of his speech of February 17 to the Legislature which, according to him,
stated "his point of view". For Gandhiji's comments on the speech, vide
"Letter to Lord Wavell", 9-3-1944.
234
other means of interpreting that Will apart from the results
he can see.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3934; also Bombay Secret Abstracts: Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 76, p. 335
