424. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Friday, Bhadra Sud 3, September 10, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,
Your letter to Swami about your health did not alarm me,
but your letter to me did. I will certainly have a talk with
Swami; but, as they say, too many midwives attending on a
woman in labour make the delivery more difficult, and so I am
of the view that when one friend is guiding a person with great
love and intelligently, others may express an opinion if they feel
inclined to and leave the matter there. I believe that for many
reasons the right of advising you in regard to your health belongs
chiefly to Swami. He is, moreover, an intelligent person and,
therefore, I don't feel anxious either. There may be differences
of opinion in certain matters and I make a suggestion in passing,
but don't press my view. There is hardly any science as imperfect
as the science of medicine, and, in a matter in which we are guided
mostly by inferences, to press one's view on a man who is follow-
ing a certain line, and thereby create doubt in his mind, will be
like spoiling the mendicant's chances for both things, as the say-
ing goes. I am not particularly enamoured of Mussoorie. We
are poor people and I, therefore, do believe that we should draw
the line somewhere. As to where and when to draw it, there
can be of course no fixed rule which can be applied to everyone.
All of us here will discuss with Swami what should be done in
your case, and finally abide by his decision. There is biting cold
in the air here these days. The sky is all the time overcast with
clouds and the river is full to the banks.
Tanasukha's letter had no effect on me. The ideas expressed
in it are immature. But then, children ought to have the free-
dom to think even such thoughts. Some of these errors are such
as they themselves see and correct in the course of time.
KAKASAHEB KALELKAR
SWAVALAMBAN PATHSHALA
CHINCHWAD
(DIST. POONA)
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12277
