249. LETTER TO ADA WEST
January 13, 1920
MY DEAR DEVI,
I have your letter. Each time I see your handwriting, I feel
like being with you and just at the present moment, when I
have a lot of children on hand, I feel your absence more keenly
than ever, but I know that I cannot have you with me in my
Indian work. I cannot understand your complaint about the
absence of any letter from me. I wrote to you the other day
from Lahore. I have been sending you my letters c/o. Mr. Rustom-
ji. Do you know that you never put down your address at the
top and therefore I am at sea as to directing your letters.
I hope you will make it a point to see Mr. Andrews when he
reaches Natal. He is coming to a very difficult task this time.
The people of South Africa have become more selfish than they
were before the War. They do not want the Indians who have
the least bit of their trade.
I reciprocate your sentiments that many marriages are often
a failure and I can certainly speak from experience that a restrain-
ed unmarried life is infinitely superior to a married one. Marriage
divides your attention as nothing else does. It is after all in the
majority of cases a concession to our weakness and it was in order
to find a solution for the difficulties of a married life that I have
prescribe the rule in the Ashram and the rule which without pres-
cribing I advised in Phoenix for willing people. As I write this,
the striking example of Miss Hobhouse occurs to me. She
could never have performed the Herculean task that she did in
South Africa had she been burdened with the cares of married
life. I shall still hope that you will share in my conclusion by an
unbroken experience extending over a period of nearly 40 years
that one need not change one's faith in order to appreciate the
beauties of another and that one becomes better and stronger in
one's faith for appreciating beauties of another's faith. My Hindu-
ism does not debar me from taking what is best in Christianity
nor does it blind me to the imperfections in practice. You will
now understand the strength of the remark that Miss F[ aering]
should be able to live her own Christian life without the slight-
est hindrance in the Ashram. I do expect you whenever you find
the time to pay us another visit and I hope that Miss F[ aering], s
description of the beautiful surroundings in which we are living
has but whetted your desire to visit us. I shall esteem it a privilege
if you will give me your own impressions of Miss F[ aering] both
regarding her physique and her mentality. She is such a self-denying
girl that I really sometimes do not know what she does want. You
will perhaps also be able to give me your confidence in this
matter.
With kindest regards and best wishes for a happy new year,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the handwritten copy: S.N. 7027
