552. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
SRIRAMPUR,
December 5, 1946
A special messenger from the District Magistrate, Comilla, delivered
your packet containing your two letters dated 2nd and 3rd instant
respectively. I am glad that you are going to issue some such statement
as suggested by me. In these days of fear, sometimes not without ground
and sometimes groundless, no contradiction should be superfluous, much
less appear foolish.
2. If "some mischievous Hindu young men have been throwing crackers
and missiles at Muharrum processions", I would suggest that they should
be brought to book.
3. I note that you have devoted a considerable portion of your letter
of the 2nd December and the whole of the 3rd December to Bihar,
and you have repeated the advice you have given me often enough
that my place is rather in Bihar than in Noakhali. If I find any
confirmation of the most serious statements made by you about Bihar,
I confess that I have egregiously blundered by resuming normal diet.
But I am loath to reject the testimony of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru,
then of Dr. Rajendra Prasad, both responsible men and persons who
had gone specially for the purpose of seeing things for themselves and
1 A fragment of this letter has been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVI, p. 195.
2 ibid., p. 139.
allaying mob fury. They admit that the behaviour of the Hindu crowds
was bad enough in all conscience but they do not bear out the statements
made in your letter. Nor do they uphold the figure given by you. They
also tell me that mob fury has subsided and that the Government have
regained control undoubtedly with the assistance of the military. If I
could feel that my presence was at all necessary in Bihar, I assure
you that I would not need any encouragement from you to do so. On
the contrary, my informants assure me that my presence is not required
in Bihar. In these circumstances, unless I feel sure of my ground, I
know that I must not go to Bihar. But I would like to make the assurance
doubly sure and with that end in view I would be glad to get your
permission to send copies of your letters to the Prime Minister of Bihar
and know his reaction. There too you will pardon me, will you not,
for not taking your statements as gospel truth. For one thing, you have
no first-hand knowledge of events. I suggest that there should be an
impartial commission, appointed with the consent of the two
Governments, to go into the disturbances both in Noakhali and Bihar.
If your statements are true and the callous behaviour of the Bihar
Government, which you so graphically describe, can be sustained, it
is a bad day for the Bihar Government, a bad day for the Hindus
and good-bye to restoration of friendly relations between the two
communities, and it would be a serious question for me to consider
where I stand. The least I can permit myself to say is that then I
should have no hesitation in publicly denouncing the Bihar Ministers
and Bihar Hindus. I would plead with you to suspend, if you at all
can, final judgment in the matter.
4. Now I come to Noakhali. I sent you a longish letter yesterday and
I asked Satis Babu to arrange for its quickest delivery through a special
messenger. I tried even to see if there was possibility of sending it
by air but I failed. You have painted a rosy picture of things in Noakhali.
I wish I could share your estimate. I have formed no judgment. I have
passed on to you the purport of much of what is handed to me in
writing and what is given to me by word of mouth. If the information
imparted to me is correct, things are not safe enough in Noakhali. Hindus
have not shed their fear and from what you say even the Muslims
are not free from it. My business in coming here is not to sow or
promote dissensions between the two. I regard myself, as I have ever
been, an equal friend of both. I know that through no fault of which
I am conscious I have lost caste in the Muslim League circles. No
Muslim friend has yet been able to tell me what I have done to deserve
that fate. I am in Noakhali to be judged by my conduct. My non-violence
is at stake. Bear with me whilst I am groping. I am the same person
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
as I was when we met in Faridpur and later in Deshbandhu's house
after his death. This much is enough for time being.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
Wish you could show me a quicker way of reaching my letters
to you, as they are likely to be important and probably frequent.
M. K.G.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
