87. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
WARDHA,
June 12, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got all your letters. But I could get no time at all to reply
to them. Today I woke up at one and started writing.
You have taken up a good job indeed there. We are faced
with such difficult moral problems here that I miss you very
much. Since, however, you have undertaken the present work
with my consent, I can do nothing for some time. You must
be permitted to continue your experiment.
I am not quite
happy that the place is Rajkot.
But since you yourself see no
difficulty in that, I don't worry. My faith rests on yours.
I assume that you will see me either in Ahmedabad or Bhav-
nagar. Would you like to have Prema or Gangabehn with you
there?
has fallen once again, and this time very low indeed.
He must leave this place now. The final decision will be made
today. Some other moral lapses also have been discovered. I
don't write about them here for want of time. Vinoba has
undertaken a seven-day fast.
It has been decided that Vinoba
should live here now, but that will not be enough. He must
have somebody like you to help him. Can you make any use-
ful suggestion in this connection?
And now about Jamnadas. His complaint is completely un-
justified. But there is no remedy for a suspicious nature. I have
always given him help or advice whenever he sought either. I
have given him advice even without his seeking it. Jamnadas can
say that I have neglected him only if you also can make that
complaint. When I have no doubt as to the correctness of the
course he is following and no advice to give, why need I write
unnecessarily? Whenever he asked me to take him with me
on my travels I did so. If he didn't learn anything, how could
I help that?
What work could I give to anybody who accom-
panied me only occasionally as he did?
This time there are so many persons wanting to accompany
me that it is a problem how to take them all. I certainly don't
require all of them. If, now, Jamnadas also comes, he cannot
but be superfluous. And I, too, would be busy with problems
connected with my own work. This is the position. If you can
understand him, [try to advise him and] guide him properly.
If he would let me guide him, I am ready to do so. I would
assign him a village and put it under his sole charge. Would
he go to Phoenix? Can't he do some work under you? Why
can't he run the school after you have put it on a sound founda-
tion? Or why doesn't he go somewhere to improve his health?
Would he like to go to Almora? Does he know his own mind?
Does he want to marry? You can show this letter to him.
I have been thinking about Sharma.
He has decided to
adopt a simple life and live with Ramdas. He wants to take the
latter to Phoenix. Some decision will be taken today. Jamna owes
me one letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8402. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
