318. LETTER TO BILL LASH
February 5, 1933
DEAR FATHER LASH,
You do confound a poor man like me. Who is father, and
who is brother, and when, and also perhaps why? But that is
neither here nor there.
It is a fine thing to find you in Sabarmati. I hope you will
feel as much at home there as at the C.S.S.A., and it is good too
that you are there when Mary Barr is there. I take a promise
from every stranger that visits the Sabarmati Ashram that he
should give me his criticism of the Ashram and especially tell me
frankly all about the defects he might have noticed in it. You
have to make the promise, please.
Now, for your difficulty. It is not necessarily wrong "to be
compelled to act against one's reasoning and instinct through fear
of hurting someone whom we love", provided of course that the
thing we do is in itself not only not wrong but morally worth do-
ing. You will notice that I have copied your own wording. Con-
versely, to be compelled even through love to do a thing that is
wrong is undoubtedly wrong. But then that love itself is wrong.
It is good for me to love you and be loved by you. But it is
immoral for me to do wrong for the sake of love. If there is
any likelihood of that happening, we have to shun each other's
company.
Having stated these two propositions, let me cite the world's
experience in proof. Whether it is right or wrong, it is a fact
that in innumerable cases men and women are good, not for the
sake of good, but for the sake of love which they owe to others
or which they receive from them. In an equal number of cases
such love keeps us from falling. Perhaps you will easily admit
that Jesus Christ was and still remains one of the greatest among
moral coercers of the world. He continually coerces you, a very weak
man otherwise, to do the right thing though your weak flesh would
have you to do the wrong thing, and the strange thing is that you sing
hymns of praise to Him for holding you tight in His chains. You
do not mind some people laughing at you for your helplessness and
weakness. Do not retort by way of answer: "But Jesus was Christ
and God Incarnate." I have given you the most telling illustra-
tion to show what is happening in everyday life. Some have God
to rely upon; others, poor mortals, have their parents; and yet
others, like me, have their wives, sons and friends to lean on. I
had, not very many years ago, all but fallen, but the thought of
Devdas, who was then living with me, of Mahadev, Mathuradas
and others who were at that time surrounding me and whom
I believed to be themselves leaning on me, and the thought of my
wife, kept me from going to perdition. It was their love which
chained me so tightly and strongly that I could not burst through
the bond although the flesh was pulling hard enough to tear the
chains to bits and rush into hell-fire.
That is the type of coercion and no other which my love,
expressed through my fast, was intended to exercise, the common
thing in all these illustrations being the doing of a right act.
There is nothing wrong in people doing the right thing under the
pressure of love and later doing the same thing for the sake of it.
I hope I have made my point clear, even though I might not have
carried conviction.
You must pardon me when I contradict you by saying that
God's shoulders are broad enough to bear the responsibility even
of anything that is wrong. In Christian parlance, does He not
bear easily the humanly intolerable burden of the world's sins?
This contradiction is unnecessary for our purpose, but I thought
I would draw your attention to what I think is a clear slip. My
fast was certainly right so long as I hold the belief truthfully that it
was prompted by God. But even under God's shelter I cannot
claim immunity from a fast which may be designed to compass un-
knowingly an immoral thing. Therefore, the motive behind must
be right, the end in front must be equally right, and the act itself
propelled by the motive should also be right. Hence in this chain
the intermediate act, if it is violent, would vitiate both the motive
and the end. Hence the necessity for unadultered ahimsa-non-
violence in thought, word and deed. And since the Gita says
"Man can really only control his acts"1, if they are right he may
safely leave the rest to God, and whether he willingly and
wittingly does so or not, God alone controls the rest.
I do hope that your foot is quite all right now. If it is not,
I would not now ask you to try the earth-cure, but ask Naran-
das to send you to a doctor or fetch a doctor for you. It is no
use playing with even a small mischief.
With love from us,
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 40
