637. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
March 5, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter, and I have also two copies of the Ben-
gali Harijan. I wish my knowledge of Bengali was such as to
enable me to read what you have been writing. Sjt. Ghanshyam-
das has heard me say that I am studying Bengali. Unfortu-
nately, that is untrue. What I told him was that I was studying
Urdu and that if I had the time I had a great longing for
studying Bengali and reviving my knowledge of Tamil. A study
of Bengali, as you know, is an old dream. It was about to
materialize in 1914, but I had to abruptly leave London for
India and the lessons which Mrinalini Devi was giving to me had
to be suspended. Therefore when Mahadev has read the paper
I will send you what he has to say. The cover is certainly attrac-
tive. You will let me know what reception it has had from the
public. As for the articles to be sent in advance, there are tre-
mendous difficulties, but I shall see what can be done.
I understand your position about vaccination. Your faith
will sustain you.
474
You will see how the report that you sent about the Bengali
work was interwoven by Shastri into the "Week to Week" columns.
Have you noticed the 'comedy of errors' that happened in
connection with the information that Hemprabha had given me
about Aroon's father's death? When I read her letter, I could
not believe my eyes. There was nothing wrong with you. You
were Aroon's [sic] father and yet the expression 'Aroon's father' was
there right enough. I read or showed it to the Sardar, Mahadev
and Chhaganlal, and we all came to the conclusion that it must
be another Aroon whose father was dead, because later from the
language used by Hemprabha it was clear that you were to have
seen Aroon's father before he died, but you and she were too
late. I had a vague recollection of Hemprabha having adopted
a boy or girl, so I connected Aroon with this adoption, and
yet there were not two Aroons to my knowledge. Therefore my
letter to Hemprabha baldly referred to a strange Aroon's father.
Your letter cleared the mystery. And now comes Aroon's post-
card, but of course your letter itself was quite clear that it was
your father who had died. If I had remembered, as I should
have remembered, that your father was still alive, I would at once
have known that Hemprabha meant grandfather instead of father.
But at the time I read Hemprabha's letter I had forgotten alto-
gether that your father was still alive. It was only your letter
which revived the recollection.
I hope you and Hemprabha, Aroon and everybody who read
my letter had a hearty laugh at my expense. But if I had been
there when my letter was received, I should have joined that
hearty laughter, or perhaps called for a laughter at Hemprabha's
expense. I am not writing separately to Aroon. You will there-
fore share this portion with him. I see that he is still not quite
well. And tell Aroon that I shall write to him when he has
written to me the letter he has promised.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20470
