286. LETTER TO "RAND DAILY MAIL"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
August 25, 1908
THE EDITOR
[RAND DAILY MAIL]
SIR,
It is wonderful how every demand made by British Indians is being
misunderstood. When my countrymen recognize that the Bill just
passed by the local Parliament is better than the Asiatic Act, they do
not admit that their position of serfs is removed. The very fact that the
status of educated Indians hangs fire shows that there is no desire to
treat them otherwise. Was not my claim to partnership resented? Was
not its repudiation by General Smuts received with sustained cheers
in the popular House? And, yet, what is strange in the claim put for-
ward by me? You, Sir, know well that we are taught in the public
schools in India the doctrine of partnership and equality in the eye of
the law, and yet, these are expressions one may not even whisper in
the Colony without being laughed out of court.
You have drawn a parallel between Mr. Sauer's remarks on the
Dealers' Act at the Cape and a general education test in an immigra-
tion Act, which would have the effect of preventing an unrestricted
influx of Asiatics into a British Colony. May I remind you that
Mr. Sauer has dealt with a farcical Court of Appeal consisting of preju-
diced persons? I, too, should agree with the hon'ble Member, and
even go further than he has done, when fellow-traders are appointed
a Court of Appeal for the question of a licence being granted to one of
themselves. It is not only hypocrisy and humbug but downright
Injustice. I, however, see nothing wrong in an Immigration Act which
provides against an indiscriminate entry of a class of people, the distinc-
tion being based not on their race or colour but on an educational
qualification. If what my countrymen claim is a quibble, surely the
Parliament of the Colony should have sufficient magnanimity to con-
cede a quibble. The fact is that it is not a quibble. The Colony wishes
to establish a new principle and to draw a sharp colour line. It wishes
to override the late Mr. Rhodes' formula of equal rights for all civilized
men south of the Zambesi, and it wishes also to fundamentally change
the British policy. We would be less than men if, after having suffered
for nearly two years, we were to quietly accept such a violent
departure from British traditions, without making a supreme effort
and without showing to the world that, although our own status can be
made a little more bearable under the new Bill, we would reject the
benefits thereunder, if we cannot successfully oppose the new departure.
You seem to think that Mr. Sorabjee's deportation is the last word
on the interpretation of the Immigrants' Restriction Act. The future
will show whether it is so. In the meanwhile, may I remind you that
Mr. Sorabjee was convicted not under the Immigrants' Restriction
Act as a "prohibited immigrant" but under the Asiatic Act for being an
unregistered Indian. He entered under the Immigrants' Restriction
Act, but he came under the disability imposed on him by the Asiatic
Act, which Mr. Sorabjee would not accept.
[I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Rand Daily Mail, 26-8-1908
1 & 2 These words were used by Sauer in the Cape Legislative Assembly.
3 Vide "Trial of Sorabji Shapurji-II", pp. 356- and "Trial of Sorabji Shapur-
ji-III", p. 377.
