404. LETTER TO SATYANAND BOSE
[Before September 16, 1917]
DEAR SATYANAND BABU,
Mr. Polak had sent me your letter of inquiry about Passive
Resistance. I have time only to give you the briefest reply to your
questions. P. R., as conceived by me, is soul force, and essentially
a religious principle. Its scope, therefore, takes in every variety of
wrong. It is a force as old as the world itself. Consider the con-
duct of Prahlad, Daniel, Jesus, Mirabai and others whose guiding
principle in life has been religion. Indians in South Africa made
use, more or less, of this force, and they were successful only to the
extent that they used it to the exclusion of every other force.
From whom did the idea first originate, is your second question.
In view of the meaning I have given to the expression, no reply
seems to be necessary. But it may be stated that so far as its use
on the political platform is concerned, the idea may be said to have
originated with me. I knew nothing of it, but Tolstoy drew my
attention to it.
At the time of the controversy on the Education Bill passed
by the House of Commons and the so-called Passive Resistance
offered by Dr. Clifford and others, Mr. Winston Churchill said
that P. R. was perfectly constitutional under the British Consti-
tution. A similar pronouncement was made by Gen. Smuts, with
regard to our Passive Resistance when demand was made by Sen-
ator Whiteside for my deportation side by side with that of the
nine Englishmen who were deported in connection with the
European Railway strike that had just then ended.
I am unable, offhand, to give any reference from a constitu-
tional lawyer.
Your fifth question requires historical precedents. This is
answered in para. 2.
Your sixth question, whether it comes within constitutional
methods needs no answer. I am sorry for the delay that has taken
place in replying. I am in Ahmedabad up to the 16th September,
then prepare to leave for Bihar.
From a photostat of the office copy in Mahadev Desai's hand: S. N. 6385
