421. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
April 18, 1934
BA,
I got your letter, even though late. It is 3.15 just now. I
have taken up your letter after cleaning my teeth. This place
is called Jorhat. It is in Assam. Two days remain now for the
tour here to end. After that I will spend a little more than a week
in South Bihar and then I will go to Utkal, i.e., Orissa. I see
that I shall be in Bengal when you are released. If the date of
your release has been fixed, let me know it. There was a letter from
Manilal specially meant for you. He writes in it about your in-
quiring after everybody. I have replied saying that I send your
original letters to Phoenix, and copies to Ramdas, Devdas and
Sardar. I have already written to you about Kanti having been
released. He is all right.
Since there is to be no jail-going
now, it will shortly be decided where he will stay. He will come
and meet me somewhere. Jamnalalji is now expected in Bihar.
Satisbabu is all right. He is in Calcutta. Raojibhai, Panditji,
Parnerkar and others are all working together in Bihar. Madhav-
das also is with them. Bal and Prithuraj are with me. Narandas's
nostrils bleed and so he is still at Rajkot. Perhaps he may come
and see me at Ranchi. Chhaganlal is in Bhavnagar. He has
almost regained the weight which he had lost. He visited Bhansali.
There is something the matter with Bhansali's legs. He cannot
move them or walk. He has got his lips stitched up. He drinks
flour mixed with water through a tube. He also drinks gram or
mung flour mixed with water. He drops me a postcard now and
then. Despite the pain, he remains cheerful. Rajendrababu keeps
excellent health. Prabhavati and Jayaprakash are better now. My
weight is 108. Mirabehn doesn't make speeches. Sometimes she
goes to open khadi exhibitions. I myself am not able to attend
such functions. While opening the exhibitions, she says a few
words. You see them reported in newspapers. I rarely get time
to read newspapers. Ramdas's mother-in-law and Navanit have
gone to Wardha. The epidemic in Ahmedabad has spread to
other places too. I had written to Allahabad regarding Shyamlal
Nehru. Umabehn has borne the separation from her husband with
fortitude. Her daughter wrote a long letter to me. You must
402
have received the slivers. Let me know when you want more.
Where do you intend to break the semi-fast of the Purushottam
month? I hope you get enough milk and fruit. Ranchhodbhai
and others are in Ahmedabad, of course. They did not go out
anywhere. Chimanlal has been having fever, and so he has gone
to Veraval. Sharda has accompanied him. Mithubehn stays on
in Bombay. Kalyanji and Kunvarji also are there. I did write
a letter of condolence to Kunvarji on the death of his wife.
Chandrashankar had returned, but he fell ill again and so
went back.
I will write to Premlilabehn on your behalf.
Kishorelal is still ill. He is at Deolali. Radha of course is there.
Santok and Gomati also are there.
Velanbehn is in Baroda.
Om and Kisan go back to sleep after the morning prayer when-
ever they have no work. The constitutions of both need more sleep.
I think this is enough for this time.
These days I am not able to send a discourse.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 22-
