632. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
September 25, 1935
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your letter. Reading about the things that Balvantrai
has tolerated doesn't lessen my grief. Please tell him so, or con-
vey it in a letter, if you have shown him my previous letter.
The news that the houses of Bhangis were satisfactorily completed
though after much delay, was welcome.
Can you not, with the help of Dakshinamurti, find somebody
in Bhavnagar who would take up debt-relief work among Bhangis ?
Valji's [nephew] Rasik is studying in Shamaldas College. College stu-
dents are often found doing silent social work while studying.
See if you can tempt Rasik. If he comes forward, he may also
be able to draw his friends into the work.
The fact that 15 maunds of bones did not give even a bas-
ketful of manure means that they were heated more than neces-
sary. The bones should merely be charred, that is, heated till they
turn black. They should be heated less than wood is when it is
turned into charcoal. There will then be hardly any loss of weight in
the bones. I performed the process myself and produced manure.
The experiment was demonstrated in Maganwadi. The method is
now frequently made use of in Nalvadi. The fuel consists of dried
stumps of uprooted hedge-plants. Wood should not be used for
the purpose, and dry sticks not at all. The material used for fuel
should be such as would burn just a little longer than hay, so
that when it is burnt up it will leave the bones unburnt. It
should be remembered that our aim is not even to heat the
bones till they look like charcoal. Charring bones means merely
heating them till they turn black. We have to go just a little fur-
ther than smoking them. Bones heated in this manner lose no-
thing besides a little nitrogen, and certainly no phosphorus. If the
phosphorus in bones is lost, their essence is lost. Collect a few
bones and make the experiment yourself several times till you
have mastered the process. Did you by any chance try to heat the
15 maunds of bones together at one time?
More and more bone-mills and flour-mills will continue to
come up and people will go in for their products. But wouldn't
a true brahmachari remain unshaken in his vow even in the midst
of widespread immorality? Going further than that, don't we see
that, though the threat of death hangs over everybody, the whole
world strives, and commendably, to stave off the evil day? If in
the same way we regard it our duty to do our best, we would go
on doing our work fearlessly and with faith and a cheerful mind
no matter how often we fail.
The success of mills lies in being able to pay dividends,
whereas ours lies in doing our duty. One who has dedicated him-
self to a cause doesn't hope for the reward of his work. A person
who travels to Hardwar in a train does nothing very great, but a
pilgrim who travels on foot from Kanyakumari to Jamnotri may
be said to have achieved something. I say 'something' because
after all Jamnotri is only a physical goal. Our effort for the revival
of village industries belongs to the same class. But real effort con-
sists in striving for an invisible goal. Despite the coming into
vogue of aeroplanes, we shall need our legs. Likewise, despite
the numerous mills which have sprung up, there will be need for
village industries. Just as it would be foolish to neglect cultivating
strength of limbs because of the increasing use of aeroplanes, so it
would be foolish to neglect village industries because of the multi-
plication of mills. We are trying to save the country from commit-
ting such folly. There can be no room for despair in such effort.
The description of the condition of the cultivators in Sam-
dhiyala proves that I am fully justified in giving the first place in
our programme to village sanitation. Even this first step in man's
education has come to be neglected. The reason for that neglect
is the unforgivable sin of the higher castes in looking down upon
the lower castes.
If Dhiru has gone to Totaramji to learn agriculture or with
the noble desire of serving him, my congratulations to him, Rama
and you. I never think about Harilal now.
I have already written to you about the result of my inquiry con-
cerning . . .'s character. To me his letter seemed to be perfectly sin-
cere. It seems he is connected with several institutions in Rajkot.
He has suggested to me that, if I wish, I might make further
inquiries to ascertain the correctness of the facts stated in his letter.
Narandas has no doubt regarding that, and Bhai Jethalal has pro-
duced before me no definite evidence. I, therefore, have made no
further enquiry. However, I am prepared to do so if you produce
definite evidence. I have still kept that door open for you. Person-
ally, I have no bias either way in the matter. My condition is
like that of a judge who changes his view from time to time
as more and more evidence for or against is brought forward. I
have sent Narandas's letter to Jethalal Joshi. Please tell him that
he has not even acknowledged it, and, if he has not received my
letter, inform me accordingly. I haven't even kept a copy of
Narandas's letter. The date of posting of my letter can be as-
certained from my register. Jethalal lives in the same house where
you live. If, therefore, you feel inclined to take up this matter,
by all means do so. You must have seen from Narandas's letter
that he does not accept a single charge.
It should be borne in
mind that. . .'s character or whether or not he habitually wears
khadi is not the only subject-matter of inquiry. It is possible that
Narandas's attitude on that point is not correct. I have not come
to any conclusion even about that. The main complaint is against
the whole management of the school and Narandas's fitness as a
teacher.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5534
