47. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 8, 1923
CHI. NARANDAS,
Owing to heavy arrears of work, I am unable to write as much as I wish
to. But I have seen that you can understand from a little the substance of
what I mean and do not, therefore, worry.
Bhai Damodar's letter is enclosed. You can know from it what matters
he discussed with me. Keshu's letter also is enclosed. I am not enclosing
1 A few sentences here are illegible in the source.
2 In the years before 1930, April 2, 1923 was the only date on which Chaitra Vad
9 was a silence day, i.e., a Monday.
LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
41
Santok's because she has not permitted me to do so. My purpose in forwarding
these letters is not to subject you to an examination. I entertain no doubt
about you. When Damodardas told me all those things, I had to rebuke him
harshly and then asked him to give me in writing what he had to say. Hence
the accompanying letter from him. He ought to have told you what people
said and believed about you. At the time, I charged him with not doing so,
I did not think it necessary to tell you these things. But now when the
reference came up, I thought it my duty to place it before you. There is a
very heavy attack on Prema in the letter but she will not be able to bear it
and hence I advise you not to show her this or the other letter. It is because
I have believed you to be of a forbearing and forgiving nature that I am
sending you this letter. We have to win over Damodardas, Santok and Keshu
with love. If, therefore, we do not have in us sufficient love for that purpose
we will not be able to win them over. If they have done all this with an
innocent motive, their goodness in future will show it. I do not think it is
necessary for you to show this or the accompanying letters to anyone. However,
if you wish to show them to any responsible person, you are free to do so.
You are free to make whatever use of it you wish to do. So long as I do not
believe anything against you, you have no reason to get upset. Rightly or
wrongly, I have formed the opinion about you that even if I were to entertain
a false opinion about you, you would not be upset. I can conceive of only
one situation in which a satyagrahi or a yogi of the Gita would get upset,
and that is when he departs from a satyagrahi's or a yogi's dharma. The world's
censure, in fact, strengthens him. If I am wrong in thinking you to be such
a man, let it be so. If we consider a few people or even the whole world to
be better than what they in reality are, there is nothing wrong in it. Probably
only by doing so does a man realize the extent of his own littleness. It has
been said about painters that there must be a moderate element of exaggeration
in the work of a truthful painter. But think of all this as mere idle wisdom.
The point of all this is that you need have no fear as far as I am concerned.
I have certainly gathered from your letters that you did not have a high
opinion of Damodardas or Santok. You have one opinion of Damodardas and
a different one of Santok. Let me know what you have come to know about
them. I need to drink the cup of poison to the full. In that lies my good as
also theirs and the Ashram's. I have still not lost hope of being able to guide
them. In Santok and the others, the element of selfishness is a little greater.
I do not believe they have the other defects. I believe Keshu to be caught in
the snare of infatuation in spite of himself. I have not been able to take his
true measure. But I do not have the courage to believe that he is wicked. I
think the responsibility for his having fallen so low is first Maganlal's and,
42
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
secondly, mine. Damodardas also has some virtues. I have not abandoned
any of them. I will still take from them, in my own way, what I can get
from them. If I have not given up all hope of even a person like Harilal,
how can I do so of these or of Mahavir and the others?
BAPU
[PS.]
I will eagerly await your reply. I will be satisfied if I know that you are
unperturbed.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33850
