230. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
Sunday, [March 4, 1906]
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
Do not fail in the slightest degree in doing your duty. It is abso-
lutely necessary to bring the accounts up to date. The balance-sheet should
be made up. You should take Mr. Bean's help in correspondence; asso-
ciate Hemchand with Gujarati. It is not at all necessary to keep him in
Durban. I shan't be able to send Kalyandas for the present. Most likely
Brian Gabriel will come. It will be good if he does. The shortage of
men we are experiencing will then cease. You alone know best how to
lighten your burden. It will be enough if you go to Durban only for
a day [in the week]. The main work is the collection of outstandings.
You should have the same arrangement in the Gujarati section as
you have in the English. The leading article should come first, followed
by the smaller leaders. After that should come the translations of articles
on important subjects, etc., followed by letters like the "Johannesburg
Letter" and last of all, Reuter's Telegrams.
The article on the Kaffir rebellion which you had placed first ought
not to be there; it should have appeared in the news section. As I have
entrusted the question of the Kaffir rebellion to you, I do not pay any
attention to it. But you should study the subject well. If you make
notes, you will be able to give a column or more of the latest news on
Thursday. In accordance with the above arrangement, "The Natal Indian
Congress" will be the leading article this time.
We should give the Gujarati "contents" at the end.
Discontinue the advertisement from Haji Suleman Shah Mahomed
as we are not going to get it. Reduce Mr. Gool's to half. He has made
a special request about it as his condition is not sound at present. I see
that many advertisements from Cape Town will be discontinued. But
I am not worried in the least by that. We shall get others. I am per-
severing in my efforts.
Mr. Isaac will arrive there during this month. Please keep a table
and a chair for him in our office.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
I have not translated Mr. A. Cadir's speech assuming that you would
do it, which please do.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original : S.N. 4314
