556. LETTER TO VICHITRA NARAYAN SHARMA
ON THE STEAMER,
January 13, 1946
CHI. VICHITRA,
I have your letter of 26-12-1945. Come and see me by all
means. Consult Dada if you want. I see that you and Jajuji
do not get on well. I am unable to make up my mind whether
I should try to persuade you to keep together or let you work
independently in your different ways. Either course can be justified.
What harm could there be if you were to work independently
of the Charkha Sangh? You are both devoted to khadi. It is
possible that under Jajuji's control, the Meerut Gandhi Ashram's
progress is arrested and they cannot work to their full capacity.
If it is so and if Jawaharlalji and Pantji are also of the same opin-
ion, why not have a separate organization for khadi in the U. P. ?
Assuming that it is done for the love of khadi and if, as a result,
khadi is more successful in the U. P., such a step would only do
good instead of harm. There have been many instances in my
life when I gave such encouragement and it always resulted in
good. The latest instance is that of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.
I quit it. How could I oppose Tandonji? He had the main part
in building up the organization. I do not approve of his present
policies and feel that I would be able to serve Hindi well,
perhaps even better, by keeping out of it. In case it does not turn
out so, I shall admit my mistake and follow Tandonji. But if I
have not made a mistake, I shall only further the cause of the
Hindi Sahitya Sammelan from outside. The important point is
that our actions should not be inspired by selfish motives and our
ultimate aim should be one and the same. Maybe I should be
able to make a definite statement if I could meet all the people.
Think well over this letter, consult the others and write to
me what you think is the proper course of action. I shall reach
Madras probably on the 21st and shall stay there for 15 days. You
may come there if you like. Jajuji will of course be there. You
need not go there immediately I arrive. We can manage even if
you come in the beginning of February. My sole intention is
that all khadi devotees should make all-round progress and khadi
should get its rightful place. Of course, if you do not sincerely
believe in non-violence, do not consider khadi its symbol and
have no faith in my present policy with regard to khadi, then it is
a different matter. When our views differ to such an extent, the
question assumes a wholly different form. And if, while main-
taining different views with regard to the above three points you
still want to serve khadi, you must dissociate yourself from the
Sangh. Then the question is not one of differences with Jajuji
but of differences over principle, and if that be the case they
ought to be cleared up.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
