186. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
VELLORE,
February 19, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI ,
I got your postcard. I am dictating this letter in the hope
that it will reach you. I have kept excellent health, though the
travelling has been quite hard. Valjibhai has joined me now. He
was not keeping good health and has joined in the hope that
touring in my company will improve it. Harjivan also is with
me at present. He will leave for Kashmir on the 24th. The tour
of Tamil Nadu will end on the 21st. After that, we have to visit
Rohini and Poviya's Coorg and shall spend two days there.
Then we shall be in Karnataka for ten days and after that most
probably I shall have to go to Bihar. Rajendrababu wants me
there. Ramdas and Nimu are in Wardha. Ramdas's mind
doesn't seem to have become steady yet. Nimu is again preg-
nant. Devdas and Lakshmi are in Delhi. Lakshmi also is preg-
nant and this is the eighth month. Maruti's Lakshmi also is in
the same stage. Radha is fairly well. She is still at Deolali.
Keshu is in Wardha. He seems to have settled down there.
Kishorelal was seriously ill. He was in bed for a long time. He
has now gone to Deolali. The place will probably do him good.
Brijkrishna is fairly well. He has risen from his death-bed, so to say.
I did not criticize your desire to learn English, but wrote to
strengthen it. I want you and all other women to learn English.
Madhavji and Mahalakshmi have arrived here today (the 19th).
They wish to discuss and solve the problem of their children.
Kaka is in jail for two years, and so also is Jawaharlal. Bal
is in Patna. Ba is all right. Shanta and Lalita also are with
her. You may read what you like in Gujarati, I have nothing
to say about it. I understand that Anasaktiyoga alone cannot
satisfy your hunger. It would not satisfy mine, too. I may men-
tion a few books.
All books written by your father-in-law1, all
works of Ramanbhai the poems of Dalpatram the four parts
of Kavyadohan4, Vanaraj Chavdo5, Forbes's Rasamala some of the books
of Manibhai7, Chandrakant Maniratnamala, a translation of the
Mahabharata, all works of Anandshankarbhai . Is this enough to
satisfy your hunger?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9382. Also C.W. 627. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit
