479. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
September 21, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
I arrived here at 4 o'clock today. I have your letter.
When a person takes beer with two per cent alcohol content
and is forbidden to take whisky with 75 per cent alcohol con-
tent, can I ask why beer and why not whisky? You must
see also that when we drink lemonade or eat things with some
alcohol content in them nobody says that we are taking alcohol.
Equate chillies with whisky and then consider if chillies can
go with turmeric or coriander. Taking spices does not mean
consuming all kinds of spices. There is said to be a lot of differ-
ence between green chillies and red chillies. It is surprising that
all these simple things have escaped your attention. Whatever
spices we give, like turmeric, black pepper, coriander, etc., are
given on doctor's recommendation and on grounds of health. Even
so, who can prevent anyone from eating for taste, and how can
it be done? Have you not heard that a Vaghari woman used
to relish greatly a two-day stale bajra chapati without ghee, but
when she was given kheer and wheat halwa to eat every day
she started shrinking and fell ill in the end. Shall we then say
that this Vaghari woman had conquered her palate and subsisted
on dry bread, chillies and salt? What else should I write?
Why did you not ask me till today about taking chillies on
grounds of health? Of course we do let Shakaribehn have chillies
willingly. But how can we give it to others? The reason is not
that chillies have no good qualities at all. They certainly have
some medicinal value. But chillies have no place in a hospital
except as a "pain-killer" which is an extract of chillies. In
the Ashram we neither take nor give anything merely for taste.
But we do not ask everybody whether they relish what they
eat and if they do so they should leave the Ashram. If we
take this view, none but animals and birds will be left in the
Ashram.
Kamle should somehow calm down and improve his health.
I have already written about Purnachandraji. While living
in the Ashram everyone has to observe brahmacharya. I did not
know about Ramprasadji. But I was under the impression
that Ramprasad's house was a little away from the other houses
of the Ashram. Niamat's room was also there but she was never
asked whether she wanted to observe brahmacharya. But I had
thought that Ramprasad had not come to live in the Ashram like
Niamat. However, when I came to know that the manner in which
they lived they could even produce children I was perturbed.
Besides others this is the strongest reason for one to leave the
Ashram. His having a separate kitchen also used to irk me.
But since this had been allowed in the case of others I could
not be too insistent in dissuading him.
It is not enough to assume that Purnachandraji must be
observing brahmacharya while staying in the Ashram. It is neces-
sary to ask him clearly.
I hope to go to Poona from here on the 24th.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 4529
