22. LETTER TO B. W. TUCKER
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 4, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Surely there was nothing in your previous
letters to be ashamed of. Though I could not accept your judg-
ment I certainly appreciate the affection underlying your criti-
cism. The attitude that you have taken up with the Deputy
Commissioner appears to me to be correct. Indeed the conduct
of foreign missions in India does not in any way appeal to me.
lt is more expedient and mundane than correct and religious.
How can a religious body accept the terms that have been im-
posed upon foreign missions? The English missionary effort is
frankly political. It is in alliance with the Government and
takes its code of conduct generally from the Government. Such at
any rate is my reading. I expect that one of the reasons which
determined Andrews in giving up the Cambridge Mission was its
over-secularity. But here too I write under correction. My own
judgment is wholly independent of Andrews's attitude. The present
crisis that has overtaken you, I, therefore, regard as a blessing in
disguise. And if you have the conviction and the strength, you
will sever your connection once for all. And, in my opinion, you
will be all the fitter for becoming a messenger of Truth.
I understand what you say about my proposed visit to the
West. If the external circumstances are favourable and if I keep
good health, I hope to go next year.
Yours sincerely,
REVEREND B. W. TUCKER
"THE MANSE", DARJEELING
From a photostat: S.N. 13451
critical attitude . . . those criticisms were most of them the products of the
weaker side of my nature and an effort to justify some of my attitudes about
which I have much uncertainty in my own mind and heart . . . ."
1 Tucker had written: "I was utterly astonished when I met Mr. Wares
[Deputy Commissioner] to have him tell me that the offence which I had com-
mitted was that I had attended political meetings . . . that attendance at such
meetings was a violation of the undertaking which the Board of Foreign Mis-
sions in America had given on behalf of its missionaries . . . if I did not cease
attending such meetings . . . our school in Calcutta . . . would lose the
Rs. 175 per month of grant from the Government and that the Government
would complain . . . to the Missionary Board . . . to withdraw me. . . . I have
already communicated the report to Bishop Fisher and the Secretary of the
Board in America, and have told them that I have no inclination to accept this
order. If they insist that I conform to the demand of the Government, there
is no honourable course for me to take but to resign as a missionary of the
Board. . . ."
2 C. F. Andrews
3 Tucker had written: "I agree with your plan not to deliver public
lectures but only to meet selected individuals and groups. It will not only
save you from the severe strain . . . but it will also enable you to make your
message and personality felt in larger measure . . ."
