138. LETTER TO KASTURBHAI LALBHAI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
December 10/11,1936
BHAI KASTURBHAI,
I am sending herewith my draft of the Award. I am still
going through the papers. As I read them I find that the mill-
owners do not have any case for the cut, and if they have they
have not been able to argue it. If you feel that the papers we
have received prove their case it is your duty to guide me. I
will in any case be receiving your Award, which will contain your
arguments also. If I can understand them I will certainly change
my decision. I of course take it that in your Award you will not
make use of anything that you may know but of which I am
ignorant because in that case I will not be able to understand it
at all. I may have heard many things from the Labour Associa-
tion, but what can I do so long as they are not recorded in the
files? I write this not by way of warning but just to know your
mind because I shall feel unhappy if both of us do not arrive
at the same decision. I want to understand your point of view
fully but only on the strength of the evidence we have received. I
do not understand how you can demand a cut in wages so long as
the Delhi settlement is not proved unworkable. So for me the doors
are closed. You will realize my difficulties better after reading my
Award. If you think it is necessary for you to come here, do
come. If you find that it is necessary to send me a telegram, do that.
As I hear that you have gone to Ahmedabad, I am sending
this to two addresses. Send back to me one of the two copies.
See that we adhere to the time limit of the 15th.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
December 11, 1936
[PS.]
I wrote this yesterday. As it missed the train in spite of
all efforts, I opened it to write about the Umpire.
That
was left out. Besides Shri Madgavkar, the other names suggested
are Shri Motilal Setalvad and Shri Patkar. Shankerlal told me
that you approve of Shri Govind Ballabh Pant. You may choose
any of these.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4196
