327. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
6.25 a.m., Silence Day, May 6, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Your recent letters make me feel a little worried. I feel that
you are forcing yourself to do what is beyond your strength. Do
nothing out of false regard for me. I know that you find it diffi-
cult to stand alone. Do not believe that the dairy, or for that
matter even the weaving factory, should run in any circumstan-
ces. I have made it my profession in life to break up homes
and have felt no wrench in the heart at any time while doing so.
I started doing this in the year 1891; that is, ever since I became
independent, I have been doing nothing but that. I set up a home
in Bombay and broke it up; did the same in Rajkot, broke it up
and went to Bombay at a mere suggestion by Kevalram. Then I
broke up the home in India to go to South Africa for one year
only. The books remained unused, the furniture and other house-
hold things became useless, the dress became useless and I had
to buy everything new. I had built up the home in Natal with
much thought, had exercised much care in buying furniture of
my liking. I had furnished a room as a gymnasium. I threw up
all this in a moment. I gave away many of the things, some-
thing to this friend and something to another. I returned to Bom-
bay and set up a home in Girgaum. Manilal fell ill there and was
at death's door. I decided that we could not live in that air.
After hunting for a house everywhere, I chose the "Viller Villa."
I got a rent-note drawn up and signed it. Revashanker, too, came
to live with us. I took out a first-class season ticket, and rented an
office in Bombay in Payne Gilbert's chambers. At last, I felt, I had
settled down. Just then came a cable: 'Come to South Africa.'
I left Ba under the care of Chhaganlal and went to South Africa,
accompanied by some youths who cared to come with me. There
was the same story there. I cannot tell now how much money
I must have wasted on furniture. But I do not remember having
ever felt a wrench in the heart in all these wild adventures. I felt
lighter every time and convinced that that was God's will and
the change was for my good. I shall, then, feel no wrench in
my heart in breaking up this Ashram and building a new one.
Yes, I crave for one thing — sincerity. Only those of you who can
live sincerely may remain. I would not say that those who re-
main out of a false sense of shame or under pressure from others
are sincere in what they do. Sincerity may sometimes appear
cruel. You should not shrink from appearing to be cruel to me.
Be sincere at any cost. Do not act unnaturally even for a minute.
Please understand the meaning of the word kritrim here; it does
not mean "making false show", but means "unnatural". Do what
your conscience bids you do. That will be for your good and
through that you will prosper in the end. This is what you can
learn from me; though, to be sure, few have learnt it. You will
be surprised when I tell you that Maganlal earned the certificate
of having done so. You will remember how he used to oppose me
in meetings. Sometimes he saw that I had felt upset. He would,
on such occasions, come and tell me the next morning. "Bapu,
haven't you taught me to oppose you whenever I do not agree
with you?" I would then smile at him and calm down. Once
we had an argument about spinning. I took one side and he
another. He did not understand what I was saying and all the
time I was burning with misery. He saw the expression on my
face and he, too, felt miserable. But he did not give up his
stand. I saw in the end that my argument was not based on
experience. The matter was trivial, but Maganlal felt that he
would be doing no service to me by yielding to my whims. I
recollect many such incidents. There was a reason, too, why he
clung to me. He himself explained it in one of his letters. I did
not remember the matter at all.
What more shall I write and how may I reassure you so that
you may have no fear? You should be as fearless as I am. That
requires only faith in God. Who are we? A mere imaginary
point such as cannot be drawn on a board. He is the only Reality
and is all that exists. Doesn't the Gita say, "Sarvata eva sarva"1?
Why should we, then, form all kinds of plans in our minds? We
should do, to the best of our understanding, the task that lies at
hand and live with our hearts for ever light.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have written this letter to you after writing a similar letter
to Mirabehn. She has also made me feel worried. She has asked
for permission to come to Nellore and join me. I have had to
send a wire to her saying "No". And so I have written a letter
to soothe her.
I have not read this letter after finishing it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5412
