225. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
AHMEDABAD,
December 12, 1916
MY DEAR WEST,
This is not the draft letter that Polak refers to in his letter to
you herewith. But what I am now saying is in substance what is
in the draft letter.
We have all thought over your proposal and feel that we can
no longer rely upon support from the P. R. fund. The Phoenix
trustees are not all agreed upon the support being so received. The
Committee here will at the most just tolerate the withdrawal of
fund[s] for sustaining Indian Opinion. And the public there will also
look upon such support with strong disfavour. In the circum-
stances, we can only fall back upon local support or failing that
reduce the paper to any extent we choose. In this matter you
should have absolute control. By you, I mean you, Devi and
Sam and anyone who may be sent from here.
I observe that Pragji must now leave. He wants to. Bhaga
too goes. Chhaganlal is ready to come over and work under you
loyally. Or if you will not shoulder the responsibility, he will work
the paper with your loyal co-operation. I do hope you will agree
to Chhaganlal's return. If you don't, Maganlal will come with his
family to work on the same terms as above. And if you do not
favour Maganlal's return, Manilal and Ramdas can be sent. They
of course can only work under your directions. Manilal should find
no difficulty in gradually editing the Gujarati part. For the time
being, he will simply translate what you want him to.
If you favour Chhaganlal's return, cable simply 'Chhaganlal'
and I shall know. If you want Maganlal, cable simply 'Maganlal'.
And if you want Manilal and Ramdas, cable simply 'Manilal'.
If you want only Manilal, you may cable 'Manilal without Ramdas'.
I shall write later about the accounts. We do not need to
publish them now. I have only to inform Mr. Petit how we propose
to deal with the balance. Transvaal Indian Women's Association
funds are not with me. They are in the balance with you. Even
if you disagree, you should bank the amount due separately in con-
sultation with Miss Schlesin and hand the receipt to her. They
want it banked to bear interest. And they are right.
Polak has gone to Madras. I am preparing for the Congress.
I want to write on many matters, not about the press or Phoenix.
But this must wait till after my return from Lucknow.
I wrote to Pragji when he told me that you all did not want
Chhaganlal, that I would not send him. So said Polak too.
But after consultation with Chhaganlal and examining the situation
here, I came to the conclusion that I must at least let you know it
and let you decide one way or the other.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4425.
Courtesy: A. H. West
