3. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
9.30 p.m., February 9, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your second note as also wire. As you must have received
my letter yesterday (Monday) I did not wire back.
Mrs. Gandhi is progressing slowly though I think surely. She has
lost heart, worries over the fact of my impending departure 6 and
1 A German Theosophist in charge of the Phoenix School ; came to India
and joined Gandhiji at Sevagram, where he died in 1960.
2 Rev. Joseph J. Doke
3 Gandhiji went on deputation to England on June 21, 1909; vide Vol. IX,
p. 269.
4 The reference, presumably, is to the motor-car; vide also pp. 14 and 25.
5 Kasturba Gandhi had undergone an operation on January 10, 1909 ; vide
Vol. IX, p. 105, fn..
6 Gandhiji was sentenced to three months' imprisonment on February 25.
imagines all kinds of woes. This naturally retards recovery. However,
the baths are having a marked effect upon her and it is just likely
that she will pull through. Anyhow she has all of me at present.
Poor Chanchi ! She frets over Harilal's departure. She is
passionately fond of him. She is very romantic. You meet with such
characters in novels. Evidently she is living the heroine of her best
novel. She too is on the sick list. I am glad for her that I am here.
Many thanks for having seen Heymann, Gordon and others. I cannot
suggest anything particular to be done. We must for the present simply
wait and find out how many Indians will stand to the last. Smuts will,
according to the current notion of diplomacy, be a fool if he yielded
just when he must hope to break down the opposition almost entirely.
Patient waiting is, therefore, to my mind, the only remedy.
Why are you indecisive ? Surely it would be madness to come
to Durban for a few days only. I can be here at the most perhaps
5 days. I understand my case is to be heard on the 17th instant. If
so, I would like to leave here on Sunday, reach there Monday evening,
pass the whole of Tuesday meeting people and return to Volksrust
Tuesday evening - so it is no use your running down to Durban. We
shall go together when I am discharged and if I am then free to do
so. In the meanwhile I think you should decide to settle down to quiet
study and do what may be possible for the struggle.
Curzon's letter is good but it really shows that the struggle is
important and it must be prolonged. And why not? The more prolonged
it is, the greater the opportunity for the people to educate themselves
in a most practical and effective manner.
I have not been able myself to do anything regarding Doke's
commission I have, however, written to Bonyan, the photographer.
I hope the African Building trouble is over.
You are laying nothing regarding your piles. I infer that they no
longer bother you.
Has not the motor-car yet gone? I shall be going to gaol in the
full belief that it will no more entice you.
My fingers are now aching. I shall therefore say good night.
With regards to you and Mr. Call,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
(with renewed apologies to Mrs. A.)
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Chanchal, wife of Harilal Gandhi who was awaiting imprisonment; vide
Vol. IX, pp. 174-.
2 General Jan Christiaan Smuts (1870-1950); Colonial Secretary, 1907-10;
Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa, 1919-24
3 Vide Vol. IX, Appendix XII.
4 Rev. Joseph J. Doke had requested Gandhiji to send material for his
biography: M. K. Gandhi : An Indian Patriot in South Africa; ibid., p. 100
and Appendix VI.
