218. LETTER TO PYARELAL
November 22, 1937
CHI. PYARELAL,
What have you done? You went away leaving me sick and
Sushila in tears! But no doubt I permitted you, didn't I? Of
course, I have laid down a condition. We shall know by and
by whether my making the permission conditional was correct or
not. Right now, my anxiety is increased. And Sushila is absolu-
tely shaken.
You silenced your mother and your brother. You silenced
your sister. Yesterday you silenced Ba and, while leaving, you did
not even spare me. Is this right?
Do you remember what you had said?-that, if I let you go,
it was just possible that you would not be able to bear the
separation, and would rush back and put your head in my lap.
Has that moment arrived? Does not two days' separation seem
like two years'? If it does, in answer come here or send a tele-
gram. Then alone will Sushila be able to serve me and then
alone shall I be able to take service from her.
You know that if I understand your point, I can agree with
you even with regard to your terrible step. Will you not wait
till I recover or die? If I survive this illness, I shall take the
first opportunity to talk with you. If you say that now there is
nothing more to explain, it will be adding insult to injury.
Your letter to Jairamdas following Chhotelal's passing away
was not appropriate. It was unfair. You did not have the pa-
tience to read Kishorelal's letter. You have done gross injustice
to him. Except for the introductory portion you forgot your duty
to read the whole of it. Even if the whole world fails to recog-
nize you and is unfair to you, your duty is to bear it. "My
reputation is in your hand, O Lord, protect me." You will ruin my
life by taking any step that should not be taken. Come soon.
And if you do not come, send a telegram that will pacify me and
Sushila. Also write a letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
128
