11. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
June 3, 1932
CHI. KAKA1,
I do get news about you from time to time.
All the same,
when you can next write letters, write to me and tell me how
you are . . . . 2 The pain in your back must have disappeared
now. I hope the rains have had no ill effect on your health.
Who are your companions? Recently I have been spinning on the
Magan spinning-wheel. The left elbow is paining and the doc-
tors say all it needs is rest. Since the pain has been caused by
the exertion of drawing the thread in spinning for many years,
I learnt to draw the thread with the right hand on the Gandiva
spinning-wheel. But the doctors advised me not to exert the left
hand even for rotating the wheel. Even otherwise, I had intend-
ed to learn spinning on the Magan spinning-wheel, and this ad-
vice gave me one more reason for taking it up. And so I have
started spinning on it. I had a good deal of difficulty in learn-
ing to use it, but I may say that I have now acquired fairly
good control over it. When I had good slivers, I had attained
a speed of 150 rounds [per hour]. Just now I have been spin-
ning with the worst possible kind of slivers. The speed is less but
not much less than 100. I give some time to Urdu. And daily
I read some book or other apart from star gazing. I have taken
up the study in right earnest. I would not now show myself a
complete ignoramus in discussing the subject with you. Among
the books which I have seen, I have found Flammarion's book
the most useful so far. Dikshit's book seems to be the result
of considerable labour, but, from a learner's point of view, it re-
quires a good deal of improvement. Patwa's Akashdarshan can be
of some help, but the book is very superficial. There ought to be
one good book in Gujarati, which should also give some informa-
tion relating to astronomy. Two separate books in Gujarati for
this purpose are not a practical proposition. We must have a book
which would give both scientific knowledge of astronomy and
practical guidance. If you were with me here, I would have
made you write such a book and I also would have made some
contribution to it. I have come to take so much interest in the
subject and perceived such deep religious significance in this study
that, were not my knowledge altogether inadequate, I myself
would have started writing such a book. I occasionally exchange
letters with Hiralal on this subject. He has sent me two or
three books. I read the biographies of Ramakrishna and Viveka-
nanda written by Romain Rolland. One of them is being read by
Mahadev now and the other by Sardar. (Sardar's self-chosen
job is to go through newspapers and to make beautiful envelopes
from used brown paper or such other thick paper which we may
get. Thus he is daily adding to the nation's wealth and dust is
being turned into gold, so to say.)
Mahadev gives about five hours every day to carding and
spinning. There is a friend of Chimanlal named Chhakkaddas
who loves spinning very much. He has sent us beautiful slivers
made from Cambodian and Navsari cotton. With those slivers
Mahadev daily spins 650 rounds, the yarn being of 40 to 45
counts, and also cards an equal quantity from the cotton which we
have received. Hence we always have a good stock of slivers
with us. My experiment of milkless diet continues. My weight
is steady. All three of us are in good health.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Gangadevi passed away about a month ago. She was per-
fectly calm at the time of death. Her death was worthy of an
1 Shanker Balkrishna Dikshit's Bharatiya Jyotishshastra
2 Wife of Totaram Sanadhya
Ashram inmate. Totaramji has sent, at my request, some very
beautiful reminiscences of her. We can see from them that her
life was truly great.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9486. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
