371. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 18, 1929
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I think it wrong to try to run the affairs
of the Ashram from a distance. But that is what I have had to
do all my life. It was so even during Maganlal's time. It is
true that as he came to know my nature better, my burden
became less and there was less need for him to consult me. But
he certainly asked me whenever necessary. After I return this
time, however, we shall make some other arrangement if possible.
I am certainly not longing to control the Ashram affairs. I tore
up your letter after reading it.
If anyone in the Ashram speaks ill of Chhaganlal, we should
bear with that. If people speak ill of him, they have praised him too.
All the letters which I received were expressions of love. Do
you not think that Chhaganlal should continue to stay in the
Ashram as a measure of atonement, if for no other reason? If
he cannot do so, that is a different matter. Dharma requires that
he should. You do not seem to have understood my meaning
when I said that he should become a cipher and remain. A
cipher means not a person who does not work but one who is
free from egoism. Chhaganlal has always harboured the egoistic
sense of being someone. That is why he was tempted by sin.
All that I meant was that this egoism should disappear. If
Chhaganlal cannot live according to the ideals of the Ashram and
cannot be a member of the common kitchen, he may live in the
same manner as you will be doing. Even by doing that he will
overcome his egoism. But we shall talk more about this. I don't
wish to insist on my view in this matter either.
I desire the good of Chhaganlal and Kashi and am ready
to do anything which will promote it.
We shall talk about Purushottam when we meet. He must
build up his health.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have written this in the midst of a crowd of people coming
and going.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine—Part I, pp. 53-
