119. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU AND M. R. JAYAKAR
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
August 15, 1930
DEAR FRIENDS,
We are deeply grateful to you for having undertaken the
duty of trying to effect a peaceful settlement between the British
Government and the Congress. After having perused the corres-
pondence between yourselves and His Excellency the Viceroy and
having had the benefit of protracted talks with you and having
discussed among ourselves, we have come to the conclusion that
the time is not yet ripe for securing a settlement honourable for
our country. Marvellous as has been the mass awakening during
the past five months and great as has been the sufferings of the
people among all grades and classes representing the different
creeds, we feel that the sufferings have been neither sustained
enough nor large enough for the immediate attainment of the
end. Needless to mention we do not in any way share your view
or the Viceroy's that civil disobedience has harmed the country
or that it is ill-timed or unconstitutional. English history teems
with instances of bloody revolts whose praises Englishmen have
sung unstintingly and taught us to do likewise. It therefore ill
becomes the Viceroy or any intelligent Englishman to condemn a
revolt that is in intention and that has overwhelmingly remained
in execution peaceful, but we have no desire to quarrel with
condemnation, whether official or unofficial, of the present civil dis-
obedience campaign. The wonderful mass response to the movement
is, we hold, its sufficient justification. What is, however, the point
here is the fact that we gladly make common cause with you in
wishing, if it is at all possible, to stop or suspend civil disobedience.
It can be no pleasure to us needlessly to expose the men, women
and even the children of our country to imprisonment, lathi charges
and worse. You will, therefore, believe us when we assure you and
through you the Viceroy that we would leave no stone unturned
to explore any and every channel for honourable peace, but we
are free to confess as yet we see no such sign on the horizon. We
notice no symptom of conversion of the English official world to
the view that it is India's men and women who must decide what
is best for India. We distrust the pious declarations of the good
intentions, often well meant, of officials. The age-long exploita-
tion by the English of the people of this ancient land has rendered
them almost incapable of seeing the ruin, moral, economic and
political, of our country which this exploitation has brought about.
They cannot persuade themselves to see that one thing needful
for them to do is to get off our backs and do some reparation
for the past wrongs, by helping us to grow out of the dwarfing process
that has gone on for a century of British domination, but we know
you and some of our learned countrymen think differently. You
believe a conversion has taken place, at any rate, sufficient to
warrant participation in the proposed Conference. In spite, there-
fore, of the limitation we are labouring under, we would gladly
co-operate with you to the extent of our ability.
The following is the utmost response it is possible for us,
circumstanced as we are, to make to your friendly endeavour.
We feel the language used by the Viceroy in the reply given
to your letter about the proposed Conference is too vague to
enable us to assess its value in terms of the National Demand
framed last year in Lahore nor are we in a position to say any-
thing authoritative without reference to a properly constituted
meeting of the Working Committee of the Congress and if neces-
sary to the A.I.C.C., but we can say that for us individually no
solution will be satisfactory unless (a) it recognizes in as many
words the right of India to secede at will from the British Empire,
(b) it gives to India complete national Government responsible to
her people including the control of defence forces and economic
control and covers all the eleven points raised in Gandhiji's letter
to the Viceroy and (c) it gives to India the right to refer if
necessary to an independent tribunal such British claims, con-
cessions and the like including the so-called public debt of India
as may seem to the national Government to be unjust or not in
the interest of the people of India.
NOTE. Such adjustments as may be necessitated in the interests
of India during the transference of power to be determined by
India's chosen representatives.
(2) If the foregoing appears to be feasible to the British
Government and a satisfactory declaration is made to that effect,
we should recommend to the Working Committee the advisability
of calling off civil disobedience, that is to say, disobedience of
certain laws for the sake of disobedience but peaceful picketing of
foreign cloth and liquor will be continued unless Government
themselves can enforce prohibition of liquor and foreign cloth.
The manufacture of salt by the people will have to be continued
and the penal clauses of the Salt Act should not be enforced.
There will be no raids on Government or private salt
depots.
(3) Simultaneously with the calling off of civil disobedience
(a) all the satyagrahi prisoners and other political prisoners convict-
ed or under trial who have not been guilty of violence or incite-
ment to violence should be ordered to be released, (b) properties
confiscated under the Salt Act, the Press Act, the Revenue Act
and the like should be restored, (c) fines and securities taken
from convicted satyagrahis or under the Press Act should be re-
funded, (d) all the officers including village officers who have
resigned or who may have been dismissed during the civil dis-
obedience movement and who may desire to rejoin Government
service should be reinstated.
NOTE. The foregoing sub-clauses refer also to the Non-co-
operation period.
(e) All the Viceregal Ordinances should be repealed.
(4) The question of the composition of the proposed Con-
ference and of the Congress being represented at it can only be
decided after the foregoing preliminaries are satisfactorily settled.
Yours sincerely,
MOTILAL NEHRU
M. K. GANDHI
SAROJINI NAIDU
VALLABHBHAI PATEL
JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
SYED MAHOMED
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
The Hindu, 5-9-1930
