517. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
ASHRAM,
Wednesday [May 12, 1926]
CHI. MAHADEV,
I have your letter. I also got a telegram from Jamnalalji. A
telegram from Sir Chunilal has just been received. The Gover-
nor will see us on Tuesday. I am, therefore, sending a wire
that I shall start tomorrow. I will take the first train. We shall
fix up the rest of the programme after I reach there. I would
prefer that we leave for Deolali on Friday itself in the evening
and return to Bombay on Sunday morning. We may then spend
Sunday and Monday in Bombay and finish the work for Young
India and Navajivan till the usual period of my vow of silence on
Monday is over. I should break my silence on Monday evening
and leave for Poona, from where I can immediately take the
train to Mahabaleshwar. We can have our wash and lunch in
Mahabaleshwar itself. This will impose the least strain on us. But
you should, all of you, consult among yourselves about any
changes which may seem necessary in this programme; we will
alter it accordingly after I arrive there. We should stay in Maha-
baleshwar on Tuesday and Wednesday and leave there on Thurs-
day morning. On our way we should cover Sinhgarh; we should
start descending immediately after sunset and take the train from
Poona so as to reach Bombay the following morning, and Ahmeda-
bad on Saturday morning. As far as I can see, we cannot save a
single day from this programme. We must reserve two days for
Mahabaleshwar. We can, if we wish, spend Monday in Maha-
baleshwar. But it seems best that we should spend Sunday and
Monday with Devdas. Or, we can spare one day more for Mathura-
das. In any case, we should spend Monday in Bombay.
I think I have nothing to add. Oh yes, I forgot one thing. I
have yielded to Kumi's repeated requests and Kanti, Rasik and
Minu are leaving for Rajkot tomorrow. My condition is that they
too should be sent back on Friday. On asking the children, I
could see that they wished to go and so I thought it best to
let them go.
Ramniklal has started a ten-day fast from today, the reason
merely being his own several years old, strong wish to do so. So
now Bhansali has a companion during the last days of his fast.
The latter is going on very well with his fast. Today is the twelfth
day, but he does not show in any way that he has been fasting.
There is no observable effect even on his face. He sleeps quite
soundly. He takes enemas, and that ensures bowel movement.
Drinks plenty of water. He himself reads for an hour every day,
and also gets others to read a little from religious books.
Since Devdas is all right, . . .1 can now come away. Rami,
being alone, is likely to feel a little, though of course Mani, Radha
and others look after her with great care. I propose to bring
Subbiah along with me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19494
