57. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, NATAL
[DURBAN,]
October 19, 1899
TO
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
MARITZBURG
SIR,
About 100 English-speaking Indians of Durban met together
at a few hours' notice on the 17th instant to consider the desir-
ability of unreservedly and unconditionally offering their services to
the Government or the Imperial authorities in connection with
the hostilities now pending between the Imperial Government and
the two Republics in South Africa.
As a result, I have the honour to enclose herewith a list con-
taining the names of a portion of those that have offered their
services unconditionally. These have been subjected by Dr. Prince
to a rigorous examination.
He will examine the remaining volunteers tomorrow, when
about ten are expected to pass the test. But, as time is of con-
sequence, it was proposed to forward the incomplete list.
The services are offered by the applicants without pay. It is
open to the authorities to accept the services of all, or so many
as they may consider fit or necessary.
We do not know how to handle arms. It is not our fault; it is
perhaps our misfortune that we cannot, but it may be there are
other duties no less important to be performed on the battlefield
and, no matter of what description they may be, we would con-
sider it a privilege to be called upon to perform them and would
be ready to respond to the call at any time appointed by the
Government. If an unflinching devotion to duty and extreme
eagerness to serve our Sovereign can make us of any use on the
field of battle, we trust we would not fail. It may be that, if in
no other direction, we might render some service in connection
with the field hospitals or the commissariat.
The motive underlying this humble offer is to endeavour to
prove that, in common with other subjects of the Queen-Empress
in South Africa, the Indians, too, are ready to do duty for their
Sovereign on the battlefield. The offer is meant to be an earnest
of the Indian loyalty.
The number we are able to place at the disposal of the Author-
ities may appear to be small; but it probably represents twenty-
five per cent of the adult Indian males in Durban that have
received a tolerably good English education.
The mercantile portion of the Indian community, too, have
loyally come forward, and if they cannot offer their services on
the battlefield, they have contributed towards the maintenance
of the dependants of those volunteers whose circumstances would
render support necessary.
I venture to trust that our prayer would be granted, a favour
for which the petitioners will be ever grateful and which would,
in my humble opinion, be a link to bind closer still the different
parts of the mighty empire of which we are so proud. 1
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
LIST OF NAMES OF INDIAN VOLUNTEERS WHO HAVE OFFERED THEIR
SERVICES TO THE NATAL GOVERNMENT OR THE
IMPERIAL AUTHORITIES
Gandhi, M. K.; Paul, H. L.; Peters, A. H.; Khan, R. K.;
Dhanjisha, P.; Cooper, P. C.; Godfrey, J. W.; Baghwan, R.;
Peter, P.; Dhunde, N. P.; Lawrence, V.; Gabriel, L.; Harry, G.
D.; Govindoo, R.; Shadrack, S.; Ramtahal; Home, J. D.; Nazar,
M. H.; Naidoo, P. K.; Singh, K.; Richards, S. N.; Lutchman
Panday, M. S.; Royeppen, J.; Christopher, J.; Stevens, C.; Ro-
berts, J. L.; Jappie, H. J.; Done, J. S.; Gabriel, B.; Royeppen,
M.; Lazarus, F.; Moodley, R.
From a photostat of the office copy in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 3301-2,
and The Natal Mercury, 25-10-1899
