582. LETTER TO N. K. BOSE
February 7, 1947
CHI. NIRMALBABU,
I never succeeded in writing to you on your first personal
letter. The second on B's relation with A now comes. I must
undertake this second today. I sent your letter to A. You left
it open for me to do so. My loyalty to him demanded that I
should.
B has led you into doing an injustice to A. I discussed it
with her. She saw the truth of it. A's love is wholly free from
animal passion. I have called it poetic. It is not a perfect ad-
jective but I can find no better. He loved once a girl with
the same passion with which he loves B. In either case, it was
philanthropic. The first came in a flash, the second took practi-
cally two years to discover. He thought he would give B the
best of him in point of education. In his opinion both cases
went wrong because of my initial aversion.
In the first, I re-
lented when, as A thinks, it was too late. In the second, it is
almost too late. The first girl is married. He is entitled to
hope till B is married elsewhere, if she is. So far as B knows
herself, it is a sealed book. Now mark the beauty of it. A
says so long as B does not change her mind, she will be as
sister or daughter to him and [that he] would never make any
other advances to her. B believes this assurance, what she
objects to is his shadowing her as she calls it.
If he does not get B as wife, he will never think of making
love to another woman. He is too pure to think of any such
thing. If you accept my analysis, you will render justice to A
and lead B aright.
I do wish you could see that in non-violent conduct, whe-
ther individual or universal, there is an indissoluble connection
between private, personal life and public. You may be as gener-
ous and charitable as you like in judging men, but you cannot
overlook private deflections from the right conduct. If you are
convinced about this proposition, you should pursue my connection
with Manu and if you find a flaw, try to show it to me.
I have written in order to save your time and to let you
think. But I shall welcome discussion, if you like it.
Asirbad1,
BAPU
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 156-
