263. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
ON WAY TO CALCUTTA,
[Before August 17, 1921]
I have your letter. Motilalji certainly wants you to stay on,
but the main thing for you to consider is what you yourself would
like to do. If you find the work there very strenuous or if the
place does not suit your health, do come away. Can one be more
important to a man than be his right hand? "If only I were the
right hand" could have been written either in grief or with know-
ledge. If in grief, I would say you have not understood me. If you
wrote it with knowledge, all is well. Two brains can drift apart
from each other, but can a hand be separated from the brain to
do anything? I am training you to work as a brain. Santaram,
being a "permanent Under-Secretary", cannot leave. I should like
you to understand your position rightly.
You will not understand the secret of my keeping Pyarelal
here. You do not know that part of my life. Ba and I do not have
the same temperament. Ba does not understand me. I have not
yet found in the Ashram a single woman of the type I want.
Managing the kitchen is [a difficult thing]. Only a few can do
it. I consider the work beyond your capacity. So far Maganlal,
Vinoba, Chhotelal3, myself and to some extent Bhuvarji have
proved equal to the task. There is science in our cooking. There
were numerous difficulties on account of Gokibehn . We do want
one responsible man [in the kitchen]. I think that I am
making the best use of Pyarelal. When the proper time comes
I shall shift him from there and put him elsewhere.
While Joseph is out, your asking for Devdas or Pyarelal to
join you seems to be rather an exorbitant demand. You should
find someone of a lower level than these two. You can have
Prabhudas with you.
Would it suit you to continue staying with Joseph after
Durga has recovered? But that is a distant thing. I must first know
what your own desire is. I will not now send you to take up
Young India. Did you receive my last letter? You will either
continue there or be with me-this is what I think at present.
I read your articles. All of them are good, that is, they call
for no comments. You have given a good reply to Bipin
Chandra.
Write to me at Gauhati. I shall be in its neighbourhood up
to the 25th.
Kristodas who was to join me for Young India work, has
come. He is with me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 11413
Blessings from
BAPU
