480. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
SODEPUR,
January 5, 1946
CHI. DINSHAW,
I have remitted Rs. 10,000 to you yesterday. With this amount
open an account in the name of the Trust in any bank you like
and issue the cheques yourself, because I have remitted the amount
to you as Trustee and Director. I hastened with the money
because I understood you had no funds left with you. I am sorry
I was under the impression that you usually had a large balance
lying with you and, indeed, an important account such as yours
ought to have such a balance. Had I known that the account
hardly ever had a balance I would have arranged for an amount
before leaving Poona-but let it be.
I have a letter from Gulbai, which has alarmed me. She is
unhappy. Do not cause her unhappiness. It seems she is hesitant
about getting Ardeshir vaccinated whereas you seem to be insist-
ing on it. I don't have any faith in vaccination. I am writing
to Gulbai accordingly. If I were in your place I would respect
Gulbai's wishes. After all a mother has a stronger claim over
the children. Once the seed is planted the man's job is over. It
is the mother who carries the child for nine months and then
suckles it while it grows. But that is not what pains Gulbai;
it is your behaviour that pains her. We had already had a little
talk on the subject. Please talk to her patiently and explain
things to her.
You appear to be squeamish. I would still suggest that you
draw a salary from the Trust. I am aware that the Deed does
not provide for this, but the three Trustees can agree to make
the necessary change. You may take up some other occupation
if you like. A man's first duty is to be honest with himself and
to be truthful. One who does not do this is no good for any-
thing. He turns into a hypocrite or cheat. You made up your
mind to go by my advice. Understand the significance of this.
Anyone who decides to defer to another either sees the point of
what he is told or accepts the advice on faith. Such faith, again,
proves more productive than understanding. And when it does
not, the person is ill at ease. May you never come to such a
pass. I don't want you to lose your fire. I shall be satisfied
only if you rise higher and higher as a result of my contact.
On further reflection I think I had better send you Gulbai's
letter so that you can understand her feelings and know what
pains her. Be calm and patient with her.
I shall reach there by the evening of 21st February, or on
the 23rd, because 22nd is Ba's anniversary and I should observe
it at a fixed place. This cannot be done on a train where it
would be difficult to read the whole of the Gita.
It appears Chi. Sushila Gandhi has written to you. Have
you not replied to her? If not, please write to her. She is now
in Delhi at Devdas's. She does not seem to have benefited [by
your treatment]. What could be the trouble with her? Was she
administered thyroid extract? I have forgotten all.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
