269. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
TITHAL, BULSAR,
May 29, 1937
MY DEAR IDIOT,
I have already told you I leave here 10th June, reach
Segaon 12th June, not to leave it (D. V.) till the meeting of the
Haripura Congress. So I expect you in July and thereafter
you will take your seconds, minutes or hours whatever you can
get and have advice, guidance, and orders at your wish!
Yes, Kumarappa does feel that his interpretation was right and
mine wholly wrong and misleading and when he told me that
Bahadurji had agreed with him, I told him I must have his
opinion in writing. He said he would get it.
I do not know
what happened after. I still maintain that he has no legal sense.
But what does that matter? He has good sense, he is a faith-
ful worker.
I would therefore be pleased if he proves to be
right in his interpretation. I shall then have to blowout my
legal brain which people thought I had.
Your pin-head is an eternal pin-prick for me. You must not
neglect it. You must worry Shummy's life out of him and get
it right, your preoccupations notwithstanding.
Your dal is also a pin-head. I speak not from prejudice
but experience. You cannot judge results from what ordinarily
healthy men can eat seemingly without harm. I tell you a tea-
spoonful of dal has been known to upset delicate stomachs and
yours is extra delicate. You do get enough protein from your
milk and chapati when you take enough. I wish you would
consult Menkel1, the food specialist. I am not sure of the spell-
ing of his name.
I would be sorry if you miss meeting Kallenbach. He has
no desire to see anything in India. He has come just to be
with me as long as he can. He is not sure how long he can
stay. Although he has become a big architect and his firm has
four branches employing 35 architects, he remains in his personal
life just as simple as when I left him in 1914.
I hope you have the lace from Bombay.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3786. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6942
