202. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
July 1, 1938
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter was excellent, because it was so frank. There
was no reason at all for you to apologize for it. I fully re-
member the discussion at the Sabarmati Ashram. But my im-
pression is the opposite of yours. I think also that the subject
was discussed on two separate occasions. I have a faint im-
pression that at the end of the discussion on the first occasion
some decision was arrived at regarding my practice of walking
with my hand on a girl's shoulder. Kaka was not present at
that discussion. When he came to know about it, he raised the
subject again, for he approved of the principle behind my
practice. At the end of the second discussion, my memory is that
I had decided to maintain the status quo. Be that as it may,
the main point is that I do not think I have failed to do what I
had promised to do.
As regards the Wardha decision, you will see if you read
Harijan that the girls, while going in procession from Maganwadi
to Mahilashram and from Mahilashram to Maganwadi, used to
call at my hut and take me out with them. I walked with my
hands on their shoulders by turns. This was observed by some
people and became the subject of comment. I myself raised
the matter for discussion and published the decision at which
I finally arrived. It was not in my mind at all that I would
never place my hands even on the shoulders of girls who live
with me, for after writing that article I continued to use Manu
and other girls as my walking-sticks. But that procession stopped,
and the practice has not been revived and will not be re-
vived. The reason for stopping it had nothing to do with my
vow of brahmacharya. The only consideration was the good of
society. In this instance, too, there is no question of my having
failed to do what I had declared I would do. If I had made
such a declaration and then failed to abide by it, knowing full
well that I was doing so, I would be pained and feel humi-
liated in my own eyes. It would give me no pleasure to know
that I had weakened in my determination to keep a vow. Yes,
there may be self-deception sometimes; as, for instance, when
I decided to drink goat's milk because my vow forbade me to
use cow's or buffalo's milk, or when I compromised by counting
several vegetables as one item in observing the vow of not con-
suming more than five items at anyone meal. This is a pain-
ful memory for me. Even so, I have convinced myself that I
have not violated the letter of my pledges and exercise the utmost
strictness in observing a vow. I have no comment to make
about Thakkar Bapa having been pained. You had no reply
to give to the criticism of that muni of Kutch, for you had
before you two instances of what you regard to be violation of
pledges; you should, therefore, bear that criticism without re-
sentment. Your only reply can be: 'Even we, who live with
him, are puzzled by some of his actions. But we think we have
lost nothing by our association with him, and so we cling to
him. I will ask him about the comparison which you have
made.' If you gave this reply, it was correct. If you kept
quiet, that also was right. In any case, you can always give
this reply: 'He has always touched girls with a pure feeling and
never with a gross purpose. But a doubt having occurred
whether, unknown to him, there might not be an impure feeling
in his heart, he has temporarily given up the practice to end
that doubt.'
Personally, I cannot compare the muni's conduct with mine.
According to me, there is a serious error in it. If, however, his
own conscience feels nothing wrong in his practice, he should
continue it no matter what I do. This is so deep a matter that
blind imitation of one another is likely to land one into serious
error. Everybody, therefore, should cultivate a vigilant con-
science and be guided by it, with God as witness.
I am trying to issue a statement explaining my position. I
wish to satisfy as many co-workers as I can. Let us see if I
succeed.
You do not seem to have understood the meaning of the
remark "the ship is still in port". It only means that, though
the experiment is going on, while discussion about it is still con-
tinuing it cannot be said that it is being carried on in thought,
speech and action. I can observe its effects only if I go on with
it silently. Just now, therefore, it is being followed only in ac-
tion. As for thought and speech, we joke about the matter daily.
This is enough for today.
I can say nothing about the Frontier Province just now. I
shall see about it afterwards.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5547
