76. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 3, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Today is Sunday. Gordon is here. He is keeping well. His farm
is still unsold.
Your brother is to be married today. He sent me the invitation.
I wrote wishing them a joint happy life. He invited Call to stay for
a few days at his house and to look after it while he was away. Call
left the Farm yesterday. He is still unhinged. He likes no one at the
Farm. He said if it was a matter of choice, he would prefer the asylum
to the Farm. I let him do pretty much as he liked even to the extent
of spiriting leather. He took it into his head to make for himself a
pair of sandals. He made a horrible pair. He is never of the same
mind for two minutes. Of course I shall watch him wherever he is.
How nice it would have been if you had been here. He likes you
immensely. He thinks that you are his only great friend. I am trying
to get compensation for him from the company. He has been offered
£3-2- per week. I am still in correspondence with the manager.
The windmill is working. The wheel does not turn the whole day
long. Naturally, therefore, we do not get 9,000 gallons of water per
day. The water is allowed to run into the dam but it has not reached
there yet. I might lay the pipes as far. I shall go slowly.
£100 were cabled to you last week. You had written to Kennedy
who was then in Durban. Miss Friedman asked me and I drew a cheque
for £1 00 and the manager cabled transfer of £1 00 to the Bank there.
I am certainly sorry that you are considering commercial
propositions. You have not gone to Europe for that purpose. We did
discuss these matters here and you seemed to think that you would
clear off the bond from the property itself He who would be good
and do good must have patience. As in diseases so in other matters
we must let Nature have her course. Our business difficulties are also
a variety of disease — mental it is true. And we may no more suppress
these diseases without suffering from other eruptions than we may
physical diseases without their breaking out in another form. We have
to eradicate them and there is only one way of doing so. I agree with
your analysis of Fisher Unwin. I too met him when I was last there.
You had introduced me to the Daniels in your previous letters.
If Kennedy is at the office tomorrow, I shall discuss with him the
question of your staying longer and if he is agreeable I shall cable.
I am anxious that you should stay there as long as you like. Only be
sure that you do not stay for your pleasure, it may be ever so subtle.
The condition also should be that you are to stay only with Mrs. Mayo
or return. Germany is certainly not now the place for you. We are
not intended to seek temptation. We can resist it only when it forces
itself on our attention.
Did I tell you that the boys had left off the saltless diet ? I noticed
that they were getting tired. So at present only Medh, to an extent
Mrs. Gandhi, and I are saltless. With me it seems to have come to
stay. Even with the simplest diet it is possible to overeat than under-
eat. Why then need we multiply dishes ?
We had fair rains of late. We are therefore having a good crop
of apricots. And so we have the eternal stew.
You want me to discuss with you the Indian tour. It is probably
as well not to go. Personally I think that it is time for you to return.
But you are the best judge. If, therefore, you wish to stay on and
that at Aberdeen, you may do so if Kennedy is agreeable. Please do
not mind me. It is no trouble to me to look after things here. At present,
it is Miss Schlesin who looks after them. I simply sign and endorse
cheques.
There are now 15 boys at the Farm. Some of them are very good
but I am not satisfied with one or two of them. I could not reject
them as they accepted the conditions on the Farm.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
