280. LETTER TO HRIDAY NATH KUNZRU
January 31, 1933
DEAR HARIJI,
I have your letter of the 26th instant. If you will look up
my telegram about Lakshmanshastri you will find that it was
accurate enough. You got the telegram at 10.45 p.m. The next
day began after midnight. Therefore Lakshmanshastri was reach-
ing there, as he did, at 2 a.m. following 10.45 p.m. I would not
however have bothered you about this, as it was quite a small mat-
ter, if I did not want to write to you about the defeat of the
Harijan candidates.
This defeat makes me sad. I would not trouble you to enquire
again into the matter. But I cannot help owning to you my utter
stupidity. I had fondly believed, I suppose quite without any
warrant, that Harijan candidates will have a walk-over at elections,
especially in the beginning stages. I see, however, that without
reservation they would have a poor chance of being elected unless
caste Hindus develop a high sense of honour or unless Harijans are
overwhelmingly represented on the voters' list, but where there is
neither honour nor overwhelming representation on the voters'
list, reservation seems to be their only safety. This Cawnpore elec-
tion opens my eyes as nothing else before did, and I can now appre-
ciate the force of the summary rejection by Dr. Ambedkar of any
convention. Nothing but statutory reservation would satisfy him,
and it may be that we shall have to have statutory reservation every-
where as fit punishment for our selfishness. In order to avert a
calamity of such a nature descending upon us, if I had my way, I
would right this evil by three caste Hindus vacating their seats and
allowing three Harijans to be elected. It would be a striking demon-
stration of our ability to repair wrongs if the defeat of Harijan
candidates was a striking demonstration of our selfishness.
You may make whatever use you like of this letter.
Yours sincerely,
SF. HRIDAY NATH KUNZRU
1 KATRA ROAD
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 19276
