468. LETTER TO GIRI RAJ
CAMP GORAKHPORE,
October 4, 1929
MY DEAR GIRI RAJ,
I have your letter. I am glad you have taken long boots to
protect your legs. I hope you have now thoroughly recovered.
You must keep your health.
Dead cattle hide is certainly enough for our wants. Have I
told you that we are exporting nine crores worth of dead cattle
hide out of India? You must remember that millions in India go
barefooted. Sir Nalini Ranjan Sarkar told me that the reason
why many tanneries have failed was because the leather want was
limited in this country. Anyway I did not expect you to raise
such an academic question because it is exactly on such academic
questions that many of the evils in the world are sustained, as
for instance meat-eaters justify meat-eating on the plea that the
earth will be overrun by the animals they ate if they became
vegetarians. Birth-control people justify birth-control on the ground
among others that there would be over-population if there was no
artificial control. Even war has been justified on the ground that
without it we should perish of pestilence and disease. Celibacy is
condemned for one reason among the others that the earth will
cease if all became celibates. Does it not strike you that it will
be time enough to consider the question when we have absorbed
nine crores worth of dead cattle hide? I am writing to Pratap
Pandit and enclosing the letter with this. Your argument about
machinery is not happily worded. Surely we can run a tannery
both for the instruction of villagers and for supplying the wants
of those who need foot-wear made out of dead-cattle hide. The
main consideration about machinery is that it should not displace the
labour of those who cannot otherwise be employed. You will find
that this one argument answers all objections. We do not want to
displace hand processes. We want to cultivate hand processes to
perfection but where it is found to be absolutely necessary let us
not hesitate to introduce machinery. Do you know that some
of the most delicate life-saving appliances would have been im-
possible without the aid of some machinery? After all the simple
charkha is also a machine. What we must dread is huge machi-
nery run not by hand but by non-human power such as steam, elec-
tricity, etc. But even this need not be tabooed. If this is not still
clear to you you must continue to challenge my arguments.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. GIRI RAJ
SURAJ MAL ONKAR MAL'S CHAWL
MATUNGA
From a photostat: S.N. 15613
