94. LETTER TO T. R. VENKATARAMA SASTRI
PATNA,
March 16, 1947
DEAR VENKATARAMA SASTRI,
I have your precious letter about the proposed Sastriar
Memorial.
Let me tell you that I have not identified myself with the
Malaviyaji Memorial although I am deeply interested in the
doings of the Kashi Vishwavidyalaya.
As for the proposal, whilst I am deeply concerned with
everything about Sastriar I wonder if it is necessary to have an
institution in memory of the deceased for political education. Isn't
that function performed by the Servants of India Society for which
he gave his life? Political education is today being given by so
many parties in which I may mention the Socialist Party and the
Communist Party. However much one may differ from their way
of thinking, it is not possible to withhold admiration from them
for drawing to their fold people of learning, industry and self-
sacrifice. I intensely dislike destructive criticism unless it is ac-
companied at the same time with constructive suggestions. I
claim no exemption for my criticism. Strictly speaking mine is
no criticism. I have simply thrown out a thought for your con-
sideration. As at present equipped I would say that it might be
a good thing to make an appeal for sustaining and expanding
Sastriar's last and best beloved institution. That it needs expan-
sion I have no doubt. I haven't thought out how. I will add
however that the donors should earmark their donations for the
object to be particularized in the general appeal. At this junc-
ture when everything is in the melting-pot and institutions are
undergoing rapid transformation it may be necessary to take the
precaution. If you think that my suggestion is worthy of con-
sideration you will have to consult the present President of the
Society.
The fact that I have taken deep interest in your project
should not be taken to mean that I shall identify myself with
that or any other project. My views about memorials have
undergone change for some years and experience is daily strength-
ening them. But this is not for engaging you in considering
them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
SHRI T. R. VENKATARAMA SASTRI
"KAUSTUBHA"
EDWARD ELLIOTS ROAD
MYLAPORE
MADRAS
From the original: T. R. Venkatarama Sastri Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
