388. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
Fagan Sud 5 [March 5, 1911]
CHI. HARILAL,
I had your letter when it was least expected. We are all surprised
whenever a letter comes from you. The general expectation is to have
no letter from you.
What you write about Ba is not true. Had she intended to go she
would hardly have been scared by my stipulation. And my condition
also was meaningless. If she had wanted to return she could have bor-
rowed money from anybody and done so. The fact is that Ba does not
know her own mind. However I have nothing to say against your plead-
ing for her.
1 Vide "Letter to A. H. West", p. 421.
2 and 3 These were reproduced in Indian Opinion, 11- -1911.
4 Gregorowski's opinion not available in full; see however "Letter to E.F.C.
Lane", pp. 425-6, and "Letter to J. J. Doke", pp. 434-.
5 This letter was written before the second reading of Immigrants' Restriction,
Bill, which took place on March 13, 1911. The Fagan Sud 5 prior to it was March 5,
1911.
There is nothing to be ashamed of in your being weak in mathe-
matics and general literary education. You could have learnt them
had I given you the necessary opportunity. The practical knowledge
boys in India possess is not due to the education they receive in schools,
but is due to the unique Indian way of life. It is due to the meri-
torious deeds of our ancestors that we find healthy standards of beha-
viour, thrift, etc., around us, in spite of the repeated inroads of modern
education, the immorality that we see among the people and their
growing selfishness. This I am writing to you to give you courage and
ask you to go deeper into the matter and observe things for yourself. It
is not right to attribute the relation of cause and effect between things
after just a superficial glance.
I will not stand in the way of your studies or other ambitions that
you may have, provided there is nothing positively immoral about
them. You may therefore cast off all fear and pursue your studies as
long as you like. I may not like some of your views, but having no
suspicion about your character I do not have any anxiety on your
account.
Sorabjee is sitting by me as I am writing this letter. Shelat also has
come to the Farm.
The Bill has not yet had its second reading.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati original in the possession of the Navajivan Trust:
C.W.663
