308. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
December 28, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,
Chhaganlal's son being ill I was obliged to hurry here as
soon as we reached Johannesburg. The youngster is much better
now thanks to the hip baths & partial starvation.
Many thanks for your letter from Mombasa & cable from
India. The criticism you cable was expected by us. It does not
affect me at all. The critics have not troubled to study the ques-
tion. Even Mr. Natrajan in his paper says that we have made as
good a bargain as we could under the circumstances. The fact is
that we have made no "bargain". But I must not worry you. I
value your time and health too much to inflict a long letter on
you.
I replied to your cable early this week. I hope that the
souvenir case was received in time. The Umkazi remained a long
time at Beira.
You were right and I was wrong. The foodstuff bought at
Johannesburg for our voyage went to the Farm. All evidently lost
their heads, Miss Schlesin most of all. You wanted to know, too,
as to who was responsible for the omission to pay our passage.
Ismail says he knew nothing about it and that he never received
Polak's wire. Polak distrusts Ismail. Poor Rustomjee was upset
when he heard that the passage had to be paid at Beira. The
omission to give you the diary of your tour was due to Polak's
forgetfulness. I admit that all these mishaps were preventable and
I could have prevented them had I given them more thought. The
lessons I have learnt during the tour will not be lost on me.
I hope to shift to Phoenix during the middle of January.
On my arrival in Johannesburg Miss Schlesin told me that
the whole of the passive resistance balance was used up. As I have
several calls to meet, I took the liberty of adding to the cable a
few words asking you to ask Mr. Petit to cable the balance in his
hands.
I hope that you are keeping well. I should value all the news
you could give me about your health and the changes made in
your dietary, &c.
If one of the Servants of India could be specially put on
S.A. work arrangements could be made to send him a regular
letter every mail about the position here, and a few copies of I.O.
for careful distribution. You have asked me to write to you regularly
about the position. But I feel that I ought not to expect you to
read such heavy correspondence from fortnight to fortnight. The
member whom you may appoint could do all that & take your
instructions when necessary.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
[PS.]
Enclosed is the bill of lading regarding the lost case and in-
surance certificate.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G. N. 3806
