539. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM,
July 27, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
You write that you neither have altercations with anyone
there nor have any cause to feel unhappy. I think the reason for
this is that while here you were not in your own milieu, there
you are. You are in a place which you desired and which you
have found with your own enterprise. Here you were brought
SV:III. 22
only by circumstances. Therefore, you are in your natural
situation there. The situation being unnatural for you here, there
was constant friction, or so you thought. This is true not of you
alone but of everyone. As I think on it, I see that those who
have not absorbed the atmosphere here are constantly in conflict.
The atmosphere here cannot be said to be natural for anyone.
It is what it is. Hence, only he who has learnt to master the
atmosphere or wants to do so can live here comfortably and
grow. There is no particular purpose in my writing this. As a
doctor, you must be concerned with such matters and so I have
placed before you my view for your consideration.
Kumarappa is coming today to stay here. This change has
been made following your letter. It is intended to provide him
rest. He could go to Coimbatore, but I felt that if he stayed
here, I could see to things myself and when necessary consult
you. If he does not maintain good health here, we shall have
to think of an alternative. He does miss you. He asked about
your coming again yesterday. I informed him that you were
tied up there till the middle of September, and the next pro-
gramme was not definite. He just listened. Others are also
asking.
Bablo's fever is still persisting. He is being treated only for
malaria. He took 15 grains of quinine yesterday. Kesho and
Appu had a severe attack of malaria. Now they are better. They
have not resumed work yet. Abha is down.
Three English articles will be sent to you today. I took up
Harijan work since I have been able to avoid writing letters.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
