108. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
PATNA,
March 18, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,
I had your letter. I wanted to write to you at once but
never got the chance. It is a very strenuous time I am having
here. But do not worry.
You remember those two note-books containing rich treas-
ures from the Bible and other Christian literature. If they have
not taught you and me to be anxious for nothing and nobody,
they have taught nothing worth learning, for our faith in the living
God is to be measured by the extent of freedom from anxiety of
any kind whatsoever and full faith in God requires an accurate
knowledge of His laws and corresponding obedience thereto. This
is the sum total of nature cure. The supreme law, making others
superfluous, is heart-assimilation of Ramanama in every fibre of
our being. The truth of this is verified in everyday experience.
I note what you say about your suffering and about Dr.
Jacob's treatment. I hope to be able to learn some day that
you have shed all your illnesses.
Tell Shummy that he belies the teaching of the Bible which
among our company he seems to know best.
Sardar must not have any swelling whatsoever. But his obsti-
nacy is very great.
I have asked you to pay me a brief visit. You might be of some
use in the work that is being done here. That means your sparing
a fortnight at the most. But I do not want you to neglect
the duty you have undertaken, of course with my full consent.
Who told you that I had consented to take some rest?
That rest must certainly come some day. Meantime I am learn-
ing day by day, though little by little, that all work, without
any the slightest trace of anxiety, is true and living rest.
Jajuji has sent me a copy of your letter about the Secretaryship.
I want you to give me a full and accurate account of the
big tragedy that is going on in the Punjab.
Surely you cannot be called "Her Highness" as Catlin calls
you.
Lastly about myself. I had an affectionate but mournful
visit from Nathji and Swami Anand. I gave them as much
time as I was capable of giving. Our discussions were full,
frank and cordial. You will have no difficulty in accepting at
its face value my statement that not one of our company knows
the full value and implications of brahmacharya, and that among
these ignoramuses I am the least ignorant and the most exper-
ienced. With one solitary exception I have never looked upon
a woman with a lustful eye. I have touched perhaps thousands
upon thousands. But my touch has never carried the meaning
of lustfulness. I have lain with some naked, never with the in-
tention of having any lustful satisfaction. My touch has been
for our mutual uplift. I would like those who have felt other-
wise, if there are any, truly to testify against me. Even the one
solitary instance referred to by me was never with the intention
of despoiling her. Nevertheless my confession stands that in that
case my touch had lustfulness about it. I was carried away in
spite of myself and but for God's intervention I might have
become a wreck.
My meaning of brahmacharya is this:
One who never has any lustful intention, who by constant
attendance upon God has become proof against conscious or un-
conscious emissions, who is capable of lying naked with naked
women, however beautiful they may be, without being in any
manner whatsoever sexually excited. Such a person should be
incapable of lying, incapable of intending or doing harm to a
single man or woman in the whole world, is free from anger
and malice and detached in the sense of the Bhagavadgita. Such
a person is a full brahmachari. Brahmachari literally means a person
who is making daily and steady progress towards God and whose
every act is done in pursuance of that end and no other.
You say K. and N. had agreed to withdraw their boycott.
From the letters I have, such is not my impression. Nor did I
gather that impression from N[athji] and S[wami].
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 3702. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 6511
1 & 2 Kishorelal Mashruwala and Narahari Parikh; vide Vol. LXXXVI,
p. 452.
