55. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
BELIAGHATA, CALCUTTA,
August 15, 1947
MY DEAR AGATHA,
This letter I am dictating whilst I am spinning. You know,
my way of celebrating great events, such as today's, is to
thank God for it and, therefore, to pray. This prayer must be
accompanied by a fast, if the taking of fruit juices may be so
described. And then as a mark of identification with the poor
and dedication there must be spinning. Hence I must not be
satisfied with the spinning I do every day, but I must do as
much as is possible in consistence with my other appointments.
1 Vide p. 28.
2 According to Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, "realizing that Suhra-
wardy was not at the prayer meeting, some of the young men . . . went
shouting for his blood towards the house and stone-throwing began again. . . .
Prayer over, Gandhiji returned. . . . He rebuked them for their attack on
Suhrawardy. . . . 'He will not be able to stick to me if he is not sincere. . . .'
After a time when he had got them into a mood to listen to Suhrawardy,
he beckoned him. . . ." Suhrawardy's unequivocal admission of responsibility
for the "'Great Calcutta Killing' . . . had a profound effect on the crowd.
'It was the turning point,' Gandhiji afterwards remarked. 'It had a cleansing
effect, I could sense it.' "
I got through Amrit your first letter at 4 o'clock in the
morning. I have through her your second letter. This has been
brought by Rajaji, the Governor of West Bengal. Rajaji could
not afford to come himself. The Government House is surrounded
by a huge admiring crowd. He is, therefore, a prisoner in his
own house. He sent his secretary with Rajkumari's packet.
You refer me to Winterton's speech, which you will be
surprised to learn, I have not read. The speeches during the
debate on the Independence Bill, I was not able to read. I
rarely get a moment to read newspapers. Some portions are
either read to me or I glance during odd moments. What does
it matter, who talks in my favour or against me, if I myself
am sound at bottom? After all you and I have to do our duty
in the best manner we know and keep on smiling. Rest from
the papers. I am about to finish my spinning. Therefore I
must think of other things.
My love to all our friends. I was glad to find that Carl
Heath was well enough to preside at the gathering described
by you.
How I wish I could tell you all about the happenings here.
Perhaps Horace will. He was with me for a few days. He left
me only last night.
Love.
BAPU
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
OLD JORDAN'S HOSTEL
NEAR BEACONSFIELD BUCKS, S. W. II
From a photostat: G. N. 1528; also Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase,
Vol. II, p. 372
1 During the debate on the Indian Independence Bill in the House of
Lords, Earl Winterton, the Conservative Peer, had made a speech attacking
Gandhiji.
