65. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
June 28, 1927
No matter what Chi. Shankar does, you should not feel
sorry. How can the poor fellow help it? What should he do—
keep pace with you, obey Kaki or be in tune with the wind that
blows about him? Day by day, I find myself experiencing merely
the bondage of human existence. Man has freedom only to
attain moksha. In whatever else he does, he becomes more and
more dependent on others. You can easily check up on this.
Then you will not bother about Shankar and Kaki.
What wonder if Bal longs for Kaki's company? She alone is
the medicine for him. If we decide not to take Kaki into the
Ashram we should offer him his choice. He either stays with
Kaki at Belgaum or wherever she would or in the Ashram with
anyone we ask him to stay with. I have not yet decided that
Kaki must come to the Ashram. I have had no reply as yet to my
letter to her. I have been waiting for it a long while.
I welcome Gangubehn staying with you and coming in
contact with Gangabehn and keeping it up. Gangubehn appears
to be an absolutely innocent girl. I would like it very much if
Gangabehn formed a separate group of the women in the Ashram.
She should start it gradually and those who want to associate with
her may do so. I like, as an ideal thing, even a married couple
living apart in the Ashram. It appears difficult to implement the
idea at present. But if we once accept an ideal, we can ultimately
live up to it. Rather than discussing the ideal, at present, if only
all the women who live scattered about come to live together and
find it workable we shall have scored a great victory.
The path of non-violence is the most difficult of all. Truth
is not a path, it is the goal. There is only one path-that of non-
violence—to reach there, so how could it be easy? So far we have
not yet attained non-violence in thought. When we see our duty
clear as daylight, we sometimes lack the strength to carry it out.
In view of this let us be as careful as possible in our thought and
action and live happily. If what the Gita conveys is correct I get
this same meaning out of it while translating it. . . .1 Not to find
fault in others is to see one's own. Those we see in others were
once in us too and, in a sense, are still there. In the process of for-
getting the difference of mine and thine, Surdas and others call-
ed themselves rogues and so on.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
