288. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
MAHABALESHWAR,
May 23, 1945
CHI. NIMU,
I have received your long letter just now. I will not say
that you have been lazy and so have saved yourself from
writing to me. Today you had no escape from writing. That
is as it should be. I love to have letters from all of you but
I will not expect them from anyone.
I have a letter from Sumi which I am sending you. I
have lovingly rebuked her about the examination. Ask her to
send you the letter. Do not send for her there. Her eyes will
be harmed. Everything can be done in Delhi. If you want
to go and take Usha with you, you may go. Kanam will look
after himself. However, I want you not to leave Ramdas.
My advice is that you should entrust Sumi to Devdas and
Lakshmi. If Sumi can manage without you, let her do so. If
you people go, Devdas will certainly have to bear some bur-
den. Lakshmi is very good-natured and affectionate. But her
health is delicate. She has just left childbed. It will be a
different thing if you go there and take charge of cooking,
etc. You will not be able to do that; so your place is in
Nagpur with Ramdas. It will be enough if you can make
Sumi give up her infatuation for reading. It is not through
reading that one can think. What is the advantage of mere
cramming? Devdas will manage. Lakshmi can also manage.
The doctors in Delhi are good. It is a consolation that Sumi
likes being there.
You have to persuade Ramdas. He should continue with
Mehta for a long period. That was what he decided when
he was here with me. If you wish, you can win him over and
make him do what you want. No one else has that power. I
had it once. But not now, because I am not able to pay much
attention to him. My attention has been divided these days.
Kanam will come and see me either here or at Panchgani. I
have a letter from him. I have given him the permission.
Manilal and Devdas left yesterday. Most probably Sushila will
not come to the hill station. She will come only to Sevagram.
Blessings from
BAPU
SHRI NIRMALABEHN GANDHI
[C/O] RAMDAS GANDHI
TOMCO SALES DEPOT
KHALASI LINES, NAGPUR
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
