66. LETTER TO JIVRAM K. KOTHARI
January 15, 1933
The words "twenty-four hours" you have taken rather lite-
rally. You should have understood my intention in using them.
For twenty-four hours mean for as long as possible. When it is
raining or is very hot, when there is a strong wind or it is
extremely cold, or when for any other reason it is absolutely
impossible or will be harmful to remain or sleep or work in the
open, one's moral duty is to take shelter under a shade or a roof
or in a house with the doors and the windows shut. All that
you should have read in my words is that it is desirable to spend
as much time as possible in the open without anything between
oneself and the sky. Those who understand this will spend the
least possible time inside their houses and will also see that
there is adequate ventilation inside.
1 Addressee's wife
2 The addressee was working in Orissa.
56
And now about knowing the time of the day. A village work-
er does not require a clock or a watch. All his activities follow
nature. His clock also is nature's. His manner of indicating
time is different from ours. He will not ask a person to come at
four. He will say: 'Come at prayer time', or 'Come an hour
or two before sunset', or 'Come at daybreak', or 'Come when the
birds start singing', or 'Come at dinner time', or 'Come when
I am weaving tape', or 'Come at twilight' or 'at supper time'.
One can thus use different descriptions for different hours of the
day. And the worker is so regular in his tasks that he does not need
to look at the sky to know the time of the day. Every day he
does the same job at the same hour and takes the same time for
doing it. Because of this exact regularity, when the work is over
he knows what time of day it is. Since he is not in the habit
of consulting a watch, he cannot say how many hours he would
require for a given job. But he says that he weaves a certain
number of yards of tape daily, and from that he and others can
judge for how many hours he must be working. It was because
of this that in former days time was not counted in hours but
was measured by the amount of work done.
Even when the
village worker travelled, he experienced no difficulty, for he
knew how many miles he could walk between sunrise and sunset.
Such a worker rests not according to the clock but only when he
feels tired. In short, one feels very little need for a clock in a
village; one may say that one feels no need at all. The village
worker measures his work by reference to the movements of the
sun or the other heavenly bodies. Clouds are no obstacles to this,
because there are very few days in the year when the sky is
covered with clouds. Even on such days, however, his work goes
on as usual. Prayer time also is observed without any conscious
effort. If one's hours of the day are filled with work and succeed
one another in the same order, one will know without looking at
the clock when it is time for prayer. It will, then, rarely happen
that one gets up late and has to worry about how to make up for
the lost time. It is not necessary to adjust the time of evening
prayer with the prayer hour in the Ashram. People living in
different parts of the world cannot do a particular thing at the
same hour. It will, therefore, be most convenient for you to start
your prayer when the sun sets in that part of the country. I
think I have answered all your doubts, big and small.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 55-
