247. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
AMBOLI,
April 14, 1927
BHAI SATAVALEKAR,
I thank you for your prompt reply. I shall try and send you
a good student. From the consideration you have been showing
me I see that you are treating me as a fellow-seeker. I shall cer-
tainly try to become one. I read your book on the Isopanishad and
was extremely pleased.
I shall write to Bhai Bapulal in connection with Brahmacharya
and Suryabhedan Vyayam. He must not suffer any financial loss.
I am acquainted with Kuvalayanandji. I had sent a young
boy to him who being weak was not taught pranayama and other
disciplines but was instead treated with medicines. Despite the pre-
vailing climate I have not lost hope regarding the practice of
brahmacharya, etc. There will rise from our midst a true aspirant
who will clear the prevailing atmosphere. As yet I have come
across no such aspirant. My own tapascharya is hopelessly im-
perfect. I have been observing external, physical brahmacharya for
nearly 30 years. I have, however, not freed myself from passion; I
am trying to. I think complete control of all the five sense-organs is
essential for the observance of perfect brahmacharya. It will not suffice
to have control over the six-fold passion it has to be rooted out.
I believe in every word of the verse: "The yearning too departs
when he beholds the Supreme." The world is prone to hero-worship.
The unhealthy climate prevailing around will soon clear when such
a person emerges. Let us work with all our faith for the advent of
such a person amidst us. And have not you yourself said that if
the message of the Upanishads, etc., is eternally true-and so it is
-even today we can come across Uma, Hemavati and Yaksha
and, God willing, we shall. I too have read about rubbing in semen
and consuming it. I regard this as a demoniac practice. There
may be some truth in it but the experiment deserves no considera-
tion, because we want the brahmacharis to master their senses. Pre-
serving and retaining the vital fluid is a means to an end and not
an end in itself. Consuming semen does not bring about freedom
from passion; it might to some extent remove the debility conse-
quent upon ejaculation. This is what the Western method achieves.
The root cause of seminal discharge lies in the rising of passion.
[And] we aim at annihilating all passion.
That is why I enquired about the asanas, etc. Now I under-
stand that asanas, etc., are a stage on the way [to brahmacharya]
and it may be deemed necessary for the aspirant to pass through
them.
Have I made myself clear?
I have understood what you say in your book about the
asanas for retaining semen. Your cautions put one on guard. Even
for a married man I see no harm in the siddha and other asanas.
With the help of siddhasana a married man's semen may pos-
sibly be retained, the secretion however does not stop. How many
men can we come across today who go to their wives purely for
the sake of progeny?
If the term 'calming down' can be used
of passion, etc., a married man may calm down his passion with
the help of siddha and other asanas. But then it is another thing if
his aim is absolute eradication of desire.
I was relieved to find that you do not reject the Puranas. I
was afraid you would be disdainful of the ancient Puranas. Indeed
I am convinced that at a time when people were growing sceptical
the authors of the Puranas aroused in them a love for dharma
with their rich poetic appeal. Our Shastras need to be re-interpre-
ted, as you are doing, in the light of modern knowledge and for
the young people of today.
When I am settled somewhere I would like to give you the
trouble of coming over to me so that we can compare notes.
I am now reading the Kenopanishad after which I shall take
up your Mahabharata Samalochana
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 12771
