187. LETTER TO V. D. HULYALKAR
March 23, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. To all the preaching that you are doing
I should add some tangible work, say, teaching Harijan children.
I take it that you diligently read the weekly Harijan.
Now about your questions.
1. The Devadasi question is very little, but by the purity
of your own life and perseverance you will be able to reduce the
evil. The only effective argument I can suggest is that Harijans
should realize that there can be no religion in reserving one
daughter as Devadasi, for the simple reason that the millions of
other Hindus do not do so and regard such reservation as impure.
Those who have already given themselves up to an immoral life
will only leave it when a sense of shame is created in Harijan cir-
cles. It will not do for you to become panicky.
2. The game of mud and water will be given up if you will
carry on your propaganda in perfect gentleness and if you have
endeared yourself to Harijans by constructive service.
3. If Harijans can become vegetarians, nothing can be
better; but if they will not, they should at least give up carrion
and beef.
4. Of course it is difficult for you to find them in their homes
during the day-time. Certainly, therefore, visit them at night or
early in the day, but they will not be in the mood to listen to
you early in the morning.
S. By constantly defending the Harijans against insults they
will themselves learn to resent insults.
6. All things considered, a well-chosen vegetarian diet with
the addition of pure milk is undoubtedly better than a mixed diet
of meat and vegetables.
7. Smoking surely is not necessary in order to secure rest.
Wherever organized labour is working, employers of labour should
be induced to give rest at fixed intervals to all, smokers and non-
smokers.
8. I am afraid that the argument that field labour is more
paying than a peonship requiring a knowledge of the three R's
is true and therefore Harijan parents will not be easily induced
167
to send their children to schools without being shown that it will
be more profitable in the end.
9. There is no question of first and last; the awakening should
be general, both amongst the Harijans and the caste men.
10. Truth and non-violence must always succeed. Tit-for-
tat is the law of the beast, not of man.
11. I have no doubt that the present Harijan movement will
purify Hinduism all round and will succeed in preventing distur-
bances or disruption.
12. Everybody is authorized to ask Harijan servants all
kinds of questions, much more so their parents, therefore such
questions should be patiently and courteously answered.
13. If your silence and fast on Mondays is a matter of vow,
you cannot break it on any account unless you have left any loop-
hole.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. VISHNU DAMODAR HULYALKAR
FREEDOM HOUSE
JAMKHANDI (S.M.C.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20674
