491. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
October 26, 1932
Constant reflection will strengthen your resolution. If you ana-
lyse each word of the Gita in detail and reflect over its mean-
ing, that itself will give you more than enough strength.
That is
what I find happens to me. Do you try and understand the Gita in
the original Sanskrit? Do you study Sanskrit? Among other books,
Tolstoy's essays. Imitation of Christ is worth reading. You must read
an account of the life of the Buddha, and The Light of Asia1, if you
can understand it. It will of course be very good if you read the
Ramayana. There is a booklet in Hindi entitled Brahmacharya which
is very good. If you wish to read it, I will get it from the Ashram
and send it to you. There is a collection of articles by me entitled
Nitinashne Marge which also is worth reading. For the present, this
reading list is enough. Instead of worrying how you will be able to
carry out your resolution, tell yourself that you are bound to succeed
in carrying it out and that God will help you. Fix this thought firmly
in your mind and keep yourself absorbed in your work. Do not
be impatient even in reading. If you do not follow anything, read
it over again. It does not matter if this takes more time. Even if
you do not remember what you read, do not brood; always remain
cheerful. Do not worry however slow your progress is. One day you
will find everything easy. Do not do anything at the cost of your
health. Put only as much burden on your mind as it can bear.
Your eagerness about the children is right. But you need not
worry about them right now. Just now it is necessary that they
should improve in health and become very strong. For that we
require Nimu's co-operation. I will write to her about them. Recently,
I have been getting her letters fairly regularly. You also should
write to her often. If their bodies become strong and if they grow
up in a healthy atmosphere, they will automatically become what
you want them to become. You are of course right when you say
that you two should exercise self-control at least for their sake.
What pure education means, how it can be imparted and what
kind of education will suit the present age, all this requires careful
thinking. But there is plenty of time for that. You may ask me
any questions which occur to you concerning these problems. If
you wish, I will send you a short note which may help you.
I suppose Surendra is busily occupied with his shoemaking.
Tell him that God may be found even in shoes and the leather of
dead cattle. The leather for soles which I recently received was
excellent. I see in it God in a beautiful form. He is not to be
found only in scriptures. Ask Surendra to explain to you the story
of Tuladhar, and let him also reflect again over its meaning. It is
not necessary to search for Him in inaccessible places. We carry
Him under our arm, but, forgetting that, we go about the whole
town looking for Him. When at last we remember that He is in
our arm, we weep and laugh over our foolishness.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 179-80
