246. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
PRETORIA,
January 21, 1914
TO
THE SECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
Before leaving for Phoenix I venture to express my thanks to
General Smuts for the patient and kindly interviews that he has
been pleased to grant me during a time of overwhelming pressure.
My countrymen will remember with gratitude his great considera-
tion.
I understand that the Minister is unable to accept (with regard
to the Indian Enquiry Commission) either (1) my suggestion that
a member representing Indian interests should be co-opted when
questions of policy are enquired into; or (2) my suggestion that
a second Commission, with Indian representation, should be ap-
pointed to deal with these questions only; the present Commission
in that case becoming purely judicial. I submitted a third pro-
posal also, but this, in view of the Government's decision, I need
not state here. Had any of my suggestions been viewed favourably
by the Government, it would have been possible for my country-
men to assist the labours of the present Commission. But with
regard to leading evidence before this Commission (which has a poli-
tical as well as a judicial character) they have conscientious scruples,
and these have taken with them a solemn and religious form. I
may state briefly that these scruples were based on the strong feeling
that the Indian community should have been either consulted or
represented where questions of policy were concerned.
The Minister, I observe, appreciates these scruples, and regards
them as honourable, but is unable to alter his decision. As,
you make the change and sign on the spot?' 'Certainly.'" Charles Freer Andrews,
pp. 96-. The settlement reached, Gandhiji and Andrews left for Durban, by
the 11 o'clock train, on January 22. According to the Governor-General's obser-
vations at the end of his despatch of January 22, 1914, the sentence inserted at
Gandhiji's suggestion was: "He also recognizes the motive which makes you
unwilling to revive old sores by courting libel proceedings before another
tribunal." Vide Appendix XXI, paragraph 1. Vide also the following item.
however, by granting me the recent interviews he has been pleased to
accept the principle of consultation, it enables me to advise my
countrymen not to hamper the labours of the Commission by any
active propaganda, and not to render the position of the Govern-
ment difficult by reviving passive resistance, pending the result of
the Commission and the introduction of legislation during the forth-
coming session.
If I am right in my interpretation of the Government's attitude
on the principle of consultation, it would be further possible for
us, without violating the spirit of the vow we have taken, to assist
Sir Benjamin Robertson, whom the Viceroy with gracious fore-
thought has deputed to give evidence before the Commission.
A word is here necessary on the question of allegations as to
ill-treatment during the progress of the Indian strike in Natal. For
the reasons above stated the avenue of proving these through the
Commission is closed to us. I am personally unwilling to challenge
libel proceedings by publishing the authentic evidence in our poss-
ession. I would far rather refrain altogether from raking up old
sores. I beg to assure the Minister that as passive resisters we
endeavour to avoid as far as possible any resentment of personal
wrongs. But in order that our silence may not be mistaken, may
I ask the Minister to recognize our motive and reciprocate by not
leading evidence of a negative character before the Commission
on the allegations in question.
Suspension of passive resistance moreover carries with it a
prayer for the release of the bona-fide passive resistance prisoners
now undergoing imprisonment either in the ordinary gaols or the
mine compounds which have been declared as such.
Finally, it might not be out of place here to recapitulate the
points on which relief has been sought. They are as follows :
(1) Repeal of the £3 tax in such a manner as the Indians relieved
will virtually occupy the same status as the indentured Indians
discharged under the Natal Law 25 of 1891.
(2) The marriage question.
(These two are the points that, I have verbally submitted,
require fresh legislation.)
(3) The Cape entry question.
(This requires only administrative relief, subject to the clear
safeguards explained to the Minister.)
(4) The Orange Free State question.
(This requires merely a verbal alteration in the assurance al-
ready given.)
(5) An assurance that existing laws specially affecting Indians
will be administered justly and with due regard to vested rights.
I venture to suggest that the Nos. 3, 4 and 5 present no special
difficulty, and that the needful relief might now be given on these
points as an earnest of the good intentions of the Government regard-
ing the resident Indian population.
If the Minister, as I trust and hope, views my submission with
favour, I shall be prepared to advise my countrymen in accordance
with the tenor of this letter.
I have, etc.,
M.K. GANDHI
Rand Daily Mail, 23-1-1914; also, Colonial Office Records: 551/54
