468. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
SEGAON (WARDHA),
July 16, 1937
MY DEAR MALKANI,
Why don't you steal in a note in The Hindustan Times adver-
tising your wares or write to The Hindustan Times a letter to be
1 In the source, the quotations are in Hindi.
published in the correspondents' column, complaining of public
apathy and telling the public what attractive things can be had
there? Secondly, why don't you have a list of the things you have
for sale and post the same to likely addresses in Delhi? You are
bound to get some orders. Thirdly, you can engage a hawker
who can hawk about your things on commission. Fourthly, some-
times you can pay visits to friends yourself and get their orders.
If you just learn enough of the tailoring and shoemaking tech-
nique, you can take measurements yourself.
Shrimati Rameshwari Nehru is sporting a pair of slippers or
some such thing from your colony. They have given her blisters
all over. Now, your department has to turn out first-class articles
if you are to command a large custom.
Then you mention the trouble about getting workers in the
Provinces to interest themselves more than they are doing. Of
course this is a universal complaint. We are not slaves without
deserving our slavery.
Then, about the boys themselves, why should you not so ar-
range your departments as to absorb all the boys in the colony.
Then they would be earning a decent livelihood and you will
produce master tailors, master shoemakers, etc.
I am surprised that you, as a teacher, can feel lazy and say,
you haven't enough to do. With eighteen children for whose
welfare you are wholly responsible and to whom you are both
father and mother, I should have thought that you had more than
you could manage. Can you imagine a widowed father having
eighteen children to care for feeling lazy and with time hanging
heavy over him? That sentence in your letter is a disturbing sen-
tence. You know what I mean.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 926
