70. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 16/19, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your packet on Tuesday. Read my reply to Jethalal's
letter. I have not received his report. Send it by registered post.
You have sent Hiralal Shastri's account of his "Jivankutir",
but it is not accompanied by any letter from him nor do you men-
tion anything in your letter. If you know, please tell me some-
thing about him. I have already written to you about Sitala Sahay.
I hope you also got the postcard I wrote about Mahavir.
I send with this a letter for Medh. Manilal's problem has
become very complicated. I think we should now give up the
hope of his coming.
About prayers, I intend to write a separate article, so that it
may be useful to all. I, therefore, do not write anything about
it in this letter. It will be enough if you are able to keep up the
new rule which has been adopted.
The labourers should wear khadi, send their children, if they
have any, to the Ashram school, give up smoking, but only if
they can easily do so, should be free from the vice of drinking
and, if they are staying on the Ashram premises, attend the morn-
ing or the evening prayer. It should not be enough if they wear
khadi when in the Ashram but not outside. If they like spinning,
they may spin, otherwise they need not. I think we should not
lay down any other condition besides these. However, we should
have faith that if we take interest in their lives, share their joys
and sorrows, and care for their children, they will observe the other
rules voluntarily and in the proper spirit. Just now, we should
only explain to them the meaning and importance of those rules.
If our company really has the power of improving them, Tulsi-
1 Vide pp. 73-.
2 A constructive worker of Rajas than, founder of the Vanasthali Vidyapith
3 About five minutes' silence during prayer time
das's assurance will not be proved false. We shall be tested, too.
Up to now we have not looked upon labourers as our kith and kin.
It is true that we have tried to be friendly with them, but we
have done so patronizingly. There has always been a feeling in us
that we are in some way superior to them. The more I understand
the truth, the more I realize that nobody is superior or inferior to
others. And we cannot judge, we have no means at all of judg-
ing, who has more holy merit earned in past lives. Who can say
whether the mustard seed or the mountain is superior? We don't
regard a thing as superior or inferior because of its size. Simi-
larly, we cannot compare the relative worth of persons. I have,
therefore, suggested the easiest rule-I should say, rather, that
I have extracted it from Shastras-that everybody should regard
himself as a cipher. We shall then never feel proud about our-
selves. If you or anybody else, who has more practical experience
of life than I, see any error in this reasoning of mine regarding
labourers, please point it out to me. It will of course be difficult
to act upon it. But there must be some difficulty in every attempt
to do a good thing.
I feel that Dhiru and Kusum have returned much too quick-
ly. There must be some reason why they did so. If you have been
able to know it, tell me what it is. I had Dhiru's letter from Rana-
vav last week, in which he had said that both of them kept good
health and that their weight was improving. Hence I infer that
they have returned so soon because something must have hap-
pened there which hurt them. I have already explained to you my
reason for not writing "Blessings from" when signing the letters
-it saves energy. My blessings must be assumed.
I think that Ba's reply that the illness was caused by mangoes
is not correct. Her attitude is that one should not eat mangoes at
a difficult time like this, and she is right from her own point of
view. She wishes in the depth of her heart that I also should feel
in the same way, and the reason is her love for me. She has seen
the fruit of the little self-control which I have exercised. In the
past it used to trouble her and she could not even understand
its aim, but gradually she realized its value. However, this time I
have not excluded mangoes from my diet. Fresh fruit is essential
in the diet experiment which I am making. I have always found
that mangoes benefit me. Hence, when some mangoes were sent
to me unasked, I did not object to eating them. The fact that I
had no objection to eating mangoes became known and so parcels
have been coming one after another. However, I don't criticize
Ba's resolution not to eat mangoes.
If you begin mixing with the Chharas, do not give up the
practice afterwards. If, however, you discover that the task is
beyond your strength, you may give up the attempt. None the less
I do believe that it is our duty to mix with them even at some sacri-
fice to ourselves. We should not try to mix with them in the hope
that thereby we shall save ourselves from possible harassment by
them. If we entertain any such hope, we shall not save ourselves.
God will save us, if He wills. If He does not, we will welcome the
harassment as His loving gift. We should regard it as our duty
to mix with them because they are our neighbours. According to
me, the person most qualified to make the attempt is Panditji 1.
The first time we go in their midst, we should go singing Ramdhun.
But it is necessary that Panditji should have faith in himself for
this purpose. He can also take with him a party of children who
will lead the procession. We can take up the job of teaching the
Chhara children. We can help the Chharas who may fall ill. If
we take up that work, one person should devote himself exclu-
sively to it. We can help them in two ways in illness. In ordi-
nary cases, we ourselves may treat the patients. If a case is be-
yond our skill, we may ask for help from doctors with whom the
Ashram has connections, and I think they will be glad to give it.
Tell Chhakkaddas that I was so pleased with the slivers sent
by him that I would not mind having more. I do not get here sli-
vers of such fine cotton. If, therefore, he would like to send more,
as he said he would, he may. I will not use them, for I don't
think I can spin yarn of 40 counts on the Magan spinning-wheel.
I have not heard of anybody else either, who could do so. And
slivers like those are too good for yarn of lower count. Mahadev
requires at most 30 tolas of slivers every month, and there is no
immediate need. He has enough slivers from the lot sent by
Chhakkaddas to last for thirty days. After it is finished, Maha-
dev will surely try to spin with the slivers prepared here and see
what count he can produce with them. I have stated all this
only in order that Chhakkaddas may not think it necessary to
work very hard and send the slivers immediately. And he may
send them only if he can do so without any inconvenience.
Chimanlal and you should consider independently whether
Chhakkaddas should be put to all this trouble, and, if you think
that he had made the offer merely through his goodness and that
really it would be much trouble to him to send the slivers, do
not convey my message to him. I send with this Totaramji's letter.
Bhansali is really very strong in his firmness. Where is Lilabehn
and what does she do? Has she kept up any connection with the
Ashram? I did not get any letter from Ramnarayan Choudhari.
And now that the Ashram has been shifted to Wardha, he may
even have courted arrest. If you have heard anything more about
the matter, please let me know.
Where is Lalji working at present?
Is there no yarn in
Vijapur or Amreli? Does any person on behalf of the Government
stay in the Vidyapith? And does he use the buildings for any pur-
pose? I hope Kanaiyalal has now completely recovered. You
must have come to know that Damodardas is in serious difficul-
ties.
I got your second letter while I was writing this. I had got
a direct wire, too, about Devdas. I have sent a wire in return
asking for more details. I have not received any reply to it so
far.
BAPU
June 19, 1932
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8234. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
