252. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[LONDON,]
September 8, 1909
MY DEAR HENRY,
I have your letter and cuttings. Whatever possessed you to publish
my cablegrams? If you could only read the Gujarati cuttings you have
been sending me, you would laugh over the whole thing. The Gujarati
writers have been proclaiming a great victory, and, naturally, our friends
here have a laugh at your and my expense. I notice also, in the English
columns, your effort to extract yourself from the difficulty, by claiming
a partial victory and by going for the Boers. Happily, nobody takes any
notice of the Indian Press here, because our struggle is practically taboo.
If these cuttings reach Neame I can well imagine his doing us very
great damage. I hope you do not think there is any agreement arrived
at with reference to repeal of the Act. I did not intend to convey any
such impression through my cable. The odds are that nothing will be
granted without a bargain that passive resistance should cease, and yet,
your writings in the Bombay Press seem to show that you have taken
the repeal of the Act for granted. I am interested to know how you are
going to deal with the whole question at the forthcoming meeting. My
letters, I hope, will have made everything clear to you. If they have not,
I should never be able to forgive myself. Three years ago if any such
premature publication had taken place and if a victory had been imputed
to us when there was none, I should have probably torn my hair, as
there would have been, then, no passive resistance to fall back upon. As
it is, I assure you, I have not even given serious thought to this publication,
nor have I worried over it, knowing that whenever we gain what we
are fight[ing for, we shall have] gained because of passive resistance,
. . .3 I mention the publication of this cable, I do so in order to
warn you for the future, and in order to let you know what our friends
(you know whom I mean) are saying.
What a silly mistake on the part of the Bombay Government to
have stopped the public meeting. I am looking forward to your graphic
description of how and why the thing came about. It is a matter for
1 L. E. Neame, author of The Asiatic Danger in the Colonies, a reply to which was
published by the editor of Indian Opinion in the form of a pamphlet.
2 The original being damaged, words in square brackets have been conjectured.
3 A few words are missing here.
great regret that Sir Pherozeshah still continues to hamper your progress.
However, I am fully expecting you to disarm him by the time you have
finished with Bombay.
I quite agree with you that the statement I sent to you would not
do for Bombay at all; I never thought it could. A much more elaborate
and detailed statement is required for India.
If you can induce Mr. Petit and others to defray the cost of the
two deputations, it will be a great stroke and it will automatically solve
the difficulty we have been trying to grapple with for the past twelve
months.
At the time of dictating, Lord Crewe has not sent an appointment.
I do not know what this delay means.
I am very sorry to hear about Mr. Gokhale's health. What is the
matter with him? Does his medical adviser give up hope, or does he
mean that he should have a change?
I would like to have your impression about Mr. Padshah, and whether
it is the elder Padshah or the younger. Both are brilliant men, but I
have always heard it said that the elder Pad shah has a saintly character.
The younger Padshah I know well; he was a co-student. He does not,
or rather he did not, when I was in Bombay, ap[prove] of the idea of
Indians emigrating at all, and he . . . induced to take any interest
in our. . .5
What are the medical students for the Vegetarian Examination?
I am rather interested in this, because I have been told here that medical
study is practically impossible without having to destroy life. Mr. Gool
tells me that, in the course of his studies, he must have killed about
fifty frogs. An examination in physiology without this, he tells me, is
not possible. If this is so, I have absolutely no desire to go in for
medical studies. I would neither kill a frog, nor use one for dissecting,
if it has been specially killed for the purpose of dissection.
I hope that you have made it clear to the friends there that our
restricting the propaganda to the two demands regarding the Trans-
vaal does not mean that we do not intend to fight for the other things,
as occasion arises. That the two things only are being mentioned pro-
minently at present is because passive resistance has been applied to
them only, and that on that account they claim, as they ought to,
the greatest attention. I mention this as the question was discussed
with Lord Morley, as also Lord Crewe. The latter inquired what we
proposed to do in reference to the other things, and I told him that
we were going to work in the Transvaal to bring about the desired re-
forms, and I even hinted that passive resistance might have to be taken
up in connection with them. Sir Muncherjee is very keen on this state-
ment being made because he thinks that otherwise the people over there
may not work in future, thinking that they had done their duty in helping
us to solve the present problem.
I notice that you remark in your letter that the [passage of] the
Union Bill makes our position somewhat more . . . however, think
so, as we never raised any discussion on the Union itself. As a matter
of fact, work done after the Union, so far as the negotiations are con-
cerned, was more substantial than before.
I do not think I need, and yet perhaps I may, tone down your rap-
tures over what you have seen in the India of Bombay. I know you know
that you are seeing Westernized India and not real India, which I hope
you may be able to do whilst you are there, though I question whether
you will. I was reading last night a very illuminating work by Edward
Carpenter—Civilisation, Its Cause and Cure. I finished the first part and,
whilst I was reading it, I thought that I would issue the warning, which
I have done. His analysis of the civilisation, as we know it, is very good.
His condemnation though very severe is, in my opinion, entirely deserved.
The cure suggested by him is good, but I note that he is afraid of his
own logic, naturally because he is not certain of his ground. No man, in
my opinion, will be able to give an accurate forecast of the future and
describe a proper cure, unless he has seen the heart of India. Now you
know in what direction my thoughts are driving me. If you have not
read the book, and if it is not on your shelf, you will find it at Phoenix.
I have the following cablegram from Johannesburg:
Magistrate rebuked Vernon for stating in court duty white men hunt Asiatics
from country. Leader, Star strongly comment.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5056
1 Some words are missing here. Polak had observed: " . . . the passage of the Act
of Union handicaps you immensely now. It is one weapon the less in your armoury."
