4. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
NAME OF PRISONER : M. K. GANDHI
No: 777
PRETORIA GAOL,
TRANSVAAL,
April 5, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I was shocked yesterday to hear of your mother's death - the
more so as I felt and do feel still guilty in that I was instrumental
in you not going to Europe to perform the necessary pilgrimage. I know
what a great consolation it would have been to you to have been by
her bedside. Knowing as I do so well your affectionate nature I can
fully enter into your grief. I feel it keenly that I am not with you in
body to share your sorrow. I am none the less your partner in it in
spirit. May I recall to your mind by way of consolation the incident
that happened to me ? You know that my dear mother was snatched
from me just a few days before my return to Bombay from London.
This was over seventeen years ago but as I describe it to you, it seems
but yesterday that I realized on landing at Bombay what I had lost.
And my devotion to my mother was not inferior to yours.
But neither your mother nor mine has died. Their bodies have
perished but their souls still live, let us hope, fit for better tenements
than they have hitherto occupied. If so, why need we grieve? Our
affection is surely not restricted to their bodies which were bound to
be reduced to their natural elements some day or the other. And do
not our parents live in us as they have a right to, if we reproduce
in our lives their better parts ?
Need I say that among those of whom I think daily you are one.
I am not with you in body but I am always with you in spirit and
often feel as if I was doing my share of the household work-through
you!
I hope you are keeping well in body, soul and spirit. Many thanks
for the books you have sent. I have read David Copperfield with
avidity. I finished it yesterday. You told me once you had read it and
1 Gandhiji had set sail from London on June 12, 1891 and reached Bombay
on July 5, 1891.
2 A novel by Charles Dickens
6
mentioned Uriah Heep. I want you to recall Steerforth. I will not
say much but he may serve as a warning to all of us mariners on
this stormy ocean of life. We have all both good and bad in us like
Steerforth. But like him if we do not take care, we may in spite of
present brilliant promises become wrecks in the end. Was it not Solon
who said no man was to be considered good until he was dead! No
matter who said it, we find the truth of the saying daily demonstrated.
I then, for my part, want to learn from your mother's death how fleeting
this body is and how necessary it is for me to prepare now for a
better hereafter? May the same be yours.
From the trend of my remarks you will gather what course my
reading has taken - and I have read a great deal and pondered over
what I have read.
Now I close, once more offering you the consolation of a loving
friend. Pray remember me to Mr. Hosken and Mr. Cartwright4, Mr.
and Mrs. Doke, Mr. and Mrs. Phillips. My kind regards to Olive. How
is Mr. Call ? Pray remember me to him also and to Mr. Kennedy
and his fiancee.
Do not trouble to answer as your letter will not be given to me
if you do write.
I am quite happy.
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
H. KALLENBACH, ESQ.
ARCHITECT
SACKE'S BUILDINGS
COMMISSIONER STR.
JOHANNESBURG
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 & 2 Characters in David Copperfield
3 William Hosken, Member of Transvaal Parliament
4 Albert Cartwright, Editor of The Transvaal Leader
5 Daughter of the Dokes
6 Addressee's professional partner
