102. LETTER TO DR. PORTER
21 TO 24, COURT CHAMBERS,
February 15, 1904
DR. C. PORTER
MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH
JOHANNESBURG
DEAR DR. PORTER,
I am extremely obliged to you for having paid a visit last Saturday
to the Indian Location and for the interest you are taking in the proper
sanitation of the site. The more I think of it, the uglier the situation
appears to me, and I think that, if the Town Council takes up a position
of non possumus, it will be an abdication of its function, and I do res-
pectfully say that nothing can justify the Public Health Committee in
saying that neither overcrowding nor insanitation could be helped. I
feel convinced that every minute wasted over the matter merely hastens
a calamity for Johannesburg and that through absolutely no fault of the
British Indians. Why, of all places in Johannesburg, the Indian Location
should be chosen for dumping down all the Kaffirs of the town passes
my comprehension. While the great projects for sanitary reform of the
Public Health Committee are undoubtedly very laudable and probably
necessary, the obvious duty of dealing with the present danger of insani-
tation and overcrowding in the Indian Location, in my humble opinion,
is not to be neglected. I feel that a few hundred pounds now spent will
probably cause a saving of thousands of pounds; for, if, unfortunately,
an epidemic breaks out in the Location, panic will ensue and money will
then be spent like water in order to cure an evil which is now absolutely
preventible.
I do not wonder that your staff, hard worked as it is, is unable to cope
with sanitation in the Location, for what you do want, and what you
cannot get, is a topaz for each Stand. What is everybody's business is also
nobody's. You cannot expect every resident to look after the sanitation.
Before expropriation, every Stand-holder was held responsible, and very
naturally, for the proper sanitation of his Stand. The result, as I know
personally, was that every Stand had a topaz attached to it who continually
looked after the Stand, and I have no hesitation in saying that, compared
to what the Stands are now, they were kept in an ideally good condition.
You ask me to suggest remedies. I have slept over the matter and,
if only the Town Council would take up a reasonable attitude, I have no
doubt that an immediate improvement, without any cost to the Town
Council, and probably to the saving of a few pounds, is possible. Let short
leases — six-monthly or quarterly — be given to the Stand-holders. The
leases may state exactly how many people are to be kept on each Stand,
or in each room. The lessees could pay, say, 8 per cent on the valuation
of the valuators and should be made strictly responsible for the sanitation
of the Stand leased by them.
The sanitary regulations could then be strictly enforced; one or two
inspectors could visit the Stands daily and come down upon defaulters with
a heavy hand.
If this humble suggestion is accepted, you will see a vast improvement
in two or three days, and you, by a stroke of the pen, could deal effectively
with insanitation and overcrowding. The Town Council would also be
saved the necessity of having to make individual collections of rents.
Of course, under my suggestion, the Town Council must withdraw
the Kaffirs from the Location. About this mixing of the Kaffirs with the
Indians, I must confess I feel most strongly. I think it is very unfair to the
Indian population and it is an undue tax on even the proverbial patience
of my countrymen.
Although I have not personally visited other portions included within
the Insanitary Area, I very much fear that the same condition of things
exists there and the suggestion I have made above would apply to the
other parts also.
I trust you will receive this letter in the spirit in which it is written,
and I hope that I have not expressed myself more strongly than the urgency
of the occasion requires. I need hardly add that my services in this connec-
tion are entirely at the disposal of yourself and the Public Health Committee
and I have no doubt that, if the Town Council would but give the Indian
community a fair chance of proving what it is capable of doing in the
way of sanitation, I do not think it would be much mistaken.
You may make what use you like of this communication.
In conclusion, I hope that an immediate remedy will be found for the
danger that threatens the community.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. Gandhi
Indian Opinion, 9-4-1904
