431. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
July 30, 1935
CHI. NARAHARI,
I read your letter regarding the Vidyapith. What pay has
been fixed for Jayabehn? Don't you think there is something wrong
with our training so that, though we have at least twenty-five
women, not one of them has been trained in the way you want?
And if that is the case, how can we expect to get a woman from
outside who would fit into our mould? I feel that we shall have to
reap as we have sown. Do not have the slightest suspicion that I
include myself in 'we' merely out of politeness. I know my limi-
tations full well. I do consider myself a teacher but I am no
better than a shrub in a desert. Having said all this, what I
want to tell you is simply that you should aim ultimately at
producing from among ourselves a woman worker of the type
you want. Some day your effort will succeed. Be sure that all
attempts to get such a worker from outside will be futile. Even if
there is a chance of your succeeding in such an attempt, it will be
to our good and ensure the success of our mission not to make it.
Do you teach the girls the new method of spinning on the
takli? That method is of great importance. By following it, little
girls attain a speed of 80 rounds per half hour in just 15 days'
time, as it is very easy to learn. Test from time to time the girls'
speed of spinning on the takli and on the spinning-wheel.
I am not writing anything about the Vidyapith just now.
300
I have been constantly thinking about the goshala. I still
feel that either we should take over some pinjrapole and keep
the useless cattle there, or we should set up one ourselves
along with the dairy. Such cattle can be kept only in Bidaj or
some such place. Parnerkar's idea of securing the co-operation of
Bharawads attracts me more and more. I wish to try that experi-
ment on a large scale here. I am only waiting for Dahyalal to
get ready. Titus may perhaps come. I had a telegram from him.
What I have understood from Parnerkar is this: We should have
complete control over the Bharawads' cattle. They should give the
cattle fodder of our choice; should milk them and rear the
calves scientifically. We on our part undertake to sell the milk
obtained from them. If the last two suggestions cannot be imple-
mented, forget about them. Keep as many good cows as you
can manage and do whatever is practicable.
Vanamala will have to end her vow of saltless diet for the
present. It would be better if she takes some other vow. You
perhaps know Bhaskarrao. He was in the Ashram for some time.
Afterwards he worked with Vinobaji. He has also worked under
Mama. He comes from Baroda. He does not want to live very
far from his parents. He knows Gujarati, Sanskrit and Marathi.
Most probably he also knows English. He requires only twenty-five
rupees as pay. I would advise you to employ him either in Vinaya
Mandir or in the Harijan Ashram. Vinoba thinks that he will
prove useful if we employ him. He is a very pious man. I am not
sure, but probably he knows you. Write to me if you cannot utilize
his services either in the Vidyapith or in the Harijan Ashram.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9084
