26. LETTER TO L. FRENCH
2, MOZANG ROAD,
LAHORE,
February 15, 1920
DEAR MR. FRENCH,
I have just returned from Sargodha where I heard from the
lips of many witnesses the story of the persecution they said they
underwent at the hands of the Tahsildar, Nadir Hosen Shah, who
was in 1918 cruelly murdered, and other officials whilst recruiting
was going on. I think that hard recruiting was necessary during
the late War and that some kind of moral pressure was inevitable.
I think too that a certain amount of overzeal on the part of the
inferior officials was to be looked for and can only now be looked
[sic].
But the stories that I had repeated to me by several witnesses
—men and women —cannot be ignored and I am sure His Honour
will not desire to excuse the oppression that is said to have been
practised.
The statements made before me go to show that villagers were
brought up on a wholesale scale and were called upon on pain of
suffering inhuman tortures and indignities to send their sons as
recruits if they were at all of age. It is stated that for this purpose
men were made naked, they were whipped on their buttocks and
were made to bend themselves on thorns whilst they were whipped.
Women were made to drag men whose modesty was outraged.
1 Vide "Congress Report on the Punjab Disorders", 25-3-1920.
2 The Lt.-Governor of the Punjab
XVII-
Women themselves were made naked and subjected to disgraceful
treatment because their husbands and boys were hiding themselves.
It has also been stated that men were falsely challaned and
otherwise brought under legal processes, that punitive police has
been imposed on several villages in connection with the murder
of the deceased Tahsildar and that members of the police levy
unlawful exactions from the poor villagers.
In my humble opinion this is essentially a matter which requires
a searching investigation and the officials who can be found to have
persecuted villagers deprived [sic] of the opportunity of so doing.
I venture to think that the punitive police should be removed
without delay and villagers freed from daily exactions.
The statements made are so serious that I feel it my duty not
to publish them without at least drawing His Honour's attention
to them. I shall be pleased to submit the statements for His
Honour's inspection should he desire to see them. I am also
prepared to wait on His Honour in this matter and render what
assistance I may be capable of rendering in order to bring the true
situation to light.
I am leaving today for Benares, c/o Pandit Madan Mohan
Malaviya, by the Calcutta Mail and shall be there up to the 20th
instant; thereafter at Sabarmati, B. B. & C. I. Railway. I could
wait on His Honour some time after the 6th March. Urgent business
will keep me away from the Punjab at least till that date.
I shall esteem it a favour if you will please drop me a line to say
what His Honour's wishes are in this important matter.
Yours sincerely,
L. FRENCH
PUNJAB GOVERNMENT CAMP
From a copy: S. N. 7125
