176. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
December 6, 1932
Are you able to follow the "Ram Gita"3? Its central idea is
bhakti and its fruit. Pure bhakti is bound to lead to non-attach-
ment and true knowledge. If bhakti does not produce such
results, it is not true bhakti but mere sentimentality. True know-
ledge means the discrimination between the essential and the
non-essential. The book-learning that does not give this power
of discrimination is not knowledge but bookishness. You can see
that once this is realized and the "Ram Gita" grasped accordingly,
all worry and impatience disappear.
I am writing this letter soon after the morning prayers. I
intended to write about the fast, but began with comments on
the "Ram Gita". The fast is now a thing of the past. As it lasted
only a day and a half, I feel no effect of it at all. The weak-
ness came rather quickly but it also left as quickly as it had come.
I did a lot of work on the day of the fast and also on Sunday.
I can now take sufficient quantity of milk. You should not,
therefore, worry about my fasts any time. You should know one
thing, i.e., that it is not I who undertake a fast. It may be
said that God does it, as my fasts are inspired by Him. You should
not, therefore, feel unhappy when I fast, but, if anything, rejoice
that I follow dharma by doing so. It should also be remembered
that no one is to fast in mere imitation of my action. And parti-
cularly those who have close relations with me should fast only
after consulting me. Of course it is possible to imagine circum-
stances in which there might be no time at all to consult me
or when the inspiration from within might be unmistakable.
However, the tradition among spiritual seekers has been that one
should take a new step only after consulting the person one has
accepted as more experienced than oneself as long as such a person
is physically with us. Everybody cannot hear the inner voice as
a matter of course. What one hears may be only a semblance of
the inner voice or in fact the voice of the ego. The ego means
Satan, Ravana, Ahriman or the Demon. We cannot always re-
cognize whether it is the voice of Rama or Ravana. Very often,
Ravana appears in the garb of a sadhu and he looks like Rama.
We should, therefore, consult a person of more experience if such
a one is available. I intended to write a short letter, but I have
written a long one. Show this to all.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, p. 307
