554. LETTER TO J. B. KRIPALANI
SRIRAMPUR,
NOAKHALI,
December 11, 1946
DEAR PROFESSOR,
Sucheta is still in Calcutta attending to her ailing sister. I have asked
her not to hasten here so long as in her opinion her presence in Calcutta
is necessary for her sister. She has not sent me the medical certificate
but in her letters she says she will hand it to me when she comes.
You may depend upon my not letting her overdo things to the damage
of her health. I will see that she is quite safe with me.
Yours is no easy job. But probably it is more difficult than you
or I had imagined. I do not think of the two letters of which you have
sent me copies in the way you do. I think they are honest letters.
Evidently, they have remained members of the Committee, but if I
were you I would not insist on their remaining. I will take them at
their word and have new blood with you, and I would say that if
you find that you are unable to shape the organization in the best way
possible and if they let you resign you should do so without a moment's
thought. We can only think of the organization we serve and nothing
else.
The friend who brought your letter and Sucheta's brought also a
packet from Mridula. It contained copies of her note prepared for the
Congress and another note prepared by her on her experiences of
Garhmukteshwar. You must have seen both. I liked them. I read the
note on the Congress organization only today. Her suggestions make
a forcible appeal to me. I would advise you to ask her to see you
and discuss all her proposals with you and enlist her services as also
Keskar's to the extent that they allow you to do so. I think that you
should discuss her suggestions with Jawaharlal and let him take an active
part in carrying them out. Whether he remains a member or whether
he does not, I would not for one moment question his downright honesty.
He promises to render all the help he can and I have no doubt that
he will do so and perhaps more efficiently, because he would then
enjoy freedom of action which he will not do otherwise. He is right
also in his reflections on the Hindu-Muslim question. It is a terrible
problem and a great responsibility rests upon the Congress now-
therefore, the greatest on you.
1 B. V. Keskar
319
You have asked me to send for you if I want to. I am not likely
to do so, but I do want you to feel that you are at liberty to come
at any time you like without notice, if you want to consult me about
anything. Personally I would say that you should do as your reason
and conscience tell you, irrespective of what I may think or may not
think. I am too much engrossed in the work before me to think of
anything else, unless a letter like yours moves me.
Darkness around me still persists. It comes from within, not from
without, but it certainly does not deject or disappoint me. I am passing
through a fire such as I have never passed through before. All the
same I am quite happy in the thought that I am not shirking what
I hold to be my duty. God is the Rock of ages and I cling to that
Rock.
Blessings from
BAPU
ACHARYA J. B. KRIPALANI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
