18. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG GAOL,
January 28, 1908
TO
THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY OF THE TRANSVAAL
SIR,
As representatives of the Indian and the Chinese communities
who have taken a prominent part in the opposition to the Asiatic
Registration Amendment Act, we have the honour to lay the following
considerations before you:
Our opposition has never been directed so much against the finger-
print requirements of the Regulations under the Act—in so far as such
finger-prints were deemed necessary for the identification of Asiatics
who could not very well be otherwise identified—as against the element
of compulsion contained in the Act itself. On that ground we have
repeatedly offered to undergo voluntary registration if the Act were
repealed. And even now at this late hour we would urge on the Govern-
ment the adoption as far as possible of the course more than once
proposed by us.
We recognize that it is not possible during the Parliamentary recess
to repeal the Act, and we have noted your repeated public declarations
that there is no likelihood of the Act being repealed. We would however
point out that the periods fixed for registration under the Act by the
various Government Notices have expired and that therefore any
1 This letter as well as the draft Cartwright brought to Gandhiji in jail were
published in Indian Opinion, 11-7-1908. The draft was either prepared or approved
by General Smuts; vide Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XXI and "Johannesburg Letter",
p. 66. There exist four sources for this letter: the Pretoria Archives; the records of
the Colonial Office to whom a copy of this letter was sent by the Transvaal Govern-
ment; an office copy of the Cartwright draft together with handwritten changes made
at Gandhiji's instance (S. N. 4907); and Indian Opinion.
2 The Indian Opinion version, however, is dated January 29, 1908.
3 The Cartwright draft has only "the Indian community".
registration at present would necessarily have to be of that voluntary
nature which we originally prayed the Government to concede.
Under these circumstances we would once more respectfully suggest
to the Government that all Asiatics over the age of sixteen years should
be allowed within a certain limited period, say three months, to register
themselves, and that to all who so register, the Act be not applied, and
that the Government take whatever steps they deem advisable to legalize
such registration. Such mode of registration should apply to those
also who being out of the Colony may return and otherwise possess the
rights of re-entry.
In taking the registration of Asiatics we do not object that the req-
uirements of the Act and the regulations be as nearly as possible complied
with, provided the registration officials do not press for any information
which offends the religious sense of the applicants, and receive discretion
to dispense with the finger-print requirement in the case of those applicants
who by reason of their education or property or public character are
well known or can be easily identified otherwise. In those cases we
urge that the officials should have discretion to accept the signature
of the applicant as a sufficient identification.
Should the Government agree to these suggestions and accept
registration on these terms, we assume that all further prosecutions or
punishments under the Act will be suspended during the period set
aside for registration. We on our part again would undertake to use
all our influence to induce our compatriots to register and withdraw
all countenance from those who refuse to register or are not legally
entitled to register.
We put forward the above suggestions because we are sincerely
anxious to prove to the Government that we are loyal and law-abiding,
and that we are willing to adopt any course which will lead out of the
present difficulty without violating our consciences inflicting any
indignity or casting any stigma on us.
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,
M. K. GANDHI
LEUNG QUINN 3
T. NAIDOO
Pretoria Archives; also a photostat of the typewritten office copy with hand-
written changes: S. N. 4907 and Colonial Office Records: 291/127
