450. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
December 31, 1933/ [January 3, 1934)
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I got your letter written from Calcutta. I could not judge
from the letter whether or not you had met Satis Babu during
your stay there. I suppose you did meet him. You haven't men-
tioned anything about your health, either. Write about it in
your next letter. The fact that Shivprasad escaped unhurt is in-
deed a remarkable thing. The tour is progressing very well.
My body is standing the strain better than I had expected. There
is, therefore, no cause at all for worry. Om is doing well
enough. She is not a girl who will let others worry for her.
She is slowly getting trained for the position of secretary. She
is not vigilant enough to satisfy me, but I don't wish to goad her
to be more sharp at the cost of her health. I ask her to do only
1 Presented by the Municipality, the Depressed Classes Association and
the District Board
2 The following paragraph is from the Harijan.
3 The postscript was written on Wednesday, which fell on January 3, 1934.
430
as much work as she can do without strain. I am sure you know
that Kisan is accompanying me. She is a very good girl. She
has become very friendly with Om. Her health went down in
jail. Before that she was fairly strong and was quite smart.
The tour seems to have benefited her. At present Malkani is with
me. I needn't say anything about him. He is working hard.
Damodar is working satisfactorily. He has proved his sincerity
and capacity. Did you send the sum which was to be sent to
Delhi from the Harijan account? Gosibehn will have to be paid
something every month. Pay that also from some account. Pay
her what Mathuradas suggests.
She should have been given
the full amount from Bombay, but the people there are not giving
it. I will write now, but while the correspondence is going on she
must get the amount from somewhere.
Blessings from
BAPU
PS.
Before Morning Prayer, Wednesday
How is it that Janakibehn complains against your temper? If
there is any truth in her complaint, overcome your weakness. I
asked Om and she also tells me that sometimes you make even
Madan Mohan weep.
Tara has always been a sincere worker. If she keeps good
health she will fully prove her worth. I had a wire from Dr.
Sharma (of Delhi). He has sold his property for Rs. 10,000 and
paid off his debt.
Now he wishes to come and live in the
Ashram. He will come with his wife. I have advised him to
write to you. I think he should be taken in. If he proves wor-
thy, well and good. Otherwise he will be asked to leave the
Ashram.
I hope you work with due regard to your health. Janakibai
Soman wishes to stay there. Could she be accommodated where
Vidya and the others were?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2928
