2. LETTER TO THE REV. ALLWOOD
148, RUSSA ROAD,
CALCUTTA,
August 1, 1925
DEAR FRIEND,
It was a pleasure to meet you and have that little discussion,
and an equal pleasure to have received your letter. What I
said at the meeting was based upon recent experiences.
I know that individual instances of a broader and truer
outlook upon religions are on the increase. The tolerance with
which I was listened to at that meeting is a proof of it. But the
literature that was sent me by unknown friends in the jail and
the letters that I received almost every month from Christian
friends, both in India and outside, demonstrate the truth of my
remarks. As to Bishop Heber's Hymn4, you will realize, perhaps,
that it is one thing for a man to think of himself as vile and
unclean, but it is another for the world to pronounce him as
such. Augustine considered himself as chief among sinners. The
world calls him a saint. Tulsidas had no adjective harsh enough
to describe himself as a sinner. The world regards him also as a
saint. Lastly, I wonder if you know that the Christian Litera-
ture Society continues to sell the utterly unbalanced views and
opinions of Mr. Murdoch and others. And if you only knew
the literature in the vernaculars that is distributed through tens
of thousands of leaflets and booklets, you will, perhaps, appreciate
the force of my remarks. These things hurt me only because I
know that they believe the teachings of Jesus, in whose name
they are said and written; and it hurts me also because Indian
Christians are fed upon such ignorance which they, in their sim-
plicity, imbibe as God's truth, and hence learn to hate those who
were once their friends, companions and relatives. You perhaps
do not know that I mix as freely with Christian Indians in the
lower strata of society as I mix with a similar class of Hindus
and Mussalmans. I say these things [not] by way of argument,
but to tell you that I spoke in that meeting out of fullness of
knowledge and love. I went there in a spirit of service and I
have written this also in the same spirit. That is the best appre-
ciation I can tender of your well-meant letter. Please remember
me to the friends who accompanied you.
Just after finishing dictating the foregoing letter, I read a
letter from another Christian friend, this time an Indian. It is a
long letter, but I cannot help giving you two extracts from it.
Here they are:
(1) I was greatly disappointed to hear you at the Calcutta Mission-
ary Conference yesterday. I was under the impression all along that you
were a true follower of Jesus Christ, but the utterance which you made
last night broke my heart altogether. I do not know how I can call you
'Seeker for the Truth,' when you say Jesus Christ is only a great teacher
and nothing else. What a great pity, a man of your calibre and culture
says-Jesus Christ is a teacher. I must say, in that case, that either you
have not cared to study the noble life of Jesus Christ intrinsically and
prayerfully, or you studied the life with a deep prejudice in mind.
(2) It has been said by the leading men of different religions,
other than Christians, supposed to be seekers for Truth, that Chaitanya,
Buddha, Mahomed, Krishna and Christ are all the same. This is a most
idle talk; where ignorance is bliss, it is folly to be wise. This class of
people have no business to call themselves-"Seeker for Truth"-they
should be called the "enemies for Truth"-Truth is Truth and there is
not the slightest compromising element in it. I cannot believe even for
a moment that a true Hindu is a Christian, or a true Buddhist a Hindu,
and so on. How could you say that at the meeting yesterday? I am
at a loss to discern. A man of your calibre and learning and experience
would be the last man to utter such blunders.
Yours sincerely,
[PS.]
After the letter was typed, I got a copy of the Hymn. Here
it is. You will observe that the good Bishop was thinking only
of non-Christians. The Hymn still finds a place in ordinary hymn
books. I have often heard it sung in churches in South Africa.
M. K. G.
[To
THE REV. ALLWOOD
BARRACKPORE]
From a photostat: S.N. 10648
