519. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
August 24, 1935
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,
Can you not be content to have Dahibehn treated by Hari-
bhai? Try and see if you can persuade Chanchal. One is put
in an extremely difficult position when faced with two equal duties.
You, who know the situation there better than I, may certainly
guide her as you think best.
If you can get pure cow's milk of good quality there, by all
means organize a business in it. But take up the work only after
ascertaining what the producers get. We shall have to enter their
lives, know in minute detail how they live and work and what
debts they owe. You should thus know the history of the sample
which you have sent to me. All your depots should have the
history of every sample, in this fashion: 'This sample was made
by Bharwad Meghraj of Limbasi, who spent — hours in the work;
— of milk cost —; labour charges per hour —; the middleman's com-
mission —.' And this information should be passed on to the buyer.
Please don't tell me that this will take up too much of your time.
The work will not take so much time after it has been systematized.
No matter what rate is fixed by the Sangh, you should not pay
less than two pice per hour. In the case of articles for which
average production per hour can be calculated, you should fix
the rate for work per hour. This can be done. For instance,
if an average spinner spins 400 [yards] of yarn of 15 count in one
hour, we may pay two pice for 400 [yards] of 15 count. Many
new ideas are being discussed in Harijan these days. I should
like you to read all these articles regularly. The institution of
insolvency was originally intended to help persons like Chanchal's
father. But afterwards it came to be misused by knaves and, there-
fore, fell into disrepute. I, however, would certainly advise him
to resort to this means and free himself from his worries. He may
then cherish the hope of being able to payoff the balance of his
debts one day. As things are, he would not even be able to
engage himself in any business in peace because of harassment
by importunate creditors.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9006
