512. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Padavo [October 30]2, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time I got your packet on Tuesday. By the time you
get this letter, I am sure Mohan will be on his feet again. I don't
suppose you read Balbhadra's long letter. Pass on my letter to
him without reading it, since that is his wish. It is desirable that
we should respect children's wishes in such matters. Send for him
and tell him that, as suggested by me, the letter is given to him
without being read. That will make him happy. He had men-
tioned two things in his letter. One, that he was very much afraid
of his father, and two, that every time he did something wrong
you and Prema threatened to send him away to his father. The
complaint seemed exaggerated to me. But he is an obstinate child
and likely to get on one's nerves. I would not, therefore, be sur-
prised if he had really been scolded in that manner. The child has
no one to care for him. And, moreover, he is dull-witted, so that
everybody makes fun of him. Not being able to realize his foolish-
ness, he is upset when people make fun of him. Such children
deserve great pity. Talk to him casually and find out all this from
him, and give what sympathy you can. If his fear of us, whether
or not he has reason for such fear, leaves him, the fear of his
father also will not remain much longer. At present he is very
much afraid that, if he is sent away from the Ashram, he will
have to go to his father. One more complaint which he makes
is that students do not now enjoy the freedom which they former-
ly had. I don't think there is any truth in this complaint, and
I have told him so in my letter. However, you may think about
the matter if there is any element of truth in it.
I have a very angry letter from Ratilal. He says in it that you
got very angry with him, insulted him, and so forth. Champa also
has joined in the complaint. I do not understand why she is angry
with you. I understand what you say in regard to money.
I have a letter from Mahavir in which he says he will return to
the Ashram in a few days, and also that he has asked for your
permission to come and see me on his way to Ahmedabad. On
my part, I have asked him to give up the idea. For one thing,
it is still uncertain whether I shall start seeing visitors again. And
a visit here would mean an unnecessary expense of about thirty
rupees. How can it be justified?
I think it would be desirable if Navin goes to Almora as
soon as he can. In my letter to Mathuradas, I have written at len-
gth about spinning fine yarn. Read that letter. Did you find Tila-
kam's health very much improved when he returned there? What
is his diet at present? I think Mirabehn's diet will suit him. His
body is built on non-vegetarian diet. I have often observed that
persons who have been used to non-vegetarian diet cannot preserve
strength on pulses. But they can live on milk, rotli, green vegetables
and sour lemons. The reason is this. Non-vegetarians do not require
much starch. When they give up flesh, they eat plenty of starch to
satisfy their hunger and a good quantity of pulses to provide nourish-
ment to the tissues. Naturally they cannot digest all this food and
in consequence fall ill. If, when giving up non-vegetarian food,
such persons take milk in sufficient quantity, it would supply them
the nourishment which they previously got from flesh. And their
hunger would be satisfied by whole-flour bread. The bran contained
in such bread and the natural water of the green vegetables would
1 Vide pp. 301-.
help them to keep their bowels clean. This is the theory. Vege-
tarian diet agreed with Mirabehn immediately because I did not
permit her to eat pulses at all. Of course her firm determination
also was an important factor. She had resolved, from the very
day she came into contact with me through letters, that she would
not eat non-vegetarian food even if she died without it. But her
resolution and faith are unusual.
I have written to Jamna a long sermon on the primus stove.
Ask the other women also to read it, and then they may do as
they like. Their renouncing the use of the primus stove will benefit
them only if they do so willingly.
Read my letter to Jethalal. I need not write more about the
subject here. That letter contains the answers to your questions. I
hope Purushottam's health has not deteriorated after his arrival there.
You will notice that I have dictated quite a large number of
the letters this time. The right elbow is in the same condition now
as the left was. I may say that I took too much freedom in writing
letters after the last fast. Besides the letters to people in the Ash-
ram, I wrote a great number of other letters too. Moreover, I wrote
every day. Add to that spinning for two and a half hours. The
exertion proved too much. I, therefore, decided to spare the right
hand from writing work as much as possible. As a result, the condi-
tion of the elbow is a little better now. But you need not worry
at all. At this age, I cannot expect to regain lost fat and tissue very
soon. In six days the body had thinned visibly. It cannot become
as it was before the fast in a month. There is no reason in this to
feel concerned. I can do all ordinary work as usual. If I have been
writing for the whole life, there is nothing wrong in my giving a
long rest to the hand, and no cause whatever to feel surprised or
concerned. There is certainly no disease in the hand. It does not pain
when I do not work with it. I do not feel the pain even when I am
working but afterwards as it starts paining I feel that that part is
exhausted. Hence, as a measure of precaution, I am giving rest to it.
All the inmates have my blessings for the New Year as a
a matter of course. Even children who can understand things
know very well now what I expect from the Ashram. It is my hope
that all the inmates, grown-ups and children, may acquire the
strength of character and devotion to service which would ful-
fil my expectations, and my prayer to God that He may grant such
strength to you all.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8262. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
