119. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
June 30, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I regard you as being three years old. What you say is cor-
rect. When I brought you along with me from Bombay, I was
doubtful whether you would continue in the Ashram, though
not as much as you believe I was. For you had kept your pro-
mise, and I do not feel doubtful about anyone who keeps his or
her promise. I do not think there was sarcasm in my words, but
I was not sure that you would continue as long as you have done.
I recollect this to be the state of my mind then. I certainly wish
that you should spend your whole life there as you have spent
three years and that through deliberate resolution, not aimlessly,
with the firm conviction that you belong to the Ashram and the
Ashram belongs to you. But, of course, I cannot force you to do
this. I may only wish that you should do so. You cannot make
up your mind to stay on unless you sincerely feel that the Ashram
belongs to you. I have merely expressed my wish.
This refers to your second birth in the Ashram. The other
birthday falls on July 13 and you should get this letter about the
8th. You have my blessings, of course. May your highest aspira-
tions be fulfilled! I have no doubt that they will be, since you
are alert and striving with that aim. You should also have
sufficiently long life and good health for that purpose. I am
sure you will have them too. But, ultimately, none of these things
depends on you or me. We trust everything to Him. He may
do as He wills. And whatever He does will be for the best.
Send to me your account for the 13th. Tell me what resolu-
tion you make on that day. I suppose you know that I advise
everyone to make a good resolution on his or her birthday.
Put no trust in the predictions of astrologers. Do not take any
interest in the matter at all. Even if such predictions come
true, there is no benefit in knowing them. The harm is plain.
It is hot there. But here it is very cool. There has not been
much rain, though.
Send to me soon the following Urdu books—as many bio-
graphies of the Prophet as you can find, the two parts of Asva-
e-Saheba, Khulfa-e-Rashdin and the English-Urdu and Urdu-English
dictionary. If you can send them to Dahyabhai in Bombay, he
will bring them here on Saturday.
All the buildings should be cleaned regularly on fixed days.
The luggage should be lifted and the spot cleaned. You must
find the necessary time for this.
It is our duty to try to raise to perfection whatever we find
imperfect, whether a person or a society or an institution. If on
the whole we find more shortcomings than good points, our duty
is to leave the person or the thing, non-co-operate with him or it.
This is a universal principle and I asked you to follow it. In
doing so, I did not wish to advise you to leave the Ashram, or
anything else. I only explained to you what is accepted as every-
one's moral duty in certain circumstances.
In Bengal, hundreds of sheep and goats are slaughtered in
broad daylight every day and offered as sacrifice to the Goddess
Durga in Calcutta. I pray to God to make me a fit instrument
for stopping this. Didn't you know this? 1
I knew that men often describe themselves as gopis. If this
is done purely through bhakti, I see nothing wrong in it. Before
God all of us are the weaker sex.
When we have swaraj, men will certainly come forward to
climb the top of the Himalayas or discover the North Pole. I do
believe that knowledge of the physical sciences is useful.
My experiments in diet have done me no harm. They have
lasted for periods ranging between seven days and eight years.
Dhurandhar has gone to Nasik.
"Monodiet" is certainly beneficial.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10292. Also C.W. 6740. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
