499. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Y. M.,
January 25, 1932
CHI. SHANKERLAL,
Somebody has sent from Madras Ramanathan's speech
against khadi, Pattabhi's and Varadachari's criticism of it and
the rejoinder by Ramanathan. These have been published in
the form of a small pamphlet. If the speeches by Pattabhi and
Varadachari as published are complete, I would say they were
inane. There is nothing much in Ramanathan's speech. But if
it was thought necessary to reply to it, the reply should have
been telling. Read the pamphlet if you have not done so. One
point made by Ramanathan is worth considering. He says that
there are very few persons if any, who spin in their spare hours.
Those who spin have no other occupation and spinning to them
is a full-time occupation. Even if that should be the case, I see
nothing wrong in it. But if it is true, it does mean that our chain
is broken. Gujarat's experience does not support Ramanathan at
all. Gujarat may have shown less work; but we know everyone
of the spinners. Those who spin for money do so only in their
spare time. The others spin for their own use, but they also do
so in their spare time. We should have full mastery of our case.
We do not want to shield the weak. We need not be ashamed,
if the progress has been slow, to admit the fact. I am not going
to admit defeat even if the progress has been slow or if its rate
is declining; because to me the whole thing is as clear as day-
light. And Ramanathan's own statement proves it. He asks if
fifty persons working with a machine can do in two hours the
work which they would take eight hours to do with hand. Who
would be so foolish as to employ fifty persons for eight hours?
If machines can thus give work to everybody who would protest
against them? But Ramanathan has totally missed the point.
He is not so dishonest as to do so deliberately. I therefore
believe that he has fallen into ignorance and consequently his
reason has become clouded. But be that as it may, we have to
draw a lesson even from his speech, which please do. The re-
sponsibility for keeping the Charkha Sangh unsullied lies with
297
you, so that one may say I can sit back in peace here. I would
therefore keep shooting arrows from here, which you must take.
I have seen the Gulzarilal1-Desai [note]. You must be keep-
ing good health. Anasuyabehn too should write.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : G. N. 11538
