304. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Magshar Sud 9 [December 18, 1912]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
You left the same day as I reached Johannesburg. I have
both your letters. I shall myself tear them up after reading them.
I also do not understand why your health should have suffered.
Chi. Chhaganlal says that you were dispirited this time, that you,
known to be the strongest of all, tired [easily ]. All this shows that
your recent experiment in diet did not suit you. I could have
shown you where the fault lay if only I had been with you.
Chhaganlal says that you had also grown irritable. You should
resume taking milk, ghee, dahi, etc., when the six-month period is
over. Sugar and salt you will not need. Do eat them, however, if
you must but improve your health. You may resume your
experiment, if you wish, after I go there. If you do not keep
very good health, no one will believe in the value of your experi-
ment, and, if you do not keep a normal temper, it will do you
no good either.
And now to your questions.
If we eat no dahi, naturally butter and buttermilk should also
be avoided. Surely, if dahi is forbidden, butter and buttermilk are
constituents of dahi. They are less of an evil because they are less
palatable. But you need not worry over this rather subtle distinc-
tion. If you take ghee, you may as well take milk, dahi, etc. We
shall see about it later on.
It is nothing wrong if one who takes coco-nut oil eats copra.
In fact, copra should be better. But, just as one who cannot
digest wheat may be able to digest its milk1, so may one who
cannot digest copra be able to digest the oil. Moreover, oil is more
convenient for a person without teeth. You are likely to find
yourself in this state. And the same about gingili. In order to
consume two ounces of its oil, one must eat a large quantity of
the seed and this cannot be done. True, the cake will be left out,
and for some constitutions it is just as well.
One can certainly live on bananas alone. Then one need
not eat nuts. I feel that the kernel in the almonds and other
nuts contains more nourishment than fresh fruit.
I can think of two reasons why you got boils. Because of
unsuitable food the blood became weak and the enervating air at
Phoenix had an immediate effect on you. Or else, Phoenix water
affects only the skin, in the same way that mere contact with
cactus will affect the skin of a person even if his blood is pure.
If some air enters the stomach through an enema, no harm
will come out of it. At the worst, there might be stomach-ache, as
the body has no use for air entering this way. When this happens,
one should go to the toilet and strain, so that most of the wind
is expelled. One is unlikely to die if some air enters, though, for
a delicate constitution like Krishna's, the result might well be
disastrous.
In case of any stomach disorder, a wet-sheet pack will certainly
have some effect. The pressing out of fat through the countless
pores in the skin will undoubtedly reduce pressure to that extent,
and this may well induce a motion.
When the patient is in no condition to be treated with earth
bandage and is too weak to fast, there is likely to be no unwanted
matter in the system and even if there is it will do no harm. In
this case, the patient should be given hot milk or similar food to
revive him, and he should then be given earth treatment, etc. If
he is so utterly weak that one may not even bring him in contact
with cold water or give him a glass of water, be sure he is
nearing his end. One should be resigned to and wait for it.
Even while one waits, the patient may possibly revive.
There is no universal rule that one must always do something.
Sometimes, rest alone is the right thing for the patient. Patients
like Krishna cannot be given a hard bhakhri made from rice or
other flour. They have inflammation of the intestines and can
only be given the simplest liquid food. This treatment is for
enteric and other fevers. Patients like him can be given orange
juice, strained. It must contain no trace of the peel or the pulp
inside.
If a very weak patient has excessive motions, a wet pack, soak-
ed in ice-cold water, should be applied to the stomach. If this
has no effect, the motions should not be interfered with.
When a patient is delirious, one should understand that he is
suffering. He should be treated with mud packs over his head
and stomach and allowed plenty of fresh air. It does not matter
if he continues to be in delirium after this. He will come round
by and by. If his vitality is exhausted, he will eventually succumb.
After six months are over, you may cheerfully take whatever
food your inner being prompts you to.
You may learn weaving if that can be done without strain. I
do not insist on it.
We affectionately address both God and mother as thou, hav-
ing no fear of either. The father inspires fear, so that one does
not, normally, address him that way. As for others, they are all
distant. They certainly cannot take the place of God or a mother.
It was certainly not right of Sugriva to have had Vali killed.
He can be defended up to a point. It is surely not possible to
defend all the actions of the virtuous in the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata. Even the poet has not visualized them as perfect.
If you are so crazy about a bicycle, use it, and then rid yourself
of the craze. While riding to a village on a bicycle, one has to face
danger from cattle. The latter are utter strangers to our bicycle
and, being frightened, charge at us. You may write to Mr. Kallen-
bach unhesitatingly. I shall continue to write [to you].
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5641. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
