671. LETTER TO FULCHAND KASTURCHAND SHAH
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Friday, June 11, 1926
BHAI FULCHAND,
Your letter. You may perhaps like to file Jamnadas's post-
card; hence I am returning it to you. I have written to him
that he should have asked me for money. Because of our difficult
[financial] position you do not have the means to offer the money.
Most probably I have written to you that my going to Finland
has been cancelled. I have also replied to Devchandbhai. Today
there is a letter from the Dewan. I have sent that also to Dev-
chandbhai. In reply he writes that he would come by the end of
the month. I have received the report and shall go through it. Fix-
ing the date of the conference has been delayed and that troubles
me too. But I am a bird with my wings clipped; so in every such
case my inclination is to wait. It is perfectly true that Manilal has
deposited a sum of Rs. 32,000 with Revashankerbhai, but we are
not in a position to use it yet. A letter of authority for Manilal
is still to come. He told me on his return from Rajkot that it would
come in a short time. On receiving this amount, whether my
finances allow it or not, I shall definitely payoff the sums for which
I have committed myself. I have talked to Vallabhbhai about the
school at Rajkot. Whenever you need anything, please do ask for
it. I am prepared to provide the cotton for the training of Antyaja
teachers at Rajkot, Jetpur and other places. Bhai Balwantrai has
arrived. I have asked him to keep Rs. 100 for the sale of khadi.
And for making payments to the weavers he may ask for more as
the need arises. I am having a talk about Gariyadhar with Bhai
Shambhushanker who is here today. I have found that he is getting
the work done very economically. It seems to me Gariyadhar work
is the least expensive of all. Bhai Balwantrai said that Mulchand-
bhai needed Rs. 500 for the Antyaja Ashram, which has been
paid to him on his personal security. All your queries have now been
answered.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 10923
