220. LETTER TO VINOBA BHAVE
SEVAGRAM,
August 18, 1945
CHI. VINOBA,
. . . I shall look into the Nayee Talim matter. Ashadevi is
not here at present.
I have not a full copy of the Ramayana as abridged by me
but I send you a marked copy of the Ramayana from which you
will be able to know the principles on which I had worked. As
far as possible I have tried to retain the historical or narrative
portion unbroken. Some of the interpolations are useful by them-
selves, but still I have dropped them altogether. I have also
dropped any matter which had been over-lengthened as also such
portions as appeared to me unnecessary for the narrative. I have
also generally removed portions where woman is referred to in
derogatory terms. But I have kept some portions of it just to
indicate the mind of Tulsidas. So far as I can remember at the
moment, these are the principles I worked upon. But you are
intelligent enough to discover any other principle not mentioned
here from the marks in the book.
Failure has compelled me to do what I was not prepared to do
by persuasion. I mean that I have commenced from yesterday
the recitation of Gitai in place of the Sanskrit Gita. I realized
that nobody learnt Sanskrit. The same old members are there,
but even they do not or are unable to study Sanskrit even to
the extent of understanding the Gita. Moreover, they were un-
able to recite it in chorus, and what pained me more was the
fact that though the recitation of the whole of the Gita was con-
fined to the morning prayer, still some members walked out as
soon as the recitation began. On making an enquiry into the
cause of this, I found that it was very trivial. I did not know
it before. I found it out only the day before yesterday, and I
immediately came to the conclusion that perhaps interest in the
Gita might be created more quickly if it was recited in Hindi,
Marathi or Gujarati since the people would understand its mean-
ing more easily. I have commenced with Gitai because Marathi
holds the place of prominence in this part. So far as the mem-
bers attending the morning prayer are concerned, they are so few
that it would not matter much which language I chose. But
the music of Gitai has been felt by me to be very sweet. May-
be, the reason for this is that I have heard it several times
recited by Shivaji and I have liked it. Kishorelal's (Gujarati)
translation is there but I have not yet been able to assimilate its
music. I have not heard anyone reciting it in a sweet tone. I
got an opportunity of hearing it at Bardoli but it was insuffi-
cient, and my ear could not adapt itself to it. Haribhau has
published the Hindi Gita recently. But I have not yet been able
even to examine it and so did not like to touch it. Therefore,
I have commenced with Gitai.
The immediate cause for writing this is that I happened
to see Shivaji yesterday. If he is going to stay here for some
time, it would please me if he can be induced to give at least a
week to the Ashram just now during the period of the commence-
ment of this recitation. He can train those who desire in reci-
ting it in the same manner as he does, and pick up his music.
Blessings from
BAPU
Harijan, 16-5-1948
