168. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON DELHI TRAGEDY
BOMBAY,
April 3, 1919
TO
THE EDITOR
THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE
BOMBAY
SIR,
I venture to seek the hospitality of your columns to make a
few remarks on the Delhi tragedy. It is alleged against the
Delhi people who were assembled at the Delhi railway station,
1. that some of them were trying to coerce the sweetmeat-
sellers in to closing their stalls;
2. that some of them were forcibly preventing people from
boarding tram-cars and other vehicles;
3. that some of them threw brickbats;
4. that the whole crowd that marched to the station de-
manded the release of the men who are said to be the coercers
and who were for that reason arrested at the instance of the rail-
way authorities;
5. that the crowd declined to disperse, when the Magistrate
gave the order to disperse.
I have read Sannyasi Swami Shraddhanandji's account of the
tragedy. I am bound to accept it as true, unless it is authoritatively
proved to be otherwise, and his account seems to me to deny alle-
gations, 1, 2 and 3. But assuming the truth of all the allegations,
it does appear to me that the local authorities in Delhi have made
use of a Nasmyth hammer to crush a fly. On their action how-
ever, in firing on the crowd, I shall seek another opportunity of
saying more.
My purpose in writing this letter is merely to issue a note
of warning to all satyagrahis. I would therefore like to observe
that the conduct described in allegations I to 4, if true, would be
inconsistent with the Satyagraha Pledge. The conduct described
in allegation 5 can be consistent with the Pledge, but if the alle-
gation is true, the conduct was premature, because the committee
contemplated in the Pledge has not decided upon the disobedience
of order that may be issued by Magistrates under the Riot Act.
I am anxious to make it as clear as I can that in this movement,
no pressure can be put upon people who do not wish to accept
our suggestions and advice. The movement being essentially one to
secure the greatest freedom for all, satyagrahis cannot forcibly
demand the release of those who might be arrested, whether justly
or unjustly. The essence of the Pledge is to invite imprisonment
and until the committee decides upon the breach of the Riot Act,
it is the duty of satyagrahis to obey, without making the slightest
ado, magisterial order to disperse, etc., and thus to demonstrate
their law-abiding nature. I hope that next Sunday at satyagraha
meetings, all speeches will be free from passion, anger or resent-
ment. The movement depends for its success entirely upon perfect
self-possession, self-restraint, absolute adherence to truth and an
unlimited capacity for self-suffering.
Before closing this letter, I would add that in opposing the
Rowlatt legislation, the satyagrahis are resisting the spirit of
terrorism which lies behind it and of which it is a most glaring
symptom. The Delhi tragedy imposes an added responsibility upon
satyagrahis of steeling their hearts and going on with their
struggle until the Rowlatt legislation is withdrawn.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Bombay Chronicle, 4-4-1919
