16. LETTER TO A NATUROPATH
May 28, 1947
I appreciate your enthusiasm. But the Indian nature-cure
system cannot subsist on enthusiasm alone, nor will my identi-
fication with it help to keep it alive, as I regard myself an
ignoramus in the science. There would be some hope if you
transmuted your enthusiasm into knowledge.
If you admit the shortcomings of your system, why don't
you try to overcome them by a systematic study of anatomy
and physiology? If you had equipped yourself with the
knowledge which the allopaths have gained after years of
laborious research, you would not have committed the mistake
you did. Do not deceive yourself with the belief that allopathy
today holds the field by virtue of the backing and patronage
that it receives from the Government. In my opinion it holds
its present position in the world because, though it is a false
science, its votaries have faith in it and have made great sacri-
fices to advance it. But the modern naturopaths have made no
sacrifices. They are easily satisfied. No wonder they feel they have
earned the right to fleece the poor and gullible and grow rich.
I am not writing this in praise of allopathy. I have a
fundamental difference with the allopaths. They are too easily
satisfied with half-baked knowledge and exploit their diplomas
to fill their pockets. There is a craze today for rushing to the
West for specialization as if it were the sole repository of know-
ledge. I would entreat all doctors and would-be doctors of
medicine to think in terms of the seven hundred thousand
villages of India. They would then see how great the need is
in India of a medical cadre trained not in the Western style but
in the system of rural medicine. They would then adopt many
indigenous practices and prescriptions that have proved successful
in India, and not become mere dispensers of foreign imported
drugs when our fields are teeming with natural, medicinal herbs.
The true function of the medical profession, as I conceive it, is
not to prescribe cures, whether foreign or indigenous, but to prevent
illness by teaching the people to observe the rules of health.
[From Gujarati]
Bihar Pachhi Dilhi, pp. 24-
