493. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
October 26, 1932
CHI. MATHURADAS,
This time I was waiting for a letter from you every day and
wondering why there was none, when I got it. You have caught
the point regarding the testing of yarn. An understanding of such
practical aspects saves us much time. Some of the methods fol-
lowed by the mills are devised with a purely commercial aim
and some others to help in mass production. These methods are
of no use to us in our rural industry, though some of them do
deserve to be adopted by us too. We have to use our discrimina-
tion and judge which ones we should adopt.
I suggest that
Mahadev's fine yarn may be passed through doubling before
weaving, if you feel that it is unfit for weaving only because of
its lack of strength. If you think, however, that we do not have the
type of rach and heddles required to weave such fine yarn, we should
manufacture them. Perhaps Ramji's experience may not help us
much in this matter as he may not have the intelligence necessary
for dealing with yarn of such fine count. To get this yarn woven,
you should approach other skilled workers in Ahmedabad who
weave very fine cloth. Again, it is likely that the method for test-
ing the strength of very fine yarn is a different one, and the tools
for that purpose and also the knocker required for weaving fine
yarn must be especially delicate so that there is the least possible
strain on the yarn. The method of starching fine yarn must also
be different. It is likely, however, that the skilled weavers in
Ahmedabad weave only fine silk yarn and do not know enough
about very fine cotton yarn. If that is so, we should procure the
necessary tools from Andhradesha or Bengal where they weave very
fine yarn, or we may send to them a specimen of our yarn and in-
quire about the method of weaving it. Have you seen the Andhra
weavers at work? Did you observe the starching and other proces-
ses which they demonstrated at our exhibitions? But I think that
after reading what I have written you yourself will be able to find
a better solution. We must acquire the skill to weave our finest
yarn ourselves in the Ashram. You will perhaps be able to see
from all this that only voluntary spinners can fully master all as-
pects of the art of spinning and that, when we have mastered
301
it, it will be quite easy for us to produce ordinary khadi of the
best possible quality. You will also see, if you cast a glance at
other crafts and skills, that when the people themselves had not
learnt the required skill the craft remained poor, and that it was
only amateurs who became experts in it. It is because our people
neglected hand-spinning that the country lost a cottage industry
which gave work to millions in their homes. Now the craft can
be revived as an occupation only if we do hard tapascharya and
cultivate the art once again in a spirit of yajna. Looking at the matter
from this point of view, I was very happy that you had finally
decided to cling to your work and overcome your restlessness.
Keshu's carding-bow will of course be useful. As it cannot be
installed in a village home, the old carding-bow will remain as
the old spinning-wheel has remained. The best thing to do is to
make improvements in it, and I believe that such improvements
are possible. Mirabehn has been working fairly hard with that
aim. She has been carding in jail too, and has made some improve-
ments. You are quite right in applying yourself to that task.
Your test report on the yarn spun by both of us will help us
very much. I saw the justice of most of your criticism. I myself have
observed the defects which you have pointed out, but I ignore
them sometimes when I am tired. I often observe that the yarn is
rough because of an occasional bad sliver or because of uneven
tension when spinning. Instead of cutting off and taking out that
part, I let it pass. I do know that this will mean a lot of trouble for
the weaver, and that, therefore, by letting that yarn remain I also
commit violence. However, while I am actually spinning, partly
through lack of vigilance at the time, partly through greed, partly
through lethargy and partly through fatigue I may ignore defects
in the yarn. But now that I have received your criticism, I know
that the quality of my yarn will automatically improve. If, there-
fore, I receive further criticism when the yarn is woven, it will cer-
tainly help both Mahadev and me, for both of us wish to spin yarn
of the finest count and of the finest quality that we can. As we
cannot get here other yarn for comparison, some defects will of
course remain; but we will keep up our efforts to reach as high a
standard as possible.
I hope you are keeping good health. I don't write anything
about Meghaji.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3757
