151. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
August 8, 1945
CHI. KAKA,
I have your letter. I am in two minds about whether you
should or should not go to the Tilak Vidyapith. And therefore
it is best that I should express no definite opinion. If your mind
inclines this time towards going, by all means do. But in that
case my view will be that you should stay mostly in Poona. I
very much doubt if you will be able to do full justice to the job
while staying in Wardha. If you feel that you would like to
discuss this further, do so. Otherwise let this suffice for you.
I have been thinking a great deal about the marriage rite.
My views are becoming firmer. People will no doubt criticize us.
But if we cling to an outdated tradition simply from fear of
criticism or out of respect for public opinion, we shall never be
able to do anything. I have said in some article of mine that the
true Vedas are still unrevealed; they are an ocean. We do not
wish to enter into controversy over the Vedas. The compositions
that are today accepted as the Vedas are full of unresolved doubts.
Not all the writings have come down to us. Even from among
those which have, no one knows what is genuine and what is
not. As regards their interpretation, sheer confusion prevails.
Hence the judgment about goodness or badness can come only
from a purified conscience. I have, therefore, taken as my guide
the sloka cited by Anandshankarbhai in his book:
~~f~: i3~G: 13f~(ql1~q'lfl1f<1: 1
~G:~r=!1!1~IT€t qt 'ii.r~1'! f<l.n'iiG 112
I do not even know from where he has quoted the sloka. It
appealed to me instantly and sank into my heart, and I, there-
fore, got it included in the women's prayer. Also please remem-
ber that we got the marriage of the Harijan girl Lakshmi and
Harijan Velayudhan performed according to the rite that we had
accepted. I do not remember the names of other Harijans. But
all this I consider irrelevant. If I am right in my statement that
the regeneration of Hinduism lies in our becoming Harijans, then
it is very clear that a change must be made in the marriage rite
in all weddings taking place in the Ashram or the ones with my
blessings. Since I have already agreed, Indu and Tendulkar should
be married in the Ashram. I am not bound as regards the
rite, and, therefore, the new rite should be introduced from this
wedding. I am giving all this additional information here simply
by way of background. Yesterday Parachure Shastri discussed the
matter with me and argued with me at length, but as I could
not give him much time the discussion was inconclusive. You
may, if you wish, discuss this matter with him. You may discuss
it with Vinobaji also, and then prepare as short a text of the
ceremony as possible. Remember that this must be finalized
before I leave. I assume that you also will be accompanying me.
I saw the other photograph of Bal4, and recognized him. Now
let us see where we land.
I gave your letter to Ki. to read. I am told that he is strongly
opposed to it. If you wish, you may discuss the matter with him
also.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10965
