83. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 5, 1931
CHI. PREMA,
I have your letter. In my opinion, the view of Vivekananda
and Dhurandhar is one-sided. One should feel in the heart
what one says. Surdas, Tulsidas and other bhaktas have described
themselves as cunning, lustful, etc. In doing so, they were not
merely using the language of modesty, but speaking from the heart.
The truth is that we feel both ways. In an enlightened state, we
know ourselves to be Brahman, but in the ignorant state we feel
meek and humble before that Merciful One. He who does not
feel so but knows himself as the perfect Brahman may not sing
bhajans praying for God's mercy. You will not come across one
such person in millions. To realize one's greatness is the beginning
of being great. The drop of sea-water which has become separated
from the sea would dry up if it thought that it was still the
sea. If it admitted to itself that it was no more than a drop, it
would flow towards the sea, merge in it and become one with it.
"Culture" means refinement of feelings and "education" means
knowledge of literature. Education is a means and culture is the
63
end. The latter is possible even without education. For in-
stance, if a child is brought up in a truly cultured family, it
will unconsciously imbibe culture from its environment. In our
country at any rate, present-day education and culture have no
connection with each other. If the educated still retain some
culture, that is in spite of their education. This fact shows that
the roots of our culture are deep.
My blessings and compliments to Prasannabehn. I should
like her to draw her husband also to the Ashram.
You seem to be running a competition in the opposite direc-
tion with Narandas with regard to weight. It is good. You can
afford to put on some more weight, and Narandas to lose some.
I like the translation of Gitabodh which Dhurandhar is making.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10250
