128. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
CAMP BORSAD,
May 8, 1931
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I had your telegram and now I have your letter of 30th ultimo
but not the previous letter. There is certainly no urgent need
about your returning. From your telegram I have gathered that
you were all Al in spite of the chill of which you write to me
in your letter. What you read in the papers about a break-
down was not without foundation but just now in Gujarat there
is no immediate danger of a breakdown. I am going to Simla
next week to confer with Mr. Emerson about several outstanding
matters and he says in his letter that incidentally there would be
meeting with the Government about the Round Table Conference.
He expects me also to go to Nainital on or about the 18th.
I do not know how things are progressing in the U.P. just now.
But it will be as well for me to go to Nainital. Of course you
were quite right in writing to me on the Hindu-Muslim question
as frankly as you have done. I should have felt hurt if you had
done less. You have a perfect right to unburden yourself without
the least fear of being misunderstood by me. Of course I do not
plead guilty to your charge. I have always taken good care to
say that I was speaking for myself. So long as we have not evolv-
ed a concrete policy how could I help expressing my own personal
views? But the occasions have not been many when I have let
myself go. I quite agree with you that Dr. Ansari's proposal about
arbitration consisting of the many names he suggests is highly
unpractical. Nothing of course has come out of it. Dr. Mahmud's
fear is absolutely baseless. I did see Bhopal at the latter's in-
stance and when he discussed the Hindu-Muslim question I natural-
ly said that he might call in Shaukat Ali and his other friends
and then summon me to Bhopal if he thought that there was any-
thing to be done. I could not say to him that he was not to
move at all. That same day Mrs. Naidu brought Shaukat Ali
to Mani Bhuvan and I related the conversation I had with Bhopal.
Nothing more has happened. I have made no movement and
have written not one single line beyond saying that I was pray-
ing, which I am literally doing. I wrote last week as much to
Dr. Mahmud when he complained that I had broken the pact
that I was to be dumb. When you return completely restored, we
must have a meeting of the Working Committee and if we can
evolve a formula for the guidance of all Congressmen, nothing
will please me more. Personally I think that we shall not be able
to evolve any formula just now and I am more and more driven
to the idea I adumbrated before you on the day of your departure
or the day previous. When you reach Bombay of course you will
first of all seek me out wherever I am. It is highly likely that I
shall be by that time in Borsad or Bardoli.
No going to London without Hindu-Muslim unity.
Love to you all.
BAPU
PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NUWERA ELIYA
CEYLON
From Gandhi-Nehru papers, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library
