236. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Monday, March 14, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Mahadev has joined me in the nick of time for my right
hand has just gone out of service.
By this I do not meant that
it is continually paining, but I certainly mean that it would
start doing so if I went on writing with it or doing any other
work. It may even happen that I shall never be able now to
do much work with it, for, I see that, though I gave it com-
plete rest during the return voyage from England, it has not
recovered sufficiently well so that I could resume working with
it. We need not feel sorry even if it becomes useless for ever.
Sooner or later all the bodily organs will have become weak. We
need not, therefore, feel concerned when we see them gradually
becoming so. It is no small grace of God that I have taken
from the right hand the service which I have done. And, after
all, as our [spiritual] dictionary tells us, it is He who takes work
from us, and He will do so as long as He wills and on His own
condition. Our hands and feet are His tools, and it will be
enough if we knowingly do nothing to impair their efficiency.
We were foolish to the extent that we misused them in the past.
It is because we misuse our body that, when what we call old age
arrives, our limbs and organs begin to decay. To one who has
never misused his bodily organs, old age will not be painful but,
on the contrary, it will bring happiness. If trees were thinking
beings, we can easily see that they would feel no pain when
their fruits, fully ripe, fell to the ground. Rather, the knowledge
that these fruits would be used by human beings would make
them happy. Similarly, he whose life is good must feel confident
that when old age has worn out the strength of his body, his new
condition will serve some greater good. But, as things are, all this
seems to us as mere wise talk, for we see no instances in the
world, or very few, of perfectly happy old age. Similarly, we
rarely see a person who welcomes his death as a friend.
The health of all three of us may be described as good. It
is true that Mahadev has been suffering pain in the bone of one
of his legs, but rest and sun-bath will probably cure it. There
is no cause for worry.
You have given no news about Khushalbhai during the past
week. I infer from this that the cloud has dispersed for the time
being.
The position about visitors is still not clear. It is not im-
probable that the practice may have to be stopped. However, I
believe Jaisukhlal, Kashi, Lakshmi and Moti will have come and
seen me in a day or two.
Haridas Gandhi has been brought here. He is still in the
hospital. We get reports about his health from time to time, but
none of us has yet been able to see him.
Ramdas came and
saw me. Most probably I shall be able to see the others too.
I had expected a letter from Mirabehn, but I have received none
so far.
It was reported in the newspapers that Gangabehn Jhaveri
has been released. It seems somebody paid the fine on her behalf.
Who was that person? Do you get any news about Prabhavati?
You should not mind the expenditure on behalf of Radha.
I hope Punjabhai has recovered now.
You may write to Holmes about the permission which those
gentlemen from New York have asked for. Or, it might be
better to send a cable. Since you cannot give a final reply to
Holmes within Rs. 25, you had better send a cable to the others
as follows:
"Authorizing Rev. Holmes Community Church New York
do needful."
Send a copy of the cable to Holmes and tell him that, if he
thinks fit, he may give them the permission they have asked for.
Lilavati told me that the preparation of almonds which she
had brought for me was made of a mixture of almonds and
dates. If I can know how it is made and in what proportion
the ingredients are mixed, we may be able to make it here. It
does not seem proper that you should send a parcel of the thing
from there periodically, and even if I don't mind your doing so
I must know the quantities of the ingredients, for otherwise I
can not judge how much of the preparation I should eat daily.
I had read in the papers about Brijkishan .
Blessings from
BAPU 3
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8214. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
