176. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI M. PATEL
Sunday [October 11, 1925]
BHAI DAHYABHAI,
I was able to read your letter today. Its purport is: that
the khadi activity has not been carried on properly in Gujarat,
that we cannot reach villages through the spinning-wheel, that
workers are so in name only and that for the sake of mere pole-
mics I put aside Dr. Sumant's proposal.
I think we could have improved the khadi activity in
Gujarat, but when everyone was inexperienced, whom could we
blame? No one has done wrong intentionally.
I am unable to give up the faith that we can really reach
the villages through the spinning-wheel alone. Where the people
starve, this is the only means of relief. Where the people are
well-off but lazy, it is the only thing which will rid them of their
laziness. Its partial failure is only because very few with faith
in it have stayed in the villages.
Those who have been working in Gujarat are not workers
in name only. If your allegation is against Laxmidas4, you do not
know him. With his wife and daughter he has dedicated himself
to the work. In which Ashram except Satyagraha Ashram have
lakhs been wasted? But all its accounts are clear. In Bardoli
there was certainly waste of money on the building but it was
due to lack of experience. In Sarbhon there was no extra ex-
pense. In Godhra extra money was spent but it will bear fruit,
because how else can the untouchables have such a building? If
you would present the matter more clearly I could explain it
better.
I did not brush aside Dr. Sumant's suggestion for the sake
of polemics. How could I do so when I am proud of Dr. Sumant
and when I would not disregard even a child's suggestion? But
what to do when I don't understand something? I acted ac-
cording to my knowledge. If the Satyagraha Ashram is not a
Sevak Samajl what else is it? How could I shape it better than
I knew. I wish we had other societies, too, but who should do
this work-they who know better or I?
The fact is that you have not realized my limitations. I am
not omnipotent. I do not reserve my strength, but use it fully;
what more can I do?
I shall definitely go to Dholka, unless God wills it otherwise.
When I reach the Ashram, you may join me so that we may
reduce our worries. Do not reply to this, but argue it out with
me when we meet.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2693. Courtesy: Dahyabhai M. Patel
