327. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
February 5, 1933
BHAI BALWANTSINH,
I have your letter.
1. The guru must possess the virtues of a sthitaprajna. I have
not come across such an embodiment of perfection. But I have
found a few people in all countries who possess varying degrees of
these virtues.
2. To remain equally unmoved by happiness and unhappiness,
honour and dishonour means that one should not be hurt by
insults nor feel elated by honours. But in no way does it follow
that one should not reply to the insult or end the sorrow.
3. The virtues of a devotee can be acquired by effort and the
direction of effort has been indicated in the chapter on bhakti.
But there is nothing to hinder one from acquiring the virtues in a
different way if it be possible.
4. Sleep can become sounder by practice. On waking from
sound sleep there is awareness of nothing except sleep and a sense
of well-being. Even when the Gita, etc., are recited many thoughts
rise unawares in the mind. Sound sleep is possible when the soul
is in rapport with the Gita or, in other words, with God. There-
fore we should faithfully continue the present effort of filling our-
selves with the Gita.
5. The idea of writing about the Ramayana too has always been
there but lack of time has stood in the way. Anyway there is no
longer much need of it. One who studies Anasaktiyoga well can
easily get at the secret of the Ramayana.
6. The history contained in the Ramayana is only secondary.
Spiritual philosophy is the main thing. Dharma has been revealed
through the unfolding of events. Hence while studying the
Ramayana, you must regard Rama as the Supreme Being and
Ravana as the forces opposed to Him. You may equate Rama
with Krishna, his forces with the Pandava army, and Ravana with
Duryodhana. The Mahabharata and Ramayana express one and the
same idea.
Your study of the Gurumukhi works is also useful. The vow of
memorizing the Gita must be kept.
I have answered Bhai Fulchand's letter. I hope this letter
reaches [him].
We are all well.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1869
