25. LETTER TO SIR WILLIAM W. HUNTER
DURBAN,
January 29, 1897
SIR,
I reached Natal on the 18th December but could not land
in Durban before the 13th January. The circumstances under
which this delay occurred are very painful. The Indian com-
munity yesterday sent a very long telegram to you narrating the
events of the past 30 days. I venture to give below the
circumstances that culminated in a demonstration by about 5,000
Durban men to oppose the landing of passengers on board two
ships Courland and Naderi, the first named being owned by Messrs
Dada Abdoolla and Co. of Durban and the second by the Persian
Steam Navigation Co. (of Bombay).
About the beginning of August last, the Tongaat Sugar
Co. applied to the Immigration Trust Board for eleven Indian
artisans to be brought under indenture. This gave rise to an
organized agitation by the European artisans against the Indians
generally. Well-attended meetings of European artisans were held
in Durban and Maritzburg and other towns to protest against the
introduction of Indian artisans by the Sugar Co. who, yielding
to the voice of the artisans, withdrew their application. But the
agitation continued. The leaders assumed certain facts and allowed
the agitation to develop into one against the Indians whole-
sale almost without discrimination. Angry correspondence con-
demning the Indians, mostly under noms de plume, went on.
While this was going on, statements appeared in the Press to the
effect that the Indians had organized an attempt to flood the
Colony with free Indians. About this time appeared also Reuter's
telegram regarding my pamphlet which enraged the Colonists.
The telegram said that I had stated that Indians were robbed,
assaulted, etc. When, however, the papers received copies of the
pamphlet, they acknowledged that I had stated nothing that
was not stated in Natal before and that was not acknowledged
to be correct. But the general populace, who formed their
opinion of the pamphlet from Reuter's summary, continued to
retain their bitter feelings. Then came the wires regarding the
Bombay and Madras meetings. These, while not inaccurate, were
read together with Reuter's summary and made the feelings more
bitter.
In the mean while, steamers continued to bring a large num-
ber of Indians. The arrivals were prominently reported and
exaggerated. The almost equal returns by the same steamers
passed unnoticed. And the artisans were led to believe without
any ground that these steamers brought mostly Indian artisans.
This gave rise to the formation of anti-Indian associations at
whose meetings resolutions were passed asking the Natal Govern-
ment to stop the influx of free Indians, to prevent Indians from
owning landed property, etc. These associations are not much
countenanced by the commercial people but are composed chiefly
of artisans and a few professional men.
At the time this was going on, two ships Courland and Naderi,
bound for Natal and containing Indian passengers, were reported
to be on the water. I was a passenger on board the Courland. I
was to have gone by one of the British Indian boats, but the
telegram from Durban, asking me to return at once, necessitated
my taking passage by the Courland. As soon as the news became
public property, the papers and the Durban Town Council
urged that Bombay should be declared an infected port. The
steamers reached Natal on the 18th and were placed under quaran-
tine for 23 days from the day of leaving Bombay. Proclama-
tion declaring Bombay an infected port was dated the 18th Decem-
ber and published in a Gazette Extraordinary on the 19th, that is,
one day after the steamers' arrival. The medical officer, who
imposed five days' quarantine, making 23 days from the time
of departure of the steamers from Bombay, was dismissed and
another appointed in his stead. He boarded the steamers after
the expiry of the first quarantine and imposed 12 days' quarantine
from that day. The Government had appointed a Commit-
tee to report as to how the two ships were to be treated and
the reports said that 12 days' quarantine after fumigation, etc.,
would be necessary. The medical officer gave instructions with
regard to fumigation and disinfection during the time. These were
carried out. Six days after this, an officer was placed on each
ship to watch fumigation, etc. And after that, the medical officer
came again and imposed a quarantine of 12 days from that day.
Thus, even if the Committee's report were justified, 11 clear days
were wasted before the 12 days' quarantine began.
While the ships were thus lying in the outer anchorage,
a local butcher, Mr. Harry Sparks, Captain, Natal Mounted
Rifles of the Volunteer Force, published a notice under his signa-
ture calling "every man in Durban to attend a public meeting
to be held on the 4th January for the purpose of arranging a
demonstration to proceed to the Point, and protest against the
landing of Asiatics." This meeting was very largely attended
and held in the Durban Town Hall. It was, however, a com-
plaint that the more sober portion of the community held aloof
from active participation in the movement. It is also worthy of
notice that the associations before referred to did not take part
in the movement. Dr. MacKenzie, one of the members of the
Committee alluded to above, and Captain of the Naval Carbin-
eers and Mr. J. S. Wylie, a local solicitor and Captain of the
Durban Light Infantry, were the chief movers. Inflammatory
speeches were made at the meeting. It was resolved that the
Government should be called upon to return the passengers on
the two ships to India at the Colony's expense and "that every
man at this meeting agrees and binds himself, with a view to
assisting the Government to carry out the foregoing resolution, to
do all his country may require of him and with that view will,
if necessary, attend at the Point at any time when required."
The meeting also suggested that the quarantine should be further
extended and that a special session be called, if necessary, to
extend it, thus, in my humble opinion, showing clearly that the
previous quarantine was meant to vex the Indians into returning
to India.
The Government, in their telegraphic reply to the resolu-
tions, said that they had no power "apart from such as may be
conferred by the quarantine laws to prevent the landing in the
Colony of any class of Her Majesty's subjects", and deprecated
action suggested by the second resolution quoted above. There-
upon another meeting was held in the Town Hall. Mr. Wylie
moved a resolution, which was carried, to the effect that a special
session should be called to extend quarantine. The following are
the significant passages of his speech:
The Committee said if the Government did nothing, Durban would
have to do it herself and go in force to the Point and see what could be
done. They capped that by remarking "we presume that you, as represen-
ting the Government and good authority of this Colony, would have to
bring force to oppose us." Mr. Escombe, the Attorney-General and Minister
of Defence, said, "We will do nothing of the sort. We are with you and
we are going to do nothing of the sort to oppose you. But, if you put us in
such a position, we may have to go to the Governor of the Colony and
ask him to take over the reins of this Colony as we can no longer
conduct the Government.
You will have to find some other persons.
The second resolution was that, "We proceed by demonstration
to the Point on the arrival of the Indians but each man binds him-
self to conform to the orders of his leaders." The speakers in-
flamed the hearers particularly against me. A document that was
issued for signatures was thus headed: "List of names of mem-
bers (trade or profession mentioned) who are willing to proceed
to the Point and resist by force, if necessary, the landing of
Asiatics and to obey any orders which may be given by the
leaders." The next stage in the movement was for the Demon-
stration Committee to send an ultimatum to the Captain of the
Courland, saying that passengers should return to India at the
Colony's expense and that, if they did not do so, their landing
would be resisted by thousands of Durban men. This was prac-
tically ignored.
While the movement was thus progressing, the Agents com-
municated with the Government and asked for protection of pass-
engers. No reply was vouchsafed until the day on which the
ships were brought in, on the 13th instant. Not much remains
to be added to the telegram, of which a copy is enclosed herewith.
As to the assault on me, it was due to the misrepresentations
that appeared about me in the papers. The assault itself
was the work of irresponsible persons and by itself need not be
noticed at all. Of course, I narrowly escaped being lynched.
The papers agree in saying that I did nothing that another in
my place would not have done. I may also state that, after the
assault, I was treated kindly by the Government officials and
afforded protection.
The Government now intend to introduce, in March next,
laws restricting the influx of the Indians. Town Councils have
been asking the Government for widest powers to enable them to
prevent Indians from taking out licences to trade, owning landed
property, etc. What the outcome will be it is difficult to say.
Our only hope lies in you and the gentlemen working in London
in our behalf. In any case, it is time some declaration was made
as to the policy of the Home Government with regard to the
Indians going outside India. The continuation of assisted im-
migration to Natal under the circumstances seems to be a great
anomaly. There is absolutely no danger of the Asiatics swamp-
ing the Colony. There is no competition between Indian and
European artisans. It may almost be said that for every Indian
coming to Natal one returns to India. The whole of this matter
will be fully dealt with in a memorial to Mr. Chamberlain that
is in course of preparation. This letter has been sent in the
mean while to furnish you with a brief summary of the past
events. We are aware that your time is otherwise well occupied.
But, however reluctant we may be to trouble you with our sor-
rows, we find no escape from the course if we are to get justice.
Thanking you on behalf of the Indian community in Natal,
I remain,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the office copy: S.N. 1967
