433. LETTER TO " THE RAND DAILY MAIL"
JOHANNESBURG,
June 28, 1905
TO
THE EDITOR
The Rand Daily Mail
SIR,
Perhaps you will allow me to make a few remarks on your leading
article in the Daily Mail of the 26th instant anent the Krugersdorp anti-
Asiatic meeting.
4‒31
After admitting that pledges were given before the war by the Home
Government regarding the British Indians, you go on to advise them that
"they must admit that their competition has driven out many white traders".
With all due respect, I venture to think that you are advising the Indian
community to admit what does not exist. There has not yet been given,
at any of these meetings, one authentic instance of the white trader having
been driven out by Indian competition. This can only be proved by the
appointment of a commission to investigate the charge. In the meanwhile,
the presumption is wholly in favour of the Indian contention that Indian
competition has not "ruined white trade", or "driven out" any such traders.
In the Transvaal itself, as well before the war as now, the white traders
have held their own. At the Cape, in spite of the greatest freedom of trade
granted to Asiatics, the white trader is largely predominant. In Natal,
where there is the largest Indian population, Sir James Hullett only the other
day said, in his evidence on oath, that the Indian traders had not seriously
affected the white traders. I submit that this competition has been quite
healthy, in that it has kept down the prices of the necessaries of life. I
am free to admit that the Indian scores by his simplicity of life, but this
is more than counterbalanced by the white trader's knowledge of the
English language, his superior organising ability, and better facilities for
making connections with wholesale houses in Europe.
But, Sir, the Indians are prepared to concede all that can reasonably
be expected of them, without having to make the admission you advise
them to make. They are prepared, in place of Law 3 of 1885 and other
unnecessarily stringent regulations, to accept municipal control over the
licences in general, whereby the local bodies will have the right either to
grant or to refuse licences, subject, in special cases, to revision by the Supreme
Court.
Their trading rights are the greatest cause of irritation, and this can
be allayed without the slightest difficulty, and without loss of time, by
accepting the compromise above suggested.
You seem to think that the Indians now here "have certain moral
claims which will have to be dealt with by fresh legislation". This is not
in accord with facts. They have a moral claim, certainly, to be placed
on an equality with the Europeans, so far as the rights of trade, ownership
of property and locomotion are concerned, but they have, today, a legal
right to trade and live where they like, as has been laid down by the Supreme
Court, and it is not capable of being restrictively dealt with by fresh legis-
lation, as has been said, both by Mr. Lyttelton and Mr. Brodrick; and yet,
in order to conciliate public opinion, the Indian community is prepared
to accept a restriction on trade, on general and non-racial lines, under
the proviso above mentioned.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Indian Opinion, 8-7-1905
