328. LETTER TO PYARELAL
September 19, 1938
Read this with a calm mind when you have the leisure.
CHI. PYARELAL,
One day I had a talk with Mother and then this letter
began to take shape. Last night I came to the conclusion that
if I did not write to you, I should be deceiving you.
I decided to write this yesterday because of Mahadev's
illness.
If you can, you should work whole-heartedly for Harijan
and [other] papers. For this to be possible there is something
that needs to be done. Mother said: "Marry Sharada to
Pyarelal. She will agree if I persuade her. But you must take
up this responsibility." My immediate reaction was that I
do not have that much influence over you these days. Still,
should I not convey to you what appears to me in the best
interest of you, me and many others? I spoke to Sharada. She
is of course willing. I suggested to her that in that case she
should herself write to you. She said : "I do not know how to do
it. You may write and I will sign. When I have placed myself
in your hands, what is the difficulty?" Sharada does not seek
to gratify any sensual desires. She is keen to serve. Seeing that
you had suffered a terrible shock, Chimanlal thought of entrust-
ing Sharada to you and, moved by a similar feeling, Sharada
went along with the idea. Knowing you as I did, I dissuaded
him. This of course you know. Now I am approaching you
with a different motive altogether. Three or four different
people were approached for Sharada. She was turned down
because of her weak health. This quite shocked me. In such a
state Mother's suggestion was quite a help. It is our duty to
accept the hand of someone whom nobody accepts. What does
it matter that Sharada is weak of health? I do not consider
her weak. I see many qualities in her. She wants a teacher
for husband, somebody who will educate her at home. Such a
husband should make her overcome her desire to be a mother.
If he does not do so she has the strength to remain calm.
You will not be betraying Yoga by accepting the hand of
a girl like Sharada. I have already suggested that the Yoga of
your imagination whom you have wedded remains what she is.
Supposing that Yoga was named Sharada? But if that be not
the case, you may not give Sharada a child. So long as you give
her knowledge, you give her your love, she will be content. If
you can understand this much, my task becomes easy. And the
broken strings of your heart are made whole again. But if you
are not convinced at heart, I would certainly not insist that you
should abide by what I say.
Sushila told me that the assurance I gave you at the time
of your fast, which I later withdrew, had not become inoperative.
I have already written you to say that it no longer holds. If
you wish you may pursue your fast under my supervision. So,
this need not become a hindrance to your Harijan work.
My statement that you and I had different ideas of dharma
represented a conclusion drawn from your letter. My sending
blessings to Yoga on her engagement distressed you. I feel it
was my duty to bless her. I was under the impression that you
had also taken the same view. I am not convinced in my heart
that Panditji or Lakshmibehn used coercion with Yoga. I
did not simply follow the custom in sending my blessings.
I shall not write anything more now. By accepting Sharada's
hand you will be bringing a cow home. It is just possible that
she may turn out a Kamadhenu for all of us. I for one notice
such qualities in Sharada. Do not refuse her hand.
I am not able to break my silence. You have risen from
the death-bed. It is a sign from God. You will have truly
risen when you come out unscathed from the burning forest in
which you are caught and make your full contribution to the
yajna of non-violence. My silence will easily end if you accept
my suggestion. Right now, it is a refuge for one distressed.
Blessings from
BAPU
[Ps.]
If you do not like my suggestion, feel free to ignore it. Do
not make yourself unhappy.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
