335. LETTER TO MAITHILISHARAN GUPTA
April 5 [1932]
BHAI MAITHILISHARAN,
I had your letter. I read Saket, Anagh, Panchvati and Jhankar
with enjoyment. I liked them very much. But I do not consider
myself at all qualified to make comments. However, as you have
asked for my opinion and I did gather impressions while read-
ing I am putting them down as they occurred to me.
The expression of Urmila's grief, though beautiful in style, could
hardly have had a place in Saket. That Tulsidas did not say much
about Urmila has been held against him. But this omission I have
not viewed as a fault. I see in that the artistry of the poet. The
composition of Manas is such that a worthy character like Urmila
is brought to notice only by ellipsis, in that lies the greatness of the
work and such characters. The character of Urmila and others
could have been delineated only to enhance the impact of Sitaji's
character. But Urmila's virtues were of no lesser order than Sita's.
Sita's sisters were of the same calibre as herself. Manas is an
incomparable scripture. The praise of Sita and Rama rings
through every page and every verse. I expected to see the same
characteristic in Saket. I failed in this to some extent for the rea-
son explained above. I may mention one more point. The
lamentations of Dasharatha and others described in Tulsidas's
Manas did not jar. Tulsidasji could not have done anything diffe-
rent. But such lamentations are not appreciated in a book of the
present period. It affects adversely the sentiment of valour as well
as faith. Those who have faith in the spirit and who consider
worldly pleasures as transitory cannot find death and separation
unbearable. They might temporarily give way to grief but how
can we expect pitiful lamentations from them?
I do not at all mean by all this that you should try to make
any improvements in the second edition. But it will be a different
matter if you find any worth in my comments.
Mahadev is now with me. I have dictated this to him as
the right hand pains and writing with the left hand takes more
time.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 9455. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhavan, Varanasi
