23. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
AJMER,
Thursday [March 9, 1922]
CHI. MAHADEV1,
I have come here for a day on Chhotani Mian's invitation. I
shall return tonight. Shuaib and Parasram are with me.
I got your letter. I do not know how Durga came to think
that I was offended. You did well in writing the letters. I would
certainly be hurt if you do not express your thoughts. If you do
not let me know them, I cannot correct them, nor can I, even if
I wish to, correct my own thoughts in the light of what you think.
Durga or Mathuradas or whoever else told you has made a mistake.
Remember, however, that a prisoner has no right to indulge in
such speculation. In any case, he should not feel hurt. I wish
to see you all as you actually are and not as you would be, for I,
too, wish to appear to you all as I am. I may very much wish to
be better than what I am; but if I did not appear as I am, I
cannot be what I wish to be.
There was, therefore, no need for you to apologize.
After getting and considering all the papers, I have become
confirmed in my views. By making a change in my language, I
have proved my spirit of compromise. By expressing my personal
views in Young India, I am proclaiming my firmness and indepen-
dence. Take it from me that Chauri Chaura has saved us from a
conflagration and has brought swaraj miles nearer. That other
swaraj [we were trying to attain] was like a mirage. There is
such a close connection between the means and the end that it is
difficult to say which of the two is more important. Or we may
say that the means is the body and the end is the soul. The
end is invisible, the means is visible. Now we shall have the
pleasure of demonstrating this great truth.
Just as Sudhanva kept dancing with joy in the cauldron of
boiling oil, so do I feel intense joy in the blazing fire around
me. Now is the time when the real nature of non-violence will be
revealed.
You should always write whatever you wish to without any
hesitation. Keep on purifying the atmosphere around you. I
wish you become a powerful writer in Urdu. Your presence out-
side is no doubt useful. I, however, wish that you finish your
term of imprisonment.
You should not at all be worried about what is happening
outside. Many people in America are unhappy. What can we
do about them? Similarly, what can you do about what happens
outside?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 7981
