291. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Aso Vadi 1 [October 19, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I saw your letter after reaching the Farm. Nowadays I have to go
to Johannesburg daily. Please continue to address your letters to the
Farm. I have read Chi. Chhaganlal's letter. We shall know more
from his letter tomorrow. Chi. Narandas's attitude of indifference to
worldly pleasures is a good sign. I wish that he receives encouragement.
Bombay is not the place for that. But Narandas is entirely in Khusal-
bhai's hands. He will get an opportunity for public service if any of
you brothers can politely cure Khushalbhai of his infatuation. If, how-
ever, he does not get an opportunity to do public service in this life, he
will, if he so wishes, get it without effort in the next.
I enclose herewith Doctor [Mehta]'s letter about Chi. Chhaganlal
for you to read. Please destroy it after perusal.
Ba wants me to ask you to buy two small locks for the water tank.
The suggestion seems to be quite good. Her idea is that he who really
wants water may certainly use it, but the tap should not be opened by
all and sundry. Moreover, she wants to know whether or not you have
put all the things—cots, etc.—in their proper places. If not, please do
so. If the Monday meetings are held in that house, it will inciden-
tally get cleaned every week. I think it is better for Veerjee to live
in the house formerly occupied by Bihari. It is not good to have to
bother about cleaning the big house every day. Please send me at your
convenience a list of the books received. Ba is positive that some rice
1 This letter appears to have been written during Chhaganlal Gandhi's absence
from South Africa in 1910, in which year Aso Vadi I corresponded to October 19.
2 Gandhiji's cousin and Narandas's father
is there in a bag behind the kitchen door. Please look for it there once
more.
It is not good that it should get more and more late each Friday.
Purshottamdas thinks that it is due to slackness on someone's part.
Please try to complete the work in time by doing it all together with
more energy and enthusiasm. Now that the days have become longer,
it will be better if you can go [to the press] early in the morning on
Fridays.
Do not give up your study of Tamil. What is Chakor digging pits
for? Please do not ask him to do anything which you consider unnece-
ssary. Mr. Polak says that Muthoo had been there on Friday. Please
send me the passage on tuberculosis which is with Mr. West. I want
to show it to a tuberculosis patient.
I have sent a telegram to Anglia Sheth today. I had got the news
from Rustomjee Sheth. Please read the article written by someone in
The Transvaal Leader about Tolstoy Farm. It has appeared in the issue
of today, the 19th. It is not known who the writer is.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4938
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
