105. LETTER TO NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE
March 17, 1947
CHI. NIRMAL BABU,
Your letter is full of inaccuracies and unwarranted assump-
tions. I had asked you to discuss the thing with me. You could
not do it. The result is bad. I do not mind what opinion you hold,
only it must be well fortified.
You should have ascertained my views from me before ac-
cepting second-hand evidence however honest it might be.
I go beyond the orthodox view as we know it. My definition
does not admit of laxity. I do not call that brahmacharya that
means not to touch a woman. What I do today is nothing new
for me. So far as I know myself, I hold today the same view I
held when about 45 years ago I took the vow. Without the
vow in England as a student, I freely mixed with women and
yet I called myself a brahmachari for the period of my residence
there. For me, brahmacharya is that thought and practice which
puts you in touch with the Infinite and takes you to His presence.
In that sense Dayanand Saraswati was not. Most certainly I am
not. But I am trying to reach that state and, in accordance with
my belief, I have made substantial progress in that direction.
I have not become modern at all in the same sense you
seem to mean. I am as ancient as can be imagined and hope to
remain so to the end of my life. If this displeases you, I can-
not help it. Let me appear to you and others as naked as I can.
You have not done justice to A, B or C. You do not know
them fully. Have you any right to judge them before you have
taken the trouble of knowing them as fully as possible? That
you may not want to or that you have no time, I would ap-
preciate. But that very fact should prevent you from passing
judgement on them.
I am amazed at your assumption that my experiment im-
plied any assumption of woman's inferiority. She would be,
if I looked upon her with lust with or without her consent. I
have believed in woman's perfect equality with man. My wife
was 'inferior' when she was the instrument of my lust. She
ceased to be that when she lay with me naked as my sister. If
she and I were not lustfully agitated in our minds and bodies,
the contact raised both of us.
Should there be difference if it is not my wife, as she once
was, but some other sister? I do hope you will acquit me of
having any lustful designs upon women or girls who have been
naked with me. A or B's hysteria had nothing to do with my
experiment, I hope. They were before the experiment what
they are today, if they have not less of it.
The distinction between Manu and others is meaningless for
our discussion. That she is my grand-daughter may exempt me
from criticism. But I do not want that advantage.
"Experiment" or prayog is an ill-chosen word. I have used it.
It differs from the present in the sense that the one could be
stopped by me, the other being dharma could not be. Now comes
the stop.
That I should take the public in my confidence before I do
anything new is [not] novel to me. In the present case there is
nothing new.
BAPU
My Days with Gandhi, pp. 176-
