354. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 5/6, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I send with this a letter written by a lady named Malidoshi
on behalf of the labourers working in the Ashram. You may not
have read it. Inquire about the matter and let me know what
the facts are.
Madhavji's brother Chatrabhuj writes to tell me that the
former's two children cannot be properly looked after in Calcutta.
I have already suggested that the children's aunt should take them
to the Ashram and keep them there. She might leave after the
children begin to feel at home there. You also should write to
them and get the children under your charge if you can. I have
written to Madhavji and Lakshmi about this.
I hope Duncan is better.
Read my letter to Titus. You may send the report of the
dairy as it is. I will get a copy taken out here if necessary.
Otherwise I will return it after reading it.
To me also Keshu writes only a few lines every time. I
have now given up hope about him. He has made up his mind
to leave the Ashram. It seems Radha also wishes to live outside.
I hope you received my letter in which I wrote about Dr.
Sharma and Parachure Shastri, and followed what I said. If
you did not follow any point, please ask me to explain.
BAPU
Enclosed: Malidoshi's letter and letters for Champa, Parachure
Shastri, Titus, Malidoshi and Rajbhoj.
April 6, 1933
[PS.]
Tell Durga that I gave her the date of my release as May
4, but it is not correct. It is May 19. Ramdas will be released
on May 1. I get Durga's letters regularly. I will write to her
in a day or so.
I had a letter from Gaur Gopal. I replied to him immediate-
ly. That was many days ago. Write to him and tell him that
he may go to Shail Ashram. It has a vacant room. He will
make his own arrangements for meals, etc. Prabhudas will help
him in that. It is our duty to look after his comfort as much as
we can.
I hope Dhananjay is being properly nursed. You know what
he is suffering from. Let me know who attends on him.
It
would be better if he was an elderly person, for he would then run
less risk of infection.
What has happened to Liladhar ?
BAPU
[PPS.]
We have a copy of Poore's Sanitation in our library. Send
it to Shri N., Chitaldrug, Mysore.
In case you don't have Gaur Gopal's address there, I give it
below:
C/O Sjt. Gagendraprasad Das, Advocate, Patna
Enclosed letters:
Duncan,
Premi, Chimanlal, Amina, Anandi, Nanibehn,
Durga, Purushottam, Narandas, Talwalkar, Durga (Babo).
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8350. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
