348. LETTER TO T. TITUS
April 4, 1933
MY DEAR TITUS,
Your letter is full and very good. I shall read your report
with avidity. It may be sent to me by registered post and I
shall return it after reading; that would save time and labour.
You must have read literature about the qualities of unfired
milk and how long such milk remains in an eatable condition
without needing to be boiled. I have simply suggested its being
put in an air-tight bottle or an air-tight vessel and wrapped in
wet cloth under the belief that milk so kept remains for 12 hours
or so without altering its quality, and if your reading confirms
my belief, you should popularize the use of unfired milk in the
Ashram, and begin to preserve it in the manner suggested by me.
You begin the milking early. Some of the milk is not used till
10.30 or 11 o'clock. If therefore it is taken in an unfired condi-
tion, it has got to be preserved against atmospheric changes. And
I think that the milkmen or milkmaids should be frequently
watched and taught to wash the udders, etc., in a thorough
manner.
My recollection of the Bangalore Dairy is that the animals
were taken to a special open place for the purpose of milking.
Was that not so? I have a notion that Col. Smith told me that
it was better to take the animals to a free open space for milk-
ing. If this is a good practice, and I think it is, we ought to
adopt it. But you know better. I do not want to give you more
work than is absolutely necessary. I do want our dairy to be a
first-class model dairy of its kind. We cannot go in for ex-
pensive methods, but we must go in for all the methods that wou-
ld ensure, through methodical labour and meticulous care, clean-
liness and
purity of milk. What is the lowest yield required
from a cow to make her self-supporting? And what is the cost?
Now about homoeopathy. I must confess that without any
specific cause I have never been able to take kindly to it, though
some of my friends have often recommended it to me. I have
noticed too that these friends themselves at critical moments have
given up homoeopathy and gone to allopathy. Though I should
like to believe to the contrary I am driven to the conclusion that
305
54-20
allopathy, although it has great limitations and much supersti-
tion about it, is still the most universal and justifiably the most
popular system. Allopathy provides opening medicines, oint-
ments for a variety of boils and eruptions, disinfectants for various
situations and includes surgery of a most wonderful type. It is
an all-inclusive system. It can well include homoeopathy, bio-
chemistry and the latest nature-cures. If therefore allopathy
rids itself of the worship of mammon, which has overtaken most
human activities, and could exclude vivisection and other prac-
tices which I call black, and liberally took advantage of the new
methods discovered by lay people, it would become all-satisfying
and quite inexpensive.
Having said this, if you have an accurate knowledge of homo-
eopathy and can easily spare the time necessary for treatment, I
do not mind your introducing it in the Ashram subject of course
to consultation with Narandas and the other responsible people
in the Ashram. I would love to think that we were independent
of outside medical assistance or that it was only rarely that we
have to trouble our medical friends. My ideal is to find what-
ever alleviation we want in the Ashram itself. It pains me when
any of us have to go out for medical relief or treatment or to call
in medical assistance. We may never reach that perfect state,
but the nearer the approach to it the better for us. I would
therefore be pleased if you could even minimize the occasions for
seeking medical help from outside. Tell me what treatments you
would give to Kusum, Jamna, Chimanlal and last but not least
Parachure Shastri. These are all typical cases.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20830
