25. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
SABARMATI,
August 24, 1924
MY DEAR RAJAGOPALACHARI1,
Mahadev has shown me your letter to him. You must not
despond. For Mrs. Naidu to say that I am despondent is a
libel. It is true that I am groping. There are things about
which I give no clear-cut decisions. But that is to admit that we
are voyaging in uncertain waters.
Remember we are satyagrahis. Let me apply to the situation
the law of the family. Assume that two brothers are quarrelling
over the inheritance. Both want to use it for the good of the
family. One at least knows he does not need it to serve the
family. The majority of the clan would have him to cling to the
inheritance. But is it not the duty of the satyagrahi brother to
forgo the inheritance and avoid a quarrel and consequent waste
of time and energy? Is the case any different here? However, I
am acting cautiously. All I am trying to do is to avoid an un-
seemly wrangle. I will take up the Presidentship2, if I find that
it will serve the country. There is plenty of time to decide. The
returns of spinning are proving most instructive. Is it much use
my presiding if the returns remain as poor as they are? Will it
not then be better to retire from the Congress and have a rigid
programme and a membership that is honest and willing? Is it
any use having a vote for the wheel from persons clad in foreign
stuff? And think of the exploitation of the simple folk for
capturing the Congress! Will the so-called No-changers remain
strictly honest? Picture to yourself the whole working. If we
cannot retain the Congress without this tug of war, we must will-
ingly surrender it. I have thought deeply over your letters but
feel sure that I must retire from any such contest. But for the
present I am simply watching. Am waiting for Motilalji's
answer.
Now for Malabar. I have applications from many sources.
What would you have me to do? I was thinking of sending
some one to make special report in collaboration with you. But
as nothing has yet been done I would like your suggestions. Plenty
of clothing has been collected. Please guide me about its dispo-
sal too.
I have not been able to make much headway in Delhi.
There is still some prospect of a settlement. But the thing is
very delicate.
Yes, your guess is correct. The fair friend is Sarladevi. She
wants to bombard me with more stuff but I have refused to
give further accommodation. There are some beautiful letters
from Brahmins in repudiation. I have published one.
Yours,
M. K. G.
[PS.]
My Programme:
29th to 3rd September Bombay, 4th Poona, 5th Bombay.
Then uncertain, probably leave Bombay for Delhi on 5th.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
