126. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
[JOHANNESBURG,]
April 8, 1904
ERNEST F. C. LANE, ESQ.
OFFICES OF THE INTERIOR
CAPE TOWN
DEAR MR. LANE,
I notice in the Union Government Gazette a Marriage Proclamation
requiring those who want to have their marriages celebrated by their Ma-
homedan or Hebrew Marriage Officers to have notices published of their
intention so to do. I do not know whether this Proclamation is deliberate
as showing the future policy of the Government in anticipation, or whether
it is a proclamation required for the Hebrews but necessitating reference
to the Mahomedans in terms of the Natal Marriage Law referred to
therein. Hit is the former, I beg to draw General Smuts' attention to the
fact that what has been submitted by me on behalf of the Indian
community is that past de facto monogamous marriages celebrated
according to Indian religious customs should be legalised and that [in]
future such marriages should be recognised as legal. The Marriage
Proclamation in question introduces the practice of the publication of
banns — a practice which is totally opposed to both Hindu and the
Mahomedan usage; nor is any such publication necessary, because of the
respective religions themselves requiring an elaborate process which rend-
ers fraudulent marriages impossible. I feel that, whilst the legislation
to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission is being drafted,
I should bring this matter to the notice of General Smuts.
I observe, too, from Mr. Burton's reply to Mr. Meyler that the inden-
tured Indians in the employ of the Railways Department have deducted
from their wages instalments in part payment of the £3 Tax. I venture
to suggest that a continuance of this practice is hardly consistent with the
attitude shown by the Commission regarding the Tax. One of the chief
points that the Commission had to advise upon was the £3 Tax, and it is
submitted that this deduction might have been stopped by the Government
at least pending the report of the Commission, and now that the
Commission has made such strong recommendations for the repeal of the
Tax, I do trust that the officials concerned will be advised, if they have not
been already, not to insist upon this deduction, for I assume that, if
the Government bring in a Bill for the repeal of the Tax, the arrears will
be remitted.
I am,
Yours truly,
From a photostat of the office copy: S. N. 5957.
