172. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG,]
October 23, 1913
THE HON'BLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
PRETORIA
SIR,
I am directed by my Association respectfully to invite your
attention to the following. My Association has been informed
that:
1. On or about the 27th September, a British Indian named
Abdool Fazula Khan was arrested at Johannesburg under Section
4(Ia) of the Immigration Law of 1913, which reads:
Any such person as is described in any paragraph of this sub-section who
enters or is found within the Union, or who, though lawfully resident in one
Province, enters or is found in another Province in which he is not lawfully
resident, shall be a prohibited immigrant in respect of the Union or of that
other Province (as the case may be), that is to say— any person or class of
persons deemed by the Minister on economic grounds or on account of standard
or habits of life to be unsuited to the requirements of the Union or any
particular Province thereof.
2. The said Khan appealed against the decision of the local Im-
migration Officer, and on the 13th October the said appeal was
duly heard by the Board sitting at Pretoria and dismissed.
3. The evidence led at the hearing of the appeal, and which was
not disproved or rebutted, shows :
(a) That the said Khan first came to the Transvaal in 1900
as a private of the Indian Transport Corps No. 2 Division.
(b) That he received a good discharge in November 1902
and, thereafter, remained in this Province for nearly another year—
till towards the end of 1903.
(c) That he then went to Cape Town where he filled several
situations, among others, working for Messrs Jagger & Co., Ohlson
& Co., and Petersen & Co. He remained in Cape Town about
eight or nine years with the exception of a few months of service
in German South West Africa.
(d) The said Khan then returned to the Transvaal by rail
from the Cape and entered this Province without let or hindrance.
(e) While in German South West Africa, Khan lost his dis-
charge and several other papers of a similar character.
4. On the day the said Khan's appeal was dismissed, as stated
in Paragraph 2 and immediately after, he was removed to Pretoria
Gaol for deportation, but before removal, his Attorney, Mr. Ritch,
saw the Principal Immigration Officer and represented to him the
claims of the said Khan to be sent to the Cape Province. Mr. Ritch
gave the names of the principal employers for whom the said Khan
claims to have worked.
5. On the following evening, the said Khan was deported to Natal
without his having had an opportunity to collect his clothes or
other belongings and without any further communication having
been made to his Attorney, and, thereafter, was immediately trans-
ported to India.
6. I am desired to point out that no effort would appear to have
been made to investigate the said Khan's claims to be sent to the
Cape, where he had resided for so many years, and to add that,
in the respectful opinion of my Association, this should have been
done even though it might have meant a few weeks' longer deten-
tion in the Transvaal of the said Khan.
7. My Association also desires me to call attention to the serious
hardships which must necessarily follow such sudden deportation
as this, in which case the deportee would appear to have been sent
away without any means and with no more clothing than he stood
in. Had Khan's Attorney been notified a few hours beforehand,
his friends would have passed over to him his clothing and blankets
and also money to assist him on his journey.
8. My Association trusts that the facts in this case will be fully
investigated by you; and that steps will be taken to prevent a repe-
tition of the unfortunate incident.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5904
