8. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[About 1914]
. . . then it is possible. I wish that such things should occur to you. I
firmly believe that there is some [truth] in it. I easily experience the presence
of some great men. Now something more about diet.
At 1 o'clock. I take bananas, grapes and groundnuts. I have enough
groundnuts. When that is over, I will take almonds. The groundnuts also
seem to suit me here. Even then, I am an exception as far as groundnuts are
concerned. Rama and Mr. Kallenbach also take groundnuts. However, for the
last two days, they are taking almonds. In the evening, we have gruel made
of queni mill and some hand-made bread without powder. Both butter and
milk are added to the gruel. Some salt is added to it and so also sugar. From
today, sugar has been removed from my diet. I take some groundnuts in the
evening also. It does not spoil the taste of my mouth. Mr. Kallenbach keeps
fine. Rama takes a glass of milk and a piece of bread in the morning. His
health has become very good. I do not feel that milk is necessary but that can
be said for sure only after special experience. I, on my part, have not taken
milk for a long time but there is no adverse effect on me. Most of the Indians
who were in the jail, had done without milk and ghee, but they came out
quite healthy. Lakhs of poor like Thambi Naidu never get milk. The experience
of such people suggests that one can preserve one's strength even without
milk. There may be many reasons behind the instruction to the householder
to keep a cow. One is that a householder quite frequently uses his semen and
is, therefore, advised it's use. The late Raychandbhai 2 had written that a person
1 From the contents, the letter appears to belong to the year 1914; see references
to usefulness of milk in Vol. XII, pp. 127, 146-7, 381; to benefits of a fruit diet, ibid
p. 387; to Santok's health, ibid, p. 531; and to good health of jail inmates ibid, pp.
239 and 392 which match the references to these subjects as mentioned in this letter.
2 Raychand Ravjibhai Mehta, also known as Rajchandra; a poet and a man of
great character and learning; died young at the age of thirty-three. His writings exercised
a great influence on Gandhiji, greater than the writings of Ruskin or Tolstoy or Thoreau.
8
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
who wants to observe unadulterated brahmacharya should give up milk. It is
obvious that brahmacharya serves the purpose of milk for many. Otherwise
many a youth from Kathiawar, used to drinking milk have left this world. I
had told Dr. Mehta of my opinion that all of them were lustful and that is
why they had gone. He had agreed with me. Dharamsi is no more. What is
the reason for his going? He would have drunk plenty of milk and partaken
[of food from] a number of offerings. But in a room like a store-room, he
most probably regularly played with the body of a small innocent girl. Leading
such an immoral life, eating rotis made of mill-flour and enjoying the rich
'malarial' food of Bombay, he 'ruined' his health and left this world. Such is
the favour shown by God to India that either demons will survive in India, or
religious persons. Persons pretending to be religious men, either consciously
or unconsciously, will not survive. Our eyes will open only when such things
happen on a large scale. Such thoughts come to my mind quite often. All this
is not for running down milk but to help one to get rid of his attachment for
milk.
I have discovered one thing. It takes a lot of time to cook queni mill.
How can we waste so much time? I have not found a reason here to live on
just dry fruits. It seems that at present we will have to keep wheat with us.
I soaked wheat in water for about 12 hours and then roasted them. I
thought they would pop up but that did not happen. On being roasted, wheat
became hard. I added hot milk and sugar to it. It became gruel. Chewing it
took a lot of time. I, no doubt, ate it with relish but not Rama and Mr.
Kallenbach. I have had a coffee-mill bought. In it, I ground the roasted wheat
into rough powder. I soaked the powder in a mixture of water and milk for
10 minutes and added a pinch of salt and a spoon of butter. Mr. Kallenbach
and I ate it without sugar. Rama added some sugar to it. After that, we had
two bananas and an apple each. I think that was sufficient. Roasted wheat
can be eaten as it is. It is good if cooked the way I have described. It also
tastes good if it is roasted in ghee and jaggery. Water should be added to it.
It is also good if you eat it with cow's milk or tinned milk. This thing should
be eaten in place of bread or roti and is meant to save time. It is clean. It
would have no worms like the flour. It is enough if the wheat is roasted once
a week. It does not require a big stove, etc., and one can very easily prepare
the best food in ten minutes. Wheat can be sent from here if you want to
prepare the food I have described and you do not get wheat there.
Why should we indulge in such activities? Why should we experiment
with food? Where will it take us? Such thoughts come to me quite often.
Every seeker of self will have such thoughts. They are not worthless and in
our condition, they are necessary. We are setting up everything new. If we
[do not experiment], to what things would we cling? Our normal food is full
of rituals and takes a whole day to eat. To cling to that food, is attachment.
1 Dr. Jivraj Mehta
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
9
Living on fruit is the best. At present, however, fruit diet alone will not do.
So, we have to think of something close to fruit diet. With that aim in view,
I feel like making innocent experiments. Maybe there is some attachment in
that too. At present, I do not feel that way. Experience suggests that as we
start leading a simple life and as we become firm in our search for self-
realisation, our craving for variety in food dwindles. The [craving] for food I
had an year ago is there no more. Mr. Kallenbach keeps on testing me. He
also feels the same way. From that it appears that I am on the right path. I
had to do the same in England twenty years ago and could thus subsist on a
non-violent diet there.
Now I have written enough. This letter has been written on the basis of
the questions raised by you and Purshottamdas in your letters. Both of you
should read it. Send it to Chhaganlal if you think it proper. If you fear that
the views about food will provoke him, do not send it to him.
For prolonging the life of Santok, it is very necessary for her to take
simple food, Kuhne's baths and, if required, mud-packs, and agreeable
exercises. She should sleep in the open with the face uncovered. If she feels
cold, she can wrap a shawl around her head but the face should be kept out
of the cover. If the face is kept uncovered, one will breathe through the nose
only. One can manage without water for a day but without air one cannot live
even for a minute. If the water is polluted, it can have an adverse effect on
one's health. One can easily imagine how much worse will be the effect of
polluted air on one's health. But we remain indifferent to things which we do
not see with our naked eye. We would touch the feet of God if we could see
him with our naked eyes . . .1
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32926
