195. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
April 8, 1929
CHI. MIRA,
I sent you a letter yesterday from Hyderabad (Deccan). I am
nearing Bezwada, but still away from it. We are in a little village
without a telegraphic office. The post from Bezwada has been
brought here. So I have two letters from you, 2nd and 3rd. If
you cannot be radically cured, you must take a change. You
can go to a seaside or to a hillside.
If you can hold out till June, you might perhaps go with me
to A1mora. So far as I am aware, there is to be an Almora
programme in June. You will have to travel 2nd class though.
I should dread to put you in a 3rd-class compartment in your
weak state. But this is all building castles in the air. The im-
mediate thing is for you to get well. To spend lavishly on
fruit is real economy. You cannot keep good health without
fresh fruit.
Lemons are the prince among fruits.
Dr.
Rajabali told me one lemon was equal to six oranges. I can
well believe it. But you must have all the fruit you fancy. Raw
green leaf is good, but it must be eaten sparingly, not more than
one tola at a time and then too only if it does not upset the
system. Perhaps the oil too does not agree with you. Your
primary concern is not to discover a cheap diet, but it is to be
able to live in villages without needing a yearly exodus to the
hills. Your attention must, therefore, be concentrated on making
your experiment a success, no matter how much it costs you to
live. I am going to wire to you as soon as I am at a wiring
station. How nice it is to be without a wiring office at either
end! I know that I need not wire. If I was really poor, I could
not wire. If I was not impatient and had full trust in God, I
should not wire. But I am not going to act mechanically. When
that faith comes, I shall cease to think of wiring. It ist enough
for the time being that I am not fretting, even though I get letters
about your illness and though I have no telegraph office here.
I seem to be flourishing on my diet, 3rd-class travelling and
continuous engagements. I wonder myself that I have not yet
collapsed. Of course, I snatch plenty of rest and the happy knack
of sleeping at will saves me. Truth is that God saves me so long
as He wants me in this body. The moment His wants are satisfied,
no precautions on my part will save me.
Of course, you will locate Bezwada on the map. There are
five or six districts to cover.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5359. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9415
1 Vide p. 218.
