200. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
BARDOLI,
August 12, 1928
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I have your letters. I shall write no more about the dryness
of your letters.
This is the reply to Sushila's question about Sudama. We
know nothing about whether or not he was a historical character.
I do not remember what the Bhagavata says about Sudama.
We have what Narasinh Mehta and Premanand have written
about him. The stories told by both of them are imaginary. The
pictures drawn by the two poets are their own inventions. We
cannot, therefore, take every word in the narrative seriously and
pronounce judgement on any aspect of the story. To me both the
husband and the wife seem beautifully drawn characters. The
poems were composed to illustrate the power of bhakti. In composing
them, the poets have shown the wife as a worthy lady who
tries to safeguard the interests of her family and worries about it.
Sudama, who is under the spell of bhakti, lets his affairs manage
themselves. The wife wants to protect her children and so she
tries to wake up the detached Sudama. He hesitates, because a
devotee of God makes no selfish prayer. But his wish, though seem-
ingly selfish, is in fact unselfish. Prompted by his wife, he went to
Krishna without any expectation and came away as he had gone.
We should, therefore, read the poem to enjoy the sentiment of
bhakti. We cannot draw any conclusions from it about what the
relation between a husband and a wife should be. We may use our
reason to decide that question, and act in the manner that seems
best to us. An attempt to judge old examples in the light of modern
reason is not only futile and unnecessary but may be actually harm-
ful sometimes. We should base our conduct in this age on in-
dependent moral principles.
I like Manilal's independence in what he thinks about Sastri-
ji1, but I see an error in his view. There should be a different
standard for judging every individual. If we judge a horse by the
standard applicable to an elephant, we would be doing injustice
to both. Both may be good or bad in their respective spheres. An
elephant or a horse may be treated to have failed in the test if it
fails when judged by the standard applicable to itself. If we judge
Sastriji by the standard of satyagraha, we would do him injustice.
If we look to the service which he renders to the nation, though in
Government service, we shall see that he has no equal. If, then,
he were to plunge into the field of satyagraha, he would probably
have no equal there too. It is my belief that no one else would give
as much satisfaction, through his uprightness, as Sastriji does. In
my view, he sincerely follows his conscience in everything he does.
I learn from him that Sushila now speaks fairly good English.
I would expect such information about you from yourselves.
Now that a settlement about Bardoli has been reached, I am
returning to the Ashram. Ba and Mahadev are with me. Subbiah
joined later. Pyarelal, Ramdas and Rasik have been here from
the beginning. It is to be decided now what they are to do. Devdas
is in Delhi working in Jamia Millia. Prabhudas is at Almora.
rule has now been made to have one common kitchen only in the
Ashram, and, therefore, very few are left now who have their meals
by themselves. They, too, will have stopped doing that before the
next year. At present, about 140 persons take their meals in the
common kitchen.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4742
