121. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
November 29, 1932
THE SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,
I am grateful to Government for letting me meet Sheth
Jamnalal Bajaj soon after his admission to this prison. The
Government now know the relations that subsist between him
and me. Both he and I asked the Superintendent at the interview
today whether we could meet each other frequently and he told
us that he had permission only for that single interview. If Sheth
Jamnalal had not been suffering from a bad disease, and without
the cause to be just mentioned, I should have been satisfied with
an occasional interview like the one I had today. But seeing that
he has been specially brought to Yeravda for the sake of his
health, it would be putting an undue strain on both of us if we
were not allowed to see each other frequently, of course subject
to restrictions as to conversation. I have no desire to hold any
political conversation with him. But I should want to discuss
90
with him problems of untouchability, as he was Chairman of the
Anti-Untouchability Board appointed by the Congress in 1929
and he had specialized on the question of temple-entry, having
himself been instrumental in opening to the Harijans his own
family temple and in having a number of other temples opened
in many parts of India.
His special medical adviser Dr. Modi has advised distraction
from brooding over his illness. For him to be interested in the
untouchability problem would be itself like a tonic. Indeed he
was tempted to discuss the problem today, but it was impossible
for me to do within the limited time allowed for the interview.
Alike therefore for the sake of his health and of the work
for which the Government of India have given me facilities, I re-
quest permission to have frequent interviews with Sheth Jamnalal
Bajaj subject to the restrictions as aforesaid.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (2), Pt. I, p. 399; also G.N. 3871
