451. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
August 26, 1932
CHI. BHAU,
It was a good thing that you sent me Vinoba's interpretation
of those verses. We have no ground for believing that that was the
author's meaning. But as I have explained in the preface to
Anasaktiyoga1, the utterances of poets go on acquiring ever new
and revolutionary meanings, and that is as it should be. Vinoba
has every right to interpret the verses as he has done. If, how-
ever, you are not satisfied with his interpretation, think over the
meaning which I have given. If even that does not satisfy you,
you may give the verses any meaning which appeals to your
reason provided it is not contrary to the chief aim of the Gita.
And if you cannot do even that, you should leave the verses as
ones which you cannot understand just now. If they do not yield
a satisfactory meaning, that will not hinder your study of the
Gita. Your daily programme of work is good. But there is no provi-
sion for rest in it. You should frame a programme which will help
you to get over your headaches. For that, you should stop all
work, except what you do as yajna, and take rest. You should lie
down and put a mud-pack on your head. If you do this for one
week, your headaches are bound to disappear. Also the pills given
by Dr. Talwalkar will produce their effect. Headache is not a
disease by itself, but is a symptom of some other disease or a
warning that something is coming. If you take rest for a few
days now, it will save you from a long rest afterwards. Reduce
your reading. You have provided the time from 5.45 a.m. to
6.30 a.m., 9.15 a.m. to 10.30 a.m., and 11.45 a.m. to 12.30 p.m.
for study of the Gita and reading of newspapers. You may stop
both for the time being and take rest at that time. If that does
not give you relief, reduce carpentry work a little. You should
regard it as your moral duty to banish this disease and should
try to do so by every possible means.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6735. Also C.W. 4478. Courtesy:
Bhau Panse
