372. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
August 26, 1927
DEAR DR. ANSARI,
I had your telegram. I hope you got my reply. Your pub-
lished statement is certainly an improvement on the original. But
I cannot help thinking that it would have been better if you could
have stayed your hand. But I fully recognize that you had no
business to do so when the inner voice told you otherwise.
After having waited all these days, I felt that I should
write just a brief thing for Young India. I send you a copy of the
statement. If you think that I should not publish it, please wire.
This letter should be in your hands at the latest on Monday. If I
receive a wire from you disapproving of the statement, I shall
cancel it. If the letter does not reach you before Tuesday, please
wire direct to the Manager, Young India Office, Ahmedabad, ask-
ing him to withhold publication of the note. I am instructing
the Manager not to publish the note if a countermanding wire is
received from you. So much regarding the publication of my
opinion .
Whether the note is published or not, I feel that the sugges-
tion made in it is the only proper course for you to adopt, unless
of course, you feel strongly that those who enter the Councils
must take up office and otherwise adopt the policy adumbrated in
your statement, and that if you accept the Presidentship, you must
actively work to that end. I recognize that you cannot take up an
impartial attitude, if you must become an avowed propagandist of
your own policy.
Three or four days ago when I had a long telegram from
Motilalji, I thought that in view of your statement, spontaneous
retirement on your part was perhaps the best way of dealing
with the difficult situation that had arisen. But I now feel that
consistently with your views about the necessity of communal unity,
you may not now retire. But I feel equally that if you are to make
a Herculean effort for bringing about unity, you have to forget
Council politics, adopt an attitude of absolute neutrality and act
merely as an impartial chairman regulating proceedings of the
Congress, All India Congress Committee, and the Working Com-
mittee, but not guiding or shaping the political programme and if
you accept my suggestion, I think it would be necessary for you
to make a very brief statement making it clear that whilst you
adhere to the opinion expressed in your statement, you will not
seek to impose that view upon the Congress but that you will
confine your own activity solely to the promotion of communal
unity.
Yours sincerely,
DR. M. A. ANSARI
1, DARYAGANJ, DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12874
