378. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
April 7, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have your letter of 28th March.
I do not mind those who have, under a mistaken notion,
gone away from the Hindu fold, returning when they like. But
what I cannot understand is the occasion for any expense whatso-
ever in connection with their return. For, if they have left the
Hindu fold under a mistaken notion, as soon as they discover
their mistake, it is itself a sufficient prayashchitta, and no further
ceremony is necessary. So much on the merits. Assuming that
there must be some expense which the returning Doms cannot be
expected to pay, why should not the S.U.S. bear the expense or
contribute its quota? I should give my answer in the negative,
because I feel that the S.U.S. has its very defined sphere, namely,
service of the Hindu Harijans. It has no connection with those
who are today not Hindus. Its sphere begins after the return
of the prodigals. The latter is the function of a separate
organization altogether. Here therefore there is no question of
fear, but it is a question of confining ourselves to the original pur-
pose. However limited it may be, the return of the Doms is
a kind of shuddhi, and the difference between the extreme shuddhi
and this modified shuddhi is a difference in degree only. And once
the Society takes up this modified form, it would be most difficult
for it [not] to lend its assistance to the various other shades. However
desirable therefore the return of the Doms to Hinduism may be,
I am quite clear that its encouragement by the Society is outside
the scope laid down at its very foundation.
As to the advertisement of the Titagarh Mills, I am quite
clear that we may not entertain their advertisement in any shape
or form, and if it is a matter of getting cheap paper, it can be
had from many other mills without the slightest difficulty. We
are getting the paper for the English edition at less than market-
price. It was possible to have a still more reduced quotation, but
I thought it would not be proper to ask for further accommodation.
As to the Hindi Harijan, I have already told you that it is
getting on quite satisfactorily, and if you persist in the effort, I
have no doubt that you will make it self-supporting in about a
month's time. You will see the note about it in the ensuing
number of the English Harijan.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40) (3), Pt. IV, pp. 215-6; also S.N. 20861
