92. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Unrevised
PHOENIX,
Wednesday night [March 5, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Your letter calls for a prompt reply. You are in a self-searching
mood and are therefore hypercritical of yourself. I do not mind it at
all if you make good use of this self-examination. But it has its limits.
Carried too far, it makes one morbid and sometimes leads to loss of
mental balance. If you have wasted 42 years then do not waste the
43rd. Let the past be a beaconlight. But you seem to have become
prostrate before the enormity of your own wickedness and so almost
seem to wish to remain in it. But why all this imputation of vice and
weakness to yourself? Are your contemporaries stronger and better ?
I deny. They are more amenable to the voice of Satan than you are.
Have you wasted your life in that you have overcome ten thousand
temptations and succumbed to the ten thousand and first ? By all means
avoid now the second mistake after the ten thousand and first and
take courage from the fact that you had strength to resist ten thousand
attacks. Find out the cause for the stray mistake made and you will
certainly avoid it. The true remedy is to compel yourself into ceaseless
activity. Refuse to believe that you are weak and you will be strong.
Believe continuously that you are wicked and you will sink.
Have you never done a good turn to anybody? Have you never
given a helping hand to a stranger ? Have you never denied yourself
pleasures of life ? Why do you attract Mrs. Mayo to yourself
or Maude ! Why do you gain the ear of Liddle when others fail ?
Why have you been often saved against yourself? I do not suggest
that you may pat yourself on the back for these things. But you must
use these good points to enable you to go forward. A man in the midst
of plague-stricken patients gets frightened and has the plague himself.
You imagine yourself to be in the midst of plague-stricken companions
conjured up by your imagination and may well end by getting the plague
yourself Why not think that these companions are passing phantoms
that will disappear before the other healthy-thought companions you may
create for yourself And after all, this heart-searching is a species of
subtle pride. At the bottom, there is the desire to shine, to be considered,
rather than be, good. If this is not true, you know yourself that you
114
are good because you try to avoid evil. The world, however, knows
only your failures. Are you pining to show the world your successes ?
If you are, you are on the wrong track. But I know that you are not
consciously pining. I do know, however, that you are desirous of showing
to yourself service. But why desire so ? The only legitimate desire
we can have is to perfect ourselves. If we keep that as our goal,
we shall never despond, we shall never weaken; we shall ever go
forward and never go mad. You are made for this better state. For
Heaven's sake do not unmake yourself by thinking evil of yourself as
you have the knack of doing when the mood comes on you.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
I have your books in mind. I am letting West read them.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
