255. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
ALLAHABAD,
February 16, 1931
SUJNA BHAISHRI,
I got your letter and wire. I sent a wire in reply to your
wire. One need not advise the teeth to take care not to hurt the
tongue. I feel like that real mother in the story. Was she not
ready to let go her claim to her son so that he may remain alive?
Surely, women being dragged by their hair and boys being whipp-
ed for no crime cannot make me happy. I am, therefore, eager
to go to any length to secure peace. If, however, that peace would
be like the peace between the wolf and the lamb, rather than ac-
cept it I would let women be dishonoured, the backs of innocent
boys stained with blood, people's homes looted and innocent people
hanged. I always pray to God that I, who am standing at
Death's door, may not put my signature to anything which might
180
prove a trap for the country. I am going to Delhi today with
this prayer in my heart. I do not feel presumptuous like the dog
in the story who was walking under the cart. I know the limits
of my strength. I am but a particle of dust. Even such particle has
a place in God's creation, provided it submits to being trodden on.
Everything is done by that Supreme Potter. He may use me as
He wills. Whether it is victory or defeat, it will be His. There
is, therefore, no question of defeat, or, say, rather, that it is ever
defeat for us. I think I have written enough. I have been able
to write even as much as I have done because today is my silence
day. But all this is by way of preface. My intention in writing
this letter was to request you to persuade the princes to acknow-
ledge the rights of their subjects. They wish to be partners;
will they not, then, agree to give an account of their actions to
the other partners?
How much did Lady Pattani spin and how much khadi did
she sell? What have you done for cow-protection?
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
Give me news of your health. Address: C/o Dr. Ansari.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5917
