85. LETTER TO LORD WAVELL
April 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter of 28th March received by me on the
3rd instant. Please accept my thanks for it.
I take up the general matter first.
You have sent me a frank reply. I propose to reciprocate
your courtesy by being perfectly frank. Friendship to be true
demands frankness even though it may some time appear un-
pleasant. If anything I say offends you, please accept my apo-
logy in advance.
It is a pity that you have refused to deal with important
points raised in my letter.
Your letter is a plea for co-operation by the Congress in
the present administration, and failing that, in planning for the
future. In my opinion, this requires equality between the parties
and mutual trust. But equality is absent and Government dis-
trust of the Congress can be seen at every turn. The result is
that suspicion of Government is universal. Add to this the fact
that Congressmen have no faith in the competence of the Gov-
ernment to ensure India's future good. This want of faith is
based upon bitter experience of the past and present conduct
of the British administration of India. Is it not high time that
you co-operate with the people of India through their elected
representatives instead of expecting co-operation from them?
All this was implied in the August resolution. The sanction
behind the demand in the resolution was not violence, but self-
suffering. Anyone, be he Congressman or other, who acted against
this rule of conduct had no authority to use the Congress name
for his action. But I see that this resolution repels you as it did
Lord Linlithgow. You know that I have joined issue on the
point. I have seen nothing since to alter my view. You have
been good enough to credit me with "intelligence", "experience",
and "acumen". Let me say that all these three have failed to
make me realize that the effect of the Congress resolution "must
be to hamper the prosecution of the war". The responsibility
for what followed the hasty arrests of Congressmen must rest solely
on the Government. For, they invited the crisis, not the authors
of the resolution.
You remind me that you were Commander-in-Chief at the
time. How much better it would have been for all concerned if
confidence in the immeasurable strength of arms had ruled your
action instead of fear of a rebellion! Had the Government stayed
their hand at the time, surely all the bloodshed of those months
would have been avoided. And it is highly likely that the Japa-
nese menace would have become a thing of the past. Unfortunately
it was not to be. And so the menace is still with us, and what
is more, the Government are pursuing a policy of suppression of
liberty and truth. I have studied the latest ordinance about the
detenus, and I recall the Rowlatt Act of 1919. It was properly
called the Black Act. As you know, it gave rise to an unprece-
dented agitation. That Act pales into insignificance before the
series of ordinances that are being showered from the Viceregal
throne. Martial Law in effect governs not one Province as in
1919, but the whole of India. Things are moving from bad to
worse.
You say, "it is clear to me that you had lost confidence in our
ability to defend India and were prepared to take advantage
of our supposed military straits to gain political advantage." I
must deny both the charges. I venture to suggest that you should
follow the golden rule, and withdraw your statement and sus-
pend judgment till you have submitted the evidence in your
possession to an impartial tribunal and obtained its verdict. I
confess that I do not make the request with much confidence.
For, in dealing with Congressmen and others, Government have
combined the prosecutor, judge and jailor in the same person
and thus made proper defence impossible on the part of the ac-
cused. Judgments of courts are being rendered nugatory by
fresh ordinances. No man's freedom can be said to be safe in
this extraordinary situation. You will probably retort that it is
an exigency of the war. I wonder !
As I visualize India today, it is one vast prison containing
four hundred million souls. You are its sole custodian. The
Government prisons are prisons within this prison. I agree with
you that whilst you hold the views expressed in your letter under
reply, the proper place for one like me is a Government prison.
And unless there is a change of heart, view and policy on the
part of the Government, I am quite content to remain your
prisoner. Only I hope you will listen to the request made by
me through the proper channels to remove me and my fellow-
prisoners to some other prison where the cost of our detention
need not be even one tenth of what it is today.
As to my complaint about Mr. Butler's statement and later
the Home Secretary's, I have received two letters from the Home
Department in reply. I am sorry to say, they have appeared to
me highly unsatisfactory. They ignore patent facts, and betray
an obstinate refusal to face truth even on a wholly non-political
issue. My correspondence with the Home Department contin-
ues. I invite your attention to it, if you can spare the time
and are interested in the subject.
I am glad and thankful that Shri Mirabai's (Miss Slade's)
case is being considered in the light of what I say about her in
my letter.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
VICEROY'S CAMP
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 264-6, and Correspondence
with Mr. Gandhi, pp. 124-. Also C.W. 10503. Courtesy: India Office
Library
