221. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
DELHI,
Kartik Sud 8 [November 1, 1919]
CHI. MATHURADAS,
I have your letter. How old was your uncle? Had I met
him? Is your aunt alive? I proceed on the assumption that you
are not frightened of death. The young and the old, all die
only when their time comes. All do their part during their
physical existence and then depart. The soul residing in the
body of a child may be enlightened and that in the body of an
old man may be wrapped in ignorance. In such a situation,
whose death should we mourn?
I am abandoning altogether the idea of asking you here.
There are many difficulties. But I should like you to take up
the responsibility for the Swadeshi work. I also wish to arrange
that the letters coming for me at Ahmedabad should be sent
on to you. I cannot attend to them while I am on tour. And
duties at the Ashram have been distributed among the inmates.
I wish you to see to the smallest details. You should only consult
me. In other words, you should shoulder the chief burden for
Swadeshi. Consider this matter and send me your reply at
Lahore. I am going to Lahore via Amritsar today. If you agree
to take up this work I shall send instructions that a few letters
lying at the Ashram should be sent on to you.
I am keeping very busy here. You will find some reports
in the Navajivan. Let me know how the work of spinning-classes,
etc., is progressing there.
1 The year has been inferred from the contents. Gandhiji left Delhi for
Lahore on November 1.
2 For the series of reports about Punjab, vide Vol. XVI, pp. 261-3, 282-6,
296-302, 312-6, 318-26, 328-32, 345-9, 512-.
Has the poet Shyam arrived there? How is the work at
Nara-Narayana going on?
I have sent a telegram to Bhai Umar concerning the da-
mage at Dacca. I have already written to you about it. What
has he done about it?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
