130. LETTER TO M. MUJEEB
CAMP BRINDABAN,
November 7, 1929
MY DEAR MUJEEB 1 ,
I had a chat with Dr. An sari about you in Delhi and Dr.
Ansari undertook to speak to your father himself and ensure your
allowance from him. He asked me not to worry about you. In
Aligarh I made it a special point to speak to your brother. It
was there that I discovered that he was Sohaila's husband. And
Sohaila to me is like my own daughter. Such is the intimacy I have
the privilege to enjoy with the Tyabji family. I had therefore
much less hesitation to speak to your brother than I would have
had without a knowledge of this relationship. To my agreeable
surprise I found your brother to be most receptive and reasonable.
I did not need to argue with him at all. As soon as I mentioned
the matter he said he would do as I asked him to and he agreed
that you should be supported by your father and brothers. He
seemed to be quite proud of you and proud of the fact that you
were serving the Jamia. Sohaila was present during the whole
of the conversation. I mentioned Rs. 150 as that was the sum you
thought would be enough for you. Devdas just now tells me that
your brother told him subsequent to the conversation with me
that Rs. 150 might not be enough for you. I hope however that
you will so regulate your life as to make Rs. 150 pay your way. If
you are now restored to health completely I would like you to go
to Delhi at once and take up your work. Your brother asked me
to write to your father which I am doing today.
I must not omit one thing your brother wanted me to speak
to you about. He told me that you did not listen to him in any-
thing. I said in reply that such could not be the case unless it
was on matters of vital principle. Anyway you know exactly what
Habib means. I would like you to write to him if you at all feel
up to it a sweet letter. I must confess that by his humility and
yet dignified bearing he captured me entirely.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 15749
