45. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE TRAIN,
[Before June 11, 1911]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Nothing has pained me so much in my leaving Johannesburg at
the present juncture as your physical and mental condition. If I could
have avoided going to Natal, I would certainly have done so, if only
so that I could be with you and exercise the privilege and the duty
of a friend to nurse you and encourage you. But, I think, to leave
for Phoenix was a higher duty. The struggle demands it.
Had I known the comfort (physical) under which I am writing this
I would certainly have pressed for your coming with me and that 3rd-
class. The coach I am in is a corridor, 3rd-class, for well-dressed 3rd-
class passengers. It is truly more comfortable than the 1st-class on
these trains. It is cleaner. It is cushioned, has a lavatory and sleeping
accommodation and I am the only passenger. Our miserable false pride
often keeps us from so many good things of the world. You know
how necessary lavatory accommodation is for me. Here I have
everything added to the pleasure of travelling 3rd-class. And I suppose
no European or other passenger would want me to leave this. However
we shall see. When you come I strongly advise you to take a 3rd-
class ticket. I assure you that a few of us doing this will be able to
do a great deal for 3rd-class passengers. The moral effect will be great.
It will be good discipline for you. You must have noticed too that it
attracted no attention at the station. It is only our own false pride and
self-consciousness which make so many worries and troubles.
The physical health requires very great attention just now. What
I have suggested is, I am sure, the best remedy. The seat of the trouble
is undoubtedly the stomach. But it has been accentuated by your mental
condition. You are a true man. Any false chord, therefore, shakes your
whole system. Your affection is almost divine. You have quite unjustly
transferred it all to me. And now you find your idol not satisfying you.
This hurts you as if a dagger had gone through you. But why? Who
am I ? If your affection for me weakens, why suffer agony? It is
a passing phase. Let the idol be broken. The residue will be a purer
1 From the contents it appears that the letter was written before the item
following.
54
thing. Nor need there be any worry about the practice. Take what
work you can with calmness. You will give up the profession
automatically when the time is ripe. As Tolstoy says it is a great thing
to create the proper mental condition. The rest comes as a matter of
course. The result does not follow when a man deceives himself or
others. If I always hanker after doing a thing, I can only end by doing
it. This is the law of nature. But if I only pretend that I want to do
something which I really do not, then I end by not doing it. I am a
false coin and no change can be had from such a coin.
Whatever Call is, do not worry about him or my affection for him
- I cannot do otherwise than love him. He has really some very good
points in him. I am sure that you too would like him one day. But
what can it matter either way?
I shall certainly expect a letter from you every day. You will really
do me a favour by writing. I shall be always anxious otherwise.
Yours sincerely.
UPPER HOUSE
[PS.]
I hope the room will be given up early. All surplus clothing should
be sold and sent to Phoenix.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
