265. LETTER TO V. J. PATEL
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
August 1, 1926
DEAR VITHALBHAI,
I have your letter and further cheque for Rs. 1,625.
In the circumstances mentioned by you, I shall refrain from
publishing the correspondence. It may be published later as
you suggest when the heat of the elections is over. When the time
1 Acknowledging Gandhiji's letter of July 10, and referring to a remark
of B. F. Bharucha, Jayakar had written on July 27: "I never remarked to
him that you had grown cool towards me. I have never experienced any
coolness but the warmest behaviour whenever we have met. I do certainly
feel that, not having the political following of Das or Motilal, I do not count
with you in that sense, notwithstanding the personal tenderness which has always
existed between us. But is this not only stating the truth?" (S.N. 11323)
2 Vithalbhai Patel acknowledged receipt of Gandhiji's letters of July 25
on July 28. He observed that he proposed to seek re-election to the Assembly,
on the expiration of his current term, "with a view to enable the Assembly
to establish a convention similar to the one which obtains in the United
Kingdom. If the Assembly chooses to re-elect me, I propose to continue the
same arrangement regarding my contribution from my salary for a period of
three years. I am not sure about the wisdom of publishing our correspondence
at this stage. Such publication, I am afraid, is bound to be construed in
some quarters, as an attempt on my part to influence the election in my favour.
You are probably aware that I am, unfortunately, not without mean political
rivals who are always ready to twist and turn anything that they can get
hold of to my prejudice, regardless of the effect of such a course on national
interests. Don't you think that in the circumstances it is better to delay the
publication of the correspondence till January next when the election will be
over, and it will be definitely known whether I am out of office or whether
a term of three years is ensured to me? There will not then be the slightest
for publication is ripe, you will send me the draft duly corrected
or perhaps new circumstances will then have arisen for a new draft.
Yours sincerely,
HON'BLE V. J. PATEL
"SUKHDALE"
SIMLA
From a photostat: S.N. 11326
