255. LETTER TO J. A. GUIDER
LABURNUM ROAD,
BOMBAY,
May 5, 1919
DEAR MR. GUIDER1,
Dame Rumour reports you to have been displeased with your
staff for their inability to trace the educated men behind the tragedy
at Ahmedabad, although I was able to do so. The same lady
further has it that you interpret "educated Indians" to mean only
Vakils, Barristers, Doctors, etc. I am, therefore, being torn to
pieces by friends and others for having created much mischief and
caused needless suffering by use of unguarded language. Naturally,
I have to take the consequences of my words as I have of my
deeds. I do not know how far the rumours reported to me are true,
but I would like to observe that the word I have used in the original
is bhanela, and bhanela by no means means only a "highly edu-
cated" Indian. For me, bhanela means all those who have recei-
ved any education whatsoever, whether vernacular or English.
For instance, the anonymous author of an inflammatory vernacular
poem which I have lately seen I would undoubtedly consider to
be bhanela, i.e., educated and it is exactly in that sense that I
have used the word "educated" in the translation of my speech. As
a matter of fact, if I had received evidence as to the complicity
of highly educated men, I would certainly have not hesitated to make
use of language to show that I meant such men. My attention
was directed yesterday to Mr. Pratt's speech at Ahmedabad wherein
he referred to the complicity of educated leaders. I take it that
he had not my speech in mind when he made the remark.
I may also add that "by organized manner" and "design",
I mean this: Some educated man or men believing in the efficacy
of violence for securing redress saw the temper of the mob on
Friday, immediately seized the situation and directed operations
through gang leaders and that is exactly what I know from evi-
dence before me happened on that awful day. You can see there-
fore that it is possible for these men to remain absolutely concealed.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat : S.N. 6590
