273. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[Before January 25, 1920]
The following is the extension of a cable received by me
from Mr. Aswat, Chairman of the British Indian Association,
Transvaal, regarding the Krugersdorp Municipality V. Dadoo,
Ltd., referred to in the memorandum presented to the Union
Premier:
The Court has set aside the transfers. It held that the formation of
Indian companies for the purpose of acquiring fixed property is illegal. It
declared transfers so obtained were fraudem legis, saying that legislation
cannot be laughed at (Section 130). The Gold Law was intended to pre-
vent indiscriminate mingling of Coloured [persons and] Europeans.
Further in the judgment in Potchefstroom, under the Local Ordinance
9, 1912, the magistrate upholds the Council's contention that the Asiatic's
presence causes annoyance and detriment to European commerce and
on that ground holds Indians as undesirable. Both judgments mean
the ruination of the community. Appeals noted. Europeans tendering
evidence before the local Government Commission are specialising
on the Indian question, urging complete autonomy for municipalities.
Make representations to the proper quarters immediately. The Associa-
tion prays to hold meetings throughout India. New Act 37 gives no
protection even to old companies and traders. The position is most
precarious. Strenuous action is imperative for the sake of saving the
community.
This cablegram cannot fail to disconcert those who have at
all studied the South African question, for, as Mr. Aswat says, it
is calculated to undo even the little that the new Act was claimed
to accomplish. Dadoo, Ltd., is an old-established Indian com-
pany in Krugersdorp. It holds extensive landed property in that
township, and the meaning of the cablegram is that the transfers
registered in the name of the company of landed properties are il-
legal, because, as the Court seems to have contended, the transac-
tion was in fraud of the law and that legislation could not be
laughed at. I wish to say nothing regarding the propriety of the
judgment or the reasoning on which it seems to be based.
Thousands of pounds' worth of landed property is registered
in the names of companies in which Indians enjoy a dominating
position. If the judgment stands, everyone of these companies
will become dispossessed of the land they have occupied for
years, land which they have acquired openly and under legal
advice and which has been registered in the Land Registry Office.
With the full knowledge of all the circumstances by the regis-
trars, and only last year, when the new disabling Act was passed
by the South African Legislature, we were told that the holding
of land in this manner, prior to July 31 last, would not be affected
by the legislation, and in justification of the measure, we were
told by all the speakers in the Union Assembly that the legislation
would protect existing companies and mortgages. The judgment
in question comes, therefore, as an eye-opener. I venture to sub-
mit that, even if the judgment is sound, it evidently frustrates the
intention of the Legislature and deprives Indians of rights they
have enjoyed without question for years past. I hold that the
impending sin must be averted, even if it is to be done by
special legislation, as was done in 1914 in connection with the
legal recognition of Indian marriages.
The second point raised in the cablegram refers to a magis-
terial judgment, and it means that Indians as Indians may be de-
clared as undesirable, not on ground of insanitation or immora-
lity, but because they compete with the European traders to their
detriment. If this doctrine were to hold good, not a single
Indian can engage in any trade whatever in South Africa.
Sir Benjamin Robertson will presently sail for South Africa.
His diplomatic talent and his trusteeship will be taxed to the utmost
before he secures, not a full status for the Indians in South Africa,
but even a tolerably respectable footing for them to secure, i.e.,
the right to trade and own landed property without restriction,
save such as are common to all as well in theory as in practice.
One can only hope that the Government of India will speak to the
Union Government in no uncertain terms on this question, and
that the public and the Press will strengthen their hands.
India, 27-2-1920
