168. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
BOMBAY,
December 19, 1901
TO
THE EDITOR
"THE TIMES OF INDIA"
BOMBAY
SIR,
The Indians in South Africa are eagerly waiting to see in
what direction the Indian public are going to help them in the
struggle which they are carrying on for existence in that sub-
continent against awful odds. The East India Association has, as
you are aware, sent up a strongly-worded memorial to Lord
George Hamilton. Sir Mancherjee Bhownaggree has been rendering
a most useful service to the cause of the sufferers. In season and
out of season, within the House of Commons and without, by
pen and voice, he has been asking for, not without success, a
redress of our grievances. You, Sir, have uniformly assisted us,
and so the whole of the public, both Indian and Anglo-Indian.
The Congress has been passing resolutions year after year sym-
pathizing with us. But, in my humble opinion, something more is
required. I have been asked by the leading Indians in South
Africa to suggest a representative deputation to the Viceroy,
similar to the one that some years ago waited on Mr. Chamber-
lain, and which was promoted by the late Sir W. W. Hunter.
It is evidently necessary to strengthen the hands of the Viceroy
as well as the workers in England. The authorities here and in
Downing Street are not—cannot be—unsympathetic.
The Europeans in South Africa are doing all they can to
bring pressure to bear upon the Colonial Office. They want abso-
lute power to legislate as they will against the British Indians. A
deputation, therefore, backed if possible by public meetings, can-
not fail to have its effect. Let there be no mistake as to the
real situation. Mr. Chamberlain has, let us hope, once for all
laid it down that he would not allow an affront to be placed
upon millions of His Majesty's subjects in the shape of special
disabilities on the Indians. Natal has, therefore, sought to carry
out its object by indirect methods, e.g., Immigration Restriction
and Dealers' Licenses Acts, in theory applicable to all, but in
practice mostly enforced against the emigrants from India.
In the Cape Colony, the legislators propose to impose restric-
tions similar to those in Natal.
In the Transvaal and the Orange River Colonies, very dras-
tic anti-Indian laws are in force. In the former, the Indian can-
not hold land, must live and trade in Locations only, cannot
walk on footpaths, etc. The latter he cannot even enter, except
under special permission, and then only as a domestic servant or
labourer. Unlike the two old Colonies, which enjoy complete
self-government, the newly annexed territories are under the direct
control of the Colonial Office; and it is there the question is most
pressing. Mr. Chamberlain, in answer to a question put by Sir
Mancherjee, has given an answer which, though worded in a
friendly spirit, is far from satisfactory. He evidently does not
wish at once to put the pen through the laws inherited from
the late Republics. Lord Milner has been charged with the task of
considering what alterations should be made in those laws. This,
therefore, is the time for India to assert her position as an inte-
gral part of the British Empire, and to claim for her sons in
South Africa the full rights of a British citizen. The question is
admittedly of Imperial importance. Are the British Indians, in
the words of the late Sir W. W. Hunter, as soon as they leave
India, to enjoy the full status of British subjects or not? The
answer to that question would, to a very great extent, depend
upon the action of the public in India. Even the Colonies would
not care to disregard, especially at a time when the Imperial
wave is passing throughout the length and breadth of the British
Empire, a unanimous, emphatic, temperate and continuous ex-
pression of the public opinion of India.
May I, then, on behalf of the Indian settlers in South Africa,
appeal to you and your contemporaries to help us in the desired
direction? I would venture also to ask your contemporaries, if
possible, to copy this letter.
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 20-12-1901
