516. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday morning, December 4/9, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter yesterday evening. They pass on the packets
to me and post them to you with great care. It seems that the
packets are delayed in posting by a day.
The doctor wishes to come during Diwali. Does that mean
after nine months? Or does he mean the Christian Diwali? If
he means the Hindu Diwali, a great many things will have hap-
pened by then.
Mahalakshmi and Madhavji are very conscious of the deep
significance of a pledge. Hence both of them should be pained by
a violation of even the letter of a pledge. But we should be satis-
fied if everyone keeps a pledge as he or she understands it and
to the best of his or her ability, and it seems that most people
do so. You should keep them vigilant.
Do what you think best about Giriraj. Since you will have
to bear the burden, I will accept your decision as the only proper
one. I know that Krishna will always have his own way. If he
keeps good health, I think he is likely to do great service in
future.
I believe the same about Purushottam. Let him write to
me from time to time.
Pyarelal is improving quite well in health. I hope it will
not go down while he is with me. His being with me is like a
goat being near a wolf. A goat tied in front of a wolf will grow
thinner every day even if you feed it on the finest grass. Some-
thing of that sort used to happen to Pyarelal. I hope that is not
so now. I blame myself a good deal for what used to be. Let us
see what God wills. He will get what he wants by way of food.
At present, he takes milk and curds and eats bread, vegetables
and papaiya.
I had not imagined that Parnerkar would mismanage things
as badly as he has done. He is a worker with pure motives,
but it seems that he cannot cope with work. You did very well
in being strict with him and getting the accounts in order. I hope
he will take rest now and improve his health. Should we assume
that the business at Bidaj is running at a loss? If you think it neces-
sary to reduce the scale or wind up any of our activities, do so.
Anyone who works in the spirit of non-attachment soon discovers the
measure of his ability. He will never be too eager to do things and
never undertake anything beyond his capacity. Really speaking,
he does not have to seek work. Work comes to him unsought, and
he does his best to do full justice to it. To the world he seems a man
who has no work, for his face betrays no anxiety and he never com-
plains about the burden of work. In fact he carries no burden.
He entrusts his burdens to Lord Krishna and dances as He wills.
Jethalal had written to me saying that he would send a report
of the work done. I have not received the report. I understand
what you say about Kamalabehn Lundi. That is what marriage
is. The desire for it has its source in lust and attachment. Marriage
is called a sacrament because it is a means of controlling lust.
That is how it was conceived, at any rate. But this intention is
now forgotten, and so for most people marriage has become a
means of self-indulgence. I will write to Gangabehn and Nanibehn.
I have been watching your experiment in diet. Give me
detailed information from time to time. It will certainly bene-
fit you if you eat only a small quantity of groundnuts. You may
not even need them when you have milk and curds. There is cer-
tainly some truth in the advice which research-workers now give
against eating many articles at a time. All the foods are not simul-
taneously digested in the same manner and to the same degree
and, therefore, a mixture of too many of them disturbs the sto-
mach. The description of compassion was very good indeed. You
say that you have sent the printed copies of the discourses; that
may also mean that they are being dispatched now. I have not
received them.
Friday morning
I have given all details about my health and my diet in the
letter to Kakasaheb, and so I do not repeat them here. I had
assumed that you would send for Keshu and hear his complaint,
and that was why I did not write about it in my letter. But I give
a summary now as far as I remember what it was.
1. You get angry with him without any reason.
2. Once he tried to explain matters to you, but you did not
listen to him and shouted at him so loudly that all could
hear you and you said many improper things.
3. You are very partial to Kusum, Navin and Dhiru and do
not even listen to any complaints against them.
4. You have taken away from him the management of the
factory without any reason.
5. Damodardas left the Ashram out of disgust at your partiality.
I have written to Keshu and told him that just as I used
to be under Maganlal's spell and saw no faults in him, so am I
under yours and see no fault in you, and will not, therefore, be
ready to believe anything about you which I have not myself
observed. I, however, advised him to open his heart to you and
tell you everything. He merely said in reply that he was not satis-
fied by my letter. After that I have kept quiet since he was to have
a talk with Mahadev. Now you should, yourself, call him and show
to him his complaints which I have described. If I have misunder-
stood him, he will correct my mistake. If I have left out anything,
he should add that. You may then try to satisfy him if you can.
I have written to him and advised him to take up some work, no
matter what it is. I have told Kakasaheb about him. I have adv-
ised him, too, that he should see Kakasaheb. I have no doubt
that it will do him no good whatever to remain without work.
If Harilal Desai wants to take up service in the Ashram and
if you think there will be no harm in giving him a job do give
him one. He is unmethodical in work but he is a young man of
transparent sincerity of purpose. I think it will be worth while
having him as one of our workers. Did you read the long letter
which . . .1 wrote to me? He will produce no effect on me un-
less he tells me something concrete observed by himself. I believe
. . .2 to be a pure-hearted girl. . . .3 has also produced on me the
impression of being pure in heart and one who would speak the
truth. I had a happy experience of him also during the march.
He had spread the fragrance of his character in the Kashi Vidya-
pith too. It is true that he has been guiding . . .4 and trying
to raise her level, but I have seen in him nothing but the attitude
of a brother and teacher.
Silence Day afternoon
Try to find soon a piece of leather to repair the soles of the san-
dals. I find that the soles of the new pair, too, are none too strong.
Signs of its wearing out could be seen today. About my health
and diet, you will find something in the letter to Mirabehn and a
little in the letter to Kakasaheb too. Hence I say nothing here.
These days I seem to be able to observe small things with
greater attention, and so I cannot help noticing the character of
the handwriting in the different letters received in the packets sent
by you. I am trying to improve my bad handwriting. You must
have observed this in every letter of mine. Bad handwriting is of
course a form of discourtesy. Discourtesy in every form is vio-
lence, but bad handwriting is direct violence too. Anything which
causes unnecessary pain to our neighbour or to any living creature
is nothing but violence. I have twice as much experience as others
of what pain and inconvenience are caused to the reader by
bad handwriting.
I have, in the first place, the experience of
having to read letters written in bad writing by others and also
the experience of the pain caused to others by my handwriting.
My aim in saying this is to advise all inmates of the Ashram,
men and women, boys and girls, to take great care to write a
good hand. This requires no time but only some thought. One
must have love for the other party. Let all of them observe the
following rules:
1. They should leave enough space between the words.
2. They should avoid flourishes in the letters.
3. They should never leave a letter half-written.
4. They should not let the letters flow into one another.
5. As far as possible, they should write to no one in pencil.
If they follow these rules, they will certainly be able to make
their handwriting legible. Haste signifies attachment. Let no
one write in haste. Everyone should be content with what he or
she can write slowly and patiently.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 83 letters today, but No. 36 seems to have been
omitted and so, really speaking, there are 80 only. The 81st is
for the brother of the late Mangaldas Sheth. Have it delivered
to him immediately.
The separate sheets of the discourses are included in the total
number.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
1 For the text of the discourse which followed, vide Vol. XLIX, "Letters
on the Gita"— Ch. V.
