553. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 3, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I got your letter yesterday afternoon. It is now 5.15 a.m.
We have had the prayer, then the honey, hot water and a pinch
of soda. Then we three together prepared my fruit, viz., two
musambis which Mahadev peeled, two santras which I peeled and
juice of a pomegranate which Sardar extracted. I added a pinch
of salt to the juice and put the musambi and the santra pulp into
the juice. They two went out for a stroll and I ate the salad.
It was then 5.15. And I began this letter. The left-hand writing
is by way of change and rest for the right hand.
Writing of the fruit salad, I give you my discovery. I find
that fruit to produce the greatest effect should be taken by itself
and on an empty stomach. You might almost say, the same law
applies to juicy fruit that applies to opening medicines. In fact
all food should be taken as medicine. The Sanskrit for food and
medicine is a common word aushadh. Kisen will explain this more
fully to you. Medicine need not be nasty to taste; nor is it taken
for the pleasure of the palate. Food should be treated exactly
in the same manner, i.e., suitable food in suitable proportion in
suitable manner and at suitable times. Here I interrupted the
writing for the morning walk and now resume at 6.45.
There are many books on the life of the Prophet. The first
place must be given to Amir Ali's Spirit of Islam. Then there is
335
Washington Irving's Mahomet and His Successors, a very well written
work. Carlyle's Mahomet as Hero is also well worth reading.
I am glad you have Kisen with you. She should get the most
out of you and you of her. I wonder if she got my letter in
reply to hers. I sent it to the address she gave. Whether she
received it or not, tell her never to write a bad hand whether there
is hurry or not. This lesson everyone should learn from my mis-
fortune. Bad writing and bad everything is truly himsa. We have
a rare opportunity of learning the virtue of patience in prison
life.
I think your comparison between Jesus and Muhammed is
striking and partly true. You have heard the saying comparisons
are odious. In my opinion all revolutionaries are reformers and
all reformers are revolutionaries. Both were great teachers and
each was in response to his age and its requirements. And each
made a unique contribution to the advance of mankind. They
have an equal place in the universal pantheon. Your description
of yourself as an ashramite is perfect. You do not deny Christ
but you affirm yourself as an ashramite who denies no teacher.
We are not concerned much with the interpretations of the diffe-
rent teachers. Each fashioned his or her own.
I am sending by registered post Amir Ali's book. When you
have finished it, post it to Raihana. It belongs to the Tyabjee's.
Love from us all to you and Kisen.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6248. Courtesy: Mirabehn
