407. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
September 26, 1936
BHAI MUNSHI,
Kakasaheb's acquaintance with you has been growing and
he is having the opportunity of reading your works. He read
Prithvivallabh and has pressed me to read it and give my opinion
on it. I read it four days ago and now send my opinion direct
to you. Kakasaheb will read it. You had already sent me some
of your books when I was in jail where, however, I could read
none of them. You had even then asked for my opinion. I read
Prithvivallabh with interest. Not one character appealed to me.
I did not at all wish to be like Munj. Why so? It would not
be quite in the fitness of things for you to say that you delineate
the characters as they are. Some at least in this wide and varied
world are likely to be noble, free from hypocrisy, loyal. Mrinal
324
you reduced to pieces, and poor Vilas melted like wax before
Rasanidhi. Could it be that men are so cunning and that even
a forty-year-old, homely and self-restrained woman would fall for
a man's love talk and suggestive gestures?
What does a man
read for? For mere enjoyment? And that too so low? Kalidasa
wrote nothing of the kind. Shakespeare made no such impression
on me. From them I learn something. Why not from you? Pers-
onally you appear to me nice and pleasant. I am drawn to you.
I have hopes of getting much from you both. How did I fail to
get a glimpse of your personality in Prithvivallabh which is regard-
ed-or isn't it-your best work? I have little hope that Kaka can
solve this puzzle for me. You alone can do it. There is of course
no question in this which calls for a reply immediately.
Now allow me to have a little fun. Your last sentence is
somewhat like this: Crushed under the elephant's foot, Munj's
body lay flat like a rotlo. The word rotlo was all right; but did it
ever occur to you that the body could not be turned into a rotlo?
It may do to say 'turned into chhundo The body can be turned
into murabbo into churna4, but it can never be turned into a ratlo.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7606. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
