65. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 3, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
I have read the two renderings you have sent me of the first
verse of the morning prayer. For use and perhaps conveying
the meaning, I prefer my rendering. If you find any obscurity
anywhere, please tell me. The second I sent you by the last
mail. Here is the third.
"In the early morning I bow to Him who is beyond darkness,
who is like the sun, who is perfect, ancient, called Purushottam
(the best among men) and in whom (through the veil of darkness)
we fancy the whole universe as appearing even as (in darkness)
we imagine a rope to be a snake."
The idea is that the universe is not real in the sense of be-
ing permanent, it is neither a thing to be hankered after nor feared
because it is supposed to be God's creation. As a matter of fact,
it is a creation of our imagination even as the snake in the rope is.
The real universe like the real rope is there. We perceive ei-
ther when the veil is lifted and darkness is gone—compare "And
with the morn, those angel faces smile which I have loved long
since and lost awhile." The three verses go together and I think
are Shankar's composition. You do know of Shankar, do you not?
Five more days and I shall have finished the translation of the
preface. My suggestion is that I continue to send you the verses and
the bhajans with such comments as then occur to me. You should
for your own satisfaction, with the help of whoever comes your
way, translate the weekly notes on the Gita. The plan I am now
following is well thought out, i.e., that of looking through the trans-
lation of the whole Gita in the light of my rendering and trans-
lating the notes. The attempt may lead to something good of
which we have no knowledge today. If I begin the translation of
the weekly notes, the above plan may fall through altogether. It
would not be right. Of my food experiment, you will learn every-
thing from Narandas. The assurance, that the moment I find it
necessary I shall revert to milk, should remove all cause for anxiety.
By the travelling wheel I suppose, you mean the box wheel of
the Pratishthan type. Whatever it is, your speed is certainly quite
good. Let the Gandiv disappear from your mind unless Kaka
has something to show. . . .1
I was sorry to learn about Romain Rolland's health. Do please
send him my love and tell him I often think of him and pray that
he may be long spared in the service of humanity. . . .2
Love.
BAPU
Bapu's Letters to Mira, pp. 146-
1 & 2 Omissions as in the source
