44. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[After March 14, 1915]
BHAISHRI 5 M-2,
You are right in what you think about non-violence. Its
essentials are daya akrodha4, aman etc. Satyagraha is based on
non-violence. We saw this clearly in Calcutta and came to the
conclusion that we should include it among our vows. The thought
led to the further conclusion that we must observe all the yamas 6
and that, if we do so by way of vows, we perceive the inner signi-
ficance of non-violence. In my talks with hundreds of men here
I place the various yamas above everything else.
f~l1'u'np:pfT'l1'Sf~<:"i ~m ;sr;::r~ ;::r '+I~~Ffit 1
If, f;:m;:r3l1T11 <n f;:p:n:f~~ f<f"fl19fa- a:rT~ 'fit 117
I remembered this verse in Calcutta on this occasion and
pondered deeply over it. I am absolutely clear in my mind that
India's deliverance and ours will be achieved through the obser-
vance of these vows.
In observing the vow of non-hoarding, the main thing to be
borne in mind is not to store up anything which we do not require.
For agriculture, we may keep bullocks, if we use them, and the
equipment required for them. Where there is a recurring danger
of famine, we shall no doubt store food-grains. But we shall always
ask ourselves whether bullocks and food-grains are in fact needed.
We are to observe all the yamas in thought as well, so that we shall
grow more secure in them from day to day and come to think of
fresh things to renounce. Renunciation has no limit to it. The
more we renounce, the more shall we grow in the knowledge of the
atman If the mind continues to move towards renunciation of the
desire for hoarding and if in practice we give up hoarding as far
as it is physically possible to do, we shall have kept the vow of
non-hoarding.
The same is true about non-stealing. Non-hoarding refers to
stocking of things not needed. Non-stealing refers to the use of
such things. If I need only one shirt to cover myself with but use
two, I am guilty of stealing one from another. For, a shirt
which could have been of use to someone else does not belong to me.
If five bananas are enough to keep me going, my eating a sixth one is
a form of theft. Suppose we have a stock of 50 limes, thinking that
among us all we would need them. I need only two, but take three
because there are so many. This is theft.
Such unnecessary consumption is also a violation of the vow of
non-violence. If, with the ideal of non-stealing in view, we reduce
our consumption of things, we would grow more generous. If
we do so, actuated by the ideal of non-violence, we would grow more
compassionate. In assuring, as it were, every animal or living thing
that it need have no fear on our account, we entertain compassion
—love—for it. A man who entertains such love will not find any
living being inimical to him, not even in thought. That is the
most emphatic conclusion of the shastras and my experience as well.
The principle underlying all these vows is truth. By deceiving
oneself, one may refuse to recognize an act of stealing or hoarding
as such. Hence, by taking careful thought we can ensure at every
step that truth prevails. Whenever we are in doubt whether a
particular thing should be stored or not, the simple rule is not to
store it. There is no violation of truth in renunciation. When in
doubt about the wisdom of speaking, it is the duty of a man who has
taken the vow of truth not to speak.
I want all of you to take only such vows as each one feels in-
clined to, of his own free will. I always feel that vows are necessary.
But anyone may take them only when he himself feels the need
and take only such as he wants to.
Ramchandra may have been a man of great prowess, performed
innumerable feats and killed hundreds of thousands of monsters, but
no one would think of him today if he had not had such devoted
men as Lakshmana and Bharata to follow him. The point is, if
Ramchandra had had no more than extraordinary strength as a
fighter, his greatness would have been forgotten after a while.
There have been many brave warriors who killed monsters as he
did. There has been none among them whose fame and greatness
are sung in every home. Ramchandra possessed power of some
other kind which he could induce into Lakshmana and Bharata
and in virtue of which the latter became great men of austerities.
Singing in praise of their austerities, Tulsidasji asked who else, if
Bharata had not been born and practised austerities unattainable
even by great sages, would have turned an ignorant man like him
to Rama? This is as much as to say that Lakshmana and Bharata
were the guardians of Rama's fame, that is, of his teaching. More-
over, austerities are not everything. For, if Lakshmana went
without food or sleep for 14 years, so did Indrajit But the latter
did not know the true significance of austerities which Lakshmana
had learnt from Rama; on the contrary, he possessed a nature which
inclined him to misuse the power earned through austerities and so
came to be known merely as a monster and suffered defeat at the
hands of Lakshmana, the man of self-mastery, a lover of God and
seeker of deliverance. In the same way, however great the ideal of
Gurudev if there is no one to implement that ideal, it will remain
hidden in the profound darkness of the ages. Conversely, if there
are any to put it into practice, it will spread its light multiplied
many times over. The steps which one has to climb in order to
practise an ideal constitute tapas. One should realise, therefore,
how very necessary it is to bring tapas—discipline—into the life of
children.
[From Gujarati]
Gandhijini Sadhana; also Mahatma Gandhijina Patro
