555. LETTER TO U. GOPALA MENON
November 3, 1932
MY DEAR GOPALA MENON,
I was not able before now to acknowledge your letter. As
soon as I was in a position, the first thing I did was to send you
a telegram which I hope you received in due time.
I am glad
you have written at length. It has enabled me to get an idea
of the difficulties that face us. But this movement is taken up in
God's name. He is our guide and I am positive that if we do
not lose faith in Him, He will remove all difficulties in our path and
if we would conduct ourselves in the spirit of service we would
not be uncharitable towards those who may oppose the reforms
nor should we be uncharitable to the Zamorin. After all we do
not know his difficulties. We must therefore step into his shoes and
look at the position even from his point of view. I have always
regard to visitors and correspondence on matters strictly limited to removal
of untouchability. They also recognize that if Gandhi's activities in this
matter are to be fully effective, there can be no restriction on pub-
licity. As they do not wish to interpose obstacles to Mr. Gandhi's efforts in
connection with the problem of untouchability, they are removing all restric-
tions on visitors, correspondence and publicity in regard to matters which in
Mr. Gandhi's own words have no reference to civil disobedience and are
strictly limited to the removal of untouchability. They note that Mr. Gandhi
contemplates the presence of officials at the interviews, and inspection then
and there of correspondence, should Government at any time consider that
such procedure is desirable."-Government of India, Home Department, Poli-
tical, File No. 31/95/32
51-22
found that this is the quickest method of reaching a goal. We may
not take our gaze off the goal for one single minute but in pursu-
ing it we may not judge those who do not see eye to eye with us.
After all, as you very properly say, we have but ourselves to die
in the attempt to deliver our suppressed brethren from the yoke.
Whatever happens, therefore, the people who are for the reform
must remain strictly non-violent in every sense of the term. You
are anxious to have Pandit Malaviyaji in your midst. Of course
he would be a tower of strength if he could come, but his life
has been a life of dedication. There are therefore many calls on
him. He has aged, he is weak in body though his mind is as
vigorous as ever. I know that he will come if he can at all spare
himself. But it will be the glory of the workers of Kerala if he
can be saved the long journey to the South. However, if you think
that his presence is indispensable you will press your suit and I
will certainly write to him.
I like your idea of a sister being sent from the North to work
there during these precious few weeks that are available to us
before the fateful 2nd of January. I have already moved in the
matter and hope to let you know whether it is possible for any-
one to come.
Do please tell me how Kelappan is doing. Why have I not
heard from him?
From a photostat: S.N. 18602
