52. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 27, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the big post yesterday. You must have received the
long letter which I dictated for you yesterday. I very much liked
your letter which arrived in the big post. You have exercised
good restraint in your language. There are signs of impatience
here and there, but not much to speak of. Your reply is pointed
and brief. I did not require it at all, but, since I have received it,
it will help me to pacify Chhaganlal. It will not be necessary
for me now to send his complaints to you. I will struggle with
him in my own way, and try to remove his error. I will not
waste your time, I have wasted enough of it.
I suppose you have read Shri Rajbhoj's letter. I liked it
very much. He says in it that we have used more logic than the
heart in dealing with Ramji. Since you have welcomed his sug-
gestion, the problem is over. Rajbhoj may be mistaken in his
view. But it is also possible that we have been at fault. We
should be able to prove to an impartial Harijan the correctness
of our treatment of Ramji in all respects. I am writing this not to
find fault with anybody, but only to suggest how we should be-
have in future. How can I blame anybody without knowing all
the facts? Read the letter to Rajbhoj which I am going to
write. He has suggested a change in the hour for the prayer.
That suggestion also deserves careful consideration. His argument
is that everybody should get time to answer the call of nature
immediately after getting up.
He has, therefore, suggested that
45 minutes should be set apart for this purpose instead of 20 as
at present. This is what he says:
Before answering the call of nature one is less likely to
be able to concentrate at prayer-time. People also feel very
sleepy. If the prayer is kept at 4.45, lassitude, the feeling of
uneasiness arising from not having answered the call of
nature and restlessness, all these three things will disappear.
This suggestion was made even before.
But Rajbhoj has
put it in a new way. He seems to be a thoughtful man. He is
a fresh worker and is alert, and I also see in him good power
of observation. He has discrimination, too. You should, there-
fore, have a long talk with him first and if you see some point in
his suggestion, make the change suggested by him. It was I
who insisted on the prayer being kept at 4.20-and I still insist on
it-but the lesson of experience should prevail. If so many per-
sons require to answer the call of nature before coming to the
prayer, 45 minutes should be allowed for the purpose. Anyone
who does not feel the need may use the time in any way he
likes. If you decide to make the change, I will make some sug-
gestions about the prayer. The chief thing is that you should
have a detailed discussion with Rajbhoj.
His other suggestion is as follows:
A meeting of all new workers should be held at least
twice in a month. In these meetings there should be discussions
as to how they should work, how they should serve meals,
what the Mangalprabhat discourses are about, the significance
of the vow of silence, etc. I have often observed that the
volunteers who serve meals do not do their work courteously
and patiently, they throw the vegetables down so carelessly
that they fall outside the plate and they let the milk spill
over, or serve these items in more than, or even less than, the
required quantity. Those who are entrusted with washing
the floor are so impatient to finish their work that they show
no regard for slow-eaters and drops of water splash on the
latter. It is the duty of the chief of this section to explain to
the volunteers from time to time how they should work.
To save time in dictating I have given a Gujarati translation
of the sentences instead of the original Hindi. However, the trans-
lation is literal. The complaint which Rajbhoj makes could also
be made with equal justification when I was in the Ashram and
55-
used to take my meals in the common kitchen. I had thought
that there would not be much ground for such a complaint now.
But since that has not happened, I can easily guess the reason.
The volunteers change frequently, and it is very necessary that
they should do so. But if that is necessary, supervision over
them is equally necessary. I myself have observed vegetables being
served in greater or lesser quantity than required. I have also
observed too much hurry when serving. I have observed rotlis
being thrown into the plate as if at a beggar, and milk being
spilled on the floor. And even while a fairly good number of
people were still eating, the volunteers used to start washing
the floor.
Inquire about this and do whatever is possible. I had a
letter from . . .1 and I have replied to him. He is not likely
to come round as quickly as I had thought. He also feels troubled
about . . .2 and I have, therefore, replied to him that all of them
have decided to leave the Ashram of their own accord. Even now
they can stay on if they are ready to observe the Ashram
rules. I have even advised that . . . should come and stay
in the Ashram for some time. Have a talk with . . . . The key
is held by him. If he comes, I will be relieved. But I certainly
wish that, if he comes, he should do so with a full sense of
his responsibility.
I am eagerly awaiting your reply regarding N. If she is to
come to the Ashram, I don't wish to detain her here longer.
If you have not written to me about this before you get this
letter, send me a wire.
You say in your letter that Narahari has written to me. But
the post received from you did not contain any letter from him.
Did he post his letter separately? Or is it that he intended to
write but forgot to do so?
I have found Narahari's letter in the post received today
after I had written this letter.
I am sending a wire about N. and Dr. Margarete Spiegel.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8364. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
