8. LETTER TO P. S. RUDRAMUNI
April 23, 1933
DEAR RUDRAMUNI,
I thank you for your letter. It is because you belong to the
priesthood of the Harijan community that I have felt so sore
about you. I cannot help feeling that you have neglected N.
You should not have taken her there. You did nothing in the
shape of putting her to the work for which you took her to your
village and, if N. is right in what she says, you would not
condescend to do any physical work. How I wish you would
be an ideal priest to the Harijans and labour with them and for
them, avoiding all the weaknesses and vices of the caste Hindu
priests! How I wish you, by the strength of your character and
learning, command respect from the most fastidious caste
Hindus!
So far as I can understand, you never refunded to Rama-
chandra the money for the ticket that you should have pur-
chased for N. but for which you were too late. And then
N. tells me that you resented her cropping her hair. Surely,
it was a matter for you to welcome when a sister who had but
till yesterday been leading an unclean life suddenly resolves to
throw off all uncleanliness and adopt a life of renunciation,
apart from the economic and the hygienic necessity of removing
the hair. Do you not understand, as a Hindu, that as a sannya-
sini, which according to our notion she had become, she cannot
keep hair or any ornamentation that would tempt base human
nature?
Lastly, you have not told me that the ticket for her to come
to Poona was kindly paid for by a Parsi gentleman. Please let
me have his full name and address. You will understand that I
have not written this letter to rebuke you. I have no right to
do so. I have not known you except through N. But because
I consider you to be one of my own and because I feel for you
I have written this in the hope that it may serve as a warning
for the future. If I have unconsciously done an injustice to you,
you will please correct me.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. P. S. RUDRAMUNI
CHITALDRUG
From a microfilm: S.N. 21038
