209. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 26, 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABOO,
I understand every word of what you have said in your letter
of the 21st, and you are going to do as the spirit leads you. I
must think aloud all the reactions that your letters produce upon
me so that whenever they find an echo in your heart, you may
re-adjust yourself accordingly. But there is to be no re-adjustment
if there is no such echo in your heart because in reading letters,
even yours, hurriedly, I may miss a word here and a word there
which may alter a conclusion equally hurriedly come to. Thus,
take this startling statement of yours-I mean startling for me-
"As soon as I feel that I have been able to set up some arrange-
ment for serving the Harijans on proper basis, I shall revert to
my old field of activity." This is what you would undoubtedly
do as a chemist and mechanic, as you have done so successfully
often. But service of Harijans is no such mechanical thing to be
arranged, put on a basis, and then left to workers. It is a Spiri-
tual act, soul acting upon soul, and therefore there is no such
mechanical replacement as we have in purely temporal acti-
vities. There do come replacements even in spiritual activities,
but those replacements are of a different character. Even the Pra-
tishthan work is a spiritual activity but can be arranged up to a
point as a temporal activity; not so the Harijan work. Your great
organizing ability may even be a hindrance than a help in doing
Harijan work, for you might have to plough what may appear
to be a lonely furrow without yielding any fruit which you can
see with your physical eyes. You have simply to believe that
fruit is there whether you see it or not. Thus having once taken
up Harijan work in the style that you have, there is no reversion
to the "old field of activity". Reversion can only be consistent-
ly with the unimpaired continuance of Harijan service. I won-
der if I have made my meaning perfectly clear. Of course your
conception of personal service in the basti may be quite different
from mine. You are not to fit in mine with your own. You must
hold on to your own, unless mine appeals to you as the correct
one. The two won't run together. But all this is only by way of
illustration as to what I am trying to drive at. Please also bear in
mind that whenever you feel like running down to Poona, you
should do so. It won't be money thrown away. Andrews has done
it so often with me. He has not even heeded my chiding, for, he
would say, "What you consider to be waste of money is for me a
definite want which I must satisfy", and from his own standpoint
he has been right. He would have been torn to pieces if he had
not run to me. No writing of letters would have satisfied him.
Even as I am dictating this letter a cablegram has come to me
from him. Just now he is sending a cablegram per day. This is
a costly affair, but I cannot restrain him. I do not need his
cablegrams, but he needs to send them for his peace. Look at
this latest samples: "Thank God-Charlie, Esther". This cable-
gram perhaps you cannot even understand but it has a world of
meaning for me. The latest statement of mine has reached him
and as he drafted his cable under Esther's roof, he added her name,
for Esther is like a daughter to me. But the cablegram has no place
in the plan of Harijan service, and considered in terms of money
it deprives Harijans of so much money.
If, after your walk of 26 miles in one day, you had no sense
of over-fatigue, you are certainly in a fit state, and if that is due
to the pills you took, it is worth knowing them.
I would like to be just as free from anxiety about Hem-
prabha's health as you are making me about yours.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1624
