215. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
August 11, 1909
MY LORD,
I beg to thank you for your letter of the 10th instant.
I am glad that you are pleased with the proviso I have suggested.
May I say that the proviso does not, in my opinion, involve a sacrifice
of any essential principle.
As the negotiations are still to continue, it will be perhaps as well
not to circulate the statement among the newspaper editors or amongst
sympathisers. Newspaper editors as editors are hardly interested in any-
thing that is not sent to them for publication, and I am chary of circu-
lating the statement among sympathisers without taking them into
confidence as to what is going on. Subject, therefore, to Your Lord-
ship's confirmation, I shall hold over the circulation of the statement
pending negotiations.
Although I know that I am trespassing upon your time, as I am
anxious that I should keep you informed of everything that is going on,
1 Vide "Letter to Lord Ampthill", p. 342. Commenting on this Lord Ampthill
had observed: "So far as I can judge, you would actually be securing a recognition
of right, though of course a very limited one, if the law itself were to declare that six
Indians per annum may be admitted annually as permanent residents. It would be the
gain of a practical and positive, though limited, right as against the theoretical and
unavailable right which you are contending. The 'proviso' which you suggest seems
to me to be a clever solution of the difficulty and I shall at once try what can be
done with it, but without letting it be known that it comes from you."
2 This assertion has reference to Lord Ampthill's remark: "I am more glad
than I can say to know that you are thus far prepared to make a sacrifice as, after our
talk yesterday, I despaired of a settlement."
3 Lord Ampthill had suggested that it might be helpful to give the "Statement" to
newspaper editors only for their information and to sympathisers for their confidential use.
I enclose herewith copy of a letter addressed by me to Lord Crewe,
which I hope will meet with your approval.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5000
