71. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[December 20, 1926]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I had been wanting to write to you for a long time but could make it
only today.
I had asked Mahadev to write to you about Rukhi. I suppose he has done
that. I have asked Valji, too, to write to you. The doctor is of the opinion
that after she gets some strength, her appendix should be removed. This time
she might recover completely. But as long as her appendix is not removed,
she will have to be very careful about her diet and, till then, she will not put
on weight and will remain weak. Show her to Haribhai and if he suggests,
have her operated. There is no risk and from Govindbhai's case, we know
that Haribhai is a very careful person. I have explained everything in detail
to Keshu. For the time being, Rukhi should live on milk and fruit. If she is
constipated, she should be given enema to keep her bowels clean. She should
not move about. Nothing to worry if she sits. If Haribhai suggests that she
should be immediately admitted to the hospital, then do so. I will take Rukhi
with me in the same train by which I am going to Amaravati tomorrow. At
two stations, she will have to change trains but I have made arrangement for
that. Rukhi will reach there on Wednesday night. Do give her enema at night
if she does not pass stool the whole day and has not taken enema at Surat or
if she feels even slightly heavy in the stomach. Otherwise let her go to bed.
Add water to her milk before heating it Send me a telegram of her arrival
there. I will reach Calcutta on Thursday and on the same day at 3 O' clock,
will catch the Assam Mail. So I can get the telegram only if you send it
early on Thursday. I have asked Keshu to take my address with him.
I send herewith a postcard from Vajubhai. He wants cotton. My feeling
is he works in the villages of Bhavnagar State on behalf of Pattani Saheb.
And if that is so, why does he not take cotton from the state. Even then, I
have written to Balwantrai to have a talk with you. If you think it proper,
get him some cotton and lay down whatever conditions you want to. Cotton
could be given only as a loan and in return we should either get khadi or
money.
Write to me if we have an unduly large stock of khadi there and you are
1 From the reference to Gandhiji's departure for Amravati "tomorrow" and arrival
in Calcutta on a Thursday; he left for Amravati on 21st December 1926 and reached
Calcutta on 23rd, a Thursday, leaving for Assam the same day. Vide also Vol. XXXII,
pp. 439-41.
60
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
61
not able to sell it off. If you can dispose it off by converting it into useful
things, do that. We should have the capacity to stock khadi.
I hope you have sent the copies of the Agreement with Gangabehn to
Deshpande.
Parnerkar had come here to see me. He has impressed Jamnalalji, Vaijnath
and me. He will reach there by the 7th. He is to be given Rs. 125/- per
month and a place to stay. Debit his salary in the account of All-India Cow
Protection Society. If you feel that something should be debited for the house
rent, do that also. I want the entire dairy account to come under the All-
India Cow Protection Society. Put into practice those suggestions of Pamerkar
which are acceptable to you. The tannery (charmalaya) will also be brought
under All-India Cow Protection Society.
This will no doubt take a lot of your time. You will be able to cope with
the work if you do only planning and supervision. It is necessary to have
someone trained by Ganesh. For the dairy, Shivabhai Haribhai is there.
I have already written to you about Ramachandran.
Let me know immediately if you find the work heavy or feel uneasy about
it. Do not hide your feelings in order to save me from worry.
Inform me immediately if you feel I am making a mistake. If I am not
convinced, put up with me. But do not hide your feelings in the belief that I
am not going to correct myself.
I am intentionally setting up cow-protection and other industries there. I
think it is not beyond our capacity. We must make it a success.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I am sending herewith other letters from Mirabehn. I want the girls to
read them carefully. Of course, others should also read them.
I will not have the time to read this letter again.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32910
