175. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Tuesday, Chaitra Sud 10 [March 23, 1926]
BHAI KAKA,
You must have had my letter. I have today two letters from
you. I have already written to you that you should come to Mus-
soorie. But if we must suffer separation, we shall endure it. I mean
to say that, if you find Sinhagarh very congenial and the peace-
ful atmosphere there very agreeable, you need not leave all that
for the uncertainty [of Mussoorie] just to be with me. I cannot
go where you are, because there is no room for me there, as you say.
Wherever I go, I have to accommodate Pyar Ali and Noorbano.
Like you, Gomatibehn also has been sent out, so there is one more
condition, viz., to accommodate her. It is another thing if she does
not come also. And now Mathuradas is the fourth person whom
I must accommodate. His doctor has advised Mathuradas to leave
Deolali. Therefore he will either go there or to Mussoorie. Even
if you leave the place, the bungalow can still be used since we
are a large family. It is true that we would not have had to
bother about its use if we had not rented it. Moreover, all ar-
rangements about Mussoorie are finalized, telegrams have been
despatched. It is not right to change that now. I know quite
well that there will be no peace for me there. There may not be
much difference between Panchgani and Mussoorie. Hindi makes
a second difference regarding Panchgani. But you must know
that I do not go there just for a change of climate, but to perform
some duty. I tried hard not to go there. At the moment I have
peace here. I have become intimately mixed up with the acti-
vities here, in which I am interested. Bhaktaraj and the Gita have
taken hold of me and they constitute the twin motive force for me.
Moreover, it suits me that while at the Ashram I can do some-
thing without exerting myself. And I see that Ba too is quite pleased
with this. For several such reasons as also because this place is
very agreeable to my health, I am least anxious to go away; if
still I do, it is only to please my guardians.
Now about your problem I would like you to leave your home
and become absolutely free from any attachment. But Kaki I
think, should sustain the least possible shock. You seem not to have
conceived of Kaki's return, whereas I have. She may not come to
see you as long as she intends to assert her marital status. How-
ever when she grows totally disinterested, she may herself come to
see you. But in any case, she must have some accommodation here.
You have given up this household; that is right. But the Ashram,
i.e., you and I, have to arrange her lodging somewhere on the
Ashram premises. If not the same house, some other, maybe the
one under construction. However, that is a different matter. But
you should never lose sight of this duty. I shall call Shankar and
explain to him that he should cheerfully obey your command.
For three or four days past I have been discussing with Ramnik-
lal what Shankar should do. I for one have come to the con-
clusion that Shankar must stay with someone; and Ramniklal
agrees with me. I remember your having told me to put him
directly under Thakorebhai's care. I have therefore called for
Thakorebhai's report on Shankar. This does not mean that there
is some cause for worry on account of Shankar. But I see from
his irregularity in attendance that Shankar is neither balanced
nor industrious. If these failings are condoned, they may have
further consequences. Hence I suggest that he should be looked
after with greater care and encouraged to observe the rules.
I want to introduce these changes. I had no intention
of writing all this, but since you have issued orders regarding
Shankar I let you know what I am thinking about him.
From photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 19373
