75. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 15, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
I had been waiting for your letter. It arrived today. I am
glad you have understood the reason for the fast. There was no
escape from it. It is both a privilege and a duty. It comes rarely
to someone in a generation or generations. In non-violence it
is the crowning act, if it is saturated with that spirit and the
cause has no trace of self. I ask you, therefore, to rejoice with
me that such an occasion seems to have come to me. I say
'seems' for my faith has yet to be tried. No one can dare talk
of his own strength in a matter of life and death. The question,
therefore, is whether I am found worthy of the needed strength
and also whether the cause is of the required purity and thirdly,
whether in truth I am free of every trace of violence in undertaking
the vow. When I say that I feel like all that, I merely state my
belief. Judgment can be pronounced only upon the completed
act. I want you to watch the progress of the event with-
out the slightest perturbation. Nor may you at any stage fast
in sympathy. Yours is to be buried in your own task which is
to go through your term in full resignation, making the best use
possible of every moment at your disposal.
I do not mind the drop in your weight if you are otherwise
well and fit. The weight will come gradually as you become
acclimatized there and the weather improves, which it will not
do for yet another month.
For me, I am as fit as a fiddle. Just now my food is brown
bread, milk, a vegetable, local dates (not bad) and musambis.
I am glad Kisen is with you. You must be a fair size family
now. I know that you had naturally the art of looking upon trees
and animals as friends. I wanted you to extend the idea so
as not to feel the want of friends from outside. Hence my men-
tion of strangers in the same category. That is to say, there
should be a definite realization that personal friends and relations
are no greater friends than strangers of the human family and
bird, beast and plant. They are all one, and they are all an
expression of God if we would but realize the fact. Such defi-
nite realization assuages all craving for seeing outside friends
when we are inside prison walls.
The news you have from England about the family is cheer-
ing. Send my love to them all when you write.
Our cat family, or some of them, have a fancy for the mal
of the wheel. One of them destroyed it the other day. They begin
musical operations at meal times and stop only after Vallabhbhai
has served them. The mother has a fancy for vegetarian dishes.
She enjoys dal and rice and especially vegetables. We have an
addition to the family, did I tell you? There was a human touch
about the mother whilst she was in pain and two or three days
after delivery. She would caress us and insist on being caressed.
It was a pathetic sight. The care she bestows on the 'baby' is
very wonderful.
Love from us all to you all.
BAPU
[PS.]
Ramayana is being read regularly just now by Parasram to
all.
From the original: C.W. 6237. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9703
