89. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Vaishakh Vad 7 [June 4, 1915]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. I see that you are rather upset. The fault,
I am sure, is mine. In attempting to ride too many horses at a
time, I am in danger of falling off all of them. I have not quite,
for my enthusiasm proceeds from an eager desire for service. I
may not, however, be able to hold on long if I continue to go the
way I am doing, forgetting all about service. Be patient. I intend
to send you all, on suitable occasions, to different places, so that
you may see things for yourselves. Everything will depend on what
help we get and how many we can have with us here. I am
perfectly confident of this, at any rate, that I shall satisfy the
aspirations of you all; meanwhile, I do feel that the life you
have all led so far has not been in vain, that, on the contrary,
you have learnt much.
I am not unaware that you have not attained to a state of
perfect non-attachment, for I have not attained it myself and I
know that you are yet to reach even my level. If we stop making
noise about the vows, we shall not find ourselves in unhappy
situations as we occasionally do. And now one question. Explain
to me what you mean by "not having attained to a state of perfect
non-attachment". I can explain [how that is so with me]. For
example, I observe brahmacharya, but not in all its subtle aspects.
I cannot say that my mind or eyes are never disturbed.
2. I maintain truthfulness, but I cannot say that I am never guilty
of exaggeration, consciously or unconsciously. To say what I like
saying and not to say anything which I don't like saying casts a
shadow on the vow of truthfulness.
3. I make untiring efforts to control the palate but I observe that
I extract the utmost pleasure from the five articles [I permit myself
in a day]. But I do want to keep these and other vows inviolate
and make progress in them day by day, and I am quite confident
that I shall succeed. I feel that I am not likely now to depart from
a literal observance.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5685. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
