521. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 13, 1930
CHI. MIRA,
Your p.c. was duly received.
The absence of any further
news from you, I take to mean perfect restoration. After each
illness you are soon well, because the treatment followed is natural,
but every sickness leaves behind it a legacy of weakness unless
the system is allowed full rest and the mind relieved of tension. I
suppose the mental control is the most difficult. For this the
sovereign remedy is the application of the Gita. Each time mind
suffers a shock, there is failure in application. Let good news as
well as bad pass over you like water over a duck's back. When we
hear any, our duty is merely to find out whether any action is neces-
sary and if it is, to do it as an instrument in the hands of Nature
without being affected by or attached to the result. This detach-
ment appears a scientific necessity when we remember that in
bringing about a result more than one instrument is employed.
Who shall dare say 'I have done it'[?] I know you know all this.
Nevertheless, I drive the truth home, so that from the brain it may
percolate to the heart. So long as it remains in the brain only, it
is a dead weight on it. Any truth received by the brain must im-
mediately be sent down to the heart. When it is not, it suffers
abortion and then it lies on the brain as so much poisonous matter.
What poisons the brain poisons the whole system. Hence the
necessity of using the brain as it should be merely as a transmitting
station. Whatever is there received is either transmitted to the
heart for immediate action or it is rejected there and then as
being unfit for transmission. Failure of the brain to perform this
function properly is the cause of almost all the ills that flesh is
heir to as also for mental exhaustion. If the brain simply perform-
ed its function, there need never be any brain-fag. So whenever
we suffer from illness generally there is not only a dietetic error but
there is also failure on the part of the brain to function proper-
ly. The author of the Gita evidently saw this and gave the world
the sovereign remedy in the clearest possible language. Whenever
therefore anything preys upon your mind, you should meditate on
the central teaching of the Gita and throw off the burden. Let
us hope there never will be a recurrence of the terrible constipation.
377
As to Kumarappa if you have enough charity and goodwill
forward to him all the criticism you receive leaving the result to
take care of itself. It is a duty you owe to him to let him have
the criticisms. You may now use Kaka too for the purpose of
sending your messages.
For me the milkless experiment continues as yet without
any bad result. The weight has suffered a further decrease of
3 lb. but the vitality remains. One cause of the decrease in
weight is that I am most cautious about increasing the quantity of
cereals and almonds I take. Almonds remain at 3 tolas and bajri
and juwari bhakhari a quarter, i.e., about 2 tolas each time, i.e., at 11
and 5. I may soon increase the weight. Anyway the condition
of the bowels is extraordinarily good. I quite agree with you that
the enema as a habit is a bad thing and should be got rid of, if at all
possible. It has been possible with the dropping of milk as it had
become when, on going to Wardha, you will recall, I had dropped
milk. Indeed but for my folly in hastily following Gopalrao I
might still have been flourishing on the diet I had then adopted.
The present diet is a slight modification of the Wardha one.
Whenever you are ill, you will not hesitate to write to me
at once without waiting for the weekly letter day.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9283. Courtesy: Mirabehn
