42. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SEGAON, WARDHA,
July 29, 1939
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
Instead of guiding the Dhami people I have passed them on
to you. I feel that you should discharge this burden without
any interference from me. The idea in the States seems to be to
isolate and ignore the Congress and hence the States Conference.
I have already suggested in Harijan that no State Association or
Mandal should act on its own without reference to your committee.
I should act, if at all, through you; i.e., when you refer to me, I
should give my opinion as I do in respect of the Working Commit-
tee. I told the Gwalior people also likewise yesterday. You will
have to reorganize your committee a bit, if it is to function pro-
perly.
After all I could not go to Kashmir. Sheikh Abdullah and his
friends won't tolerate the idea of my being State guest. Banking
on my past experience, I had accepted State offer in anticipation
of Sheikh Abdullah's approval. But I saw that I was mistaken. I
therefore cancelled the acceptance of the State hospitality and
accepted the Sheikh's. This embarrassed the State. So I cancel-
led the visit altogether. I was guilty of double stupidity—in daring
to think of going there without you and in not getting Sheikh's
permission before accepting the State offer. I had thought that I
would serve the people by accepting the State offer. I must confess
that I was not pleased with my contact [with] the Sheikh and his
friends. They seemed to all of us to be most unreasonable. Khan
Saheb reasoned with them. But it was to no purpose.
Your visit to Ceylon was glorious. I don't mind what the
immediate outcome is. Saleh Tyabji asks me to send you to
Burma and Andrews thinks of you in connection with South Africa.
For Ceylon the idea of a Congress deputation came to me sponta-
neously, not so these two even after the promptings. But of these
when we meet. I hope you are fresh and that Krishna is enjoying
herself.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1939. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 377-
