339. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
July 6, 1935
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I have your letters. I understand the difficulty about eradi-
cating malaria. The task is certainly difficult if all around the
place there are plantations of sugarcane. But one thing about
mosquitoes is that they do not fly beyond a certain distance. I
think you are not likely to be affected by plantations situated at a
distance of a hundred acres from your place. Be that as it may,
make sure that no water or moisture collects around the place.
Since the houses are on top of a hill, there is no possibility, either,
of water accumulating around them. The food should be light.
You should eat green leaves like salad, etc. Constipation should
never be ignored. Mosquito-nets should be used. I think with
the help of these precautions you can keep off malaria. I was
surprised to learn that Lakshmi could send khadi made from
236
the yarn spun by me. May I take it then that I need not send
anything now? If you two cannot spare any time to teach Sita,
then I should think that there is some big defect somewhere
in your life. If, willingly or unwillingly, you accept the responsibi-
lity of parenthood, then it also becomes your duty to train the
children's body, mind, etc., and you ought to spare some time for
that, however busy your life may be. Thanks to God's kindness,
children do get some education from parents whether they know
it or not. Whether you want it or not, your children are
bound to imitate your manners and thoughts.
Even for that
reason, parents are obliged to keep their thoughts and actions
absolutely pure. If your speech is pure, that of your children will
be pure. If you pray regularly, your children also will do the same.
Whatever things and in whatever manner you eat, your children
will do the same. What remains then is instruction in letters.
How much time can it consume? With a little care, you can easily
impart that to children while they are playing about. But, then,
there should be a firm determination on your part to impart
education to your children yourselves. You should first acquire in
some measure the knowledge that you want to impart to your
children. And the result will be that your children will get valu-
able knowledge in the normal course of their daily life, such as
they can never get in schools. If you spend your time in this
way instead of in idle gossip, then you will increase your knowl-
edge also and, what is more, your whole life will become more
disciplined.
Forget Sorabji and his conduct. If you try to understand the
affair about halwa, you will find it amusing. You should learn to
get entertainment even from such malicious stories.
Harilal seems to have gone off the rails once again. Maybe
he had never returned to the rails and was merely pretending
reformation when he came here. But, instead of levelling such a
serious charge against him, assume that he has now gone off the
rails. This is only my suspicion as yet. I do not know what the
truth is. It will be known in a few days.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4839. Also C.W. 1251. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi
