332. LETTER TO SANKALCHAND SHAH
BETTIAH,
Jeth Sud 9 [May 30, 1917]
BHAISHRI SANKALCHAND,
I happen to be free at the moment. I read your letter again,
and also the time- table . A time-table always gives me a headache.
I have made no attempt to remember this one.
I think history and geography, which have been mentioned
as separate subjects, should be included under Gujarati. We want
to develop the intellect through the Gujarati language. For that
purpose, we may use a language book one day and a text on
history the next. We should orally go over the matter to be
taught and then make [the students] read something on it. This
will reduce the quantum of literature by a little, but that should
not matter. If the history and the geography being taught are of
the same country, the latter will be easy to learn and prove interest-
ing. As for history, to the extent that we treat it as literature, we
may give [the students] some well-phrased pithy sentences. For
instance, "We look upon Ramachandra as an avatar, as God Him-
self. The term avatar is of Sanskrit origin. Avatru means to descend.
God's descent (to this earth) is his avatar. But at the moment we
are not thinking of Rama as an avatar. We shall only consider
the Rama of history." Whether these sentences have any life in
them, you teachers know best. But they are good enough to illus-
trate my point. This will cover literature all right. We may
compose many such sentences as we narrate the history of Rama-
chandra. We may first dictate them or write them out on the black-
board and then tell the story. We may deliberately use some
difficult words, as we do so. The pupils will want to know their
meanings and so the discussion will proceed. Since he was born
in Ayodhya, it will be necessary to explain its geography. There will
of course be a map. How far it is from Ahmedabad, how one may
arrive there, what it is like today, whether it answers to the poet's
description of it—all this is literature, history, and geography com-
bined. You must first make up your mind, while telling a story
like this, how much literature you wish to teach, how much of his-
tory and how much of geography and then be as one with the pupils.
Sanskrit should be simplified and, if it is grouped with Marathi
and the two taught on alternate days, there will be some saving of
time. It may not be that there will be one or the other of the two
languages every day, but the principle will apply. We must reduce
the hours for each. So long as we have only the Ashram boys in
the school, there is no need to provide separately for religious in-
struction. It will suffice to tell them the stories we want to at prayer
time.
I am of the view that, if Kaka is an expert in drill, the classes
should start and end with it. It will be enough to have it for five
minutes at the commencement and five minutes at the end. This
is to be followed after the movements have been learnt. Time
should be found on one of the week days for teaching the move-
ments. What is taught on that day may be practised for a week.
Agricultural work will be difficult till some land has been
obtained. Perhaps it will be best to drop it for the time being.
The man who teaches us should be one who has himself been a
successful farmer. If a gardener is available, he should remain on
the farm and teach us various techniques, which we, teachers and
pupils, may learn for a year or two. We may then go into the
science of agriculture. It will not be possible to provide for some
hours of agricultural work to all the boys every day. But they can
learn the work only if every week different classes are given two or
three days by turns. Forty minutes are not enough for the purpose.
They may suffice for learning the science of agriculture theoretically.
The same is true of weaving. Both will require constant practice.
It will be necessary, therefore, to set apart days on which pupils
can give at least two hours at a stretch. If Shri Pandya knows
both the theory and the practice of agriculture and if he agrees to
join, no doubt he will be very useful. As a rule, a man coming
from a Government agricultural school cannot, I believe, be of
much help to us. Ask Maganlal to tell the story of Nagin Babu of
Santiniketan. It was not his fault. How could he help it?
It is not necessary to teach carpentry till a boy is twelve. A
child is not able even to lift or use a hammer. At a later age,
we shall have no option but to teach it. It should be treated as
a part of agriculture. This is not done in India. It is, however, a
kind of work which we shall not be able to do till we have moved
to our own land.
You must find a Gujarati equivalent for "workshop". Will
karakhanu do? Someone had mentioned "metric system" in the
curriculum. Henceforward, we should be careful about using such
terms. There are so many points like these over which we have
to break our heads. If you do that, our children will enjoy the
fruits.
It will be enough to give every division one hour weekly for
hygiene. The teacher should keep a watch whether the things
taught in these hours are acted upon during the rest of the week.
Because the pupil doesn't have another hour for the subject on the
other days, it does not mean that the teacher has forgotten what he
taught in that week. If a boy attends the school with his nails grown
and filled with dirt, the teacher can ask him, even during the period
for arithmetic, why his nails are dirty and what he had been taught
on this point.
It is certain that Professor (what is the Gujarati for this? Or,
will it have to be retained in the language just as it is?) Kri-
palani will join. He will take a trial for some time. If the thing
is not beyond his capacity, he will join. For the present, he just
cannot get away from here.
I have written at length on some points, saying things which
may appear rather silly. My anxiety to make myself quite clear
was the reason.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
Something remains yet.
Music will have to be left out till we get a teacher for it.
Since due weight is not attached to it, the thing has remained
with actors and bhaktas We must consider before taking in an
actor. A bhakta we are not likely to get. Write to the Gandharva
[Maha]vidyalaya and see if you succeed. Will you please send
a list of the equipment needed for science? I hesitate to buy costly
equipment before we have become stable. If any books are want-
ing, it will be good if you make a list of them as well.
Please treat all my observations as no more than suggestions
for consideration. Whether or not they should be implemented is
left to the inclinations of you all.
I am returning your letter and the curriculum.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 6360
