13. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
DETENTION CAMP,
February 24, 1943
DEAR COL. BHANDARI,
There seems to be between Khan Bahadur Kateli and me
a conflict in the understanding of Government instructions about
interviews. From the correspondence and instructions you were
good enough to read to me, I had gathered that those who
were permitted to visit me were not restricted as to the nature
of discussion or its duration, a Government representative, if
necessary, being present. Where I am physically unable to carry
on discussion I leave it to Shri Pyarelal to finish it. Naturally
also the visitors who are intimately connected with me are seen
and talked to by my wife. I personally can do very little
talking. Doctors, for one thing, have to limit it to the fewest
possible minutes. The Khan Bahadur's instructions are that the
talk must be confined only as between them and me. If such
is the position, it is hopeless.
Thus Seth R. D. Birla came and
so did Shri Kamalnayan Bajaj. They know all about the trusts
that I used to regulate. Naturally I took the opportunity of
their visits and instructed Shri Pyarelal accordingly, and he has
been talking to them regarding them. The Khan Bahadur had
a very delicate duty to perform. He did it firmly but as
gracefully as was possible under the circumstances. The Khan
Bahadur also says, he has strict instructions not to allow visitors
to take any notes or papers. During the remaining days of the
fast and convalescence, I would like, if possible, to be undisturbed
by such things. I would, therefore, like clear instructions which
Khan Bahadur and I can mutually understand. I have no desire
to go behind them.
Shri Devdas Gandhi, my son, has permission to stop at the
Palace as long as he likes. During the permission period he
talks during odd minutes when he thinks he can. Naturally
the Khan Bahadur cannot be present at those times. I have
asked Shri Pyarelal to show him all the correspondence that
has passed between the Government of India and the Govern-
ment of Bombay and myself. I had also the intention of sup-
plying him with copies of such correspondence. But since the
Khan Bahadur's prohibition, pending Government instructions,
I have asked my son not to take any copies.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, pp. 47-
