569. LETTER TO HABIBUR RAHMAN
November 5, 1932
I was glad to get your letter. Let me know more about your-
self. How much Sanskrit have you studied? For how many years?
What is your age? How long have you been teaching? What is
the number of boys studying Sanskrit and how many are Muslims
and how many Hindus? Are your parents living? If so, what is
your father's occupation?
Now I shall attempt to answer your queries. The special
feature of Hinduism is that it permits considerable freedom of
thought. And since tolerance towards other religions is implicit
in it, Hindus may adopt such good points as they find in other
religions. Indeed it is their duty to do so. That is why the exege-
sis of Hindu scriptures is ever developing. There is nothing new in
what I have said regarding the characters of the Mahabharata and
the Gita. I have taken it from the commentaries. The idea has been
very well developed by Sadanand Mishra in his commentary on
the Gita. I am told that some Prakrit works contain similar views.
Not all that is contained in works popularly known as Hindu
scriptures is gospel truth, and it is not necessary for the Hindus
to accept everything laid down in the scriptures. I am in no
way prepared to accept as religion, even though it might have a
historical basis, the punishment of pouring molten lead into the
ears of the Shudra listening to Vedic recitations. And there are
innumerable Hindus who do not accept it as religious injunction.
There is one simple test laid down in Hinduism which even a
child can understand: anything which is not acceptable to reason,
anything which goes contrary to reason cannot be religion; so
also anything that violates truth and ahimsa.
Now for the Yeravda Pact. To me at any rate votes were no
consideration. To me the question was one of undoing the harm
that had been done to Harijans by the declaration of the British
Cabinet. What explanation can I give you about my fast? I can
only say that it was inspired by God and that I could not have
avoided it.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 208-
