36. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
You must have received the letter which I wrote to you yes-
terday. I forgot to enclose in it a newspaper cutting to be shown
to Dr. Sharma. I send it with this letter. These days I have to
write with the left hand and so could not write yesterday all that I
wished to. I hope to do so today. I felt that it would be better
if Chhaganlal replied to your comments on his criticisms of you,
and so pressed him to do that. Accordingly, he has given me his
reply. After careful thinking I felt that I ought to send it to you,
and am doing so. I don't think it proves the necessity of your
reforming your method of work in any respect, but I do see in his
note his honesty of purpose. I have never felt any malice in him.
But he is suspicious by nature and cannot easily put a straight-
forward interpretation on things. He does not readily see the
virtues of the other party, and magnifies the defects. This gives an
impression to other people that he lacks generosity of heart. He
does not wish to be ungenerous nor is he ungenerous by nature.
But people who do not understand him can easily see ungenero-
sity in him. If I have succeeded in convincing you of this, the
anger and intolerance which are present in your reply would not
be there. Your charge that some inmates of the Ashram realized
the necessity of better educational facilities for children after they
themselves had children, is unworthy of you. And it is not true,
either. It is utterly wrong to believe that Narahari, Chhaganlal
and others who subscribe to this criticism are as selfish as that.
They also are loyal inmates of the Ashram and are good men.
They also care for the good of the Ashram as much as we
do. They may be-they are-less efficient, but you ought not to
be conscious in the slightest degree of your greater efficiency or
be proud of it. Even a mention of somebody else's inefficiency
is an indirect form of self-praise. I want you to avoid even that.
And suppose that children are born to inmates of the Ashram and
some new ideas occur to the parents when the children grow up
a little, we should not detect in that their selfishness as parents.
This thing is part of human nature and criticism of it is not just.
All that we should expect from people is this. One should desire
for others' children what one desires for one's own and should
make no distinction between one's children and other's children
under one's charge. We may say that in the measure that this
attitude is absent in the Ashram we are imperfect. However, no
inmate of the Ashram should say that the shortcomings are those
of others and not his. It is as difficult to know one's shortcomings
fully as it is to attain self-realization. And I believe that for a person
who can see his shortcomings fully and who ceaselessly strives to
overcome them to the best of his ability, self-realization is no
difficult task. I, therefore, certainly desire that, if you feel that
it was improper for you to make such a statement and that it
cannot be proved, you should withdraw it and apologize to your
co-workers. However, I don't want you to withdraw it only to
please me if you yourself are not convinced of its impropriety. If
you sincerely believe that the reason why people make this criti-
cism against you is that they have children now, let your charge
remain till in course of time you learn from experience that it is
not true. In the Ashram nobody should be asked to apologize
merely for the sake of form. Such apology would benefit no one.
For us apology can have only one meaning, namely, that it is
sincere admission of one's error. All of us must tolerate the
charges which our co-workers make against us. I don't ask those
who make charges against you to apologize to you, because they
sincerely believe what they say. I can advise them to apologize
only when I can change their belief. The same rule applies to
you.
Chhaganlal's second objection is against your criticism of
him for occasionally requiring food to be sent to his room. May-
be when he had a guest he found it necessary to ask for a thali
for him in his room. I see nothing wrong in that. If a guest
turns up unexpectedly, what else can a person who does not cook
in his own house do? And if a guest has turned up just at meal-
time, I can understand that one might not like to bring him to
the common kitchen, for it might be possible to talk to him only
during the meal. I do not know whether or not Chhaganlal had
these legitimate reasons, but I do not expect criticism for such
things from you. Need there be any limit to generosity? Our
ideal examples of generosity are king Bali, Yudhishthira and others
like them. The former lost his whole kingdom through his genero-
sity and Yudhishthira stopped the blood from flowing out of his
wound in order to save king Virat from Arjuna's wrath and, be-
fore the latter arrived, got it all cleaned by Draupadi and waited
as if nothing had happened. Our aspiration is that we should be
able to do easily in this age all that they could do in ancient times.
I did not read any complaint on your part in your references
to Purushottam and Kanu but saw in them only an acknow-
ledgment that things could not be otherwise in the Ashram.
Mahadev, on the other hand, supports Chhaganlal's interpretation
and says that you nurse a grievance about Purushottam and Kanu
having remained without a knowledge of history, geography, etc.
Whether it is that or whether it is an acknowledgment on your
part of what is inevitable in the Ashram, your own interpretation
should be accepted as the only right one. Let me, therefore, know
what the truth is. My own view is that we should not regret any
boy having not learnt what passes today as history and geography.
On the contrary, I believe that the boys could not have acquired
anywhere else what they have in the Ashram.
Moreover,
they have learnt history and geography, too, of the kind to which
we attach value. I do feel unhappy, but not by way of com-
plaint against anybody. I feel unhappy about the interpretation
of the Ashram itself. I know that we have not been able to give
the children all that we were eager to give them. Isn't that my
own shortcoming? That people do not regard it as such is another
matter. But when we try to draw up a balance-sheet and exa-
mine the credit and the debit columns, a shortcoming must be
recognized as a shortcoming. The Ashram has grown according
to the capacities of the persons whom I could attract and the
ideas which I could implement.
I can enumerate no end of
shortcomings to be found in the Ashram. And still I love it, for
it is chiefly my handiwork. If I had greater ability and the
circumstances had been more favourable, the Ashram would be
a more attractive place and there would have been no ground for
the criticism which it deserves in some respects.
My purpose,
however, in stating all this is to persuade you not to see the short-
comings of others and not to criticize people who might criticize
you, only to point out the error in their criticism and accept
whatever is acceptable in it and act upon it. This will save you
from many problems.
And now a few words about Chhaganlal's note. Like his
previous note, I didn't like this one either. If I wish, Chhaganlal
would readily amend it. But in that case you would not be able
to know what he really thinks. What is necessary is that you and
I should love him despite our knowledge of what he thinks. If
we fail to do that, we cannot prove that the Ashram is a large
family. And, moreover, if we cut ourselves off from everybody,
one after another, for small defects, we would be left alone in the
world. Nobody except God can afford that. This is why I have
often stated that one should forget oneself completely and become
a cypher. Nothing can equal the joy of that state. As for Chhagan-
lal's note, I see an error in almost every sentence of it.
Chhaganlal's language is offensive and betrays his thought-
lessness and intolerance. Leaving aside your anger and your
charges, he has not been able to see at all the effectiveness of
your reply. Even in regard to points on which you have given a
convincing reply, he has again offered advice.
In writing about Chhaganlal, I have been completely frank.
I know that there was no need to advise you. I have explained
this to him. I had also let him read what I wrote to you; even
then he has written what he has. If I did not know him, his
remarks would have seemed utterly mean to me too. But I should
like even you not to see meanness in them but only his lack of
intelligence. I am sending such a note to you hoping that you
will be able to ignore even such criticism like that with a generous
heart. I believe that since I am forwarding the note to you,
you are completely safe and so is Chhaganlal. It is a great good
fortune of the Ashram that we are trying to tell, without any fear,
even the unpleasant thoughts which we think about one another.
55-
I will now end this letter. It is I who am loading heavier
burdens on you. I don't hesitate to put before you even criticism
in which I do not believe and, by doing so, I waste your, and
therefore the Ashram's, time. But I think it was absolutely
necessary to do this. But now it is enough. You need not at all
reply to the accompanying note. If you understand the few points
which I have tried to explain to you, you may write a line or
two accordingly. This letter, too, contains some good ideas. Do,
therefore, show it to others but don't think that it is necessary
for you to discuss any point with anybody. Keep on trying
to do the best you can. As desired by you, I am also returning
your letter.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 836. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
