484. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
October 19, 1936
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I liked the letters from you both. Manilal, it was your
dharma to have pointed out my shortcoming which you did,
nor was it indecorous. Filial piety consists in respect for par-
ents in spite of one's knowledge of their shortcomings.
In
that test none of you fail, barring Harilal. But the fault is not
entirely Harilal's. For how could we hold him responsible for
what he does or says under the influence of drink?
I shall not write a long reply as I am surrounded by
patients. Mirabehn as well as Nanavati are better today. I
do not repent for the kind of education I gave you brothers.
I should have been glad if I could have done more along the
same lines.
I offered you at the altar of my sacrifice, not un-
mindful of your well-being but knowing it fully well.
Nor
do I believe the result has been unhappy. There was a spe-
cial purpose in sending Sorabji. 1 He achieved it too; we could
have seen it had he lived. As for Chhaganlal2, he was sent
to prepare himself for a specific task. It miscarried because
he was threatened with tuberculosis and left England abruptly.
How do you forget about Ritch and Polak ? There was a
purpose in sending them and there was one also in not
sending you brothers. By the time you had reached the age
of discretion my infatuation with Western education had worn
away. It was not that I did not provide you such education
for want of money. The Doctor's purse was always at my
disposal. When Ritch was sent I too was in a position to
meet the cost. However, I purposely moulded you in the
school of experience and drafted you for public service. I
understand how you might regret the want in view of the
present times, but that does not change my thinking. Don't
you know that I have done the same with the boys and girls
that came to be placed in my charge here too? I am not
worried that Radha, Keshu, Shankar, Bal, Jayanti, Kanti, etc.
rebelled against it. I see in it the force of the current stream
and not any defect in my thinking. The best of workers here
have no Western education, and men like Mahadev who have
it are with me not because of it but because of their other
qualities. I do of course make use of Mahadev's education by
the way, but that is of no great significance. It may be my
efficiency. Mahadev will himself admit that Maganlal was
more valuable than he. How many educated men do you
think there are in my army?
To what position would I have
been reduced had I depended on them? Don't you know that
I had a hand in sending Joseph, both the Godfreys and Ber-
nard? Where are they? What have they achieved?
I also
know the art of producing barristers and doctors, but it has
borne no fruit. I think you brothers were spared the wild goose
chase. Why can you not see my non-violence in the excep-
tions I made in the cases of West and Sam ? Had I not
been generous to them, how could I have accommodated them
and others like them? You know that I encouraged Kitchin
to eat meat when he was ill and, as a result, he gave it up
altogether. In the Boer War I myself served wine to the stone-
breakers in my corps and served bidis to others. Discretion is
very necessary in doing all such things. Generosity to others
is as necessary as strictness with oneself.
I have dilated far more than I had intended. You need
not send anything to Kanti as Devdas has undertaken to pay all
his expenses.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4858
