312. LETTER TO THE PRESS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
November 14, 1910
SIR,
Since the well-known Poonia case, the Indian community had
come to understand that Indian women crossing the border would
not be interfered with, and I know of several cases in which they were
permitted to cross the border unchallenged. But after the interference
with Mrs. Gandhi, over a month ago, when she was travelling alone,
I could see that the spell was broken. Whenever, therefore, wives or
other female relatives of passive resisters wanted to enter the Province
from Natal, I took the precaution of informing the Chief Immigration
Officer at Pretoria, who is also the Registrar of Asiatics, of the move-
ments of these families, informing him also of their exact relationship
to the respective passive resisters, and until very recently there has been
no actual difficulty. I returned from Natal yesterday week in the com-
pany of Mrs. Sodha, the wife of a passive resister who is at present serv-
ing imprisonment at Diepkloof for the offence of asserting his right of
entry as a free-born British subject possessing the qualifications required
by the Immigration Law of this Province, as apart from the Asiatic Act.
Before leaving Natal I had taken the usual precaution of tele-
graphing to the Immigration Officer that I was crossing the border with
Mrs. Sodha. On reaching Volksrust I learnt that the Police had
received instructions to stop Mrs. Sodha. She and I, together with other
passive resisters who were in my company, got down from the train.
Mrs. Sodha has a baby in arms, another under three years and a boy
twelve years of age. I took her and her children to the Charge Office
where I was asked to produce Mrs. Sodha the following morning, and
on my undertaking to do so I was permitted to take her away. Needless
to say, Mrs. Sodha had never in her life seen a Charge Office or been
addressed by a constable.
An Indian store-keeper kindly provided shelter and food for her
and her children. The next day she was charged as a prohibited im-
migrant and the case was remanded to the 21st instant, she being releas-
ed on her own recognizance. Thinking that Mrs. Sodha's arrest might
have been due to a misunderstanding, I telegraphed again to the Chief
Immigration Officer giving him the information about Mrs. Sodha's
children and telling him that she was proceeding to Tolstoy Farm,
that she would retire from the Transvaal at the end of the struggle
and that she was being taken to the above farm only pending her
husband's continuous incarceration. I received at Volksrust a reply
to the effect that Mrs. Sodha would be tried as a prohibited immigrant
unless she immediately returned to Natal. She and I, however, conti-
nued our journey as Mrs. Sodha's case was already adjourned. In
order to avoid any further complications, Mr. Cachalia, the Chairman
of the British Indian Association, telegraphed to the Minister of the
Interior, recounting the circumstances of the arrest and requesting that
the prosecution might be withdrawn. The Minister replied in the
negative, stating that her husband was a prohibited immigrant. As
the British Indian Association was desirous of avoiding importing
women into the controversy, it again approached the Minister and
requested that a temporary permit should be issued to Mrs. Sodha.
He, however, declined to do so.
Mrs. Sodha has entered the Transvaal temporarily as the Sodha
family has been reduced to poverty and their home broken up owing
to Mr. Sodha's having been in prison almost continuously for the last
eighteen months and as passive resister families are being supported at
Tolstoy Farm out of public funds.
I do not propose to go into the legal merits of this case which is
sub judice. Possibly Mrs. Sodha has committed a technical legal offence.
If so, all the Indian women, who were allowed to enter the country and
to whom I have made reference, have also committed an offence, in so
far as the Government are concerned, for the latter have undoubtedly
contended that all Indians who have ever been deported under the
Registration Act are prohibited immigrants.
The Government,
however, seem to have distinguished between Mr. Sodha, who is an
unregistered pre-war resident of the Transvaal, and other passive
1 Vide "Telegram to Chief Immigration Officer", p. 348.
2 Vide "Telegram to Minister of Interior", p. 349.
3 Vide "Telegram to Minister of Interior", p. 350.
resisters who are registered residents and whose wives and families, as
stated above, have entered the province unmolested.
As the wife of a passive resister Mrs. Sodha has now no alternative
but to face imprisonment and deportation if found technically guilty. But
why this sudden persecution, for I cannot call it a prosecution, of Indian
women? The Government are at war with Indian males. They are
now attempting to hound out of the Province a certain class of Indian
boys born of registered parents. The community was, however, un-
prepared for an unchivalrous attack on its womanhood. Mrs. Sodha
is not a competitor in trade. Her character is admittedly above re-
proach. A meeker woman it will be, perhaps, difficult to find throughout
South Africa. She has committed no crime under the common law of
the country. Every means that could be adopted was taken to placate
the authorities, whose only aim now seems to be to punish Indian
women, as the punishment hitherto inflicted on their husbands appears
to have failed in its purpose. I cannot foresee the extent of the terrible
effect that must be produced on the minds of the Indians throughout
South Africa and of the people of India when the news of this war on
women is spread abroad. With this aspect of the question the Minister
of the Interior is, apparently, little concerned; but I cannot conceive that
the high-handed, wantonly cruel and unnecessary proceedings against
Mrs. Sodha will meet with the approval of the people of South Africa.
Here is a question for the Loyal Women's Guild and other similar
organisations to consider. Whatever may be their views on Asiatic
immigration or on the question of general passive resistance, will not the
Christian men and women of this Union rise in unanimous protest
against this latest parody of administration on the part of the Govern-
ment?
I trust that Mrs. Sodha's act will not be construed to be one of
defiance. She is as innocent of the curious laws of this country as a
new-born babe. If anyone is guilty it is the writer, under whose
advice and by whose assistance the lady has entered this part of the
Union. In any case I wish to recall a graceful act of administration
under Crown Colony Government. In 1906, Dr. Abdurahman of
Cape Town entered the Transvaal without a permit. Lord Selborne
came to know of this and without questioning the legality of
Dr. Abdurahman's action he instructed the then Chief Secretary for Per-
mits, Captain Hamilton-Fowle, to send him a permit. The mighty and
responsible Union Government lacks both the grace and chivalry to
refrain from harassing an inoffensive Indian woman.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transvaal Leader, 15-11-1910
X-23
