392. LETTER TO REVASHANKER JHAVERI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Sravana Vadi 0, 1982 [September 7, 1926]
RESPECTED REVASHANKERBHAI,
I have your letter. Sheth Lalji Naranji also wrote to me direct-
ly, and I have replied to him saying that my going to Bombay
is likely to serve no useful purpose. If it is necessary for me to
see them, the meeting will have to be specially fixed, and I will
certainly take steps to have one arranged. If they wish to see
me, I will arrange a meeting at any convenient place. I have,
however, left the responsibility for the final decision to Lalji
Sheth and Purushottamdas. If they think that I must go, I will
go. It is advisable that no decision should be taken in a hurry.
Chi. Jamnadas had been feeling uneasy for the past many
months, but I used to reassure him and persuade him to carry
on. In the end, when I took no notice of his letters, he took
prompt steps to carry out his decision. I sent for him, and he
has been here. He gave three reasons for leaving:
(1) Self-assumed unworthiness as teacher;
(2) Throat trouble, which makes it difficult for him to
speak;
(3) Lack of faith in spinning as yajna, though he unreservedly
believes in khadi.
The last two reasons appear sufficient to me for letting him
go. If he experiences difficulty in speaking, he certainly cannot
teach; and if he does not appreciate the value of spinning in the
spirit of service, he can have no influence on the pupils. I have
now written to Nanabhai and asked him to visit Rajkot and
inspect the school there—he is the head of this Dakshinamurti and
Vice-Chancellor of the Vidyapith. You need not resign from the
Committee in a hurry. I will write more about this after discuss-
ing the matter with Nanabhai.
The more I see of Ratilal the more I notice his straightforward
nature and his simplicity. I have observed that it is Champa
who is extravagant. Just now they have both gone to Manilal
Kothari's. Champa wishes to stay on there till the Paryushana
holidays. Ratilal has not yet decided what he will do.
I am writing to Doctor about Jeki . I will write to you
again after I have his reply.
Ratilal has returned today.
Respectful greetings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1280
