419. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
NANDI DURG,
Jyaishtha Shukla 2 [June 1, 1927]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
Your letter to hand. While I am dictating this letter Mahadev
reminds me that you had sent word through Jamnalalji that I
should write to you in English. But I propose to write nothing
that needs be conveyed to anyone. I am, therefore, having this
letter written in Hindi.
I have the letter you wrote from the steamer. I have already
written two letters to your Geneva address. They must have
reached you. I am steadily improving. I write regularly to
pujya Malaviyaji. No sooner had I written to him this week than
a lengthy telegram arrived from him, telling me that his health
was now better but weakness persisted. He is at present in Bombay.
It won't be right to say I do not take care of my health. I
do take all the precautions that I think are necessary to preserve
my health. Pujya Malaviyaji does not do it as I have comp-
lained on many occasions and he took no rest even after solemnly
promising to do so. He has great faith in the treatment of vaidyas
and believes that he keeps and can keep well by taking their
pills and powders. And so strong is his self-confidence that in
spite of his weakness and ill health he is determined to live at
least up to seventy-five. May God carry him through his resolve.
Who can try to persuade him? I have written to him in a lighter
vein but with as much severity as can be combined with courtesy.
The truth is that man's wisdom is determined by his past karma.
In such matters there is very little scope for human effort. It
is our duty to try and we ought to do it but there comes in the
life of every man a time when all effort appears futile and luckily
God gives us no fore-knowledge of the end so as to avoid the
frustration. Why then worry over the inevitable? The affairs of
the nation depend neither upon Malaviyaji nor upon Lalaji nor
upon me. All are but instruments; moreover I think a good man's
efforts bear fruit only after his death. It is not correct as Shakes-
peare says, "the evil that men do lives after them, the good
is oft interred with their bones". Evil does not endure. Rama
is still in our midst and we cherish his memory. Ravana and his
wickedness are no more. Not even the wicked utter his name.
Who knows what Rama was in his own age? The poet certainly
says that in his own lifetime even Rama did not escape recrimi-
nations. But now all his imperfections have, with his body,
turned to ashes and we worship him as an incarnation of God.
And the Kingdom of Rama is much wider now than it ever was
while he lived in the body. When I write this I don't mean to
philosophize or persuade you to suppress your feelings. But I
emphasize that we should never grieve over the death of one whom
we regard as a saint. And we must have the firm belief that a
saint's deeds begin to work or, say, truly bear fruit only after his
death. The achievements which were regarded as great in his
own time are only infinitesimal compared to the influence they
will have in times to come. Yet it is certainly our duty to emulate
to the best of our ability the good deeds of those whom we regard
as saints of our age.
Regarding your health I would suggest if you have no faith
in allopathy, and you need not have it, that you should visit the
institutions of Louis Kuhne and Just when you go to Germany.
Their treatment with open air and water has benefited hundreds
of people. Contact the Vegetarian Society both at London and
Manchester. There are always some nice, serious-minded people
to be found there who will be courteous and considerate. Of
course, you will come across some faddists and fanatics too.
You said milk was not available on the steamer. Next time you
should carry Horlick's Malted Milk. It is pure milk-powder.
The chemists say that this dehydrated powder contains all that
milk does. You can try it.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6148. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
