8. LETTER TO SIR RICHARD TOTTENHAM
February 8, 1943
DEAR SIR RICHARD1,
I have very carefully studied your letter. I am sorry to
say that there is nothing in the correspondence which has taken
place between His Excellency and myself, or your letter, to
warrant a recalling of my intention to fast. I have mentioned
in my letters to His Excellency the conditions which can induce
prevention or suspension of the step.
If the temporary release is offered for my convenience, I
do not need it. I shall be quite content to take my fast
as a detenu or prisoner. If it is for the convenience of the
Government, I am sorry I am unable to suit them, much as
I should like to do so. I can say this much that I, as a prison-
er, shall avoid, as far as is humanly possible, every cause of
inconvenience to the Government save what is inherent in the
fast itself. The impending fast has not been conceived to be
taken as a free man. Circumstances may arise, as they have
done before now, when I may have to fast as a free man. If,
therefore, I am released, there will be no fast in terms of my
correspondence above mentioned. I shall have to survey the
situation de novo and decide what I should do. I have no desire
to be released under false pretences. In spite of all that has
been said against me, I hope not to belie the vow of truth and
non-violence which alone makes life livable for me. I say this,
if it is only for my own satisfaction. It does me good to re-
iterate openly my faith, when outer darkness surrounds me, as
it does just now.
I must not hustle the Government into a decision on this
letter. I understand that your letter has been dictated through
the telephone. In order to give the Government enough time,
I shall suspend the fast, if necessary, to Wednesday next, 10th
instant.
So far as the statement proposed to be issued by the Gov-
ernment is concerned, and of which you have favoured me with
a copy, I can have no opinion. But if I might have, I must
say that it does me an injustice. The proper course would be
to publish the full correspondence and let the public judge for
themselves.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, p. 38; also Correspondence with
Mr. Gandhi, p. 13
