530. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 24, 1928
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,
With reference to your leaderette in the Indian Daily Mail of
. . . I would like to say just this: Whatever might have
been your impression of the conversation between us when you
kindly offered a donation for the Bardoli fund, I never wished to
convey to you that I was collecting for Bardoli sufferers only,
but I did include Bardoli sufferers in my estimate. But Sjt. Val-
labhbhai tells me that there are no Bardoli sufferers as yet worth
mentioning. He says that they, the peasants of Bardoli, are too
proud to accept help so long as it is possible for them to avoid
it. Indeed in the initial stages of the struggle, it was they who sup-
ported the numerous workers who in Mr. Smart's language are no
better than a "swarm of agitators living on the poor people of Bar-
doli". But when the struggle became intense, forfeitures became
the order of the day and when buffaloes, the real wealth of the
peasantry and the mainstay of their agriculture, became a fit prey
for the japti officers, it was no longer possible for the people of
Bardoli and Valod taluks to sustain the ever-growing expenditure.
Hence it was that Sjt. Vallabhbhai issued a public appeal for pecu-
niary help to which our countrymen have made so prompt and
so generous a response. But Sjt. Vallabhbhai is anxious that we
should accept no contributions from those who do not sympathize
with the struggle and want to confine the use of their donations
only to the sufferers. For he contends that it is wrong to accept
such help when the largest portion of the donations has to be uti-
lized for carrying on the work of the publicity office and for
maintaining the many volunteers who receive and ask for no pay
but who must be fed. I am therefore reluctantly obliged to inform
you that I may not accept your donation unless you could see your
way to remove the restriction and support the struggle on merits.
I may add that since reading your article I have seen most of the
principal donors who had paid me personally and they tell me
they were under no impression that their donations were to be
restricted as you seem to think they were and they have confirm-
ed my impression that the donations were to be used for the
purpose named above and that they have paid because they are
in full sympathy with the struggle.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. K. NATARAJAN
EDITOR,
"INDIAN DAILY MAIL"
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 14446
