225. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 25, 1931
CHI. MIRA,
I could not write to you much yesterday for want of time. I
must dictate the balance whilst I have a few minutes to spare.
There is no reason for suppressing from me your grief if it is
there. These things are not remedied immediately there is intel-
lectual conviction. The heart responds very slowly to intellectual
conviction. Hence the necessity for practice enjoined in the 12th
chapter of the Gita and in many other cases in that Book of Life.
It is enough that you do not give way to that grief and become
unsettled again. But I have told you that whenever it becomes
unbearable you are at liberty to run to me. I shall feel it but I
am prepared for it. It will not come upon me as a shock, nor
will I accuse you of breach of promise. You must, therefore,
carry your practice with an easy mind and not allow it to gnaw
into you. It is enough that you are striving your best to over-
come the weakness and realizing more and more that it is a
weakness and not a definite want for your growth.
I have sent a peremptory letter to the Collector with reference
to the unbearable things that have happened in Bardoli. If there
is a satisfactory reply there may be some chance of going to
London. If the reply is unsatisfactory, as it is most likely to be,
you may dismiss the London visit altogether out of your mind.
If we have to go at the last moment what does it matter? Suffi-
cient khadi can be procured and whatever has to be prepared
can be prepared for you both by Pyarelal and me. We can
easily borrow a Singer machine. A few hours' work should pre-
1 Vide "Letter to T. T. Kothawala", pp. 198-.
pare the necessary dresses for you and the rest can be done in
London if we have sufficient cloth. What may be necessary is
sandals of acceptable leather which can be worn with stockings
and also slippers or shoes. We have somewhere in the Ashram
specimen of sandals I used to wear in South Africa. They are
easily made and you can wear socks without any difficulty. These
may be made now and if they are not required, they can be sold.
The measurements are there.
As I have given the Collector up to noon tomorrow for reply
I should know something definite by Monday. I want to reach
Borsad on Tuesday to finish the Borsad work if I can. Provi-
sionally therefore you may take it that I shall be in Borsad on
Tuesday morning.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5437. Courtesy: Mirabehn
