331. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
NANDI HILLS,
May 14, 1927
DEAR MOTILALJI,
I must dictate. Writing regularly with my own hand causes
too much strain and it is not possible to sit up long. This, how-
ever, does not mean that I am not getting stronger, but the
strength comes very slowly. And I do not want to be in arrears
with such correspondence as I would like to attend to.
I prize your first letter as a gift. It shows you in all your
greatness and goodness.
You are living for your children. I envy them. But Krishna's
wedding must not be after Jawahar's type. It must be as humble
as Sarup's. Otherwise I must apply for a warrant of attachment.
Or, if I feel I must enter into collusion with Krishna.
I read the public printed report from beginning to end. And
I have now read the confidential report . Both are worthy of
Jawaharlal. I appreciate the view he presents about foreign pro-
paganda. But somehow or other I still feel that our way lies
differently. I feel that we will not get the support of Europe
beyond a certain point, because after all most of the European
States are partners in our exploitation, and if my proposition is
correct, namely, that we must resist this exploitation in every
shape and form, we shall not retain European sympathy during the
final heat of the struggle. However, for the moment my view is
merely academic. And you will vote Congress funds as you please.
The idea of Jawaharlal presiding has an irresistible appeal
for me. But I wonder whether it would be proper in the present
atmosphere to saddle the responsibility upon him. It seems to
me to be a thankless task. All discipline has vanished. Communa-
lism is at its height. Intrigue is triumphant everywhere. Good
and true men are finding it difficult to hold on to their position
in the Congress. Jawahar's time will be simply taken away
in keeping the Congress house tolerably pure and he will simply
sicken. Till your letter came, I had no thought of interfering
this year in the choice of the President. My instinct still goes that
way. But, being out of touch, I may be taking too gloomy a
view of the situation. You know better. And seeing that you
are taking your head, and I suppose heart also, to Bombay, you
will know the situation at first hand and guide me. There will
be still time enough to move.
I return Krishna's copy of Jawahar's confidential report as
also the first page of his letter. I have only just received papers
regarding Saklatvala which I shall go through in due time.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12576
