164. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
SITAPUR,
November 13, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I got your letter. I have arrived at a principle of conduct on
the basis of experience, namely, that one should never think of
doing good to others with a selfish motive. If while pursuing his
own interest a person incidentally does some good to others, he
should not regard it as benevolence. He earns no merit for such
a deed either. His neighbours may indeed benefit from what he
has done, but the benefit results from the usefulness of the deed
and not from the goodness of its author.
For instance, if a Bhangi cleans lavatories conscientiously, his
work is of great benefit to others. But he earns no merit for it,
since he works for his livelihood. As, however, his work is useful,
society benefits from it as much as from that of any other person
who might clean lavatories purely in a spirit of service. In the
same way, if anyone practises pranayama, etc., for the sake of health,
the benefit he derives from these activities is limited to health. His
soul enjoys no peace through such pranayama.
This preface has reference to your question regarding our
harassment at the hands of thieves. We can clean villages, dis-
pense medicines and take up similar other activities. If, how-
ever, we start them now, they will have been prompted purely by
self-interest and we shall be given no credit for our work. From the
beginning we have cherished the intention of doing such work.
We should hold to it, and take up the work in future. At the
present time we can go into the villages only by declaring our
interest in doing so.
I had drafted a leaflet with this aim. It was even printed.
But, thanks to lack of faith on the part of the Ashram inmates, their
timidity and their false sense of shame, its circulation was abandon-
ed. My position is still the same and even now I give the same
advice. I for one believe that we should go among the people
and talk to them at present about nothing but our wretchedness
and beg them to have pity on us. If I get time, I will draft and
send a leaflet for this purpose, else I will draft one after I return.
All of you may decide then whether or not to use it. I am dic-
tating this letter while visitors are coming and going, and so I
cannot finish what I wish to say. You may fill in the rest.
I wrote to you on Monday in regard to the signing of cheques.
About putting up a hedge, ask me after I return. However,
if you feel that you cannot wait till then, do what you think best.
I have not revised this.
Blessings from
BAPU
LUCKNOW
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4150
