266. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[April 26, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter. Do as you please about Bhuvarji. You
must have noticed that he does not get along with Sitla Sahai.
I got the notes from the Working Committee. I wish everything
is settled amicably. I am at the moment concerned about the
safety of our persons and property. I think it is not right for us
to hire the services of a watchman. I can understand having paid
assistants from outside the Ashram for other jobs. But just as we
have to offer our own prayers so we shall achieve our aim only
when we are able to take care of ourselves. Or we shall have to
have recourse to the practice [of employing watchmen], in which
case our experiments with truth and non-violence would suffer.
We cannot have a watchman who commits violence [against the
intruders] nor can we let him suffer violence [at their hands]. If
there is to be violence we should inflict it ourselves and also suffer
it ourselves. Women and children too should acquire this strength.
Just see what an absurd result we get if we visualize a magni-
fied picture of the reports that have reached me. Let us decide,
on the basis of merit, our course of conduct since we have not yet
lost control of the situation. The East India Company built for-
tresses and employed mercenaries simply because they had to sub-
mit to the circumstances. Should we be swayed by circumstances
or should we have them under our sway? I think we should train
workers who would keep an all-night vigil. They will have to
think of some means of winning over the thieves without having to
act in a way contrary to dharma. Let them stay awake at night
and sleep for eight hours in the day. Sailors do it without their
health being affected by it. They may take turns at this task. But
then you may look upon this as a sick man's wonderings. Being
at a distance, I am building castles in the air. But you should all
think over this individually and collectively and find out a remedy
to your liking. But do come to some final decision in the matter.
We ought to know who the intruders were this time. We ought to be
able to follow their trail since there were so many of them. Those
that were injured can be traced. I shall agree with you even if
you all came to the conclusion that we should wind up all our
activities, because ultimately it is up to all of you there to run
the show. Now we must immediately have our accounts audited.
You can invite Nathji's auditors or those of the Charkha Sangh or
anyone else you like, but it should no more be left pending con-
sideration. Ask the auditors to examine the accounts minutely and
critically and to make any suggestions they would like to. Chi.
Narandas should sit with them so that he can help them with
information.
This letter is for all of you. I am improving though not very
fast. Yesterday I walked a lot so that I could take rest today.
Blessings from
BAPU
Supplement
PS.
After writing this, I read in the other letter from you about
the arrangements, etc. So according to our practice, the enclosed
letter should be addressed to Chhaganlal, shouldn't it? It is all
XXXIII-17
right if the changes have all been introduced after due delibera-
tions.
I have noted what you say about Sir Gangaram. The descrip-
tion fails to make a favourable impression on me. It is all to
the good that you could learn something about agriculture. Ours
is an absolutely unique way. Our aim is to ensure that we
follow our dharma till the end.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PPS.]
How are Rukhi, Radha?
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7766. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri
