349. LETTER TO E. M. GORGES
PHOENIX,
NATAL,
July 7, 1914
DEAR MR. GORGES,
I have now got a moment to submit my note upon the Gold
Law. As you know, after maturer consideration, I refrained from
pressing for the insertion of a special clause defining "vested rights"
in connection with the Gold Law and Townships Amendment
Act, because I felt that any definition in the correspondence
might result in restricting the future action of my countrymen.
However, so far as my interpretation of "vested rights" is con-
cerned, I think that I shall reduce it to writing. General Smuts
was good enough to say that he would endeavour to protect
vested rights as defined by me. The following is the definition I
submitted to Sir Benjamin Robertson, who, I understood, sub-
mitted it to General Smuts. My letter containing, among other
matters, the definition, is dated the 4th March, 1914. "By 'vested
rights' I understand the right of an Indian and his successors to
live and trade in the townships in which he was living and trad-
ing, no matter how often he shifts his residence or business from
place to place in the same township." I am fortified in my inter-
pretation by the answer given by Mr. Harcourt in connection with
the matter, in the House of Commons, on the 27th June, 1911:
Complaints against that legislation (the Gold Law and Townships
Amendment Act) have been made and are now being investigated by
the Government of the Union of South Africa, who have lately stated
that there is no intention of interfering with any business or right to
carry on business acquired and exercised by Indians prior to the date of
the legislation.
I have also now traced the note by Mr. de Villiers which I
alluded to in our conversation. It is contained in a White Paper
published in London in March, 1912, and has the following:
No right or privilege which a Coloured person has at the present
time is taken away by the new Act (Act 35 of 1908).
And again,
Section 131, which, before the Bill was introduced into Parliament,
formed the subject of questions in the English House of Commons and of
despatches from the Secretary of State to the Governor, has been amended
in Committee so as to safeguard any rights which a Coloured person may, at
the present time, have of occupying land in mining areas.
Certainly, prior to the passing of the Gold Law, no restric-
tions were, to my knowledge, placed upon the movement or the
trade of British Indians in the Gold Areas. There can, therefore,
be no justification for any restriction now, especially in regard to
those who are already settled in their respective townships.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
E. M. GORGES, ESQ.
PRETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 6003
