383. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 11/15, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your mail in due time. I send with this a beautiful letter
received from a lady living in an ashram like ours in Italy. All
the workers in that Ashram are women. The letter will give you
some idea of the devotion and patience with which they work.
Explain its contents to all the inmates, particularly to the women.
Tell them at the same time about St. Francis. Mahadev once
wrote a sketch of his life for Navajivan. Maybe you have read it.
I have requested these ladies to write a letter directly to the
Ashram. If you get any letter from them, reply to it. If, on
reading this letter, you wish to write to them immediately, you
may do so without waiting for a letter from them. But please don't
think that you must write. For all I know, they may have written
a letter directly to the Ashram.
You seem to have had excessive rains there. It is practically
the same here, though to a much lesser degree. The sky is clear-
ing fairly well now.
My yarn was tested today and it was found that with the
Gandiva wheel I have been able to go up to 53 counts. Mahadev
has gone up to 80 counts, and Vallabhbhai has reached at least
40. I think such results can be achieved easily only on the Gan-
diva wheel. There is still room for improvements in it to make
it suitable for spinning fine yarn. A few such improvements are
being made by us here in the jail. Anybody who wishes to spin
fine yarn must concentrate all his attention when he is spinning
and have a supply of good slivers. The point is that one can
spin fine yarn only if one pays careful attention to every detail. I
feel more certain every day that, if we try to spin yarn of the
best possible quality and the highest possible count, we shall be
able to make many discoveries resulting in improvement in the
quality of all yarn, and our own work will also become very
methodical and neat. If we wish to bring this about, everybody
who wishes to spin fine yarn should start using the Gandiva wheel.
However, it is for you and the others there to decide about this
after a careful discussion. Though my experience with this wheel
is sufficiently long, I don't attach much importance to it. It will
count only if it is unhesitatingly supported by others who also have
spun on it. I attach value to my experience only as a guide to
others. So far no harm seems to have been done to my elbow by
spinning on the Gandiva wheel. I will use the hand as long as
it gives service. If it fails, I will go back to the Magan spinning-
wheel. It will be a very easy thing for you to spin on the
Gandiva wheel. I know that you draw the threads with the
right hand. It is very easy to do this on the Gandiva wheel.
If no bend has been made in the groove in the spindle-bearer,
all that is necessary is to change the direction in which the
spindle points. If, however, a groove is already there, you should
fit another spindle-bearer with the bend pointing in the desired
direction. Since the spindle-bearer in my wheel has a bend, it
is easier to wind the yarn firmly. I spun the yarn of 53 counts
with slivers received from Chhakkaddas. If I don't write to him
this time, please tell him that the slivers sent by him have proved
very useful.
I hope Virsinh's fever has left him, and that Amtul also is
better.
I received the slivers sent by Chhakkaddas, the Urdu books
and the French dictionary. Shankarbhai's [arm] has been in
plaster long enough. I guess from this that the injury was quite
serious. I hope the plaster has been removed now.
It is really a release for Narmada. What is Dhirsinh's caste?
Who will pay the sum of Rs. 650? Or can Narmada's relations
bear the burden? I ask this only for my information. I think
Narmada has won her freedom fairly cheaply.
If Ratubhai takes any step regarding the affairs of Doctor,
please write to me immediately even if it is not your day for
writing to me. If you have learnt now who are there in Rangoon,
please let me know that too.
My weight varies from time to time by about one or one
and a half pounds either way. I have not tried to discover if
there is any particular reason for it. There is no need to try.
I have omitted rotli from my diet for the last ten days or so be-
cause of a slight tendency to constipation. Since then I have
been eating four to six bananas for one of the meals, with milk and
one spoonful of almond paste. For the other meal I eat some
vegetable, as when I used to eat rotli. I eat it mixed with milk,
and generally at both meals I also take mosambis or oranges. This
diet has cured constipation. This time the weight was 104½
pounds. I can say, therefore, that the omission of rotli has not
resulted in loss of weight.
There is no change in the condition of the elbow. I received
the samples of yarn spun by Keshu and Abbas. Both were ex-
cellent. I will preserve them carefully. On which type of spin-
ning-wheel did Abbas spin this yarn? I have examined the state-
ment of work done by the inmates as yajna though I have not
studied it very carefully. If we want trained spinners to spin
yarn of not less than 20 counts, we shall have to fix the limit
fairly higher than that. Hardly anybody will fall below 20 then.
If a person does not wish to fall below the lowest step, he must
stand five to ten steps above the lowest. Nothing in this world
remains on a fixed level for ever. Nobody, therefore, can main-
tain himself on the lowest level fixed. And so if one does not
advance, one must fall. In the method for learning which I have
recommended it is not necessary for people to make a special effort
to spare time for one another. In an institution where the
necessary atmosphere has been created, the inmates will spontane-
ously give time to one another for such a purpose. Just as nobody
makes an effort to spare time for eating but gives time to it as
a matter of course, so also this matter of giving time to one an-
other should be spontaneous. Anybody who has wealth of any
kind should willingly share it with his neighbours who are with-
out it. But before such a habit becomes ingrained in us, it may
be necessary, as you suggest, for the inmates to reserve some time
for the purpose. Hence, if anybody has something with him which
he can share with others, the time when he can do so must be
mentioned in our daily time-table.
You did very well in inquiring of Krishnadas if he needed
help. Regarding Nimu, I will write to her. Read the letter which
I write. If she has taken a solemn I will not press her to
give it up. If one gives up a vow, though it involves no sin,
one's strength for making vows, that is, power of determination,
diminishes. If there is a demand for copies of Anasaktiyoga, I
see no harm in getting them printed in any press which you
think suitable. If you think you cannot meet the demand, you
should keep silent just now. I think there will be no harm in
getting the discourses printed. If, however, you do that, they
should be carefully revised in proof. I don't revise things care-
fully before sending them. Besides, my handwriting is bad. It is
likely, therefore, that some bad errors will have been made. The
discourses which I write now are addressed to the small circle of
the Ashram inmates. Appa seems to have done very fine work.
You have done right in asking Hariyomal to leave.
August 14, 1932
I did not see any letter from Narayanappa. If, therefore, he
inquires for my reply, tell him that I did not receive his letter.
Read my letter to Anandi and Amtul regarding the children.
BAPU
Mahadev tells me that I have not told you yet about
Vallabhbhai studying Sanskrit. I think I did mention it. These
days he is simply engrossed in that study. Whenever he gets
any time, he studies Sanskrit or thinks about it. He gives about
five hours to it. He has finished the five books of Pandit Satav-
lekar, and has now added five new verses from the Gita to be
studied daily. He has completed Chapter I and is going on with
Chapter II. This is how he started the study. There was a
letter from Rajaji one day. He had mentioned in it having
studied Sanskrit. That inspired Sardar. Five weeks have passed
since this happened. Together with Sanskrit he started spinning
too. He now spins with perfect concentration. The speed is in-
creasing every day. He has gone up to about 40 counts.
August 15, 1932
Parasram tells me in his letter that you have already dis-
patched the Anantapur report. If that is true, please let me
know the date on which you posted it. Did you send it by
registered post?
There are 44 letters in all.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8245. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
