187. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
SEGAON, WARDHA,
June 25, 1938
DEAR KHWAJA SAHEB,
I thank you for your letter of 18th June, as also for the
letters from prisoners, dated 21st and 26th May respectively. I
wish the prisoners' letters could have been sent to me earlier.
I am enclosing replies to them, which I hope will be sent to
them without delay.
With regard to the prisoners, I had the benefit of a fairly
long chat with Subhas Babu. On his return he hopes to be able
to see you, and then, if necessary, ask for permission to see the
prisoners. As, very properly, his acceptance and that of Sarat
Babu is regarded necessary, it is as well that further negotiations
are conducted by one of them. Moreover this arrangement saves
me another journey to Bengal. I am sorry to inform you that
my health has again become very uncertain owing to the heavy
strain of work I have been recently undertaking.
Before the proposed scheme can be accepted by us three it
is necessary that even following out the method of the Govern-
ment scheme, the result should approximate to what I have sub-
mitted in my letter of 13th April last. If I accepted anything less
I would be guilty of a breach of faith with the prisoners to whom
I gave an absolute assurance, often repeated, that, subject to their
subscribing to non-violence, I should strain every nerve to secure
early discharge for everyone of them. I could, therefore, not
be party to any scheme which does not imply such discharge of
all prisoners. The method adopted for achieving the end would
then cause no difficulty.
I hope that when Subhas Babu meets you, it will be possible
to reach a satisfactory solution. If, at any time, you desire my
presence, and if it is likely to facilitate matters, you will please
not hesitate to drop me a line and, health permitting, I would
gladly visit Bengal.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
THE HON'BLE KHWAJA SIR NAZIMUDDIN
7 HUNGERFORD STREET
CALCUTTA
From a copy: C.W. 9929
