156. LETTER TO WATTAL
[AHMEDABAD,
Before October 22, 1919]
DEAR MR. WATTAL,
You will pardon me for some delay in replying to your letter,
which was received in Bombay. I wanted on my return from
Bombay to search my papers, to see what I could find. You
have asked me for papers regarding an event that happened
nearly 18 years ago. I have searched my old files and I
have not succeeded in getting all you want. You will, however,
have some idea of the impression created in S. Africa by the
action of the Indian Community at the time of the Boer War.
Mr. Escombe, who addressed us, was sometime Premier of Natal
and commander of the Natal militia, and so was the late
Sir John Robinson, Premier at another time. I give you these
references, because you will find these names in the papers I am
sending you. We were present at the battle of Colenso, Spion Kop
and the action at Vaalkranz. We had to carry the wounded
on our stretchers a distance of about 20 miles, feed and nurse
them on the way. I was mentioned in Gen. Buller's Despatch,
on the relief of Ladysmith. The leaders of the Corps were recipi-
ents of the South African War Medal. In Ladysmith itself, an
indentured Indian named Ganga Singh sat perched up in a tree
facing the hill from which the Boers were shelling Ladysmith with
their pom-pom. He watched the flash of the gun each time it
was fired, and rang a gong, informing the besieged of the coming
shell, and warning them to seek shelter. He performed his dangerous
and onerous task with unfailing regularity, and for this brave and
faithful service Lord Curzon sent him a toga, which was publicly
presented to him, on Lord Curzon's behalf, by the Mayor of Durban
at the Durban Town Hall.
I am sorry I have not been able to trace the verses referred
to in your letter. I am asking my friends in Durban to send them.
At the time of the Boer War, we were over 1,000 strong. So much
for the Boer War.
In 1906, there was the Zulu rebellion. At that time also we
offered our services. They required only a small number. We
were about 20 strong, a compact body of the Nurse, Orderly and
Stretcher-bearers. We had to carry the wounded many miles at a
time and march behind the cavalry sometimes at the rate of 40
miles per day. At this time there was no restriction as to the
zone of fire. This little party took all the risks of war. A personal
letter eulogizing the services of the Corps was addressed by the
then Governor of Natal, Sir Henry MacCullum.
And then there was the European War. Indians formed a corps.
I forget the number that served in East Africa directly under
General Smuts, and I hear from one of the friends in S.A., who was
a member of the Corps, that they gave entire satisfaction to their
officer. If any further information is required, please let me know.
After perusal, will you kindly return the papers punctually?
Yours sincerely,
WATTAL
PRIVATE SECRETARY
BIKANER
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S.N. 6853
