186. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 10, 1926
MY DEAR CHILD,
I have your letter and I have the parcel too from Menon.
There are no directions in the parcel beyond saying that there is
a powder as an opening medicine and the contents of the bottle
are for malaria. So far as I am myself concerned at the present
moment, I am free. If I get a renewal of the attack I do not
know that I can take the medicine, for as you are aware, I can
take only five ingredients during any 24 hours whether for food or
for medicine. Most of these Ayurvedic medicines contain dozens
of ingredients. Therefore, however useful they may be in them-
selves, for me they are perfectly useless. But so many people get
malaria here and I would gladly try Menon's remedy if I get the
directions. Please, therefore, ask him to send them to me and
if he knows the ingredients, he may give me an idea of them.
Now about Friendship. You have used the word 'friend'
in three different senses. If we have the capacity, we can all
become friends as Jesus was. There, the word 'friend' means a
kind helper. The friendship between ourselves and those who
are superior to us is also a one-sided thing. A father is and should
be his children's friend. There it becomes companionship with the
good, satsanga as it is called in Sanskrit. What I have written about
is intimacy between two or more persons, where there is no secret
and where mutual help is the consequence of, not a motive for,
friendship. The motive is some indefinable attraction. It is this
exclusive relationship which I have considered to be undesirable
and antagonistic to communion with God.
Such was the friendship between the person I have described
in the Autobiography and myself.
Does not spinning naturally interest you? I should expect
you, if you spin at all, to spin because you are interested in it.
And if you are interested, you should master the mechanism and
keep your instrument in perfect order as you will keep your
stove in order if you are interested in cooking.
Spinning for me is an emblem of fellowship with the poorest
of the land and its daily practice is a renewal of the bond bet-
ween them and ourselves. Thus considered, it is for me a thing
of beauty and joy for ever. I would rather to go without a meal
than without the wheel and I would like you to understand this
great implication of the wheel. If you are to spin at all, I do
not expect you to take up the wheel simply because I commend
or the Congress recommends or because it is likely to be of eco-
nomic value.
I am daily picking up strength little by little.
With love to you all,
Yours,
BAPU
MRS. ESTHER MENON
PORTO Novo (S.I.R.)
From a photostat. Courtesy: National Archives of India
1 Pt. I, Ch. VI and VII; published in Young India, 21-1-1926 and
28-1-1926
