278. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Wednesday, Asadha Vad 11, August 4, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,
I have your letter. I will publish the article which you have
sent to Mahadev. I intend to add "nearly" in the last sentence.
Foreign cloth should never be used at all, but in cities the use
of motor transport may not be an evil, it may be good. If, for
instance, there is a fire at a far end of the town, a motor lorry may
be more useful in reaching the place. Or, when we see in Cal-
cutta, and even in Bombay, draught animals made to haul exces-
sive loads during the fierce noon-day heat, the advantage of motor
transport becomes plain enough. Moreover in an age of railways
and cities, we can change things only if we oppose the very
existence of cities, if we can at all do so.
And now about collective farming. That human civilization
was due to agriculture is a relative truth; in other words, man
advanced from the hunter's stage to the agricultural stage. The
next stage, now, is not that of collective farms but of orchards.
There will be even greater stability when we arrive at that stage.
Our relations with the world will become purer than at present,
and people will have to labour much less in growing fruit trees
than they do in agriculture and they would have some peace
too. Moreover, as vegetarian food is spiritually beneficial, com-
pared with flesh food, so fruit diet will be still more beneficial.
Trees, again, make rainfall more regular and are also more inde-
pendent of rains than grain fields. Thus fruit diet has numerous
economic, political and spiritual benefits. But I am afraid we
shall not have the privilege of introducing this reform, though of
course I have still not given up hope completely. If I meet a
chemist with a spiritual vision, I would immediately resume the
experiment which I had to abandon. If you can interest that
Lonavala doctor, he may perhaps carry out experiments.
I understand what you say about your health. Try one thing
more in your diet experiments. You may drink fresh milk of cow
or buffalo, if you can be sure of proper cleanliness having been ob-
served in milking. You should watch the effect. If it is bene-
ficial, you may continue taking the milk. The vaid says that the
body gets the finest vitamins from such milk, which are destroyed
when the milk is heated. These vitamins are considered essen-
tial for health. One doctor Talwalkar has done a good study
of this subject. If necessary, you may correspond with him. My
health has not suffered at all. I tried to live only on fruit, but
resumed milk because I found that I was losing weight. The
fruits contained no seeds, of course.
I don't remember anything about the three stories. If you
help me, I may be able to refresh my memory and try to read
them. Left to myself, I am not likely to have the courage or
enthusiasm to take up anything to read.
SHRI KAKA SAHEB KALELKAR
SWAVALAMBAN PATHSHALA
CHINCHVAD
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12236
