118. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 18119, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
It is two o'clock now. I am observing silence. I got your
letter about bread. I also got your weekly mail. As you say,
God's ways are indeed inscrutable. I believe that I am dan-
cing as a puppet in His hands. Hence I feel no burden on my
mind. If only I could pass the final test in this same manner! I
will live as He wills. I wish everybody there to remain cheer-
ful to the very end, to do his daily work with greater devo-
tion and not be agitated. None should feel anxious what news he
may hear the following day. Everybody should be ready for
anything that may happen. The best way of maintaining such
a state of mind is to be completely absorbed in the work which
one may be doing at any moment. I do not know what will hap-
pen on Tuesday.
Nirmala has written to me from Rajkot. She says in her
letter that, when Aunt had got herself operated upon for cata-
ract of the eye, the expenses were paid by you. I suppose you
did that from the Ashram funds. She has again to get herself
operated upon. Look into this matter and do what is necessary.
I have been looking after many things regarding Champa
and Ratilal. If, however, the whole burden falls on you, I know
that God has given you the strength to shoulder it. I suppose
you know that a sum of Rs. 25,000 is deposited in Champa's
name with Revashankerbhai. Most probably the receipt for
that sum is with Champa. The Doctor's last draft of his Will is
unsigned. I will see that you get it. If I forget, please get it.
According to it, they two should get Rs. 50,000 each, and the red
bungalow is for them both. The Doctor has left a list of the names
of trustees, but Chhaganlal has suggested other names and I
approve of them. But no matter who are appointed, this burden
will fall on the Ashram.
A gift of Rs. 6,500 has been made to the Ashram in
memory of the Doctor. Chhaganlal wrote some time ago requesting
that the sum be paid, but had added that it might be done only
after the arrangements about the property left by the Doctor
had been completed. Besides Chhaganlal, Nanalal knows all
this. You may consult him whenever you cannot understand
something.
8.30 p.m.
I had a letter from Kasumba in which she has poured out
her grief. She wants the girls to be sent back to her. The girls,
too, have written to me. They say that they do not feel happy
in the Ashram. Have a frank talk with them and, if you find
that they really wish to go to their mother, I think they
should be permitted to go. Discuss the matter with Jaisukhlal
and do what you think proper. Go through my letters to him.
4.15 a.m., Silence Day [September 19, 1932]
After doing the morning prayer and walking for some time,
I am now writing letters to the Ashram. The more letters I write,
the more I discover those that remain to be written. I will write
as many as I can. Nobody should feel disappointed if he or she
does not get a letter. A person with a large family is happy
beyond measure but he also becomes miserable. Anybody who
does not get a letter should not envy somebody who gets one; a
letter received by one has been received by all of them. Only
those who see no difference between themselves and others even in
such small matters will succeed ultimately in forgetting it com-
pletely. Anybody who cannot count one, cannot do sums in-
volving millions. I am trying to write as many letters as I can
and thereby feel one in my heart with the inmates of the Ashram.
I am drawing the soul of the Ashram into myself and pouring my
soul into the people there. I will send with this almost all the
letters which I shall write this time. Read all the letters. Do
not let the routine of the Ashram work be broken even for a
minute. Nobody should get confused in mind or feel unhappy.
Everybody should strive ceaselessly to make himself worthy of
complete fulfilment of the aim of the fast. My own worthiness
in that regard still remains to be proved. Solon spoke the per-
fect truth when he said: "Call no man happy or good till he
be dead." Who can say that my self-suffering is not a demoniac
mortification of the self? It must be counted so if deep in my
heart I harbour ill will or anger against anybody or there is an
element of selfishness in my motive. If so, my self-suffering will
be a curse on the world. I am sure all of you will be ready
to testify for me and say that, if my vow was prompted by
ill will or any such unworthy motive, I was altogether un-
conscious of the fact and that I had taken the vow knowing it to
be perfectly pure. All this that I am writing may even prove to
be unnecessary. It is possible that the efforts of the nation
may bear fruit and that my fast may not have to be continued
to the logical end. If these efforts succeed, we should welcome
the result. But I cannot assume while writing this letter that
that will be so. I must write it assuming that this body will
perish.
I got a very forceful letter from Rambhau. Read my reply
to him. I see from his letter that, if we can remove the layers
of dirt which cover his heart, he is likely to reveal himself a real
jewel. It is a difficult task. But since you have taken him in
hand, he may be able to reveal the worth which lies hidden in
him at present.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8252. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
