107. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 3, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I got your heart-rending letter. How shall I calm you?
It is extremely difficult for me to let you go. I have built
high hopes on you. But it would be selfish on my part and harm
the ideals of the Ashram if I pressed anybody to stay on in it
when it was not for his or her good to do so. The Ashram re-
presents the sum of the good of all its inmates and the means
of its achievement, hence your good and that of the Ashram
cannot be mutually contradictory. If, however, you feel that this
is not so in so far as I am concerned, I have no doubt at all
that you should leave the Ashram. If your fast is still conti-
nuing, I want that you should give it up. I will accept whatever
decision you arrive at. I will not make the final decision; it will
have to be made by you.
As I have loaded Narandas with excessive responsibility, he
has loaded you. He has not broken down. If you break down,
I would be unhappy, for I, too, would be as much responsible
for that result as anybody else. Narandas was helpless.
Even if you decide to stay on, you ought to reduce the
burden on yourself. It is contrary to dharma to accept more
work than one can do; there is pride, too, in doing so. There
is greater harm in doing that than in eating more than one can
digest. There is of course this difference between the two: 99 out
of every 100 persons eat excessively, whereas 99½ per cent people
do much less work than they can. Hence one does not always
know whether one has taken upon oneself more work or less
than one can do. All the same, the ultimate result will be as I
have stated. If I eat excessively, I alone would suffer. If, on
the contrary, I take upon myself more Harijan work than I can
do, not only the four crore Harijans but probably the whole
world would suffer.
May God give you peace of mind and show you the right path.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10343. Also C.W. 6782. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
103
