282. LETTER TO A GIRL
July 26, 1932
DEAR . . . ,
I do not remember having seen you any time. It is possible
that I might have seen you many years ago when I was out to beg.
Although I have no direct acquaintance with you, yet, as I have
connections with your father and . . . , allow me to exercise some
authority as an elder. But do not consider this my letter as
coming from an elder. I wish to be your friend. I have known
about the misdeed committed by . . . . I am pained on account
of that misdeed because . . . has been brought up in the Ashram.
Hence I have to apologize to you for his misdeed. You can accept
my apology only when you entirely forget . . . from your mind,
and you may not henceforth be caught in the snare of any youth.
I believe that boys and girls, when they attain the age of dis-
cretion, are freed from the control of their parents. Parents may
guide them as friends. (But) they cannot put pressure upon them.
You have not attained the age to enjoy this freedom. You may
not be knowing that I have guided many girls like you, and that
from among them those who have followed my advice have become
happy. In this world there is no vice (lit. dross) like untruth. He
who conceals that which is not to be concealed acts untruthfully.
If you believed that parents should not exercise their authority
over you, but that they should guide you, then why should
you write a secret note to . . . or anybody? If you fall in love
with anybody, you have a right to do so. But many boys and girls
nourish their secret passions only in the name of affection. If they
take a vow not to conceal anything from their parents and act ac-
cordingly, they cannot but be saved from such calamities.
Your present time is for study only. You have been fortunate
to have parents of broad views, and hence they are affording you
facilities for study. So long as you desire to avail yourself of this
facility, you must lead the life of a celibate. But it is possible that
this may be beyond your power. If it is so, you must consult your
parents with a pure mind. There is not the slightest need to feel
hesitation in it. If you do this much and if you give me a promise
(not to do such a thing again), then only I will know that there
has not remained in the least upon you the effect of the misdeed
committed by . . . . Give an answer to this letter if you get it.
May God protect you.
Blessings from
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. 11, p. 487
