82. LETTER TO ADDITIONAL SECRETARY, HOME
DEPARTMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DETENTION CAMP,
April 1, 1944
THE ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT
OF INDIA (HOME DEPARTMENT)
NEW DELHI
SIR,
I beg to acknowledge your letter of 21st March handed
to me on the 27th.
As to extra medical aid, I wish to state that the first request
for the services of Dr. Dinshaw Mehta was made by the de-
ceased verbally to Col. Advani some time in December last.
When repeated verbal requests met with little or no response, I
had to make a written request4, addressed to the Government
of India, dated January 27, 1944. On the 31st of January, I sent
a reminder to the Government of Bombay (Appendix A), and so
did Drs. Nayyar and Gilder in a letter addressed to the Inspector-
General of Prisons (Appendix B). I wrote again on the 3rd of
February to the Government of Bombay (Appendix C), who sent a
reply (Appendix D) which resulted in Dr. Dinshaw being brought
in on the 5th of February last, i.e., after an interval of over six
weeks from the date of the first request. And even when per-
mission was granted, restrictions were placed upon the number
of the visits and the time he was to take in administering
treatment. It was not without difficulty that these restrictions
were later relaxed and then removed.
As to the reference in the letter under reply to Dr. Gilder,
I showed it to him. The result was the attached letter addressed
by him to the Government which he has asked me to for-
ward (Appendix E). While it shows that Dr. Gilder never expressed
the opinion attributed to him, it does not alter the tragic fact
that Dr. Dinshaw's services were held up for over six weeks.
The question of calling in a non-allopath was definitely
and formally raised before the Inspector-General of Prisons
by my son after his visit to this camp early in December last.
On Col. Bhandari mentioning to me my son's request to him,
I told him that if my son thought that non-allopathic treatment
should be tried, the Government should permit it. While the
consideration of my son's request was on the anvil, the patient's
condition began to worsen and she herself pressed for the servi-
ces of an Ayurvedic physician. She spoke to both the Inspector-
General of Prisons and Col. Shah several times, again with
no result. In despair I wrote to the Government of India on
January 27, 1944. On the 31st of January, the Superintendent
of this camp enquired on behalf of the Government, among
other things, whether the deceased had any particular Ayur-
vedic physician in mind to which I replied in writing, it being
my silence day (Appendix F). As no relief was forthcoming as a
result, and the patient's condition admitted of no delay, I sent
an urgent letter to the Government of Bombay on the 3rd of
February (Appendix C). It was on the 11th of February that a
local vaidya was sent and on the 12th that Vaidyaraj Sharma
was brought in. Thus there was an interval of more than eight
weeks between the first request for non-allopathic aid and of
actual bringing in of that aid.
Before Vaidyaraj Sharma came, I had been asked to give
a written undertaking (which I gladly did) that I absolved
the Government of all responsibility about the result of his
treatment (Appendix H). The Vaidyaraj was thus in sole charge
of the case for the time being. One would have thought that
a physician in sole charge of a patient would have all such
facilities of visiting and watching the patient as he considered
necessary. And yet there was no end to the difficulties in getting
these facilities for him. These have been alluded to in the enclosure
to my letter of March 4, 1944, and in Appendix G4. . . .
All this time the patient was passing through great suffer-
ing, and her condition was deteriorating so rapidly that every
delay weighed against chances of her recovery.
Whether the delays and difficulties experienced by the pa-
tient and me were caused by one department of the Govern-
ment or another, or even by the Government doctors, the res-
ponsibility surely rests with the Central Government.
I note that the Government have maintained complete silence
over the written request (which was reinforced by subsequent
verbal reminders) of Drs. Nayyar and Gilder to call Dr. B. C.
Roy in consultation, and have not even condescended to give
their reasons for not granting the request.
Similarly the letter under reply is silent about the discrepancy,
pointed out by me in my letter dated March 20, 1944, in the Hon.
the Home Member's statement in the Assembly that trained nurses
were in attendance. The fact is that they never were. Let me add
here that nurses of the deceased's choice who were permitted were
brought after considerable delay, especially Shri Kanu Gandhi.
I hope, after a calm perusal of this bare recital of facts
and of the relevant copies of correspondence attached hereto,
it will be conceded that the claim of the Government of India
that "they did everything possible" to ensure that the deceased
received all the treatment that I wished during her illness is
not justified. Much less can Mr. Butler's claim be justified.
For, he went further when he said, "she was receiving all pos-
sible medical care and attention, not only from her regular
attendants, but from those desired by her family." Does not the
statement of the Government of Bombay (Appendix D), "Govern-
ment have decided that no outside doctors should be allowed
unless the Government Medical Officer considers that it is absolutely
necessary for medical reasons" contradict the above claims?
On the question of release, and the report received by the
Government of India of a "private conversation" my son had
with his mother in this connection, a prisoner can have no
"private" conversation with anybody from outside. Therefore, so
far as I am concerned, the Government are free to make use
of the conversation after verification (usual and obligatory in
such cases) by my son. In any case the Government would
have been absolved from all blame, if they had made an offer
of release and laid on me the burden of deciding what was
"best and kindest" for her.
As to the arrangement for the funeral, my letter to the
Government dated March 4, 1944, embodying my actual re-
quest, which the Inspector-General of Prisons took down in
writing from dictation, speaks for itself. It, therefore, astonishes
me that on "enquiries" made by the Government, they were
"informed" that I had "no special preference between the first
two alternatives" mentioned in my letter. The information given
to the Government is wholly wrong. It is inconceivable that, given
the freedom of choice, I could ever be reconciled to the cremation
of a dear one being performed in a jail compound (which this
camp is today) instead of the consecrated cremation ground.
It is not pleasant or easy for me to write about such per-
sonal matters to the Government. But I do so in this case for
the sake of the memory of one who was my faithful partner
for over sixty-two years. I leave it to the Government to con-
sider what could be the fate of other prisoners not so circum-
stanced as Shri Kasturba was.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Enclosures: A to H
From a photostat: G.N. 3936; also Gandhiji's Correspondence with the
Government, pp. 237-40
