278. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
October 30, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,
I have a bad cold. Therefore, instead of writing this letter,
I am driven to dictating. You have let me feel that I must
think you as one of my intimate co-workers to whom I could
speak and write without reserve. You have even resented my
reserve when you have detected it. I am taking the liberty of
writing this letter without reserve.
I allowed myself to be party to a discussion over the names
of the new Working Committee. Rajendrababu and other mem-
bers came to me during my silence and opened the discussion.
We had come to two names. I had suggested one name as a
substitute for Jawaharlal whilst he was in prison, and when
we came to discuss the Bengal representative, I gave my opinion.
But I saw that I was doing violence to my pledge that I shall
cease to be a member of the Congress after the session. I did
not, therefore, attend the meeting of the A. I. C. C. that day nor
of the Working Committee.
I, therefore, abruptly stopped the
discussion and wrote on the scribbling-pad: "Surely I may not
discuss these things now." Of course, further discussion was car-
ried on by the members without my listening to it.
The difficulty that they had was to choose as a Bengal re-
presentative either you or Prafulla Ghosh. I wrote saying that
Maulana Saheb alone should be given the Bengal representation,
and that neither you nor Prafulla Ghosh should be in it. I wrote
further that if anybody had to be elected, besides the Maulana,
it must be you. It was impossible to overlook you without
slighting the present Provincial Congress Committee unless you
yourself chose to stand aside. It was at this stage that I discovered
my error and abruptly stopped taking part in the discussion.
But without any compunction, having gone as far as I did, I can
write to you that I feel that the act of self-denial which I have
recommended would be the best thing for Bengal politics. You
know how I have three times suppressed Rajagopalachari or,
rather, how Rajagopalachari has allowed himself to be suppressed.
I do not think that the country has lost by that suppression.
Rajagopalachari has certainly gained, and if today he is most
useful in the parliamentary struggle in the South, I have no
doubt that it is due to this self-denial.
But, of course, I may be wholly wrong in my judgment in
this case. I felt that I would be untrue to you if I did not
pass on the opinion that I formed yesterday, but which I could
not express as fully as I have done here.
If this letter is not
helpful, you will please dismiss it from your mind altogether.
But I hope that in no case would you consider it to be an
impertinent interference. The fact is that, so far as I am con-
cerned, we have been coming closer day by day. The association
with you in Calcutta during my recent visit brought you closer
to me. Your help during the strenuous time last week I appre-
ciated very deeply, and I have not hesitated to say so to many
friends.
Whatever decision you take, I shall be fully satis-
fied if this letter does not interfere with the growth of that
co-operation. I am desperately anxious for Bengal to have a
homogeneous, closely-knit Congress Party without internal
divisions.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A. I. C. C. File No. 628, 1936. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
