273. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR,
October 2, 1930
CHI. PREMA,
If you wish, you may certainly keep the wooden sandals. But
what will you do with those bits of wood? Keep them if you think
that they will add an inch or two to your stature. I would con-
demn your action as smacking of idolatry. I used to keep with me
a photograph of my father. I had hung his photographs in the
drawing-room and the bedroom when I was in South Africa.
When I used to wear a chain, it had a locket which contained small
photographs of my father and elder brother. I have now put
them away. That does not mean that I feel less reverence for
them now. In fact they are more deeply engraved in my heart to-
day. I think of their virtues and try to cultivate them. I can
worship countless gods in this manner. If I tried to keep with me
photographs of them all, I would have no room to put them in.
And if I tried to keep their wooden sandals, I should have to acquire
a piece of land for the purpose. As a man of experience, I advise
you, therefore, to follow me when I am walking on the right path.
That will be a thousand times better than keeping my wooden
sandals, and if anybody follows your example, I would welcome
that. On the contrary, if anybody saw the sandals with you and
followed your example blindly, would he not fall into a pit?
Think on this and then do what you wish.
He who understands and does his duty, his cravings have
already left him. A person whose cravings have not left him has
no sense of duty. Our cravings are like a huge mountain which
no man can cross over by climbing. The only course for us is to
raze the mountain to the ground. To give up our cravings is to
become conscious of our duty. Suppose that I wish to go to Kashi.
I even know the path which I should follow to reach it. What
other craving, then, will force me to stray from that path? I have
no other craving but to reach Kashi, and that is satisfied. What
more do I want then? You have an opportunity for service which
has come to you unsought. You should get fullest satisfaction in
doing that service with single-minded devotion. Whatever opportu-
192
nities for human company and for reading you get while doing
that duty, may be availed of. Apart from that, you should desire
nothing. This, according to me is yoga, "skill in works", "equi-
mindedness" and samadhi.
If, however, all this seems idle preaching to you and you
thirst for reading, by all means satisfy your craving. Reduce the
burden of work on you and take rest. How you may do this, you
can decide only in consultation with Narandas. He is a man of
profound understanding, patience and goodness. He will certainly
help you. What more can I say to cheer you? A person like me
can only suggest the direction which you should follow. It is on
oneself, however, that you and everyone else should depend for
peace of mind.
I understand what you say about Sushila. In future, let her
send her good wishes in Marathi. My blessings to her.
I understand that after having enjoyed Panditji's music, a
person like you will not enjoy music by anybody else. But why
should you not, yourself, lead the bhajans? If you have the cou-
rage to do so, ask them to let you do it. If you wish, I will write.
You certainly know how to sing. I have not forgotten that you
used to sing bhajans almost every night. How are your tonsils?
Did you get them examined by Dr. Haribhai?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10237; also C.W. 6685. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
