371. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
January 25, 1941
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your very kind letter. In it there is no acknowledge-
ment of my cable reply to your cable referred to in your letter.
My reply cabled 28²th October, 1940, was as follows:
All effort failed. Indian condition wholly different and unique. Press
gagged. Have stopped Harijan weeklies. Restricting civil disobedience
minimum requirements of non-violence.
Since then I have sent you the following cable in reply to
yours of the last week of December:
M.P.'s letter ignores facts. Frank open communication made impossible.
God between us all.
I understand your argument. The Quaker attitude is indivi-
dual. The Congress attitude has reference to a big organization.
The Congress, as an institution based on non-violence, cannot
distinguish between one species of violence and another. I do not
think that the world will be any better if British arms are victori-
ous over the German through the means employed by the latter.
In the ultimate, the question before the Congress is how to do
away with the use of arms as between man and man or nation and
nation for the vindication of justice. The universal proposition
is implicit in India's fight for freedom through non-violence.
You have rightly detected the flaw in the Congress attitude
as reflected in the Poona resolution. That was when and why I
had ceased to guide the Congress or take part in its deliberations.
I withdrew my opposition when the Congress retraced its steps
through the later resolution at Bombay. In my opinion it reflects no
discredit on the Congress that it could not abide by non-violence
in all circumstances. Its policy is truth and non-violence. Above
all else, therefore, it must be honest. When, therefore, it found
the Poona demand flouted, it came round to its original position
and invited me to lead the battle of civil disobedience. I had no
hesitation in responding as I knew that the mass mind in India
was by instinct non-violent. You seem also to have missed the
fact that the Poona resolution would not have been passed at
all but for my weakness of which I made ample confession in the
pages of Harijan.
My experience is that the Congress has grown progressively,
though slowly, in non-violence. And I would have proved an
unworthy exponent of non-violence if I had failed at the right
moment to express it through the Congress.
The Congress is as much anti-Nazism as anti-imperialism.
If the Government had not thoughtlessly forbidden the anti-war
activity of the Congress and had not proclaimed it as pro-Nazi,
they could easily have claimed the whole of India as anti-Nazi-
both that part which followed the Congress non-violence and the
other which believed in the use of violence. Had it not done so,
much bitterness would have been avoided and the world would
have profited by the lesson of tolerance and its moral opinion
would have been on the side of Britain. It is never too late to
mend one's error.
Whether, however, the error is admitted and mended or not
the course of the Congress is clear. The conviction being purely
moral it should be pursued irrespective of the immediate result.
A moral means is almost an end in itself. Is not virtue its own
reward?
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
FRIEND CARL HEATH
WHITE WINGS MANOR WAY
GUILDFORD, SURREY
From a photostat: G.N. 1049
