224. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
AMBOLI, SAVANTWADI STATE,
April 6, 1927
BHAI SATAVALEKAR,
I am confined to a sick-bed. I could therefore easily get the
time to read your book on brahmacharya. I liked the book. For
years I have regarded you as a devotee of truth; hence this letter.
1. Do you regard the asanas [postures] as an infallible means
to brahmacharya?
2. If this is true does it not mean that a man who prac-
tises asanas retains his vital fluid under all circumstances? Does
it also mean that such an aspirant becomes free from passion? You
are perhaps aware of a certain process in Western medicine by
which a man can retain the fluid but is not freed from passion.
This method is followed by those who propose to enjoy sex without
losing the fluid.
Do our systems mean this thing when they speak
of becoming urdhvareta? If it were so, the state of the urdhvareta
would be detrimental to pure brahmacharya. And then there would
be a lurking danger of harm in retaining semen with the help
of the asanas. A friend from Delhi writes to me saying that with
the help of asanas he has attained brahmacharya to such an extent
that he can take any kind or quantity of food and enjoy almost
all pleasures without losing his vital fluid. I did not continue
further correspondence with him as I was not impressed by his
letter. Another friend writes to say that with the help of pra-
nayama asanas and the like the final stage of brahmacharya can be
attained within six months. Him I know. He is a simple straight-
forward man with no guile. And he goes on insisting that I
should practise asanas and the like. I have not yet acted on his
advice but your book has moved me.
I came in contact with
many students and I cannot satisfy them all by my own experi-
ments. Besides restrictions of diet, etc., all my experiments are
purely psychological. I write this as it appears to me that a
section of the student community has fallen so low that asanas
and the like can [alone] be of any help to them.
3. Do you have personal experience of what you write about
brahmacharya in plants, etc.? You would be aware that Western
scholars of natural sciences nowadays write against brahmacharya. I
have refuted their arguments with the help of my little experience
and by the exercise of whatever talents I have. But it is essential
that these Western treatises are examined by our own experts since
they greatly influence our young men.
4. I have also gone through your book Suryabhedan Vyayam.
Do you think there is no harm if a man like me takes that exercise
merely with the aid of the book?
5. Am I right if I find a slight difference between your
method and the rules laid down in the commentaries on the
Rigveda and the other texts for interpreting the hymns?
I shall be in Amboli till the 18th of this month.
Yours,
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 12771
