221. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
October 7, 1907
THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have been directed by the Committee of my Association humbly
to address a few remarks on your speech delivered to your constituents
and containing reference to the Asiatic Law Amendment Act. If the
report published in the papers be correct, it contains, in my humble
opinion, many misstatements of facts.
My Association feels deeply grieved that from your responsible
position you should give currency to the popular inaccuracy as to the
cause of the depression. Those who are engaged in business have
1 Vide "Johannesburg Letter", p. 283.
2 A client of Gandhiji; vide Vol. VI, p. 436.
stated emphatically that the cause of the terrible depression is to be
sought elsewhere. In any case, it has affected Indians just as much as
Europeans.
My Association totally denies the statement that there are 15,000
Indians at present in the Colony. An analysis of the figures which have
been received by my Association will shortly be submitted to you which
go[es] to show that there are at present not more than 7,000 Indians in
the Transvaal.
You have been pleased to state that certificates issued under the
old Law have been fraudulently duplicated and sold, and that, in
Bombay, Johannesburg and Durban, there are known to be places
where these manufactured certificates could be bought by Indians for so
much cash. My Association repudiates the statement entirely and res-
pectfully invites a public inquiry into the matter, but my Association
is aware that there was in the Registration Office a clerk who carried on
a traffic in forged permits and undoubtedly used as his tools some
Indians who had no notion either of their nationality or their honour.
That, however, is totally different from what you have been pleased to
place before the public.
You have, again, been pleased to state that the Indians have ob-
jected to this Act because of the fingerprints. My Association has very
often submitted to the Government that the fingerprints are not a pri-
mary cause of the Indian opposition, but the principle of compulsion
and the whole object of the legislation which stamps British Indians as
criminals. When the objections against the measure were first framed,
fingerprints were not even so much as mentioned. At the same time, I
take the liberty of pointing out that the Indians who have come to the
Transvaal have never been called upon to give either their finger-
impressions or even their thumb-impressions in India. While thumb-
prints are undoubtedly taken in India, in some cases not connected with
criminality, the digit-impressions are taken only from criminals or those
who are in any way connected with crimes, and, even where thumb-
impressions are taken, the rule applies in cases of illiterates only.
My Association has always been aware of the intention of the
Government to enforce the Act strictly and rigorously, but I may be
permitted to mention once more that the most rigorous enforcement
of the Law would be as nothing compared to the degradation involved
in submission to it and violation of the community's solemn and deli-
berate undertaking not to accept the Law. My Association feels that,
although you have declared that you have especially studied the Indian
point of view of the question, the whole spirit of the opposition as also
the most important points raised by my Association have been entirely
missed by you.
7‒18
In conclusion, I beg to repeat that my Association has always
appreciated the objection against a wholesale influx of British Indians
and against unrestricted competition in trade, and, with a view of show-
ing the bona fides of the community, has come forward with humble sugges-
tions which would completely meet the two objections, but it is im-
possible for British Indians to surrender what little self-respect may be
left to them by accepting a measure which was conceived in ignorance
of the true state of things, which is oppressive to a degree in its incidents,
and which hurts the religious susceptibilities of the community represen-
ted by my Association.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 12-10-1907
