178. LETTER TO C. V. RENGANCHETTY
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 20, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have the spinning-wheel and your bill. In accordance with
the terms of my first letter to you, asking for the charkha, I
shall have to return it. But, before I do so, I want to give you
my views upon it so as not to do you an injustice.
The charkha is a flimsy thing. The woodwork is all right, but
the wire spokes and the wire stays are perfectly useless because
they are not of steel. The wires easily bend under the slightest
pressure whereas, in the Khadi Pratishthan Charkha, they are all
steel wires. The axle does not lie evenly on the poles. The result
is that the wheel-string stays not in the centre, but on one side of
the wheel. The spindle is perfectly useless, because instead of slop-
ing away from one end, it is a straight pointed wire on either
end. You cannot spin on it easily. The pulley is perfectly useless.
There is no handle-rod provided. The spinning-wheel, therefore,
that you have sent me is not only not superior to the Khadi
Pratishthan [one] as you claimed, but it is altogether inferior to
it. I had sent for your charkha in order to test its quality, be-
cause the price you quoted was surprisingly low. The price of
the Khadi Pratishthan Charkha was fixed in consultation with
me after much deliberation and after arriving at the net cost. You
have no notion how much it costs when the details about fittings
are to be made scrupulously correct as they are in the Khadi
Pratishthan Charkha. Every part is tested before it is sent out. It
is evident to me that you do not yourself handle spinning-wheels.
And, unless one knows how to handle spinning-wheels, one could
be easily deceived by a superficial similarity.
You will now tell me what to do with your charkha. I do
not want you to be out of pocket by a single pice. I will, there-
fore, gladly send the charkha back to you. But if you want me
to send it somewhere else, I shall gladly do so at my cost. Or, if
you want me to try this charkha in any other manner, I would
gladly do so. And, if it can at all prove satisfactory, I should
keep it and discharge your bill.
Yours sincerely,
C. V. RENGANCHETTY
NARAYANAVARAM
From a microfilm: S.N. 11204
