396. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
[JOHANNESBURG,]
March 7, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
My letter to Polak will give you such information as I have. I am
just now telegraphing you authority from the British Indian Association,
and a telegram is being sent to Smuts also, telling him that you are act-
ing in connection with the Transvaal matter. Polak has just telephoned,
and you will have a telegram from him also. You will see what I think
is the proper course to adopt regarding the petition from Natal. We
do not want to send the petition, if the points raised are covered in some
shape or form by General Smuts. If he promises in writing during the
Committee stage, no petition need be presented to Parliament. If I
were you, I would even ask General Smuts whether he considers it advis-
able or otherwise to present the petition, that is to say, if he is in a
reasonable frame of mind, as he seems to be. His reply to the Natal
wire is that the Bill does not affect the rights of those who are domiciled,
and that the Asiatic laws referring to the rights of those domiciled remain
intact. The telegram is satisfactory in so far as General Smuts appears
to be in a receptive mood; but he is probably labouring under a mis-
apprehension and believes that there are some Asiatic laws in Natal
also regarding their residential rights. This, of course, is wrong both as
to Natal and the Cape. I, therefore, suggest that, even if Smuts is en-
tirely reasonable, [you] should see the friends or those whom you con-
sider to be friends in [the] Assembly and the Senate, and tell them the
substance of what is going on, so that they may be ready. I hope that
you will use the wire freely, and let me know what happens daily. Please
send me any cuttings you may see, and send directly to Polak or to West
at Phoenix anything you may desire for publication.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5248
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 Vide the following item.
3 Vide "Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior", p. 437.
4 Vide enclosure to "Letter to H. S. L. Polak", and footnote 1, p. 419.
