381. LETTER TO SHIVPRASAD GUPTA
February 18, 1937
I am an idealist. I am also a practical man. I have no
enmity toward foreign countries but I cannot harm my country
for their sake. I first began using Indian dates in South
Africa and kept up the practice on my return to India. But I
found that the preference was meaningless. And what a number
of calendars we have! One in Bengal, three in Maharashtra, your
own yet another, one in Bihar, one observed by the Arya Samaj,
Hijri for the Mussalmans. I should have so many panchangs with
me; only then can I possibly be impartial towards the people
of other provinces. Alongside I have to take note of the Western
calendar. Under the circumstances I gave up the use of the
Indian calendar and it has resulted in no harm to anyone; in
fact I have only benefited. I have no resentment towards protag-
onists like you of the solar calendar though not to be resent-
ful is indeed difficult. If I resent your partiality I should return
your letter and supplement the date Magh 24 with the Chris-
tian year. Love holds me back from such impertinence. The
Gregorian calendar is not solely English, it is used far and
wide in the West. We do adopt many things Western, many
of them are harmful while some are beneficial. As for the Gre-
gorian calendar, if it is not of benefit, it is not harmful either.
Now for the second question. You believe in Ekantvad while
I believe in Anekantvad. If I am granted Dominion Status along
with the right to secede from the Empire whenever I choose to
do so, then the heart of an Ekantvadi like yourself will certainly
undergo a change. But the day when we shall be thus blessed is
in the distant future. For the present we are only the sufferers. But
take it that as soon as India gets Dominion Status the word
Ramarajya will go. When the authority comes to be vested in
Indians the occasion will spark off internecine strife. You will want
the capital in Kashi while I shall favour Segaon. But the day
is far too distant, why need we quarrel about it now?
Disregard my views and improve your health with the help
of asanas and concentration upon Ramanama. Rest assured that
the sacrifices made by Indians will not go in vain because of
my shortcomings; neither will your imprisonment prove fruitless.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
