398. LETTER TO BAL KALELKAR
ARNI,
September 2, 1927
CHI. BAL,
I got your letter and liked it very much. I could not reply
immediately for want of time. I shall answer two of your ques-
tions. A brahmachari sacrifices all pleasures merely through faith
or in obedience to his parents or a custom. There is obedience
in his sacrifice, but not knowledge. And if he cannot bring
himself to make for ever that sacrifice, he has freedom to enjoy
pleasures within limits after completing his studies. A sannyasi
makes the same sacrifice knowingly and willingly. He does not
and cannot keep it open for him to return to pleasures after
having abjured them. Both types of sacrifice are very essential
to individuals as well as to society.
Now the second question. Non-violence means not harming
anyone in thought, word or action out of ill will or selfishness. If
we wish or do ill to any stranger in the interests of our parents,
that is violence. We can see and prove with the help of our know-
ledge that wishing or doing ill benefits neither the world nor our
parents. Hence I had written that it was my belief that we dis-
cover non-violence the moment we realize that its root is to be
found in wishing well to the world as much as to ourselves. You
will thus see that we can of course prove independently that one
should wish well to the world, but if we abide by the dharma
of non-violence the responsibility to wish well to the world as
well devolves on us even in pursuance of that dharma. If we
understand this from our very childhood, our reason would admit
it and the heart too would like it. That is to say, if we continue
for ever the sacrifice which we have undertaken in good faith
during the stage of brahmacharya we become sannyasis. Shankar-
acharya did this in the past. Dayananda did it in our own age.
That we all cannot do so is due to our shortcoming and that
constitutes an obstacle to doing good to the world. But we
cannot do such things merely by exercising our reasoning. But if,
with the help of our intellect, we imprint it day after day on our
hearts and if it gets so imprinted, the whole world will not, even
if it tried, be able to stop us from sacrificing our all. If any special
problems arise, do tell me. Read this to all the pupils if you can.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy; Narayan Desai
