259. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 21, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
The programme on the 22nd must be carried out. They
have already consulted me. The Gita and spinning in the morn-
ing is the right thing, also the Ramayana. I have never believed,
let alone saying, any such thing about Kanchan as you attribute
to me. I did explain to you what I believed, and you have also
accepted its truth. Kanchan told Sushilabehn that she wants to
live with you and have children. I asked her on the very day
she left and my impression is that she admitted that it was so.
lf this is true, what you write is not correct. My own view
is that after having slept in the same bed with me once it was
wrong to discontinue it through ignorance. I did not know who
forbade her. I spoke neither to you nor to her about this. I
am mentioning this for the first time to you. This is all I wish
to say. My experiment, as you know, has been suspended. If
any woman comes to me now, she will do so not for the sake
of my experiment but in order to receive from me the spiritual
strength I possess. I think I have such strength, though I am not
sure whether I am right or wrong in my belief. I have no fear
at all that I may take unworthy advantage of anybody or violate
my cherished
You are wrong in believing that you are gaining nothing
here. But if such be your belief, now or later you must leave
the Ashram.
To depend on servants for anything will be the fall of you
both. But we may engage for service a person whom we look
upon as a brother or sister, with the object of helping him or her
to advance in life. If he or she leaves us, we should do without
him or her and carry on our work as best as we can. I should
welcome such a situation for myself. We would then have neither
money nor so-called servants, but that would be a real test for
us. I have already been tested in this manner. I have been
discussing this with Kanubhai and trying to tempt him. If he
can give us the benefit of his recent experience and do some-
thing for us, all of you should welcome it.
I understand about the dalia. If you send some, I will exa-
mine it. I am still of the view that Jowar grain should not be
ground coarse and flour removed.
I think I have now said practically everything I wished to
say. Nor have I the time for more. If there is anything left
out remind me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 5833. Courtesy: Munnalal
G. Shah
