173. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Night, January 20/26, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
I handed over the post this morning and am writing again at
night. I am doing this in order to write about something which
I have been forgetting to mention in the letters for the past
several weeks.
Ba had glasses. There were three pairs. Please inquire who
has them now. Perhaps Premabehn may have them. If you find
them send all the three pairs. I cannot explain from here which
pair I require. The one which I have with me gives me a little
trouble when I spin on the takli. It is intended to serve two
purposes, and, therefore, I have to strain the eyes when spinning
on the takli. Send them with any intending visitor or by parcel.
Thursday, January 221, 1931
I got your packet yesterday evening at seven. I had done
my best to see that you got my postcards regularly. But after all
a prisoner is a prisoner. That you got them is ganimat. Do you
know this word? It is a very good one. It is much in use in
Urdu. It means "enough", "thank God".
Surendra's problem seems to have been solved for the present.
His power of thinking has become weak. That has happened
with many others who, instead of working, get caught in idle
thinking. But Surendra's heart is pure and so I believe that he
will ultimately come out safe from this. His faith in Nathji will
also help to save him. Meet Khurshedbehn. If she requires any-
thing, send it to her.
Inquire about Madhavji's diet and inform me about it. I
think he should stick to milk and dates.
When you find a serial number omitted in my letters, you should
certainly inform me. I leave it to Pyarelal to check the numbers
and trust that he does so. Last time, however, I myself had
checked the letters and put them into the envelope. I had cor-
rected two errors. The numbers on Kaka's and Maganlal's letters
were repeated. As I did the checking in a hurry, I may have
overlooked some other error. I will be more careful in future.
Do what you think best about Keshu. Ask yourself what your
duty is, rather than what I would wish, and take the reply to
that question as my own wish and act accordingly. If I permit
myself at this distance to have my own wish in the matter, I
would be guilty on two counts. In the first place, having handed
over the reins to you, I should have no wish of my own. Secondly,
at this distance I would not have sufficient data to decide what
would be desirable. Hence, from either point of view, it would
be attachment or ignorance or blind desire on my part to have
any inclination in such matters. Yes, I can come to certain
tentative conclusions from this distance. These should be intended
merely to guide you. You may act on them only if they find
an echo in your heart.
This rule should be applied to the business of the land in
Vijapur. I have written to the same effect to Chhaganlal too.
If you deal firmly with Sarojinidevi, everything will be all right.
I had to act in this manner once. I have already written to you
what I felt in regard to Padma.
In a general way I approve of your reading my letters to
all and the letters addressed by others to me. It will be good if
you now tell everyone this: 'I read, with Bapu's consent and at
my leisure, all letters received from and addressed to him, except
those which Bapu himself or the individual concerned may ask
me not to read. Everyone, therefore, may rest assured that, if
he does not wish me to read letters by or to him, I will not
read them. If anyone feels embarrassed to tell me this per-
sonally, he may write to me and that will suffice.' I see again
and again that such secrecy does much harm. But we cannot
get rid of the evil through compulsion. Hence we have no choice
but to endure it.
Mathuradas's affair is a painful one. You must have read
the letter which I wrote to him last week. If his having got him-
self released is the result of greater self-knowledge and self-exami-
nation, it is all right. I am doing something from here about Appa.
I was happy that Lilavati had to suffer. That is, it is always
better that, instead of some other woman, a woman of the Ashram
should have to suffer. An inmate of the Ashram should have
more endurance and the spirit of ahimsa in her.
Did Shankarbhai finally get a takli?
I have written to Hariyomal. He must have got the letter
with the last mail.
Evening, January 22, 1931
I had raised here the issue of Appa and others. I am in-
formed today that they will be permitted to spin. The general
problem, too, will be solved. This news, that is, the information
about my intervention, should not be published.
I told Kashinath in my last letter to him about my opinion
regarding him to which you refer. You may now do what you
think best.
Write to Swami and inform him that I have not received
The Prophets of New India.
By the time you get this, Prabhavati will have been there
for quite some days.
I suppose I wrote to you, didn't I, suggesting that you should
try the treatment of one Punjabi vaid for Prabhavati.
What you say about Mathew is correct.
Night, January 25, 1931
As I have given the information about my health in the
letter to Mirabehn, I do not repeat it here. There is no cause
for alarm; on the contrary, I think my health is excellent. I don't
require enemas at all. I had a wire from Prabhavati today
saying that she had started. The wire was dispatched from Mugal-
sarai and was dated yesterday. Hence, by the time you get this
letter, she will have settled down there. If necessary, get her
examined by Dr. Haribhai. If you prefer Dr. Talwalkar, consult
him. My own hope is that it will not now be necessary to
consult any doctor and that she will recover by herself.
Afternoon, Monday [January 26, 1931]
We were informed this morning that Pyarelal and I are to be
released. When, therefore, you get this letter, we shall have been
released, but I don't know where I shall be. My present feeling
is that I shall be leaving peace and quiet and going into the
midst of turmoil.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 80 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I; also C.W. 8149. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
