104. LETTER TO BHOGILAL LALA
[On or before May 21, 1941]
For four days, Mridulabehn, Gulzarilal and I have had
talks to our hearts' content. If you and Sjt. Jivanlal Divan could
have been also present, it would have been very helpful to me
in arriving at a decision.
I gather that there are two opinions regarding what the
Congress did, failed to do, and should do in future in case of
communal disturbances. However that may be, everything con-
sidered, I am of opinion that, in a crisis like the present, an Advisory
Committee (of which the personnel is given below) should be
appointed, and everything should be done according to their advice.
You will see that I have included Shri Mahadev Desai's name on
the Committee. He will not be able to be there on all occasions,
but he will try to be there whenever you all feel that his presence
is essential.
Your first duty is to find out how many among our Congressmen
firmly hold that violent resistance against an opponent in defence
of oneself or others is out of the question. Those who favour
violent resistance must get out of the Congress and shape their
conduct just as they think fit and guide others accordingly. I am
firmly of opinion that, if the Congress does not clearly define its
policy in this matter, it will end in proving itself to be a useless
organization.
If a majority of Congressmen hold that violent resistance
against an assailant is a duty, and if they do not regard it as
inconsistent with the creed of the Congress, they should openly
declare their opinion and guide people accordingly. The absence
of our leaders in jail should not deter anyone from declaring his
opinion in this crisis. It can be revised in case it is found later
to be wrong. The point is that no one should be in a state of
indecisiveness.
I am sure that, if all Congressmen had done their duty, we
should not have had the goondashahi-the reign of the goonda-that
we had recently.
That people should flee for their lives for fear of the goonda
should be intolerable. They ought to possess the capacity of re-
sisting goondashahi violently or non-violently. If my interpretation
of the Congress creed is correct, the Congress and Congressmen
may offer non-violent resistance only, and they are sure to succeed.
But we should tell the people, in the clearest possible terms, that
running away in fear is cowardice.
It is their duty to offer
resistance-even violent, if they are incapable of non-violent resist-
ance, which is a worthy way.
Congressmen will not ask for the help of the Government, the
police or the military. Those who believe in violent resistance will
indeed ask for Government's help.
A Congressman may not directly or indirectly associate himself
with gymnasia where training in violent resistance is given. But he
will appeal even to the believer in violent resistance to observe
certain rules of restraint. Even violent resistance admits of a certain
amount of decency. Thus, for instance, murdering an innocent man
in cold blood should be taboo. The fundamental thing to be borne
in mind is that people should, under no circumstances, be cowardly
or impotent. One need never be a goonda to fight a goonda. One
who stabs another in the back and takes to his heels will never be
counted as brave.
A Congressman can have no prejudices, and so he would go
out of his way to meet members of the Muslim League, the Hindu
Mahasabha and other bodies in the interest of peace, and persuade
them to combine in ruling out the law of the jungle, no matter
how great their political differences. That these endeavours may
fail should not matter in the least. It is their duty to appeal to
everyone, and to flatter none.
The Congress will not claim compensation for losses sustained
during the riots. That is not its concern. The people had to sustain
losses as they lacked the capacity to defend themselves; and so they
must bear them. I go so far as to believe that Government could
not, even if they would, secure adequate compensation to those
who have sustained losses.
I think it is terrible to think of protecting ourselves with the
help of the Bhaiyya, the Sikh or the Thakurda. To engage an
ordinary durwan or gate-keeper is a different proposition. There
should be no young man among the mercantile middle-class com-
munity who has not gone through training for self-defence, violent
or non-violent. Engaging these foreign elements for defence, far
from putting an end to goondashahi will put a premium on it.
Hindus staying in Muslim localities must not leave them,
but stay on there even at the risk of their lives. Muslims living
in Hindu localities should be ensured the fullest protection by
the Hindus.
The practice of closing down shops at the slightest rumour of
disturbance should be stopped and every shopkeeper should be ready
for violent or non-violent self-defence. If they will cultivate this
courage, the loss will be reduced to a minimum, and the riots
would become a thing of the past. Riots such as we have in our
country are unknown in the West, though there may be civil wars
there. The reason is that the contending parties there are equally
matched, and do not take to their heels at the sight of one another,
nor do they ask for and accept police help. The use of the police
is entirely for protection against thieves and robbers. In this
respect we are absolutely barbarous and even impotent.
MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE: Mr. Mahadev Desai—President;
Mr. Narahari Parikh—Vice-President; Mr. Bhogilal and Mr.
Gulzarilal Nanda—Secretaries; Mr. Jivanlal Divan, Mridula
Sarabhai, Indumati Chimanlal, Mr. Khandubhai Desai and
Raojibhai Patel.
The Hindu, 25-5-1941
