487. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
May 18, 1936
CHI. BRAJKISAN,
Only today have I reached your letter of May 1. It was
received during the days of our preparation for Nandi and it
remained unattended to. Now Dr. Ansari is no more. I had
such faith in his treatment that whenever a patient was under
his care I used to rest fully assured. But I do not know what
you will do now. Illness seems to be your constant companion.
Now give me all the details.
It was the right thing to close down the Bhandar. Your health
would not permit you to cope with this work. And it becomes
difficult to carry on such an enterprise solely depending on others.
I understand what you say about Nair. If no one will stay
with him the Ashram may be closed down. Nair may return to
Malabar or work under the Harijan Sangh or come over to me.
Coming to me implies that I shall post him anywhere. It will
not be possible to keep him at Segaon where I am going to
live. You may show this letter to him, so that I need not write
separately to him. If not the whole of it, give him a copy of
this paragraph.
If you have a balance of Rs. 50 or whatever the amount,
please send it to me. I shall utilize it as I wish. You should
keep with you only the amount required for your maintenance.
You have of course my permission to come to Wardha
whenever you wish. You must not take up any work involving
permanent responsibility. You may take up only such work as
can be relinquished whenever you have to, or none at all. Your
primary duty is to improve your health which you must some-
how improve. It appears that the Delhi climate suits you best;
therefore you should live there most of the time and engage your-
self if you can in the kind of work I have suggested. It will be
good if you live in a rented place in the Harijan Nivas. Kshama
had offered to erect a room if some land near the colony could
be acquired. You could live there paying rent if she accepts
it. I have made all the suggestions I could, except one. Gadodiaji '
has come across a hakim practising nature cure. Please see him.
His treatment might prove beneficial to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2447
