14. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN,
August 3, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
Anyone who knows all the processes from the [growing of]
cotton to weaving should be able to write an introduction to the
science of khadi in two or at the most seven days.
1. Cultivation of cotton, its varieties, yield of crops in the
different regions and the use of each variety
2. Plucking, cleaning and ginning of cotton-pods
3. Carding, preparation of slivers
4. Spinning
5. Weaving
The booklet would give a description of the machines with
illustrations, arithmetical calculations, improvements up to date,
etc. From among the persons whose names you suggest, Maha-
dev or Mirabehn are more likely to take up the work. But no-
body can surpass Rameshwari Devi 3. She is a woman of powerful
personality. She knows excellent Hindi.
She has an insight
into all our activities. She belongs to well-known families both
on her husband's and her father's sides. After you have availed
yourself of her services in Rajkot, take her on a short tour of Ka-
thiawar. She will give considerable impetus to khadi and Harijan
work.
I cannot send anyone better. Still, if you want me to
make some other arrangement, I will do so. I would certainly
not send anybody in whom you may have no faith.
She was
with me for a month and is just now with me in a third-class
compartment. She has a house in Delhi and also one in Lahore.
She is going to Delhi today and I also am going there for a day.
I have been invited by the Viceroy for an informal meeting. It
was she whom I had sent to Travancore for Harijan work. You
must have read in Harijan my article on education. You have to
demonstrate its practicability.
If you feel that your services can be utilized best in the primary
department only, I don't wish to shift you. I shall be more than
satisfied if you popularize khadi and uproot untouchability all over
Kathiawar. If you can achieve that, you will set an example to
the whole country. I have no plan for any work for you outside
Kathiawar. I had asked you just to make sure whether I could
call you in case I needed somebody.
I feel better. I need a little rest, which I am taking. I
am looking after Kanu. He is passing through a difficult stage.
At his age we also must have felt the same. But he is an obedi-
ent boy and will, therefore, become steady by and by. Most
probably he will settle down with me in Segaon. I am trying to
adjust myself to him as far as possible.
Lilavati gave me your letter. I for my part have permitted
her, but I don't think she will go. She doesn't wish to leave my
side. However, at times she does feel restless. Her condition also
is somewhat similar to Kanaiyo's.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I shall return to Wardha on the 5th or the 6th. You must
have seen Kamala's request for Rs. 5 for her mother. What do
you think of it ?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8533. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1 Addressee's son
