112. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
February 3, 1934
CHI. MANU,
I got your letter. Since you remain as straightforward as
you used to be I have no fear on your account. Your assurance
that you will not marry without my blessings will protect you.
I
have written to Father not to hurt your feelings in any way. In
your letters to him, see that you never forsake civility.
If he
appears to you to use harsh language just now, there is nothing
behind it but love for you and concern for your future born of
that love.
104
There is an error in your belief concerning one matter. I
do not have with me a copy of the letter to the Princess. I
don't think there will be any in the office either. You say in
your letter that it is your belief that, provided the children re-
main Hindu by culture, I wouldn't mind in what faith they were
brought up. I am not likely to have written anything to that
effect, since for a Hindu, culture and religion are one and the same
thing. Is there any Hindu culture apart from the Upanishads, the
Gita, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana? I must have said in
my letter that, if Elizabeth could adopt Hindu culture in her life,
I wouldn't mind her remaining a Roman Catholic in religion.
This is very different from saying that the children may be
brought up as Roman Catholics. I want you to understand this
difference. I have no quarrel with you. I do not distrust you
or Elizabeth in the least. But I want to correct a misunder-
standing under which you seem to be labouring. To me all reli-
gions are alike. But since religions are many, there is diversity
even in their oneness. All living beings are one in essence, but
as embodied creatures they are infinite in number and diverse.
To realize the unity of all life in spite of our having different
bodies is the supreme end of human endeavour. If the bodies
were not different, there would have been no need to realize the
unity of life. The fact that you are a Hindu and other people
are Muslims or Christians does have some meaning. That mean-
ing must be respected in the case of your children. I am con-
vinced that if you two wish to live happily and in peace after
marriage, your children ought to be brought up as Hindus,
and Elizabeth, or rather Vimala—I had forgotten her new name—
should adopt Hindu culture. If she cannot forget Europe, you
must live in Europe. If she wishes to serve India, she must
become an Indian at heart. Without doing that, she may cert-
ainly be able to serve the country although with a superior atti-
tude, but you believe her to be a true servant at heart. As she
has changed her name, she must change her heart too. But she
cannot do that by force. She will succeed in being an Indian
at heart only if she is born with such a predisposition. You also
must have in your mind a clear picture of the future. If you wish
to dedicate yourself to the service of Mother India, you will have
to imbibe in your life what I have explained to you in my letters.
If, therefore, you have any doubts on that, you should ask me to
explain again and again till you are satisfied. Don't hesitate
to write to me. I don't know whether I shall be able to write
to you after July. You should, therefore, put to me during the
months which remain whatever questions you wish to and have
your doubts cleared and get from me whatever help you want.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1010
