581. LETTER TO SHANTA S. PATEL
November 6, 1932
CRI. SHANTA,
You seem to be as mischievous as ever. A mother who does not
listen to her daughter's complaints is no mother; similarly, a
daughter who feels shy in opening her heart to her mother, think-
ing that she is too busy to listen to her, is no true daughter.
Even in your long letter to me you have only beaten about the
bush. Mahadev will, no doubt, agree to guide you, but do you
think you will let yourself be controlled by anybody? You want
to work. Well, there is plenty of work even in the Ashram. Be-
sides, the Ashram supports all the three of you. Why then do
you worry? If you want paid work, how much more do you
expect to earn through it than what you require for your needs?
You know that, generally, however much a person may earn, he
feels that it is too little. He always wants to earn a little more.
It is the aim of the Ashram to cure its inmates of such a desire.
Are you sure in your heart of hearts that you do not want
to have a home of your own? I can see even from your letter that
whether you know it or not, all your discontent springs from
your desire to marry. It is not certain, of course, that you will be
happy even after marriage. To marry, however, is to let yourself
be bound. Then, the question of happiness or unhappiness does
not arise at all. So great is the spell of this wonderful thing, marri-
age. Ask yourself whether you want to marry. If the answer is
no, then, you must remain in the Ashram till your headstrong
temper and your childishness disappear. If you trust Premabehn,
you may talk to her and open your heart. You may write to me,
too, or to Mahadev, if you wish. But please write seriously, to
whomsoever you write. I was not happy to learn about Kamala's
laziness. The remedy I have suggested for Mangala is the only
one for her. She seems to have forgotten me altogether.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4067. Also C.W. 18. Courtesy:
Shantabehn Patel
