467. LETTER TO DAHYALAL JANI
July 15, 1937
CHI. DAHYALAL,
I am writing this letter with a heavy heart. Devsharma-
ji has sent one of your letters. The other one he had torn up.
Your letter is full of untruths. I am sending it back to you
so that you can see for yourself. You seem to have mentioned
only Jani in it. You have thus started with an untruth. If you
had from the beginning wished to join a renowned institution
like the Kangri, why did you not go there straightaway? In
your description of Ishver Ramji's "hesitant policy", you have
unnecessarily maligned the institution in which you stayed.
The letter which he has written to me on his own is in a differ-
ent vein altogether.
Your first sentence suggests excessive respect while what you
really feel is helplessness.
Look at your totalling in the third sentence: 75+5=1001
Is this dreaming?
You had resolved in my presence to preserve humility. It
has been established that you do not have sufficient knowledge.
What a big claim you make in your fourth sentence? "I will
be able to teach English, science, etc., according to the latest
method." Can you justify this claim? The sentence thereafter
is equally insufferable.
In all the institutions that you have
mentioned you say, "and that too in the capacity of a Princi-
pal". Is not this the limit of deliberate lying? Have you merit
enough to say, "You will be fully satisfied with my work and it
will also bring you credit"?
See the shabbiness of the whole letter. The handwriting is
all a mess.
What impatience! The word "immediately" occurs thrice.
Devasharma has a royal heart. He was almost ready to
take you. Even now, if I urge him, he would do so. I would
throw a letter like this from a stranger into the waste-paper bas-
ket. Your letter itself proves your unfitness. Where did you
pass the three examinations which qualify you as a teacher?
[You say,] "One runs up to your Ashram just to purify oneself by
living on the holy land." All right, run on! I feel more pain in
writing this letter than you will in reading it. I have abso-
lutely no time to write such a long letter, but I could not control
my pen. You address me as "father" and describe yourself
as my son. Is not there hypocrisy even in this? However, I
will not disown you. But you will have to help me. Go to Sabar-
mati on the 20th, a changed man. You will not get such an
opportunity again. If, however, you don't wish to go, you are
free.
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
