70. LETTER TO KUVALAYANAND
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 29, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter for which I thank you. I am sorry to
have to report to you that the blood-pressure taken on last Sun-
day week had been found to have risen from 150 to 160. The
doctors could not make out why the increase had taken place.
I then gave them an ocular demonstration of what I had been
doing in the way of sarvangasana, as also halasana, as you have
termed the practice I described to you. They urged me to stop
the two practices for the time being. I therefore stopped them.
Otherwise too, as I said in my previous letter, I would have
stopped sarvangasana if the pressure had gone up, till I had taken
your advice. Last Sunday the blood-pressure was taken again,
and it was found to have gone down by five degrees. I suppose,
therefore, it is best for me to continue the suspension of the two
practices for a while. In any event, they will remain suspended
till I hear from you.
Everything else continues as before, that is, walks, deep-brea-
thing, the shavasana and the massage. I am able to take butter
also without difficulty. It has been now increased to three tea-
spoons. I do not propose to go beyond this, unless you consi-
der that it is necessary to increase the quantity. Milk stands at
30 ounces. I am now weighing the bhakharis I take, and the quan-
tity I take weighs three ounces in a cooked condition. In view
of the tendency of the system towards an increase in blood-pres-
sure on the slightest provocation, do you want me to start
bhujangasana? So far as physical strength is concerned, there is no
difficulty about undertaking any of these practices. And personal-
ly I am unable to understand why some of these asanas should in-
crease the blood-pressure, although they do not apparently affect
the system otherwise. I suppose they do not increase blood-pressure
in men enjoying normal health. It would be well if you could
say which asanas are positively harmless, so far as blood-pressure
is concerned.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5050
