161. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
JOHANNESBURG,
June 18, 1909
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
You have always generously opened your columns to a discussion
of public questions, whether your views coincided with those of your
correspondents or not. I know you will extend that generosity to those
who are engaged in the Asiatic struggle, until, in the fulness of time,
it is over, but I trust that you will see your way to give your opinion of
the latest phase of it.
The Chairman of the British Indian mass meeting of Wednesday
telegraphed the purport of the resolutions passed at that meeting to the
Honourable the Colonial Secretary, requesting suspension of the
sentences passed upon and the adjourned cases of those who have been
elected as delegates composing the English and Indian deputations.
The following is the Colonial Secretary's reply:
With reference to your telegram this morning, the Colonial Secretary
desires me to state that when instructions were given for the arrest of the persons
you name, for non-compliance with the registration provisions of the law, nothing
was known of the likelihood of their being selected as delegates. While anxious
not to interfere in any way with the freedom of action of members of the depu-
tation, he regrets it is impossible for him to comply with your request and interfere
with the course of the law.
The public do not know that the Government have dotted the
Colony with their spies, who watch the movements of those who are
actively engaged in the struggle. They have sent to them the reports
of every meeting, public or private, that is held by British Indians. The
names of the members who were elected last Wednesday have been
before the Government for some time. The names of the delegates
were finally fixed at a committee meeting last Sunday, which was attended
by nearly three hundred Indians. The Press came to know of this appoint-
ment, and an inquiry was made at the offices of the Association on Monday.
The names were published on Tuesday in the local Press. The four
delegates, Messrs Cachalia, Coovadia, Cama and Chettiar were arrested
on Wednesday. It is impossible therefore to believe that the Govern-
ment knew nothing as to the selection of these delegates. The text of
the Colonial Secretary's telegram, in the light of the facts given above,
is quite clear. When he says "nothing was known of the likelihood
of their being selected as delegates", he simply means that the mass
meeting had not yet passed them, and he did not know whether
it would confirm the nomination of the committee referred to above.
One is justified in concluding that the Government did know that
those names were to be submitted to the mass meeting, and that the
nomination of three hundred Indians was not likely to be overridden
by the mass meeting. Why did not the Government stop proceedings,
or wait until the decision of the mass meeting was known? Every Indian
believes that the Government intended that, at the time of discussing
the South African Draft Act in London, there should be no Indian depu-
tation; that they, by striking terror, into the hearts of British Indians,
wished to make the mass meeting a fiasco, and that they have left free
the remaining members of the deputation only because they got frightened
of themselves. Not only have they arrested four of the Indian delegates
out of seven, but they have also picked out some of the best workers and
the staunchest men among the Indian community, making a total of
seventeen men. Some of these have passed through the gaols of the
Colony more than four times, are married, and have left behind them
weeping wives and children. The refusal to suspend the sentences or
the cases of the delegates is as heartless as the proceedings which were
taken with such suddenness and in violation of the ordinary rules of fair
play and decency.
My countrymen consider that Sir George Farrar, Sir Percy Fitzpa-
trick and other members of the Progressive Party are just as responsible
for the savage action as Generals Botha and Smuts. They, however, act
in the name of the electors. I ask them, and I ask you, as representing
the Press, and also as an elector, whether you and they, who are about to
receive a liberal Constitution, will use the power which will be shortly
given to you and to them in prosecuting men who are fellow- subjects
with you and them, but who happen to wear a brown skin. Apart
from the merits of the case, is it too much for the public to demand from
the Government a release of the chosen leaders of the Indian people
under the security offered?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 19-6-1909
