453. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 26, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I got your letter. I hope you do not exhibit different virtues
from time to time in order to win from me the praise which
they deserve. If you do that my praise will lose all its value.
You will not see anywhere else the fierce hatreds which you
see in Kathiawar. I am not, therefore, surprised that you saw
an exhibition of them too. Such exhibitions take place there
without any preparation. A person like . . . is likely to get fro-
zen by an exhibition of such hatreds, but it is strange that though
. . . lives in Rajkot she could not remove . . .'s depression.
I am sure she must have tied on his wrist the customary raksha
on the Balev Day. But were they satisfied with a raksha of hand-spun
yarn? It ought not to be beyond . . .'s strength to discover
the cause of . . .'s unhappiness and remove it. . . . used to
adore his wife, . . . . My belief is that, though married, they
observed brahmacharya. . . .'s passing away was a great shock to
. . . . Perhaps deep down in his heart . . . wishes to marry. He
cannot understand his own condition. But . . . should have as
wife a girl with the same ideals as his own. Failing to get such a
wife, if he gets a sister with strong idealism in her character, . . .
may perhaps blossom out. I have supposed . . . to be a per-
fect brahmacharini. She cherishes friendship for . . ., and has
idealism in her character. Since you wrote about . . .'s depres-
sion, I have been tempted to write this. If you think that I have
understood . . .'s character correctly and that what I have suggest-
ed is not beyond her strength, you may safely send this letter
to her. If you feel that this is beyond her strength or that it is
not her work, you may ignore this part of the letter. . . . craves
for pure love. But . . . is full of likes and dislikes. He can love
very few persons and so remains discontented within himself all
the time. Such a person feels little need for a wife. But [,if
married,] he can remain absorbed in his wife. He must get the
sisterly love of a woman who is free from passion. If. . . gets
such a sister, his life will take a new turn.
Women in our society do not try to cultivate this virtue.
They know how to be good wives, but do not know how to be
good sisters. In order to be a good sister, one requires great capa-
city for renunciation. It seems self-evident to me that a wife
can never be a perfect sister. A woman can be a true sister to the
whole world. A wife can surrender herself only to one person.
The capacity to be a good wife is a useful virtue, but it does not
have to be cultivated, for a wife's relation to her husband permits
the satisfaction of physical desire. It is extremely difficult to culti-
vate the virtue required in one who would be a sister to the whole
world. Only a woman for whom brahmacharya is a natural state
and in whom the spirit of service has become the strongest im-
pulse of her life can become that. . . . has not given me the im-
pression that she has risen so far, but I certainly believe that she
has the capacity to rise so high. Maybe you have been instru-
mental in creating this impression in me. I have now said every-
thing which I felt about this matter. I have indeed been
striving to make you such a sister. It is a difficult task. Let the
result be as God wills it.
You have given a good description of the exhibition. Your
descriptions are always interesting to read and make one think.
You did right in returning to the Ashram for the Janmash-
tami festival. See that you overcome your anger. Do you know
that Dhiru was simply not ready to go with you? Don't get
angry with him at any time. He is a child; you are not. If you
win over Dhiru, it will be your victory; if you fail to do so, it
will be your defeat.
Is there any test by which to judge whether a father and a
mother are cultured? Who can say what the parents' state of
mind was at the time of conception? I think, therefore, that it is
best to cling to the rule that what is good bears good fruit. If we
cannot prove the truth of this rule in every individual case, the
reason may be our ignorance and not the inadequacy of the rule.
Even if I did 1 believe in Fate, its decrees could not be altered.
Fate means the effect of past karma.
For saving the prostitutes from their profession, it is necessary
that men should cease to be beasts. As long as we have beast-like
men in the world, so long shall we have prostitutes. If any prosti-
tutes give up their profession and turn a new leaf in their lives, the
so-called "respectable" men will certainly come forward to marry
them. It is not true that once a prostitute, always a prostitute.
The belief that in every country girls are abducted for the
army seems exaggerated to me. In a well-governed country this
cannot happen.
It is not correct to believe that residents of the Malabar coast
can digest coconut even after they have left the air of that place.
By mixing coconut with tandalja, you weakened the effect of
tandalja. I have often included coconut in my diet. It didn't
agree with me. But it is highly probable that it is essential
with other articles of food in regions where it grows.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10300. Also C.W. 5747. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
