438. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS GANDHI
[About April 20, 1907]
RESPECTED SIR,
I have received your letter. I wish to answer it with the utmost
calmness and as fully as possible. I shall first put my thoughts before
you as they come to my mind, and then answer your questions.
I am afraid our outlooks differ widely and I see no possibility, for
the present, of their being reconciled. You seek peace and happiness
through money. I don't depend on money for my peace; and for the
moment at any rate my mind is quite calm and able to stand any amount
of suffering.
Like you, I too believe in the old traditions, but there is a difference
in our beliefs. For you believe in age-old superstitions, while I not
only do not but consider it sinful to believe in them.
You desire to attain moksha so do I. Nevertheless, your
notion of that state seems to be widely different from mine. Though
I have the highest regard for you, untainted by any mean or selfish
thought, you harbour hatred for me in your mind. The reason for
this, as I see it, is that you are overcome by attachment and maintain
relationships for selfish ends. Though you do this unconsciously,
the result is practically the same as I have indicated. If you have really
got to the stage of striving for moksha, you should remain calm
and unperturbed and forget all about me, even if I am extremely sinful
and may be deceiving you. But you are not able to do so because of
your excessive attachment. This is what I believe; but if I am wrong
in holding this belief, I prostrate myself at your feet and beg to be
forgiven.
But whether or not you are overcome by greed and attachment,
I am not worried. It does not affect my love for you. My regard for
you does not decrease in the least, and I am ready to render you any
service that I can and look upon it as my duty.
I fail to understand what you mean by the word "family". To
me, the family includes not only the two brothers but the sister as well.
It also includes our cousins. Indeed, if I could say so without arrogance,
I would say that my family comprises all living beings: the only difference
being that those who are more dependent on me, because of blood
1 The original carries no date; however, vide the preceding item where Gandhiji
refers to Gokuldas's betrothal, while in this letter (p. 431) he refers to the forth-
coming marriage.
2 Liberation as the goal of life
relationship or other circumstances, get more help from me. Hence
it was that I took out an insurance policy in my wife's favour. And this
I did because of your bitter letters to me when I was in Bombay and
in order to escape your imprecations in case the responsibility for
[supporting] my wife and children fell on you, as I was at that time
engaged in helping the plague-stricken. Though I am myself against
insurance, I took out an insurance policy for these and other reasons.
If by any chance you die before me, you may be sure that I shall myself
[serve as] an insurance policy for your wife and children. I beseech
you to feel secure on this account. I would cite the case of Raliatbehn
in this context.
If Raliatbehn does not stay with you, I do not consider that to
be due to any fault of mine, but hold your nature responsible. I would
humbly remind you that mother was not happy with you, nor at any
time were any of the other relatives.
If Gokuldas and Harilal have gone astray, I am not responsible.
Gokuldas left me and was spoiled by the pernicious atmosphere there;
the same thing happened with Harilal to some extent. Nevertheless,
neither of them has become as corrupt as you think. They have better
character than other boys. It is only when I judge them by a standard
of my own that I find them lacking. Harilal has greatly profited by
coming here and, if I mistake not, his character has improved. Since
Harilal is already betrothed, I have nothing to say against it. At the
same time I cannot say that I am pleased about it.
I consider it wrong too that Gokuldas is going to get married. That
it has become necessary for the two brothers to get married is due to
the sensual atmosphere there. It is not any dislike for the country but
the grief I feel for its present sorry plight that prompts me to say this.
Fortunately, Manio1, Ramo and Devo are here, and are growing
up in a healthy atmosphere. I do not therefore worry about their
betrothal. To my way of thinking, it is necessary for many Indians
to observe brahmacharya, even if they get married. If, therefore, all the
three boys were to die unmarried, I shouldn't be sorry but should rejoice
instead. However, if when they come of age they wish to marry, I
am sure that they will find suitable brides. It would cause you great sorrow
if I were to give my answer to the question, "What is to be done if no
girl is to be had from our caste?"; so I would, with your permission,
rather not answer this question. I repeat that it is the divine law that
one gets fruits according to one's faith and therefore this problem does
not arise in my mind at all.
Chhaganlal, Maganlal and Anandlal are members of our family,
hence service done to them is service done to the family. They have
become better men after coming to Phoenix and I see their moral sense
developed.
As to your demand for a hundred rupees a month, I must say that
I see neither the means at present nor the need of meeting it. I run
the Phoenix Press with borrowed money. Moreover, I may have to go
to gaol in the course of the struggle here against the new Ordinance.
In that case I may become poorer still. This will come about in a month
or two. I am therefore unable at present to do anything to satisfy you.
If, however, the condition here improves during the next few months
and I am free from trouble, I shall try to send you the money you have
asked for by money order with the sole intention of pleasing you.
I do agree that you and Karsandas have [the right to] a share in
my earnings. But I spend much less on my personal enjoyment than
you do [on yours]. My earnings are what remains after meeting all the
charges here. My object in staying here was not to make money but
to serve the people; hence I deem it my duty to use for the benefit of
the people whatever is left over after meeting the expenditure on the
family here. So please don't think that I am making money here. At
this point I would remind you that between you two brothers I have
already paid nearly Rs. 60,000. I cleared all the debts while I was
there; and you told me that no more money was wanted. It was only
after this that I began spending money here. I handed over all my
savings in Natal to you; and I have not kept a penny for myself either
from that amount or from my subsequent earnings. From this you will
see that I have paid back much more than the Rs. 13,000 spent on me
during my stay in England. In saying this I do not mean to suggest
that I have done you a favour. I only state the bare facts to pacify
your anger.
What Mr. Fitzgerald told you about me only shows that he does
not know the facts.
I shall now answer your questions. These I return herewith.
1. The object of sending me to England was that we, all the three
of us, might thereby maintain the status of our father more or less, be
well off and enjoy the good things of life.
2. The risk was indeed great as we had decided to stake whatever
we had on my education.
3. As those who had promised to help us did not keep their word,
you worked hard, and even at the cost of your health, ungrudgingly
gave me as much money as I asked for. This shows your magnanimity
and your affection for a younger brother.
4. When we were reduced to the condition described in this
question, I did feel-I vaguely recollect-that I would earn enough
1 Lakshmidas's letter containing the questions is not available.
to satisfy you and make you forget the hardships you underwent for
my sake.
5. This I do not recollect, as father himself had started selling
the property and we did the same after him.
6. This is but natural.
7. I must say with deep sorrow that, on account of your extravagant
and thoughtless way of life, you have squandered a lot of money on
pleasures and on pomp and show. You kept a horse and carriage,
gave parties, and spent money on selfish friends; and some money was
spent in what I consider immoral ways.
8. I remember to have sold them. I am not at all ashamed of
it, neither do I regret it.
9. I do not remember to have sold them secretly without your
knowledge; even if I had done so, I do not mind it.
10. Though I did not replace that jewellery, I have already
paid its value in cash and much more besides. However, if I am required
to do so [again], I shall certainly deposit the money in their names,
that is, if I am able to save any. As for getting the jewellery made
afresh, I will not do so, as I consider it a sin. When I refuse to get
the jewellery made, it means that my ideas about such things have
substantially changed.
11. I do not consider that I have obliged you by doing this. Even
if nothing was done for me, whatever I have to do for my blood-brother
I would do as a matter of duty. If then I do anything for one who
spent a great deal on my account, it would be doubly my duty to do so.
12. I am not the master of my earnings, since I have dedicated
my all to the people. I do not suffer from the illusion that it is I who
earn; I simply believe that God gives me the money for making good
use of it.
13. I do recognize your [right to a] share in all my earnings;
but since there is no such thing as an income for me now, what can
I send you?
14. I am not spending your share [on myself]; but I use all the
money that God gives me for the public good. If anything is left over
after what has been used for this purpose, I would like to send you all
of it, not just your share of it.
15. I don't have the faintest recollection of having robbed you
or anyone else. If I regard all living beings as equal both from the
practical and the moral points of view, it is in the fitness of things that
those who are more dependent on me have a greater claim on me. That
is to say, I should help my wife and sons first and then those who are
helpless and have therefore a claim on me. If, on the other hand, my
wife and sons find their means of living independently of me, they may
be left alone and others who are helpless and depend on me will have
6‒28
precedence. This means that Goko1, if he were not earning, would have
a prior claim to Hariyo's if the latter were earning. If all of them are
earning and you are not, yours will be the first claim. Moreover, if all
of you were working, but Purshottam was not and he were still with us,
his would be the first claim. This claim pertains only to maintenance
and not to the illusory worldly pleasures. Whatever other questions
of a subsidiary nature arise out of the above, you will be able to answer
for yourself. All this is written without any bad motive whatever.
16. The answer to this question is contained in the previous one.
17. I have no objection whatever to your showing this letter or
any portion of it to anyone you like. I do not know who should judge
as between us. I am at your command. I am in no way your equal and
no one therefore can compare us and pronounce judgement. However,
I shall hear what those to whom you show this letter have to say and
shall reply to them according to my lights.
I revere you as you are my elder brother. Our religion bids us
treat our elders with veneration. I implicitly believe in that injunction.
But I have greater regard for truth. This too is taught by our religion.
If you find anything objectionable in what I say, please accept my
assurance that I have answered all your questions with the greatest
regard for truth, and not in order to hurt you or be rude. Formerly,
there was no difference of opinion or misunderstanding between us,
hence you had affection for me. Now you have turned away from me
because my views have changed, as I have said. Since you consider
this change has been for the worse, I can quite understand that some
of my answers will not be acceptable to you. But as the change in my
ideas is due to my pursuit of truth, I am quite helpless. My devotion
to you remains the same as before; it has simply assumed a new form.
All this I shall explain to you most humbly and at length some day
when we meet and if you want me to tell you about it. But I am
unable to say when I can leave this country because of the peculiar
circumstances and my several obligations here.
Do please believe me when I say that I have written all this with
the best of intentions. If you do that, your displeasure will cease.
Wherever you think that I am erring, please bear with me.
I have shared your letter with Hariyo, because, after all, whatever
you may think, we both belong to the older generation, and though
you write with extreme indignation . . .3 it shows the true nature . . .4 to
1 Gokuldas
2 Harilal, Gandhiji's eldest son
3 & 4 These portions in the original, about half a line each, are undecipherable.
leave me. And I am getting him to copy this letter so that you may
have no difficulty in reading it and he may know how I have answered
your angry letter and may learn whatever he can from it according
to his karma.
From a photostat of the original Gujarati draft in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9524
