50. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Friday [June 23, 1911]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I had your letters last week. This week's I receive tomorrow
(Saturday). I leave for J'HB on Monday.
You would have enjoyed yesterday's scenes in Town. I remained
at Phoenix—West went there to report. The whole affair was
spontaneous. I merely guided. And yet Ramsay Collins thought the
Indians would have accepted anything if I had not been in D[urba]n.
Anyhow they certainly surpassed themselves. Well, they have had their
first lesson in passive resistance. I have told them that they might have
to raise passive resistance over the £ 3 tax. West tells me Rustomjee 2
was grand. Abdulla Hajee Adam was superb and defiant. The Mayor
of Durban is a cad and a disgrace to Judaism. He showed not a single
virtue of a Jew and showed every weakness which the Jew is reported
to possess. I was ashamed of him for your sake. In the report, I have
laid him down very gently. He was really much worse than he appears
in the report. Collins was mad with him. However, he deserves our
thanks for waking us up. Hollander 3 may yet be our salvation in Natal
or Durban as Smuts has been in the Transvaal.
I want your comment on the recent numbers of I. O. and more
especially on the Coronation Leader.
You will see what line to take on the Gold Law from the editorial
note this week. Harcourt 5 has given us a grand opening. Smuts has
again overreached himself He certainly never intended to protect any
existing rights. And the Supreme Court could only protect leases up
to the period stipulated therein. This is no protection. The Roodepoort
case is, I think, accidental.
Another change at Phoenix! As soon as we can we propose giving
part of press time to communal agriculture. 6 To this end we shall take
in more men of a suitable type. Please do not be alarmed. I. O. will
not be allowed to suffer. It can only gain by the men coming to their
1 From the contents
2 Parsee Rustomjee
3 F. C. Hollander, Mayor of Durban in 1912
4 Vide Vol. XI, pp. 111-.
5 Lewis Harcourt, Secretary of State for the Colonies
6 Vide also Vol. XI, p. 117.
58
work fresh from the fields. We are performing the opening ceremony
of the library and school building tomorrow.
Manilal is more settled now. He does not want to go to London
before the struggle is quite over. If satisfactory legislation is passed
next year, he intends to leave in March for London.
The account you give me of family affairs is cheering. I am delighted
that Pater is doing better than before. You were bound to be satisfied
with the boys. They are naturally clever, beautiful and healthy. And
I never doubted Millie's ability to make the most of them.
With love,
Yours sincerely,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
