635. LETTER TO A MUSLIM LEADER
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
June 4, 1926
BHAISAHEB,
For many days now I have been thinking of writing to you.
I had no intention of writing in English, and have none now. I
wanted to write at length, and it is hard for me to write such a
long letter in the Urdu script. This I am getting written in the
Urdu script by a brother of an Ashram inmate. I have your
message from Brother Andrews. I wanted to write to you even
before I got the message, in fact since the time Alibhai went to
Mecca. Regarding the Hindu-Muslim question I have deliberate-
ly refrained from saying anything. What can I write? To whom
can I tell the tale of my woe? I know very well that I have no
influence whatsoever over the quarrelling elements. Bhai Shau-
kat Ali and Manzur Ali spoke to me at length about your grief,
and I have also been given to understand that you were rather
pained at my silence. Since I am unable to bring about a compro-
mise what is the good of my writing? I cannot bring myself to
believe the various Press reports. I am asked to make a public
statement that Malaviyaji and others are enemies of the Muslims,
the Hindus ask me to make a similar statement regarding the
Muslim leaders. How can I write something which I do not
believe? I cannot accept that Malaviyaji and others are enemies
of the Muslims; this does not however mean I approve of everything
they do. Nor can I agree to calling Mahomed Ali an enemy of
the Hindus. In his case, too, I do not approve of all he does.
I am asked to state my opinion regarding the Calcutta affair.
What opinion can I give out? I have no occult power by which
to know who started the trouble in Calcutta and whose crime was
heavier. But I do know that the parties are both prejudiced
against each other, they look only for each other's faults and have
lost mutual trust. In the circumstances there is no other way for
a person like me but to keep my peace. I cannot tolerate the
killing of even a single Muslim or Hindu or for that matter of
any human being. Nor can I tolerate the destruction of a mosque
or a temple or a church. It is my belief that the same God that
dwells in the heart of a Hindu is enshrined in the heart of every
other person. And I also believe that a temple belongs to God as
much as a mosque. I can never agree to the rule of blood for
blood and a temple for a mosque. But who listens to me? It is my
firm belief, however, that God does not approve of this rule of
blood for blood and temple for a mosque. A day will come
when Hindus and Muslims will own their guilt, feel sorry for their
behaviour and unite with each other. This is the culmination
that I wish to witness in my life-time. And I always pray to God
to recall me from this world if I am not to see the light of that
day. My desire to live springs solely from this hope. And I
want you too to cherish this hope with me and never despair.
Brother Andrews tells me about your proposal that Brother
Stokes and he should invite, on their own, a few Hindus and
Muslims and attempt a reconciliation. I am afraid their
efforts cannot achieve this task. Nor is the time ripe to bring
the Hindus and Muslims together in this way. You alone can
bring them together when the time comes. Those Muslims who
are regarded as enemies of the Hindus as well as those Hindus
that are supposed to be Muslim-haters must also be invited to this
conference. What good can mere discussions bring when there is
mutual mistrust and when people speak one thing and think an-
other in their hearts?
I hope you are in Mussoorie and keeping well.
From a photostat of the Urdu (Devanagari script): S.N. 11069
