222. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
January 30, 1903
[SIR,]
Two Indian deputations waited on Mr. Chamberlain in
Natal—one at Durban and the other at Maritzburg. The state-
ment sent herewith was presented by the Durban deputation:
it needs no comment.
The Rt. Hon. Gentleman considers that with reference to
the laws already in force he can do very little, as the Colony
is "responsibly" (?) governed. This reply in a measure is
true. He also said that, with reference to the recent Bill im-
posing a tax of £3 on the children of indentured Indians, he
would be guided by advice from the India Office. From what
Lord George Hamilton has said to you at the deputation, it is
to be hoped that the Bill will be rejected. He seems to share
the fear of the Colonists that, unless the immigration of free
Indians is checked, and indentured Indians are driven back to
India on the termination of their indentures, this sub-continent
will be swamped by the Indians.
In a way he seemed to
justify the attitude of the Colonists. I was present when he
addressed the deputation in Durban. It was my intention to
try to remove one or two of his misapprehensions when he
received the Maritzburg deputation; but I was asked not to
discuss any matter. So, I simply endorsed what had been re-
presented to him at Durban, and Mr. Chamberlain repeated
what he had said there.
Recently, the Natal Government has sent a commission to
India to secure the termination of indentures in India, so that
the indentured Indians may not have the opportunity of set-
tling in Natal. This, of course, would be the climax in injustice,
if it is at all countenanced by Lord Curzon. There is absolutely
no precedent for it and it would be unadulterated slavery
for a term of years. That, after the preaching of Imperial
patriotism by Mr. Chamberlain, Natal should still make an
effort to exploit Indian labour for its sole benefit, in total dis-
regard of reasonable principles of contract, passes comprehen-
sion, and shows that the Colony has not in the least degree
changed its hostile attitude towards British Indians. This is fur-
ther confirmed by the fact that the Maritzburg Town Council
is endeavouring to debar Indians from owning land. The solution
is simple and most effective, viz., prohibition of indentured
emigration to Natal, as suggested by Lord George Hamilton.
Yours very truly
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 4035
