11. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ON THE TRAIN,
August 3, 1937
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I am writing this on the train taking us to Delhi. Herewith
is my Foreword or whatever it may be called. I could not give you
anything elaborate.
You have "perhaps" before Pushtu and Punjabi. I suggest
your removing the adverb. Khan Saheb for instance will never
give up Pushtu. I believe it is written in some script, I forget
which. And Punjabi? The Sikhs will die for Punjabi written in
Gurmukhi. There is no elegance about that script. But I under-
stand that it was specially invented like Sindhi to isolate the Sikhs
from the other Hindus. Whether such was the case or not, it seems
to me impossible at present to persuade the Sikhs to give up
Gurmukhi.
You have suggested a common script to be evolved out of the
four Southern languages. It seems to me to be as easy for them
to substitute Devanagari as a mixture of the four. From a prac-
tical standpoint, the four do not admit of an invented mixture. I
would, therefore, suggest your confining yourself to the general
recommendation that wherever possible the provincial languages
which have vital connection with Sanskrit, if they are not off-
shoots from it, should adopt revised Devanagari. You may know
that this propaganda is going on.
Then, if you think like me, you should not hesitate to express
the hope that as Hindus and Muslims are one day bound to be
one at heart, they will also, who speak Hindustani, adopt one
script, i. e., Devanagari, because of its being more scientific and
being akin to the great provincial scripts of the languages descen-
ded from Sanskrit.
If you adopt my suggestions in part or in toto you will have
no difficulty in laying your finger on the spots requiring the neces-
sary changes.
I had intended to do so myself in order to save
your time. But I must not put that strain on my system just
now.
I take it that my endorsement of your suggestions does not
mean that I must ask the Hindi Sammelan to give up the use of
the word Hindi. I am sure, that cannot be your meaning. I
have taken it to the farthest limit possible as far as I can think.
If you cannot accept my suggestions, it would be better
for the sake of accuracy to add the following sentence to the
'Foreword': 'At any rate I have no hesitation in heartily endorsing
them in a general way.'
I hope Indu's operation will go off well.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1937. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 238-
