442. LETTER TO NIRMALA B. MASHRUWALA
August 24, 1932
CHI. NIRMALA,
I got your letter. I have been getting proofs of Gitamanthan.
I have got the proofs of Chapters X to XIII, but the proofs of
the last are not complete. Why have the proofs of the earlier chap-
ters been not sent to me? When were these chapters written and
who reads the proofs? When is the book expected to be published?
Who keeps Gomati company? How does she spend the day?
And now the reply to Kishorelal's letter. I have not yet been
able to take up Gandhi Vichar Dohan. Just now my correspondence
is rather heavy, and it has become very much more so after Dr.
Mehta's death. I have to write many letters to give what advice
I can from here and get the necessary information for the pur-
pose, and that leaves very little time for other things. I do not
wish to over strain myself or cut down on sleep to do anything. I
do not even sacrifice for any work the short midday nap which I
need. I can, therefore, read only during the time which is left after
attending to other necessary things. During that time I read a
little from the Upanishads and go through books on astronomy.
This week I have not been able to read any Urdu book, though
till now I could give some time at least for its study every day.
The history of the Ashram is almost complete, but I have had
to keep it aside for some time. If the predictions of the astrologers
come true, all my plans would be in a mess. But the planets be-
tray them time and again, and, therefore, as we all go on working
without thinking of death, I go on working unmindful of their
predictions. In fact all three of us go on working. Nobody has
sent me the book on health as yet. If I get it, I would go through
it at the earliest opportunity. There is every likelihood of my
making some changes in it. Experiments for improving spinning
are going on very well. Mahadev spins yarn of 80 counts and
Sardar has reached 40 counts. He will reach a still higher figure.
The two spin on the Gandiva spinning-wheel and I spin on the
Magan spinning-wheel. I can spin yarn of 30 counts on it, and
hope to reach 40 counts. Sardar's study of Sanskrit is progressing
with the speed of a race horse. He is studying at present Part VI
of Satavlekar's Pathamala. In addition to that, he studies five
verses from the Gita every day. He gives plenty of time to this
study. It is indeed very good that you are learning Kannada. It
is of course true that, if the script were the same, a good deal of
time would be saved. But we will see about that when we have
Ramarajya. It is my experience, however, that after we have learnt
two or three scripts, more scripts give no trouble, for we discover
points of similarity in all of them. I have read all the proofs
of Gitamanthan which I have received. I liked the language. He
has almost written a new Gita on the basis of the original. I have
not yielded to the temptation of making changes in the book, for
I feel that it would be improper to do so. I have thought it
better to leave as it is the arrangement which Kishorelal has
adopted after careful thinking. There is no change in the condi-
tion of my left elbow. It gives me no trouble. All three of
us are very well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 2884. Courtesy: Nirmalabehn
Shroff
