565. LETTER TO EDMOND AND YVONNE PRIVAT
SRINAGAR CAMP,
ADDRESS AS AT KAZIRKHIL,
P. O. RAMGANJ, NOAKHALI,
February 5, 1947
MY DEAR ANAND AND BHAKTI,
It was a perfect delight to receive your letter.
It is interesting to hear about Mr. R.'s views. What you
said was perfectly true, namely, without purity of heart real
non-violence was impossible. If Mr. R. is of opinion that
purity of heart is not an essential of non-violent conduct I would
like to know the reason why he thinks so.
That the real non-violent conduct of a person may well
be followed in practice by the multitude is perfectly true. Such
was my case and is today. But the prime mover has to be
au fait with the science of non-violence.
That Mr. R. may be an atheist would not matter if his
conduct corresponds to that of a man of God. Such for in-
stance was Bradlaw [sic]. His atheism was only so-called. He
had faith in the moral government of the world and his con-
duct was so straight that his funeral was attended by several
clergymen. I was an eye-witness because I attended the fune-
ral myself. His body was cremated at Woking .
I wonder if this answers your question.
If this does not
you must tax me again.
My walking pilgrimage is going on steadily and it certain-
ly gives me immense peace of mind. The upshot I do not
know, nor do I care to know. Man has no control over re-
sults. That is the sole prerogative of God. Hence I can sing
with Cardinal Newman:
One step enough for me
I do not choose to see the distant scene
Lead Thou me on.
You know the hymn, don't you? The initial verse of the
hymn is: "Lead Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom."
I hope you will soon get your Harijan. I am exceedingly
sorry that you have been without it all these months.
I say
"months" [as] it was revived only recently.
I hope both of the babies are looking as young as when
we first met.
Tell me when you think you will be ready to pay another
visit to India.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 2341
