276. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 1, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. I understand what you say regarding
Chimanlal. I am sending your note to him. What else but a
misunderstanding can there be behind this? I have deliber-
ately placed Kamala's burden on you. I don't believe any-
body else to be capable of shouldering it. Read my letter to
her. Decide for yourself in regard to anything she demands and
inform me after taking necessary action, so that if I have any
comment to make I may do so. Ask me immediately where you
have a doubt. After knowing all the details from her, give her
permission to write letters where you think it proper. Keep
every minute of hers occupied. She may study, sew, teach,
spin, sweep, card—do everything that her strength permits.
Point out to her any defect that you may observe in her.
As regards Kamu I hear that the payment of Rs. 10 will
be stopped from this month.
There was a wire from Vijaya from Chorwad: "Send
Kanubhai." I have replied: "Wishes to stay here till tenth.
Why do you send for him earlier?"
What you wrote regarding Kishorelalbhai's speech didn't
seem to me to call for a reply. Personally I see nothing ob-
jectionable in the suggestion regarding the addition of cotton-
seed as a form of subscription for the Goseva Sangh nor can
we find fault with anybody who may spin the whole quantity at
a time rather than a little daily. It is possible that this will
nullify our object in requiring everybody to pay subscription in
the same form or some other object as well. We need not
think that Kishorelal has committed any error because the way
he looks at the matter differs from ours in accepting yarn as
a form of subscription.
I don't see anything to criticize in what he has said regard-
ing equal respect for all religions. If we see an error in any
religion, why shouldn't we point it out when occasion demands?
That we must make sure that the occasion is proper, is a differ-
ent matter. If you have read any other meaning, let me
know.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8526. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
