259. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 19/21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I wrote a letter to you yesterday and handed it over today
for posting. I hope you will get it in time. It contains detailed
instructions regarding visits and Champa. In this letter, there-
fore, I don't say anything about these matters. That letter also con-
tains something more.
I saw Haridas Gandhi, Chhaganlal and Narasinhbhai today.
I shall now be able to see three [prisoners] every fortnight, and
in this way I shall be able to know the conditions of the co-work-
ers who are lodged in this jail and help them whenever I can.
Haridas is considerably reduced, but his illness is more mental
than physical. He is being well looked after. You will learn
more details from my letter to Kamala. If she wants to come
and see Haridas, she may do so. If she comes on a day on which
other inmates of the Ashram are visiting me and her name
is included in the five, she will be able to see both of us.
Hemprabhadevi frequently writes to me directly, and I also
reply to her directly. That lady's goodness, her courage and in-
dustry and her intelligence fill me with wonder. Let me hear
whenever you get any news about Janakibehn and Jamnalal,
though I believe Madanmohan also will write to me from time
to time. I take it that Chimanlal's operation is over. Who per-
formed it? Who is the vaid treating Triveni and Dudhibehn?
Take prompt measures and cure your scabies. The application of
the wet sheet pack is bound to cure it. I don't know what
advice I should give you regarding the land in Bidaj. Do what
you think right in the circumstances. Raojibhai cannot see you.
I didn't see any letter from Ranchhodbhai. Your list too did
not contain his name.
1 Vide pp. 210-.
2 Jamnalal Bajaj's Secretary
March 21, 1932
Read my letter to Tilak[am]. If he falls ill repeatedly for
want of meat in his diet, and if he wishes to have it, we should
inquire and find a place where he can get it. If you don't approve
of this, let me know. I did this [in the past] for two or three co-
workers. It is not, therefore, anything unusual which I am sug-
gesting.
You should, if necessary, even free Hariyomal from active
work and force him to attend to the improvement of his health.
What do you intend to do about Daya, who is being called
away by her father? You must have read my letter to her.
Write to me in detail about your scabies.
Blessings from
BAPU 1
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8215. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
