40. LETTER TO HAKIM AJMAL KHAN
SABARMATI JAIL,
March 12, 1922
MY DEAR HAKIMJI,
Since my arrest, this is the first letter I have commenced to
write after having ascertained that under the jail rules I am
entitled to write as many letters as I like as an under-trial priso-
ner. Of course, you know that Mr. Shankerlal Banker is with me.
I am happy that he is with me. Everyone knows how near he has
come to me-naturally, therefore, both of us are glad that we have
been arrested together.
I write this to you in your capacity as Chairman of the Work-
ing Committee and, therefore, leader of both Hindus and Mussal-
mans or, better still, of all India.
I write to you also as one of the foremost leaders of Mussalmans,
but, above all, I write this to you as an esteemed friend. I have
had the privilege of knowing you since 1915. Our daily growing
association has enabled me to prize your friendship as a treasure.
A staunch Mussalman, you have shown in your own life what
Hindu-Muslim unity means.
We all now realize as we have never before realized that
without that unity, we cannot attain our freedom and I make
bold to say that, without that unity, the Mussalmans of India
cannot render the Khilafat all the aid they wish. Divided, we must
ever remain slaves. This unity, therefore, cannot be a mere policy to
be discarded when it does not suit us. We can discard it only
when we are tired of swaraj. Hindu-Muslim unity must be our
creed to last for all time and under all circumstances. Nor must
that unity be a menace to the minorities, the Parsis, the Chris-
tians, the Jews or the powerful Sikhs. If we seek to crush any of
them, we shall some day want to fight each other.
I have been drawn so close to you chiefly because I know that
you believe in Hindu-Muslim unity in the full sense of the term.
This unity, in my opinion, is unattainable without our adopt-
ing non-violence as a firm policy. I call it a policy because it is
limited to the preservation of that unity. But it follows that
thirty crores of Hindus and Mussalmans united not for a time but
for all time can defy all the powers of the world and should
consider it a cowardly act to resort to violence in their dealings
with the English administrators. We have hitherto feared them
and their guns in our simplicity. The moment we realize our
combined strength, we shall consider it unmanly to fear them
and, therefore, ever to think of striking them. Hence, am I anxious
and impatient to persuade my countrymen to feel non-violent not
out of our weakness but out of our strength. But you and I know
that we have not yet evolved the non-violence of the strong and
we have not done so because the Hindu-Muslim union has not
gone much beyond the stage of policy. There is still too much
mutual distrust and consequent fear. I am not disappointed. The
progress we have made in that direction is indeed phenomenal.
We seem to have covered in eighteen months' time the work of a
generation. But infinitely more is necessary. Neither the classes
nor the masses feel instinctively that our union is necessary as the
breath of our nostrils.
For this consummation, we must, it seems to me, rely more
upon quality than quantity. Given a sufficient number of Hindus
and Mussalmans with almost a fanatical faith in everlasting friend-
ship between the Hindus and the Mussalmans of India, we shall
not be long before the unity permeates the masses. A few of us must
first clearly understand that we can make no headway without
accepting non-violence in thought, word and deed for the full rea-
lization of our political ambition. I would, therefore, beseech you
and the members of the Working Committee and the A.I.C.C. to
see that our ranks contain no workers who do not fully realize the
essential truth I have endeavoured to place before you. A living
faith cannot be manufactured by the rule of majority.
To me the visible symbol of all-India unity and, therefore, of
the acceptance of non-violence as an indispensable means for the
realization of our political ambition is undoubtedly the charkha,
i.e., khaddar. Only those who believe in cultivating a non-violent
spirit and eternal friendship between Hindus and Mussalmans will
daily and religiously spin. Universal hand-spinning and the
universal manufacture and use of hand-spun and hand-woven
khaddar will be a substantial, if not absolute, proof of the real
unity and non-violence, and it will be a recognition of a living kin-
ship with the dumb masses. Nothing can possibly unify and revivi-
fy India as the acceptance by all India of the spinning-wheel as a
daily sacrament and the khaddar wear as a privilege and a duty.
Whilst, therefore, I am anxious that more title-holders should
give up their titles; lawyers, law-courts; scholars, the Government
schools or colleges; the Councillors, the Councils and the soldiers
and the civilians, their posts, I would urge the nation to restrict its
activity in this direction only to the consolidation of the results al-
ready achieved and to trust its strength to command further absten-
tions from association with a system we are seeking to mend or end.
Moreover, the workers are too few. I would not waste a single
worker today on destructive work when we have such an enormous
amount of constructive work. But perhaps the most conclusive
argument against devoting further time to destructive propaganda
is the fact that the spirit of intolerance, which is a form of violence,
has never been so rampant as now. Co-operators are estranged
from us. They fear us. They say that we are establishing a worse
bureaucracy than the existing one. We must remove every cause
for such anxiety. We must go out of our way to win them to our
side. We must make Englishmen safe from all harm from our side.
I should not have to labour the point if it was clear to everyone,
as it is to you and to me, that our pledge of non-violence implies
utter humility and goodwill even towards our bitterest opponent.
This necessary spirit will be automatically realized if only India will
devote her sole attention to the work of construction suggested by me.
I flatter myself with the belief that my imprisonment is quite
enough for a long time to come. I believe in all humility that I
have no ill will against anyone. Some of my friends would not
have to be as non-violent as I am. But we contemplated the
imprisonment of the most innocent. If I may be allowed that
claim, it is clear that I should not be followed to prison by any-
body at all. We do want to paralyse the Government considered
as a system-not however by intimidation, but by the irresistible
pressure of our innocence. In my opinion, it would be intimi-
dation to fill the gaols anyhow, and why should more innocent
men seek imprisonment till one considered to be the most innocent
has been found inadequate for the purpose?
My caution against further courting of imprisonment does
not mean that we are now to shirk imprisonment. If the Govern-
ment will take away every non-violent non-co-operator, I should
welcome it. Only, it should not be because of our civil disobedience,
defensive or aggressive. Nor, I hope, will the country fret over
those who are in jail. It will do them and the country good
to serve the full term of their imprisonment. They can be fitly dis-
charged before their time only by an act of the Swaraj Parliament.
And I entertain an absolute conviction that universal adoption of
khaddar is swaraj.
I have refrained from mentioning untouchability. I am sure
every good Hindu believes that it has got to go. Its removal is as
necessary as the realization of Hindu-Muslim unity.
I have placed before you a programme which is, in my opinion,
the quickest and the best. No impatient Khilafatist can devise a
better. May God give you health and wisdom to guide the country
to her destined goal.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 7991
