47. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
January 14, 1907
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I sent some matter yesterday. Today, I send something about
the Hejaz Railway and an incomplete feature about the Amir.
The rest I shall write out tonight. All this must appear this
week. I wrote to you earlier about the Amir's photograph. Let
me know how many extra copies sell. What I write tonight will
be in your hands on Thursday. That will be in time.
The list of persons in Johannesburg from whom subscriptions
have been collected has been misplaced. Ask Kalyandas about it.
About publishing names, please speak to Mr. West yourself
and be emphatic about it. He may entrust the work to Mania1,
if he chooses. I will also write. One should sometimes use one's
discretion in matters like these.
Your devoting an hour between 8 and 9 to Manilal will
naturally provoke resentment. It looks improper that you should
do private work for me during Press hours. It should be enough,
therefore, if you can give him any time before 8 in the morning
or some time in the evening. It should be left to his luck what
he can learn in that time.
I have promised a piano to Mania and that is what stands
in the way. If he is agreeable, by all means save the expense for
the present.
It was good that an appeal for a band was made. I feel this
begging is selfless. If a band is secured, everyone will share in the
benefit. I see its need for [every] one of us. I don't think
Mr. West has made any mistake in this matter. It is not necessary
to spend much effort on the thing. The loss of one day doesn't
matter. We want ultimately to save time. The men we have are
not yet well trained; when they are, all work will proceed apace.
I will give my views about the Hindi [section] after I hear
from you again. It is certain, however, that the venture will
be possible only if we are assured of subscribers in advance.
There is no objection to giving the market rates in the English
section. They would go better, however, in the Gujarati section
1 Manilal Gandhi
54
or in the advertisement columns. The English section is purely
political at present; therefore, market rates will appear out of
place in it.
I will write about the bill for the Anti-Indian Law Fund
after giving some thought to it.
Ismail Mia has agreed to have the advertisement without a
block. You may therefore have it so. Perhaps he will pay only
for the reduced space.
Give me full particulars about the cuttings that have been
left over.
I have written to Beck to say hat I cannot recommend
patent medicines to anyone, since most of them seem to have no stuff
in them.
Give me more news about Ritch. The poster should be in
English too. I will write to Mr. West.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 4684. Courtesy : Chhaganlal Gandhi
