247. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
October 19, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS,
I got your letter. You must have received my letters. I will
take care to write to you even from Bombay. You may take cod-
liver oil and eat eggs if you find it necessary to do so.
If the
doctor leaves the choice to you, between the two, eggs are pref-
erable. Crores of rupees are spent in the preparation of cod-
liver oil, and I do not know how much cruelty is involved in catch-
ing the fish. It seems to me to be a Satanic type of medicine.
Eggs matured according to modern methods seem to be quite in-
nocuous. We can see this for ourselves by making experiments,
whereas we cannot prepare cod-liver oil ourselves. All the same,
you know that I encouraged Prabhudas to take cod-liver oil, as
also Radha and others. None of us can overcome the desire to
live. There is neither sin nor shame in this desire. Cod-liver oil
also is one of the means of keeping oneself alive.
Even men
who are reputed to be spiritually enlightened use it. Who am
I, then, to stop you from taking it? This is a matter in which
nobody should interfere in another's case.
Ultimately, everyone
should be his own judge as to what his dharma is. You practise
self-examination and are eager to acquire knowledge from
others. I have, therefore, tried to tell you about both things as
much as I know. You may now take either of them if and when
it may be necessary to do so.
Stay in the hospital as long as the
doctor wants you to do so.
All that experience will be useful to
you.
And now about Nimu. I don't write much, or anything, to you
regarding her, thinking that she writes to you about everything.
I have been giving her fairly detailed guidance in regard to food
and have made arrangements for teaching her English. Other
subjects she is already learning.
I send her milk and fruit in
sufficient quantity. Prabhavati and Sharma look after her and
she remains quite cheerful. During my absence, these two will
look after everything.
If you have any suggestion to make, write
to me. Do you think that I should go there after the Congress
session is over, that is, towards the end of this month? Does
Ba want it? When you are able to walk about, I should like you
200
to go to Wadhwan and other places. Maneklal will feel very
happy if you go to the new place where he has been transferred.
He is very keen that you should go. He praises the air of the
place very much. But you will not get fruits there. There is
Chorwad too. Stop thinking altogether. If you make your mind
light, there will be no danger at all to your life.
If you thus go
out to these places, Ba may come and stay with me at Wardha
for some time.
In that case I need not go to Ahmedabad at all.
Wherever I go, I am bound to have some public business to
attend to. I, therefore, wish to avoid going there. But if you
think I must go there I will. Let me know frankly what you wish.
I understand your earnest desire that I should call Ba to
Bombay. But I think it will be more proper if she remains there.
It will be proper for her to leave only when you can fully look
after yourself. I am not taking with me any girl this time. From
among the men, too, I will take as few as possible. I shall be
accompanied by Kishorelalbhai and Gomatibehn. Kakasaheb and
Professor Akshayachandra also will be coming. I don't remember
other names at the moment. Let us see what happens in Bombay.
What you say about the danger of my remaining in the Con-
gress being exploited is perfectly correct. It is for such reasons
that I am trying to leave it. However, it is not easy to leave
such a great institution without doing it harm. There are many
pure men, too, in it.
Jamnalalji will remain here. I am not taking even him to the
Congress session. I have dissuaded many others, too.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
