162. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA
SEGAON,
June 11, 1938
CHI. BALWANTSINHA,
Your letter is extremely good. It is pure. Your doubts are
pertinent, even your fear is relevant and your caution is quite
welcome.
The vow of 1935 was worded in English, I had not seen
the Gujarati or the Hindi translation. The purport of the ori-
ginal English is that I renounce the practice of placing my hands
on the shoulders of women.
I did not feel then that there
was anything wrong about it, nor do I now. I gave up the
practice only for the sake of public good. My heart never
took it to mean that I would never place my hand on the
shoulder of any girl whatsoever. I have no recollection of the
particular girl with whom the practice was resumed in Segaon.
But I do recollect that I fully remembered my vow of 1935 when
I placed my hand on her shoulder.
Possibly I could not resist
her request, or maybe I needed her support. I cannot of course
say that the support became necessary because of my weak state
for had that been the case I could have had the support of
some man so as to keep the vow inviolate. But my vow never
had such a wide meaning, at least for me. From the very begin-
ning I have regarded Sushilabehn in the same way as Ba, as an
exception. My tender feelings are to account for that too. I
would like to give up physical contact even with these two if it
were possible, but I have no desire to do so at the cost of the
deep hurt which I would be causing them while my heart feels
no sin in the contact of these two. I took the decision only after
much discussion with the girls here, after some laughter and some
cajoling. I have caused Ba much pain. I still occasionally do, but
I have no courage nor any desire to inflict any further pain on
her. Sushila has observed brahmacharya since childhood but her
observance does not include the exclusion of innocent contact with
men. Pyarelal too is a brahmachari and one of the reasons for his
joining me is that I do not advocate total avoidance of innocent
contact between the two sexes and I have had a certain measure
of success in this. Once I intended to give up all personal serv-
ices from Sushila but within twelve hours my soft-heartedness
had put an end to the intention. I could not bear the tears
of Sushila and the fainting away of Prabhavati. I did not even
want to. It is these brothers and sisters that my decision has
affected most and that is why I summoned them by wire. I want
their sincere co-operation in my present task. Sushila has been
present in the bathroom while I have bathed in the nude and in
her absence Ba or Prabhavati or Lilavati have attended on me.
But I see nothing wrong in it. It was necessary for someone to
be there. I could call a male co-worker, too. Pyarelal has been
in attendance occasionally but I have never felt any embarrass-
ment in being seen naked by a woman. Still it would have to
be a woman whose relations with me cannot come under any kind
of suspicion.
Now for its implementation. As soon as I put my deci-
sion into practice the discussions arose. During the first round of
discussions I started acting upon the decision the very next day
though the step was to be taken only after 3- days. The discus-
sions are inevitable as long as my mastery over the passions is
incomplete, perhaps they are even necessary. Complete realiza-
tion can be expressed best only through silence. Speech can
never fully express thought. Ignorance denotes disorganization of
thought which is why it needs the vehicle of speech. Thus you may
take it for certain that the very necessity of any explanations and
persuasions on my part proves my imperfection or proneness to
passions. My claim is and has ever been very small. I am striving
incessantly to have full control over my thoughts, i.e., to remain
unaffected in every circumstance. I am quite vigilant but the out-
come lies with God which fact relieves me of worry. Do write to
me if some point has still not been covered or a new doubt arises.
I return your letter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1904
