371. LETTER TO R. GREGOROWSKI
JOHANNESBURG,
March 2, 1911
DEAR MR. GREGOROWSKI1,
The enclosed Bill2, of a copy of which I seem to be the only poss-
essor, I must confess baffies me, the more so as I am suspicious of the
intentions of General Smuts. I, therefore, do not trust myself to give
a correct interpretation of it. May I, therefore, fall back upon you?
The following are my deductions:
(1)
Inasmuch as all laws to the extent that they are repugnant to
the provisions of the Bill are to be repealed, an educated
Asiatic passing the education test prescribed by an officer is
a competent immigrant to the Transvaal, without the nece-
ssity of having to submit to the Registration Act No. 36 of
1908 (vide Sections 1 and 4).
(2)
It is not competent for the aggrieved party to have the deci-
sion of the officer imposing the education test brought in
review before a Court of Law, no matter how ridiculously
harsh the test imposed may be (vide Section 4).
(3) An Asiatic immigrant admitted under the education test will
be a lawful immigrant even for the Orange Free State, in
spite of its exclusive Asiatic Ordinance (vide Section 1).
(4) A Transvaal Asiatic will not be able to move to Natal or the
Cape, because he will be excluded under Section 4 by means
of a rigid education test, unless such Asiatic happened to have
residential rights in either of those Provinces.
(5) An Asiatic who has once passed the education test under the
Act cannot be challenged in the different Provinces, as soon
as he shows that he has been once examined.
(6) The present residents in the respective Provinces do not appear
to be in any way protected or exempted from the operation
of the education clause. What is their legal position?
(7) The wives and minor children of resident Asiatics or such
Asiatics as may enter under the education test are also not
protected specifically by the Bill. What is their status? And,
if they are protected under the common law, does it mean that
the son under the age of twenty-one of a resident Asiatic can
claim entry?
(8) Under the reservation clause in the first schedule following the
repeal of Act 2 of 1907, minor sons of Asiatics registered in the
Transvaal will always be able, if under the age of 16, to
enter the Transvaal, and, on attaining the age of 16, to demand
registration as a matter of right in virtue of the Chhotabhai
judgement.
(9) In virtue of Section 25 Sub-section 2, it seems that every
Asiatic leaving South Africa or the respective Provinces in
which he may be resident can be made a prohibited im-
migrant by the Minister declining to give him a certificate of
domicile.
Will you kindly treat this letter as a Brief. I do not think
I need send you the Immigration Statutes of Natal, because, being
repealed, they have no bearing on the question.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten original signed by Gandhiji: S.N. 5223
