645. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,
September 28, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
I better dictate this letter. These ups and downs in Dev-
das's health do not trouble me at all. I know that he is
getting on there. And I know further that he is in the best
of hands. Whoever gave the news to Pyarelal did no good turn.
Really and truly I have never felt better.
The whole of the last supply of your apples was practically
finished by me. And I was also taking musumbis. Therefore there
is no cause for worry, even on that score. Whenever I feel the
need for fruit I shall certainly take it. I have not left off raw
leaves. There was for a few days no room left for neem leaves.
So that was omitted. But then all the vegetables were to be
omitted if I was taking fruit and the fruit jam. And now I
have gone back to neem leaves. The bhaji I have been taking in
its cooked form in order to avoid constipation but I stopped
it when I was taking apples. You will please therefore not worry
about my health.
Now about Ba. If she is not happy there and if she can be
spared, I think it is no good keeping her there. With all your
care and attention I am quite sure that Devdas does not need
her presence there. If, therefore, she feels like coming away to
Wardha you should let her do so. She is well able to travel by
herself.
She requires some assistance at stations where she
alights. That you can arrange without the slightest difficulty at
Kalka, Ambala and Delhi. Someone has simply to meet her at
the station and put her in the right compartment.
I am looking forward to your letter giving me your own
programme. I should be very much disturbed if you altered
your own programme on account of Devdas or Kumarappa. If
they cannot stay at Manorville after you leave it, they must
shift somewhere else or go to some other hill-station, if a more
prolonged stay is necessary. And I do think that both of them
should remain in the bracing climate at least up to the end of
October if not November. Devdas may even require a longer
stay.
459
The apples and your letter have just come in. If Ba forfeits
her ticket, she should pay the fare, i.e., Devdas.
Love.
From the original: C.W. 3552. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6361
