276. LETTER TO K. S. KARANTH
AS AT THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
December 19, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter. Of course if you wish to publish your
book, there is no harm. Perhaps my own experience is that it is
better to wait for publishing such books till one has obtained
greater and more accurate experience.
Your reference to different kinds of asanas seem to me to
have been taken from various books. I have been in corres-
pondence with the writers of such books and I have found that
whatever they have written is not capable of being borne out
fully either by their own experience or the experience of others
on whom one can rely. But if you have confidence in what
you have written, I have no desire to dissuade you from publish-
ing the book. If asana and pranayamas are really efficacious as
they are claimed to be, why don't you give them a thorough trial
yourself? I intended to do so myself but experts themselves
dissuaded me owing to my illness.
I see no inconsistency between advocating brahmacharya and
widow remarriage at the same time so long as I do not do so in
connection with the same persons. Whilst I would like all young
men to be and remain brahmacharis, I did not hesitate to advocate,
countenance and even officiate at marriages of those who find it
impossible to practise self-restraint. Of course when I advocate
the marriage of child widows, I presume that they want the pleasure
which all animals seek and some human beings only can restrain
themselves from seeking. Brahmacharya is not a thing that can
be superimposed, and it is sinful to compel child widows to remain
unmarried.
If the fallen sisters to whom you refer will not mind marry-
ing a person belonging to any caste, there should be no difficulty
and they ought not to object to any caste. My asking them to
observe celibacy, if they cannot secure a proper match, has a
meaning. That is to say, if they will restrict themselves to a caste
or a province, and yet lead a pure life, naturally they must
observe celibacy or they must accept any person of any character.
You may publish a translation of Self-restraint V. Self-
indulgence. But please ask the Manager of Navajivan before
you do so lest he might have given the permission to somebody.
I do not know what you wrote about Ramakrishna Parama-
hamsa. In spite of your information, it would not be wrong to
say that he was an embodiment of ahimsa. He believed in that
dharma and tried to follow it to the best of his lights. That he
did something which to us today with our fuller experience
appears to be repugnant to the doctrine of ahimsa, does not take
away from the merit of Ramakrishna inasmuch as he could not
think out of the custom prevalent around him, so far as food
was concerned. It is not possible that future generations will con-
demn the eating of cooked food as contrary to ahimsa and yet
the existing authorities of ahimsa will not be liable to condemn-
ation for not having discovered the inconsistency of eating cooked
food. No person is able to practise completest ahimsa. Possession
of a material frame involves a certain amount of unavoidable
himsa. A votary of ahimsa therefore continually strives to reduce
the extent of himsa to a minimum.
Please tell me if you want me to return the manuscript of
your book.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. K. S. KARANTH
C/O, K. S. ACHARLU, M. A.
TEACHER, DAVANGERE
From a microfilm: S.N. 12652
