129. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
November 30, 1932
MY DEAR MARY,
You have asked for only a postcard, but that won't be
adequate for me. Because I do not find a particular thing help-
ful for me, I may not be indifferent about others and not take the
trouble of knowing whether it is helpful for them. I know that
that particular form of idolatry is helpful for millions, not because
they are less developed than I am, but because they are differently
constituted. What must not be forgotten about me is that not
only do I not consider idol-worship to be a sin, but I know that
in some form or other it is a condition of our being. The diffe-
rence between one form of worship and another is a difference in
degree and not in kind. Mosque-going or church-going is a form
of idol-worship. Veneration of the Bible, the Koran, the Gita
and the like is idol-worship and even if you don't use a book or
a building but draw a picture of divinity in your imagination
and attribute certain qualities, it is again idol-worship and I
refuse to call the worship of the one who has a stone image a
grosser form of worship. Learned judges have been known to
have such images in their own homes. A philosopher like Pandit
Malaviya will not eat his meal without offering worship to the
household deity. It would be both arrogant and ignorant to
look down upon such worship as superstition. Again in the
imagination of the worshipper, God is in a consecrated stone and
not in the other stones lying about him. Even so, the sanctuary
in a Church is more sacred than any other place in it. You can
multiply for yourself instances of this character. All this is a
plea not for laxity in thought or worship, but it is a plea for a
definite recognition of the fact that all forms of honest worship
are equally good and equally efficient for the respective worshippers.
Time is gone for the exclusive possession of right by an individual
or a group. God is no respector of forms or words, for He is
able to penetrate our actions and our speech and read and un-
derstand our thoughts, even when we do not understand them
ourselves and it is first our thoughts that matter to him.
I am glad you are with Maria and your picture of her
family which includes our four-footed kinsfolk is instructive and it
is just like her. I do not mind her not writing to me. Whilst
I welcome her letters when she has anything to say to me, I do
not want her to steal a single minute merely for writing to me
because somebody else is writing.
I am glad you have fourteen months' grace. I like your pro-
gramme. So far as I recall you have not been to Santiniketan.
You ought to go there at least. I do not want to harness you
for untouchability work before you have gone through your tour-
ing. Untouchability work is a long programme and you can be
fitted in whenever you are quite ready and you have a definite
call from within. I would like you also quietly to study this
movement in all its ramifications and assimilate the spirit lying
behind it, and if you give yourself to it I want you to do it with
your whole heart without any mental reservation. I want you
therefore not to hesitate to place all your doubts before me and
offer yourself for the service when both your head and heart are
completely satisfied. Of course in connection with the untouch-
ability work you can see me any time you like.
Please share this with Maria. My love to both of you in
which Mahadev joins.
Yours,
BAPU
[PS.]
I have not revised this.
From a photostat: G.N. 5986. Also C.W. 3313. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
