261. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
April 25, 1927
I have your letter of the 29th March. I must dictate this
letter as I must keep as much on my back as possible.
I see you want me to give you the name of an Indian friend
who could lay the foundation stone for your new hall. The only
one I can think of and thoroughly recommend and whom I know
personally very well is Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. His address is:
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Clinique Stephani, Montanas Sierre,
Switzerland. And you must write to him. Use this letter and
draw him. He will come if you want him and you will be
pleased to have him. He is one of the truest men I know in
India. I am writing to him.
I do not like your resolution at all. Here is the text that I
would recommend. I know it will be difficult for you to pilot
my text. But really that alone will answer if it is backed by
corresponding action. The resolution you have given is very
vague and will be accepted by the Government of India without
any difficulty. For, they will say that they do not thwart any
action which the Indian people by their accredited representatives
may desire to carry through. They will say, 'we have transferred
this department to them. Let them adjust the finances as they
like.' Do you see what I mean? Our case is that the Govern-
ment is not sincere, that the people have really no hand in the
matter, and that the transfer of excise revenue to the elected re-
presentatives is itself proof of the Government's insincerity. Educ-
ation is a transferred subject and the financial assistance given to
them is from the excise revenue. The Government have thus
created a tie. If the accredited representatives shut up liquor
shops, they must starve education or impose fresh taxation upon
a people who are in no way able to bear the weight even of exis-
ting taxation. The remedy, therefore, is, if the position stated
above is correct, for the Government to keep the excise department
themselves and carry the prohibition policy through and recoup
themselves for the loss of revenue by cutting down the military
budget. They have as much right to raise revenue through liquor
as they would have to raise revenue through legalized prostitution.
If this is your position independently of me and if you can support
the position by your own study of facts, figures and other litera-
ture, your resolution would run thus:
In the opinion of this meeting it is wrong for the people
of this country to be party to the maintenance of the liquor
traffic in India and that therefore it was wrong on the part
of the Government to have made the liquor revenue of India
a 'transferred' (provincial) subject and consequently a principal
source of revenue on which the spending departments of edu-
cation and development have to depend, thereby rendering it
practically impossible for the Ministers responsible for these
departments to undertake a policy of prohibition. In the
opinion of this meeting the Government of India should have
retained the Liquor Revenue as a Central subject and carried
out a policy of complete prohibition, the loss of revenue thus
sustained being made up for, by retrenchment in the ever-
growing and largely unnecessary military expenditure. This
meeting therefore calls upon the Government to take the
steps necessary to enforce the wish expressed in this resolution.
You may lick the resolution into shape in any manner you
like so long as you retain the substance of it unimpaired. I fear
that you will find it difficult to carry through the resolution of this
character. But really it is the only thing worth having. And if
you find that there is no atmosphere yet in England for such a
drastic resolution-and I admit that it is drastic-merely put
your case before the educated public, and wait for the resolution.
The resolution given to you by your friends gives a wrong lead
and you know how difficult it is to undo the mischief done by a
thing wrongly begun.
I am getting better though I must still take extra-ordinary
care to give myself as much rest as is possible both for body and
mind.
Yours sincerely,
MISS MURIEL LESTER
CHILDREN'S HOUSE
Bow
LONDON E. 3
From a photostat: S.N. 12475
