167. LETTER TO GENERAL SMUTS
JOHANNESBURG,
June 13, 1908
DEAR MR. SMUTS,
With reference to the interview I had with you today, I trust you
will excuse my trespassing upon your time and attention yet awhile.
Until the Asiatic question, as far as it arises out of the Asiatic Act, is
settled, I am obliged to approach you.
You doubt my full representative capacity, or, better still, the
full representative character of the views submitted by me. I admit
it only in so far as it affects those who, whilst the passive resistance
struggle was going on, accepted the Asiatic Act. Even they do not differ
from my views, but they, like the national scouts, intend to save their
faces. But I hope, with your assistance, to have even them side by
1 This was republished in Indian Opinion, 4-7-1908, and a copy was sent by
Ritch as an annexure to his letter of July 27, 1908 to the Colonial Office.
side with the other members of the community. I clearly consider that
they have erred from fear, but every endeavour is being made to win
them over, and, should they not—why, they represent but a microscopic
minority. Some of them have had many conversations with me, and
they are, undoubtedly, as anxious as the rest of the community that
the Asiatic Act should be repealed.
With reference to the amendment of the Immigration Act, I
wish to make the Asiatic position perfectly clear with reference to the
following:
1. No position will ever be accepted by the Asiatic communities that
does not put those who have not yet entered the country but are en-
titled to do so on a level with Asiatics who have voluntarily registered.
They will, therefore, exchange their documents under the amended
Act, and take out certificates in the same form as the voluntary form.
2. Refugees who have not yet received permits under the Peace
Preservation Ordinance should be protected. There will be no objec-
tion to defining who may be termed a refugee—I suggest residence in the
Transvaal for two years prior to the 11th day of October, 1899—and
a period may be fixed within which these applications may be received,
say one year, and they should be entitled to prove their claim before a
court of law.
3. Those who hold £3 Dutch Registration Certificates should also
be protected, the onus being on them to prove that they are bona-fide
holders thereof.
4. Those who hold Peace Preservation Ordinance permits or permits
issued by Asiatic Officers should be protected.
5. Those who possess educational qualifications, whatever the test
may be, should be free like the European immigrants.
6. There are applications being made which have not been yet deci-
ded by Mr. Chamney, or which he has refused. These should be
decided finally before a court of law.
You told me that you did not want to give any rights of domicile
beyond those given by the Asiatic Act. You will see that in the above,
with the exception of holders of £3 Dutch registration certificates, all
are provided for under the Asiatic Act, and I have told you that, in my
opinion, and according to Mr. Duncan's speech, even the holders of
£3 Dutch registration certificates are protected under the discretionary
clause. Only I have suggested that they should be recognized as a
matter of right, provided, of course, that they prove their bona fides.
I need hardly point out that refugees are protected by the Asiatic
Act, because the Peace Preservation Ordinance permits were still to be
issued. They have only lately been stopped, under your instructions
and by virtue of the Immigrants' Restriction Act, but I am sure you
could never have intended that those who are still outside the Colony
and who can be incontestably proved to be old residents should not
have their claims considered. The definition of a refugee and the time
limit provide against possible frauds.
I ask you to recognize the very great service rendered by the
Indian community in giving finger-prints in the face of enormous odds,
and to recognize also that the resident portion of the community did not
avail themselves of the discretionary clause of the compromise, with
reference to education and property qualifications. This was done in
order to protect those few who were to come in future, and to show
what grace, if I may use the term, Asiatic peoples are capable of. But
I may state that they will never accept, so far as I am aware, anything
in the nature of compulsion, when they can be otherwise completely
identified. The idea is that ignorance or such other thing should be
the basis of disqualification, and not race or colour.
The great principle that the Colonists have laid down, namely,
that, in future, Asiatic immigration should be limited only to those who
possess educational qualifications of a high order has been admitted.
But those who are entitled to reside in the country will not accept the
bar sinister. And, if the question cannot be satisfactorily settled on
the above, as I consider it, most reasonable basis, it is better that it is not
settled at all.
I take it that, as you have promised, you will let me see the draft
Bill before it is published.
I have informed the Committee of the Association that you have
definitely promised to settle the matter next week. The Committee has,
therefore, authorized me to postpone the filing of the affidavits in the
meanwhile.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
GENERAL J. C. SMUTS
PRETORIA
India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08; also a photostat of the
handwritten office copy: S. N. 4827(a)
1 Vide Vol. VI, pp. 215 & 221.
2 These were filed on June 23, 1908.
