635. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
MAGANWADI, WARDHA,
September 26, 1935
CHI. NARAHARI,
I got your letter. We cannot afford to give way to despair in
this manner. I can't explain much in a letter. Find some time
after Parikshitlal returns and come over for a while.
It is true that we are not able to give the girls as much as
we ought to. But it is also true that we do not have the necessary
women workers. God creates difficulties so that we might overcome
them and not run away from them.
You acted rightly in relieving Bhagwanji. Puratan may go
to a village if he wishes. We may certainly introduce any reforms
that you desire and others also that we can think of. While doing
so we should bear only one thing in mind, namely, that we must
not abandon anything we have started so long as we see no im-
morality in it. Think over this while you are waiting to come here.
Can Anasuyabehn take charge of the younger girls who give you
trouble? If she is short of space, can she shift her Bal Mandir to
the Harijan Ashram?
You can do the tanning and the dairy work even there.
Where else will you get the facilities of land, etc., which you have
there? Valunjkar has been doing his work here so efficiently and
intelligently that I am hopeful that he will soon be able to run
tanneries at a number of places. He has even undertaken to
start one at Nasik. A building is already under construction there
and the work will start as soon as it is completed. You will see
that, too, when you come here. Valunjkar has resolved to suffer no
loss from the very beginning and all kinds of schemes are being
thought out with that end in view. I think from the economic
point of view the work here will be more successful than Satis-
babu's project. The latter has already consumed a lot of money
by now. The return has yet to come. In Valunjkar's project
very little money has been invested, the hides are being tanned,
there is a sufficient number of cobblers for the work and the
trainees, too, are making progress.
Please remember that a servant of the people must display
all the four qualities in proper balance, namely, the Brahmin's wis-
dom, the Kshatriya's fearlessness, the Vaishya's purity of manage-
ment and the Shudra's capacity for untiring labour. The greatest
shortcoming in us all is the lack of the Kshatriya spirit. We lose
heart much too soon. We tremble to stand alone. At sight of the
tiger of difficulties, whether we are one or many we start run-
ning away. Please do not think that any of these charges is
directed against you alone. I am explaining to you what I see
all around me and even in myself. As for myself, where can I
run away to? My condition, therefore, is like that of a Bania
who had got himself tied on the back of a horse. If you have not
heard this story, please ask me some time. I will enjoy telling it to
you or, if you cannot come in the near future, will write to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9089
