322. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
SHIMOGA,
August 14, 1927
I have replied to your telegrams. I have got your letters
too. I can understand your importunity, but I am convinced I
must not leave my present station. Personally I believe my
going over there would do some harm instead of doing any good.
I can visualize the one loss resulting from Vallabhbhai putting
aside his own powers and I can imagine others too. Even if I
go over, we cannot collect all the funds, as you seem to think
we can. Nor should we overdo our attempts to accomplish this task
at this time. Marwaris should work through him alone who
commands your confidence and I would regard that as proper.
Confidence is certainly based on honesty and fitness too. They
would not credit either me or you all who are my companions
with as much ability as they expect in a businessman-and why
should they? Bhai Amritlal is doing his work separately, and he
has himself gained the confidence of certain people by dint of
his ability and service. They would give him funds as long as
he does something and I would regard that as right. You should
adopt the same attitude in the case of the Hind Sevak Samaj.
Our duty is to serve wherever we can reach easily.
You write that if I were to engage you on relief work you
will get engrossed in it and discontinue the Conference work.
I do not like this line of thought. How absurd that you would
take up a job if I ask you to, else you would hold the Con-
ference! At such a moment if you say that you must hold the
Conference, you ought to do so-whatever I may think or in
whatever other work I may wish to engage you-and when you
wish to serve, why should you wait for signal from me? Why
don't you join Bhai Amritlal's group? Or if he cannot cover
the whole of Kathiawar, why do you not cover the remaining
part? Of course, you can have the funds from Vallabhbhai after
submitting your scheme to him; you can have it also from the
Hind Sevak Samaj. It is Vallabhbhai's duty to cover those parts
which are not served by others. If the satyagrahis, that is,
Fulchand's army, wait for my orders, it will hurt me deeply and
I shall regard them as unfit to launch satyagraha. How can
those who miss opportunities of service launch satyagraha, that is
civil disobedience? The fitness to go to jail should be backed by
a proof of services rendered and self-purification. My permission
and my authority relate to the launching of civil disobedience. I
would not restrain anyone from offering satyagraha in the form of
service or self-purification.
I have nothing to say about the Conference.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
