450. LETTER TO E.F.C. LANE
March 20, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,
I telegraphed today in reply to your letter of the 16th instant re-
garding the correspondence between you and me over the Immigrants'
Restriction Bill. I now venture to amplify my telegram.
There is no occasion, neither has it been asked on behalf of British
Indians, to repeal Chapter 33 of the Orange Free State Constitution;
but I respectfully submit for General Smuts' consideration that, just as
educated Indian immigrants will, under the amendment he proposes to
move, be free from registration under the Transvaal Act No. 36 of 1908,
so may such immigrants be free from the Sections of Chapter 33 of the
Orange Free State Constitution regarding what amounts to registration.
Such seems to have been the intention of General Smuts at the time the
telegram of the 4th instant, referred to in your letter of the 16th instant,
was sent. It is therein stated that
Asiatics admitted as immigrants under new Immigration Bill would not
fall under registration laws and would not be restricted to provincial limits.
1 and 2 R. Gregorowski and Laughton; vide "Letter to L. W. Ritch", p. 480.
3 Vide the preceding item.
4 Vide Appendix X.
A similar statement appears in the dispatch to Lord Crewe, published in
the Blue Book U/7/11. All that Asiatics ask for is full immigration rights
in law under the Bill without a colour bar. If an educated Indian has to
apply under Chapter 33 for permission to reside in the Orange Free State,
it means a colour bar in the Immigration Bill, and an amendment exempt-
ing such immigrants from the operation of Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9,
10 and 11 would meet the point, and would still make the immigrants
liable to the disabilities as to holding fixed property, etc., common to
the other Asiatics.
I venture to suggest that paragraph 2 of your letter is not clear. You
say that the amendment to be moved will, in effect, exempt the educated
Indian immigrants from registration under the Transvaal Act No. 36
of 1908. This may mean that an educated Indian immigrant will not be
free from the operation of Act No. 36 of 1908 entirely, but that he will
simply not be required to register. It may be that, in that case, an edu-
cated immigrant will be in a worse position than a resident Asiatic, a
state of things which will hardly be acceptable to the Indian community.
As to the third paragraph, I may state that two advocates of long
standing and wide experience, of the Transvaal and Natal respectively,
have given their opinion to the effect that the wives and minor children
of Asiatic residents will not be able to join them as heretofore, be-
cause they will be treated as prohibited immigrants, unless they can satisfy
the education test; and, if it is the intention of the Bill not to debar the
wives and minor children of such Asiatics, I submit that an exemption
clause of a general nature should be added to the Bill.
The matters I have herein submitted are all of no intrinsic impor-
tance from the European standpoint, and I venture to think, not at all
contentious, but they are of the greatest importance for the Asiatics.
I hope, therefore, that General Smuts will be pleased to give them the
consideration they deserve, and grant relief.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5327; also
Indian Opinion, 25-3-1911
