116. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before April 23, 1936]
CHI. MAHADEV,
I did expect that you would send Shivprasad's letter after
making a fair copy. It would be good if, in my old age, I could
personally teach Vijaya and Manu how to read and write an any rate.
I, therefore, give some dictation to both of them after the prayer. I
think that even with my left hand I would write faster than they do,
more legibly at any rate. But I have found this key for training them,
and I am holding on to it. My handwriting is none too good, either.
So I allowed the letter as taken down by Vijaya to go, as also the one
1 The year has been inferred from the fact that the All India Village
Industries Association was established in December 1934 and the references to
Chitre in letters to the addressee are to be found from 1935 onwards; vide also
Vol. LXI, p.310 for the letter expressing concern about the addressee's eyes.
2 From the reference to Gandhiji's proposed visit to Nagpur and from the
contents this letter appears to have been written before April 23, 1936 when
Gandhiji reached Nagpur, presumably to attend the Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya
Parishad meeting.
89
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
90
by Manudi. That 'mission' became "machine" is not so very impor-
tant. But I did sympathize with Shivprasad. Although I had expected
that you would have a fair copy made if you found it too difficult to
read, Babl Durga, Prabhudayal or, if free, Kanu could have made
a copy. I must have presumed some such thing. But what can we do,
now that the arrow has sped from the bow? Let it strike Shivprasad.
Why should he have asked such questions? Kuruvilla is free himself
to send the note prepared by you.
You will have to accompany me to Hodge's. Do whatever you
can for Daniel Hamilton. I will of course try to detain Rajkumari.
When should we reach Nagpur? Decide this if it has not already been
done, so that I may know when I will have to leave Segaon. Please
remember and caution other visitors that the wooden bridge on the
longer route has been pulled down. Hence cars, etc., should not take
this route.
Read Moore's letter to Rajkumari and then destroy it.
Jamnalalji will have arrived before Anandshankarbhai does.
Even if he has not, why not put up Anandshankarbhai at his place?
But do what you think best. If there is no reply from Madan Mohan7,
make alternative arrangements for his stay in consultation with
Jajuji or Radhakisan. Tikekar is, of course, there. He would be
comfortable at his place also. But he is in bad shape these days.
Hence it would be better to make some other arrangement.
I talked to Rambhau and also told him not to have his meals with
you. I also asked him to leave Wardha immediately. But what can I
do when you yourself are soft? Pyarelal says that he too had scolded
him severely. You can tell him on my behalf that he may either leave
or take his meals anywhere else he wishes. I knew nothing about the
bangles.
1
Manu S. Mashruwala
2
Addressee's son, Narayan
3
Addressee's wife
4
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur
5
Bishop Moore; vide also Vol. LXIV, p. 434 and Vol. LXV, p..
6
Anandshankar Bapubhai Dhruv
7
Jamnalal Bajaj's Secretary
8
Shrikrishnadas Jaju
LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
91
I have read Chopra's booklet. We do have a copy. It was lent
to Mahodaya. It came eight or nine months ago. Its title is likely to
be 'Indian Drugs' rather than 'Indian Plants'.
I am writing to Jugal Kishore and Pattani. Jajuji's lot is
pitiable. Keep in touch with him.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original: S.N. 11519
