424. LETTER TO SURENDRA B. MASHRUWALA
SEGAON, WARDHA,
March 4, 1937
CHI. SURENDRA,
I am having consultations about the date of your marriage. I
gather that you desire the marriage to take place in proper style.
You are even thinking of a gathering of friends. If that is so,
please let me know your reason. One reason I have understood.
You feel that all of us elders have enjoyed celebrations of marriages
in our time and now we are out to stop persons like you from
doing that, and you ask why. This is a pure misconception. If,
according to our custom, we regard marriage as a festive occasion,
a person can enjoy the celebration only once. Now as regards
myself, I may tell you that whatever happened happened when I
was only twelve years of age. My parents did not ask for my con-
sent in regard to anything. If anybody had enjoyed the celebra-
tions, it was they and the other relatives. I am not aware of having
enjoyed the occasion. Whatever fun I may have had at that
time was much in the same way as children enjoy play. I had
no sense at all of the responsibility of the occasion. This is how I
enjoyed the celebration. I do not know anything of Kishorelal.
You need not, therefore, envy my enjoyment. What I wish is that
on the day fixed you should come alone. I will get all the reli-
gious ceremonies performed and, after they are over, you may
take away Manu on the very same day. If you want to have a
gathering of friends, you may have one at Akola or Bombay. I
have no zest at all for such things. I am not talking about renun-
ciation but only about common duty. Nowadays some thinkers have
elevated sensual enjoyment to the position of a dharma. I have
not been able to accept this view. In my opinion marriage is a means
of observing self-control. It is desirable that men and women should
have only one connection and not many. This is their duty.
Marriage should be for service, not for self-indulgence. The
relationship of man and woman is only for progeny and should
have no other purpose. This is the ideal. Certainly one cannot
say that this ideal is wrong simply because it cannot be attained.
But if it is right, it is one's duty to follow it in practice to the
best of one's ability. And if such is indeed one's duty, then
the marriage ceremony should be made as religious, quiet and
austere as possible.
If you understand this, then you and
Manu should look upon marriage as a new birth and should
enter it with a sense of duty. Do not regard marriage as a fes-
tive occasion but enter the householder's estate with the blessings
of elders and with full understanding of the meaning of marriage.
If you have understood this, you will give up insisting on in-
viting anybody. If I can I will stop even Nanabhai, Neelkanth
and others from coming and wasting money on travelling. Not-
withstanding these views of mine, however, I do not wish to
hurt you. You may, therefore, unhesitatingly let me know what-
ever you desire.
Blessings from
BAPU
64-27
[PS.]
Manu has read this letter and agrees with me.
From Gujarati: C.W. 1564. Courtesy: Manubehn S. Mashruwala
