270. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
May 29, 1937
CHI. PREMA,
I shall not probably be able to reply to the whole of your
letter. I will try, though. I have certainly issued no order
forbidding you to make speeches. And even if I have issued
any, I withdraw it. I wish to order no one. What can I have
to say if your views change? You will follow your nature, as
everybody should do.
The fact that pure love doesn't care for touch certainly doesn't
mean that all touch is impure. I had pure love for my mother,
but I used to massage her legs when they ached. There was no
impurity in that touch. Touch prompted by lust is evil. I
would, therefore, say that anybody who says that pure love is
impossible without touch doesn't know what pure love is.
I still do not understand what you wish to suggest regard-
ing Nariman. Who did him injustice and how? At least for
the sake of truth you should come out frankly with what you have
in mind. I find it intolerable that there should be a differ-
ence of opinion between us in a matter like this. If you are
convinced that injustice has been done to Nariman, you should
prove that to me, for, though unwillingly, I had to interest my-
self in the affair. I have, moreover, assured Nariman that I
shall be ready to study his case whenever he wishes. But whether
or not he comes, your duty is clear.
What you have assumed regarding . . .1 is not correct. The
evidence which you have got is of no value. Before believing
in such a thing you should ask the person concerned. I don't
wish to suggest that no such untruth has been practised. But
the matter should be carefully investigated. If somebody tells
me that Prema did a certain thing, should I believe it without
asking you whether it is correct?
Maybe what you said at Hudli came from your heart. But
what you said in your speech was different from what you say
now. Will you admit this much? Be that as it may, I have
told you that my experience was different from your reasoning.
You are certainly entitled to attach more importance to your
reasoning than to my experience. But what should I do?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10390. Also C. W. 6829. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
