478. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
May 16, 1936
CHI. NARANDAS,
Herewith a letter for Purushottam and Marybehn's letter to
you. Yesterday I had a telegram telling me of the death at
Rishikesh of a very benevolent lady, Tarabehn Chesley, whom
you do not know.
She was on her way to Badri-Kedar with
two other women. She was a learned person, living an exceed-
ingly simple life.
Kusum is having a nice time. She comes out daily for a
walk with me. I do hope this place will help her recover her
health. Kanu moves about, absorbed in his work. He has
been trying to train his hand on the dilruba and his instrument
accompanies the Ramayana recitation every day. All the three
brothers sing the verses in unison, and now Kusum has joined
them. Sardar walks for four hours every day, and Mahadev
and Mani accompany him. It is beyond my capacity to take
such long walks. Kumarappa and Shantabehn are of course
here. Both are good company to each other and spend their
time working. Ba keeps fairly good health. This is how our
little world here goes on.
I learn from Kusum's talks that the Bal Mandir has been
running at a loss. In my opinion, we should send an account
of income and expenditure to the parents and notify to them
that the Bal Mandir would be closed if they did not help to
meet this expenditure. You may also mention that the house
rent, etc., is not included in the accounts. You should, how-
ever, include Kusum's salary of Rs. 35 or 40 as also those of
the other teachers, if any, whatever they are paid. We might
go about begging to run the school if the children belonged to
the Harijan or some other so-called lower communities, but
certainly not for the others; and emphatically not a Bal Mandir.
The very poor cannot afford to send their children there;
nor is there any great need that they should. Please think over
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 A stringed musical instrument
3 Kanti Gandhi, Kanu Gandhi and Navin Gandhi; in fact, cousins
411
this and, if you are convinced about it, you should consult the
Committee and give the parents notice of one or two months.
Kusum says that you have increased the fee already, in which
case the increase should be only to the extent of meeting the
increased cost. You must be aware that there are several schools
in the country, which bring profits to the owners after defraying
all expenses. Many schools, for example, the Bharda High School,
are a source of income. Only the Proprietary High School of
Ahmedabad and some others regarded as national schools and
some experimental schools are run with the help of contributions
raised from the public. I think we should get away from this
kind of work and give our time to work among Harijans and in
the villages.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8490. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
