111. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
MAGANWADI, WARDHA,
November 7, 1935
CHI. SHARMA,
I have your letter after a long wait. The surprising thing
is that in America you did not receive even one letter of mine.
You should have received at least three. I have the dates of posting.
These shall be given at the end of this letter as they have to be
traced in the diary. But our agreement stipulated your writing every
week irrespective of my writing or not writing. It is possible that
I may have nothing much to say while you must always have
something new to write about. Anyway, let bygones be bygones.
Now I shall expect a letter from you every week. I have also
made it a practice to send on your letters to Draupadi and
Ramdas; to the latter because of his specific request and to the
former just by the way. It has brought forth one result, namely,
that Draupadi is obliged to write in reply. Otherwise would
she have at all written to me ?
I did not expect you to pay your way so soon in America
but I did hold that it would not be difficult to live on modest
means. Anyway, now that you are there you may stay on till you
are satisfied. You should leave only when you feel that you have
nothing further to learn regarding nature cure. The experiences
of America will be almost repeated in England. There, too, you
will not find much by way of nature cure but it was imperative
that you visit the West. Quite a few misconceptions persist until
experience drives them out. From this angle I do not regard
your trip unproductive.
Do see Shelton's place if you have not visited it so far; Govind
waxed eloquent over it. His Health School is situated in San
Antonio, Texas.
You must have got the letter for England which I sent at
your request.
You ask me what I meant by saying that you would open out
in America. I meant that the slight eccentricity or say a kind
of kink that you possessed would be straightened out there and
that you would develop the habit of living well-adjusted to
others. Your account has been received. You should keep up
100
correspondence with Bhai Brijmohanji but you need not send him
an account of your expenses. You must have got the Harijan issues.
They have been sent so far to Dr. Holmes's address as also my
letters but this letter I am sending to Dr. Kellogg's address. I have
already forwarded to you the letter I received from Dr. Kellogg.
What advice can I give you from here regarding your health
except that you should be well protected against the cold and should
walk daily at least ten miles? You should partake liberally of
milk and fruit and eat salads prepared from greens. This much
should ensure good health; and keep up the breathing exercises.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Dates of letters sent to America:
1. Friday, September 20
2. Thursday, October 3
3. Friday1, October 10
Three letters.
HERBERT SHELTON'S HEALTH SCHOOL
SAN ANTONIO (TEXAS)
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 208 and 209
