591. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
WARDHA,
April 16, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
I have two letters to acknowledge.
Your circular is good. It is weak on sanitation. No refuse need
be burnt. It is like burning a currency note. Shummy can tell you
what I mean. When you come here in July, you will know much
more about this. K. has gone to Andhra. He returns next week.
Fancy Shummy having an ache. 'Physician, heal thyself.'
Your yarn has come in. It is quite good for a beginner. I could
not do as much in the time you have done. But then I am more
stupid than the average learner.
Please tell Miss Reynolds that the 2 guineas will be used
for the benefit of Harijan girls—the most neglected of Indian huma-
nity—and that too where starvation is great just now.
Of course you will write what you like to Agatha. I know
what you are going to write. But this perhaps you do not know
that our Chairman and Secretary are among the most competent
accountants in India. The accounts are public property.
Yes, Agatha has brought us so close to each other. It is a
matter of sorrow to me that I cannot give her the satisfaction she
wants in the shape of sending a man like Rajaji to England. She
does not realize that it is all one man's show. Sir S. does not
want to placate the Congress at all. He is riding for a fall. He
does not know what terrorism is being employed in order to
enforce his will. If non-violence is the remedy, as it is, against
this evil, we must have patience and all will be well. I wish you
could let Agatha see why nobody can be usefully sent just
now.
I am sending you some slivers. You will tell me how they
work.
You ought to get hold of a boy or a girl who would learn
these processes and then teach others. I could soon train anyone
you may send.
I have overtaken the arrears of correspondence. I am enjoy-
ing my silence and dread having to break it on Friday. Arrears
will pile up in no time.
You have captivated the Ashram girls. They often inquire
about you.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
R.'s letter herewith.
From the original: C.W. 3529. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6338
1 Sir Samuel Hoare
