82. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
BANGALORE,
Jeth Vad 5 [June 20, 1927]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have your letter. You, me and everyone else would have been put to
shame if , after having gone there, you had missed home as Shanti did. We
have been taught to feel at home wherever we are. Since you have liked the
place, your health should improve there.
Do not move about more than you can endure. What do you do for your
1 The reference is to Bhagavad Gita, Chapter III, verses 10 and 11, in which Shri
Krishna says that Brahma created the people to nourish the Gods through such offerings,
the Gods in turn nourishing peoples so that both might prosper.
2 From the combination of place-name, Gujarati day and month in the dateline as
also the contents; vide Vol. XXXIV, pp. 37-. Jeth Vad 5 in 1927 corresponded to
June 20.
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
69
food? Where do you bring it from? What fruits do you get? And what is the
arrangement for milk? Let me also know with whom you keep company there
and about all other things that may occur to you. Just as it is useless to think
about the past, it is useless to think of the future. 'One step enough for me'
is an advice based on experience. What shall we gain by knowing the future?
In other words, why do we not merge the future and the past in the present?
The present, after all, is nothing but an extension of the past. To think of
the distant future when at every minute changes are unfolding before our
eyes, is like building castles in the air and only fools build castles in the air.
The present means our duty of the moment. If we know what is our duty of
the moment and direct all our efforts to its fulfilment, it is the highest form
of valour. Unhappiness is born out of imagining a rosy future and lamenting
about the past. So, one who takes care of the present and fulfills his duties
has conquered the cycle of birth and death.
I have written to Victor Joshi today. If Chhotelal is there, give him
this news. I am not writing a separate letter to him because before this reaches
there, he would have left and if he has not, he would read this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32972
