76. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[AHMEDABAD,]
November 26, 1918
CHI. HARILAL,
I gave you some news about myself yesterday. I give you more
today. My health is both good and bad. I feel that the im-
provement which should have taken place in some respects has not
come about. I cannot complain about food now. Everyone says that
it would be better for me to go out for some time, and I also
think I should. I have been, therefore, thinking of doing so, and
am making arrangements. It will be good if you come over be-
fore I leave. Whatever you wish to say, you may pour out before
me without any hesitation. If you cannot give vent to your
feelings before me, before whom else can you do so? I shall be a
true friend to you. What would it matter if there should be any
difference of opinion between us about any scheme of yours?
We shall have a quiet talk. The final decision will rest with you.
I fully realize that your state at present is like that of a man dream-
ing. Your responsibilities have increased, your trials have in-
creased and your temptations will increase likewise. To a man
with a family, the fact of being such, that is, having a wife, is a
great check. This check over you has disappeared. Two paths
branch out from where you stand now. You have to decide
which you will take. There is a bhajan we often sing in the Ashram;
its first line runs: Nirbalke bala Rama.
One cannot pray to God for help in a spirit of pride but
only if one confesses oneself as helpless. As I lie in bed, every
day I realize how insignificant we are, how very full of attach-
ments and aversions, and what evil desires sway us. Often I
am filled with shame by the unworthiness of my mind. Many a
time I fall into despair because of the attention my body craves
and wish that it should perish. From my condition, I can very
well judge that of others. I shall give you the full benefit of my
experience; you may accept what you can. All this after you come.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
