32. LETTER TO KHWAJA NAZIMUDDIN
[April 13, 1938]
DEAR SIR NAZIMUDDIN,
In accordance with the understanding of yesterday, I
submit herewith my suggestions:
(1) I understand that the detenus, including the Regula-
tion III prisoners, will be discharged and all restrictions upon
their liberty will be removed inside of one month from this
date.
I can only hope that I shall not have to return to Calcutta
in that connection. Should my presence, however, be required, I
shall gladly come whenever wanted.
(2) With regard to the convicted political prisoners I sug-
gest that—
(A) the ailing prisoners should be discharged forthwith
irrespective of their terms of imprisonment;
(B) those who have less than 6 months to serve should
be discharged forthwith;
(C) those who have 18 months or less, but over 6
months to serve, should be discharged within 3 months;
(D) those who have longer terms than 18 months to
serve should be discharged within one year at the most.
(3) Those releases should be contingent upon a public
understanding between the Government and the Opposition, that
is, the Congress Party, to the effect that-
(A) there shall be no public demonstrations or proces-
sions in honour of those detenus or prisoners who may be
discharged;
(B) there should be no agitation, directly or indirectly,
initiated or countenanced by the Congress Party to depart
from or improve upon the settlement that may be arrived at.
In other words, so far as Bengal at any rate is concerned, the
question of the release of detenus and political prisoners shall
cease to be a Party question or a matter of public controversy.
I have purposely refrained from entering into any argument
in favour of the suggestions made herein.
I have discussed
them threadbare with you and you have very patiently listened
to me.
Whatever the fate of the negotiations and suggestions, it is
agreed between us that a final decision will be taken by the
Bengal Government within a few days, certainly within
one
month from today.
You have told me that any assurances the prisoners or dete-
nus may give me about non-violence could not or would not be
allowed by the Government to influence their decision. But,
as you know, I have interested myself in their cases on the
strength of their disavowal of violence for the attainment of India's
freedom. Therefore, for my own satisfaction, I discussed the
question with them and whilst they did not want to make any
statement for the sake of furthering their release, they assured
me that they had no faith in violence for securing India's free-
dom. I believe in their assurance and it would be a pity if such
men could not be discharged.
I forgot to mention one thing during our conversations of
yesterday. The prisoners at Dum Dum asked me whether
I
had received the many messages they had sent me through the
usual channels. I cannot recall having received any, except
the messages from the Midnapur girl prisoners. Whatever may
have happened in the past, I trust that in future you will kindly
Issue instructions so as to ensure the delivery of their messages
to me, assuming, of course, that they are not objectionable.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1938; also C.W. 9919
