200. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
[JOHANNESBURG]
[THE EDITOR
THE STAR
SIR,]
Mr. Duncan's letter with reference to the charge, which, with all
deference to him, I must still continue to describe as "foul", as to an
organized illicit entry of Asiatics enables me to explain the position
more fully to the public.
It is the charge of organized illicit entry that Asiatics have always
denied, and which only it was in their power to deny. One swallow
does not make a summer, nor can isolated cases of unlawful entry be
used to condemn a whole community. The charge was threefold:
(1) that Asiatics entered on permits which were not their bona-fide
property;
(2) that they entered on permits fraudulently obtained;
(3) that they entered on forged permits.
1 This was published in Indian Opinion under the title "Rejoinder to Mr. Duncan".
And it was in order to test whether the documents held by the
Asiatic communities at the time were so tainted or not that the Bill
was brought in.
With reference to the 9,000 applications, it is admitted in the
Governor's Speech that almost all the Asiatics in the Colony have
tendered voluntary registration. 1 I, therefore, assume that, in January
last, there were 9,000 Asiatics in the Colony. They have all tendered
their documents, and, on the strength thereof, 7,600 have already been
proved to have been legitimate residents of the Transvaal. As a matter
of fact, the balance of the applications have not yet been rejected. On
the contrary, most of them will probably be able to establish their
bona fides. Their claims are still under consideration only because of
the deadlock that has ensued, that is to say, they are holders of Dutch
registration certificates, which General Smuts has declined to recognize
as sufficient title to residence in the Colony.
I may add that, according to the figures supplied by the Registrar
of Asiatics, over 13,000 permits have been issued and are now in cir-
culation. Of these, under voluntary registration, 8,500 (assuming 500
are represented by Dutch registration certificates) have been called
in and, if, out of 8,500, 7,000 have established their title, will
Mr. Duncan allow me to claim that there was no organized illicit entry?
With reference to the 4,500 outstanding permits (and they are
outstanding because those Asiatics are outside the Colony) I make
bold to say that it will be found that very few of these permits are tainted.
The Indian community has never endeavoured to challenge the
statement that there was some illicit immigration of Asiatics. All that
was stated in 1906, and I make bold to repeat, is that the evidence
adduced was not, and is not now, sufficient to establish the charge of
wholesale fraudulent entry. The Peace Preservation Ordinance was enough
to deal with isolated cases. The compulsory measure was brought in
because of, and was based upon, the assumption that Asiatics would
not voluntarily allow their claims to be examined because they were
largely tainted with fraud. Hence the offer of voluntary registration
and hence also my statement that the result of voluntary registration has
disposed of the foul charge of an organized illicit entry of Asiatics.
[I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI]
Indian Opinion, 4-7-1908
1 In the course of his address to Parliament on June 15, on the occasion of its
reopening, the Governor had said, "Practically the whole of the Asiatic population of this
Colony to the number of 9,072 have tendered voluntary registration and provisional
registration certificates have already been issued to 7,617 Asiatics . . . "
