22. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
November 19, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,
You have kindly showed me a memorandum from Govern-
ment in connection with my interview with the correspondent of
The Hindu which refers to Lord Sankey's letter. In the light of
that memorandum I have read and reread the Government of
India's decision on my letters requesting facilities in regard to
visitors and correspondence on removal of untouchability. I can
see absolutely no inconsistency between the undertaking given
by me and the reference to Lord Sankey's letter in the interview.
It would be found on a perusal of the interview that rather than
in any shape or form depart from my undertaking I have expres-
sed my inability, because of the undertaking, to deal with the
letter except through the Government.
I am however grateful to Government for having drawn my
attention to what they consider is inconsistency between my
undertaking and the reference to Lord Sankey's letter in the in-
terview in question. I would add that I am carrying out the
undertaking in most difficult circumstances. Questions crop up
in the course of interviews which have a vital bearing upon un-
touchability work, but which strictly speaking would be outside
untouchability. I rigorously refrain from answering them even at
the risk of being misunderstood and the cause [of] suffering. As
it is, generally either you or the Jailor has been present at the
interviews. You or he will perhaps bear me out when I state
that I have scrupulously refused to give my opinion on any
matter outside untouchability and have even refused to receive
visitors, whether Indian or European, when I have known that they
could not have anything important to say on untouchability or
when they have desired a discussion on the political aspect of
untouchability. I feel that in doing the last thing I have gone
beyond the letter of the Government of India's decision and my
undertaking, but I know that the spirit of them would exclude
discussion even on the political aspect of untouchability. I have
here in mind the correspondence I am carrying on with Mr.
Jenkins.
Nevertheless if this reply does not satisfy the Government
I suggest their sending an official to discuss with me exactly what
the Government would have me to do in matters such as the one
which is the subject-matter of this correspondence. And if con-
sistently with my work I can carry out their wishes I would do
so with great pleasure. My one desire in the midst of the extra-
ordinary facilities given to me in extraordinary circumstances is,
if it is at all possible, to earn at the end of the chapter a certi-
ficate from Government that the undertaking given by me had
been carried out in an honourable manner.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40)(4), Pt. II, p. 35
