34. LETTER TO BHARATI
June 13, 1932
I got your letter written in beautiful handwriting. I cannot
have too many such letters.
I would certainly be pleased if you brothers and sisters
became as strong and sturdy as steel and could endure heat and
cold. But I cannot all at once make such an experiment on you
in the heat [sic] of Simla. Training in such endurance would be
fruitful only if it is undergone methodically and step by step. It is
a grave error to believe that a person who generally lives a
sheltered life can suddenly become hardened when the need arises.
That would be going against nature. I remember hundreds of
instances of persons who made such mistakes.
I would certainly enjoy reading literature. During my school
days I could not read anything outside the syllabus. After that I
got involved in so many activities one after another that I could
get little time to read. Whatever I did read was in jails. But I do
not think that I have lost much because of this. I got a great
deal of time for thinking. And, moreover, what one learns in the
school of experience is always more useful than reading.
Even those who profess to cultivate art for its own sake are
not really able to do so. Art has a place in life though what
is art is a different question. But, art and such other things are
mere means in the path that we wish to tread. When they be-
come ends in themselves they become shackles and drag us down.
God is Truth. For the past few years I have been saying that
'Truth is God' instead of saying that 'God is Truth'. I feel that this
is a more logical way of putting it. Truth is the only reality in
this world.
Here Truth should be given a wider connotation. It is some-
thing living. This Truth that is God and the laws of God are
not distinct from one another but are the same thing. Hence
Truth, too, is a living thing. Thus it means the same thing to say
that this world is governed by Truth or by God's laws. There is
infinite power in that Truth. According to Chapter X of the
Gita, it may be said that the world is sustained by just a fraction
of that power . You will, therefore, understand what I mean by
God if you read "Truth" wherever the word "God" occurs.
If God exists-though we call Him Truth-it is our duty
to worship Him. We become like that which we worship. Prayer
means nothing more than this. But does not that meaning of
prayer explain everything? Truth dwells in our hearts, but
we are not aware, or fully aware of the fact. This awareness comes
through sincere prayer. . . .1
Do you find it difficult to read my handwriting? The enve-
lope in which this letter is sealed was made by Sardar. He spends
a great deal of his time in putting to this use any useless paper
he can lay his hands on.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 214-
