358. LETTER TO NATHUBHAI
February 9, 1937
BHAI NATHUBHAI,
I got both your letters. I am replying to the first question in
Harijanbandhu. Please see it. Very few persons would be interes-
ted in the other questions, and so I am replying to them here.
The vegetarians may keep meat-eating animals, but they
should not procure meat for them, e.g., the cat and the dog.
Both are carnivorous, but we do not procure meat for them.
I know the Jain belief. I knew the ideas of Raichandbhai,
but I am convinced that they are not consistent with the ethics
of ahimsa. From the point of view of ahimsa, uncooked things
should be considered sufficient for the needs of the body. Drying,
pickling and cooking are forms of violent possessiveness and
should, therefore, be eschewed. I see no meaning in the distinc-
tion that is made between tubers and other vegetables. In Jain
literature ahimsa has been confined only to a discussion of what
should be eaten and what should not be eaten. This, in my
view, is a travesty of ahimsa. I have seen non-vegetarians who
are the very images of compassion and hence I consider them to
be votaries of ahimsa in spite of their being non-vegetarians. I
have also seen people who, although avoiding green vegetables,
etc., gratify their palate in all sorts of ways and are full of cruel-
ty. I believe that they are a disgrace to dharma. I also believe
that had Raichandbhai not died prematurely, he would have
fully endorsed what I am saying here now. To say that a fast is
broken by cleaning the teeth or by taking a bath is, in my opin-
ion, sheer ignorance. Those who are completely free from pas-
sions and are living in uninhabited forests, wearing no clothes and
eating only fruit, etc., yielded by the trees, who meditate on God
and roam about, for them it might not matter if they did not
clean the teeth or take bath because leaves of neem trees are
both their food and their means of cleaning the teeth. Earth and
sun rays are their bath. It would be sheer ignorance to apply
this, during a fast, to persons who are full of evil emotions, hold
all kinds of possessions and whose every pore emits foul smell.
As in curds, there are countless bacteria in milk also, a far
greater number of them than in plants, tubers, etc. To distinguish
among vegetables as some that may be eaten and others that
must be avoided, and at the same time to take milk, etc., freely,
is like stealing an anvil and giving a needle in alms.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6248
