261. LETTER TO " THE STAR "1
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
[JOHANNESBURG,]
December 9, 1904
SIR,
With reference to the letter published in your issue of the 8th inst.
over Mr. T. Kleinenberg's signature, I take the liberty of joining issue on
his statement. I do not admit the figures quoted by Mr. Kleinenberg.
I deny that there are at present 49 Indian traders in Pietersburg; there
are only 28 stores owned by Indians within the township, as distinguished
from the Location, and of these, some are held by the same Indians. I
have not in any way endeavoured to amend my original statement, which
was a denial of the allegation that there was a great disproportion between
the numbers of Indian traders trading in town before war and after. Those
who were trading without licences before war could hardly be called law-
breakers, especially by Mr. Kleinenberg, who knew the exact position,
and probably—be it said to his credit—helped to create it. They traded
without licences, it is true, but under legal advice, with the knowledge
of the Republican Government, on tenders of licence money and under
the protection of the British Government. If this was law-breaking, I
must confess that I do not know the meaning of the term. Within the
township before war, there were at least 23 Indian stores: the names are
as under. The probability is that there were more, but I have indis-
putable proof as to the names and the numbers I am now giving. The
original list from which the names are taken was prepared in March,
1903, in order to be produced before the Government. I think I have
1 This was published as part of an item under the heading "Mr. Kleinenberg and the
British Indian Association" with the prefatory note: "The following correspondence to
The Star was crowded out from our earlier issues. Though belated, we publish it as showing
the truth of the statement made by Mr. Abdul Gani at the great Indian Mass Meeting
recently held in Johannesburg."
The text of Kleinenberg's letter to which the above is a reply is here omitted.
2 The letter challenged the Chairman of the British Indian Association to produce evi-
dence in refutation of certain figures given by Kleinenberg at the National Convention.
3 Listed in the following paragraph.
given enough for Mr. Kleinenberg to investigate. If my figures are in-
correct, I shall be glad to admit the correction. If, on the other hand,
they cannot be challenged, and if you think that my statement has been
verified, I hope you will be good enough to collect the sum of £50 from
Mr. Kleinenberg and hand it to the Nazareth House. One word more
and I have finished. My object in troubling you is merely to place the
truth and nothing but the truth before the public. Mr. Kleinenberg is
well known to the British Indians in Pietersburg. I doubt not that he
is guided by honest motives, and it is because I feel that want of informa-
tion is the greatest mischief-maker in this controversy, that my Association
has felt it to be its duty to take up statements made at the National Con-
vention and refute them, wherever it was necessary.
The stores referred to above are :
Hassim Moti & Co. (3), Tar Mahomed Tayob (2), Ahmed Moosa
Bhayat (2), Ahmed Ebrahim Wadi, Abdul Latif Ali, Cassim Suliman,
Cassim Tayob, Osman Mahomed & Co. (2), Gane Hassim, Haji
Mahomed, Tayob Haji Khan Mahomed (3), Janellahomed Osman,
Harsim Mahomed, Abhechand, Ebrahim Mahomed and Gadit.
I am etc.,
ABDUL GANI
Indian Opinion, 31-12-1904
