433. LETTER TO MALCOLM MUGGERIDGE
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
September 12, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter. I have not read the book
referred to by you. My own personal experience and those of
many others is at variance with the quotation sent by you. But
I think there is difference between the author's standpoint and
that of my friends and my own. When abstinence is practised
"under the false idea that the instinct is but a low pleasure",
it may produce "irritability and the weakening of love". But
when abstinence is practised for the purpose of self-realization,
for the purpose of husbanding vitality and for the seeking, basing
[sic] love not on physical pleasure but upon soul contact, it soothes
one's nerves and purifies and therefore strengthens the bond between
the two. Most of the ills that you describe spring, in my opinion,
from a wrong view of love and a wrong view of sexual relation.
Under my own plan husband and wife need not live separately,
and his meeting Manilal Gandhi whose devoted labours for his father's
weekly he commended (S.N. 10788).
that is, under separate roofs, but they certainly ought not to
share the same room and lock themselves in. Long course of
habit blinds us to the ugliness of men and women passing nights
after nights in privacy, without any moral purpose whatsoever.
In doing so we become less even than animals. I can see nothing
wrong in husband and wife seeking privacy only for sexual act
which they will perform in due humility and purely for the sake
of procreation. There will, I know, still be animal pleasure left
in the act. I would call that lawful animal pleasure. And if
we could only set our thought right and strive, in spite of the
present practice to the contrary, to shape our own in accordance
with the thought, I doubt not that restraint will not only be
easy, but the most natural thing in the world. I may have the
handsomest girl as my sister and if the custom of kissing my
sister is in vogue and in accordance with it I kiss my sister, surely
no lustful thought will spring up in my breast. Why should it
be different as between husband and wife? That it is different
I know to my cost but the difference lies in our mental attitude.
We kiss our wives with the intention of satisfying the lustful
pleasure. We kiss our sisters or daughters out of lustless affection.
If the mine-owners win, they will win not because there are
too many miners, but because the miners do not know how to
control themselves. If every miner committed race suicide, ceased
to procreate, I do not know that he will better his condition.
He will have no ambition left in him. He will not want increase
of wages. It is difficult to forecast the future of a body of men
who, not knowing the higher life, do not want to restrain them-
selves and would avoid the responsibilities of citizenship.
You will please remember that check upon procreation is
common ground between us. But the methods for checking are
so diametrically opposite that the results also are equally different.
Yours sincerely,
M. MUGGERIDGE, ESQ.
AT "FARLEY"
OOTACAMUND
From a photostat: S.N. 19691
