333. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
CAPE TOWN,
Saturday [June 13, 1914]
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,
I got your letter so late today that I am in no position to
write to you by today's post or even send a telegram. I shall
now send a telegram only on Monday.
Where it is a question of a mother's love or a son's affection,
it is something of a moral dilemma for a third party to offer
advice. But offer it I must. When you took the decision you did
on the strength of your father's letter, we were able to judge your
mother's feelings. Her letter does not introduce any new fac-
tor. It has given rise, however, to a new concern, and love has
naturally gained the first place in your heart. If now you can take
a decision, with a mind free from selfish attachment, your love can
be transformed into a pure and divine thing. You can give it to
the entire world, that is, strive to do so. That is the end to which
one must love and serve one's mother. Any other form of love
is of an earthly character, such as is common in the world, a
removed, the privilege of remaining in the country will be taken away from
Indians and the only alternative left for them will be either to re-indenture
or return to India. It had also pointed out that under the Immigrants Regula-
tion Act the minister had power to declare all Asiatics "prohibited immigrants"
on economic grounds and thus to deport ex-indentured Indians.
love purely of the physical frame. You recite poems, often enough,
which sing of freedom from such love. Recite this one, Know this
world as of little good, and reflect over its inner meaning. What is
the significance of The Living One's kinship only with that which brea-
thes? What is distinctive of the Phoenix way of life is that we
strive to cultivate in us what we read about. Your going to
India will have but momentary effect; ultimately, there needs
must be grieving and weeping, be it after five days or fifteen, and
certain separation ever afterwards.
Moreover, we aspire after a way of life in which we would
not have a single pie of our own. Consider what men of such
poverty would do in a situation like this.
That you should always yearn for a sight of your parents is
good indeed. It is your duty [however] to repress the longing for
the present and free your life more and more from the sway of
attachments. You are enduring exile only for the sole purpose of
training your character. This is the condition of vanavasa for you.
Through it alone will you bring credit to your parents. The
way of self-indulgence is not for you; if, instead, you raise your
atman higher day by day and acquire a greater measure of self-
control, you will be free, for the present, from the obligation
of returning to India.
In reasoning thus, I have not had the slightest regard to the
circumstances in the press. In giving the advice I have done, I
have only considered what would best conduce to your spiritual
progress.
All the same, if you do feel yourself drawn to India by
human attachment to your mother and cannot be at peace with
yourself while remaining here, by all means go. Treat what I
have said only as advice and come to your own independent
conclusion, and then act accordingly.
With due regards
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahatma Gandhijina Patro and Gandhijini Sadhana
