262. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
August 8, 1908
[THE EDITOR
THE TRANSVAAL LEADER]
SIR,
May I, through your columns, place before those of your readers
who are interested in justice being done to all the inhabitants of the
Transvaal a phase of the Asiatic question?
I read in your impression of today's date a brief report of the two
cases of Indians who were alleged to have been connected with forged
certificates. One of the men secured his discharge by becoming
King's evidence. The man against whom he became King's evidence
has also been discharged. The public know how far one party,
according to his own confession, was involved in the forgery traffic. The
evidence against the other was undoubtedly, according to the news-
paper reports, too weak to sustain a conviction. Thus those who are
connected with the forgery are largely free. The Asiatic Law Amend-
ment Act does not, and did not, touch them. They were not charged
under it either, and I frankly admit that no Asiatic Act could deal with
such cases. Wherever there is restriction on personal liberty, there will
be found people ready enough to resort to a variety of practices to shirk
such restriction. It is worthy of note that Indians were not the only
1 This was reproduced in Indian Opinion, 15-8-1908, under the title "The Indian
Struggle in the Transvaal".
2 The Transvaal Leader commented editorially on this letter as follows: " . . .
he asserts that Asiatics sent to gaol under the present Tom-fool administration of
the Asiatic Act are being half-starved, owing to their not being given the kind of food
they are accustomed to, and to their inability to consume that which is supplied to
them. These men are political prisoners; it is unjust if they are put to hard labour or
made to wear prison clothing; it is infamously unjust if they are treated dietetically
as Mr. Gandhi says they are. We thought that countries professing themselves
civilized had abolished torture. We seem to be an exception. Surely the medical
authorities of the prisons are recommending the prisoners food which they can
take? Are the medical officials' instructions obeyed, as it is the duty of everybody
connected with the Prisons Department, from the Colonial Secretary downwards, to
obey them? Are the medical officers' views being set aside? It is not as if there
were any cooking difficulties. There is no food more easily prepared than rice.
If Mr. Gandhi's accusation be well founded, we are acting in a way which
would disgrace a Turkish province, let alone one of the British Imperial States."
parties connected with the traffic. Europeans are also alleged to have
been engaged in it.
Now, let your readers turn to the other side of the picture. Indians
who have entered the Colony openly, who have proved their
pre-war residence, who have always conformed to its laws, and who
have recently, by universal acknowledgement, helped the Government
completely to identify such persons, are being harassed on all sides, and
subjected, to use Lord Milner's historic expression, to "pinpricks".
Inoffensive Indians — in many instances Indians belonging to the highest
strata of the Indian community—are being imprisoned, not because
they have committed any heinous offence, but because their conscience
does not approve of what they consider to be irritating and insulting
legislation. Standerton is at present practically denuded of its chief
Indian store-keepers, who are now serving a term of 14 days' imprison-
ment, with hard labour.
As if this were not in itself sufficient harassment, no relief has yet
been granted regarding the food of these Indian prisoners. European
prisoners get that food to which they are generally accustomed; Cape
Boys receive European food; Natives get a diet to which they are ac-
customed; Indian prisoners get practically Native diet, and, therefore,
are half-starved. They get mealie pap for breakfast every day and mealie
pap for supper three times per week. Mealie pap, I know, to those
who are accustomed to it, or who can by a long course of training
habituate themselves to it, is good. Unfortunately, my countrymen do
not take mealie pap. The result is that in the Transvaal gaols they have
to suffer partial starvation. The authorities have been approached for
relief, but up to the time of writing there has been no response. My
countrymen draw the conclusion, probably unjustifiably, that relief has
been withheld in order to exasperate the Indians into submission. If so,
let the authorities take care that they do not exasperate them into bitterest
opposition to the Government and their measures.
Asiatics, having fulfilled their part of the contract, are now endea-
vouring to keep General Smuts to his part of that contract, which, ac-
cording to The Transvaal Leader, he publicly declared to be as follows :
"He had told them (the Asiatics) that the law would not be repealed so
long as there was an Asiatic in the country who had not registered";
and, again, "Until every Indian in the country had registered the law
would not be repealed". It is admitted that all Asiatics who had the
opportunity of making application for voluntary registration have done
so. Asiatics now ask, "Why, then, has the Act not yet been repealed,
and why was the offer to repeal the Act made under impossible
conditions?"
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Transvaal Leader, 10-8-1908
