2. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR,
March 6, 1933
CHI. PREMA,
I am starting on this letter at five sharp (Silence Day). Yours
was the last letter I read from the Ashram post.
I have not been able to go beyond 75 counts with the slivers
which you sent. Yarn of 75 counts should be regarded as very
much below the mark. I have calculated the count on the basis
of the figure you give for weight. The scales here are not good
enough for weighing with any minute accuracy. I do believe,
however, that if my hand was all right I would be able to go up
to 100 counts.
What you write to me regarding Sushila is simply incompre-
hensible to me. I am not aware of having ignored her in the
1 Literally, 'Yeravda Temple', that is, Yeravda Central Prison, where
Gandhiji was imprisoned from January 4, 1932 to May 8, 1933. This place-
line is not reproduced in subsequent letters.
1
54-
least. She herself made me feel that there was no need to inquire
after her or advise her. So I did not ask her any detailed ques-
tions. Tell her this. How could I know that like you she also
craved for a show of love and for compliments? I ought to have
known that your friend would be like you. Isn't that what you
suggest? But probably Sushila herself will not admit this. Isn't
one Prema enough for me? There are other Premas, of course,
but they are all different from one another and from you. How-
ever, I will be more careful in future.
How old is Vijaya? How does she behave?
Train Lakshmi thoroughly.
I also suspect something from the fact that Durga's boils can-
not still be cured. She used to write to me regularly, but she
never writes now. From that, too, I suspect that she is hiding some-
thing. Inquire and find out if she is suffering from some other
disease.
A diet of raw vegetables and dates is bound to help you to
reduce your weight. You should also include in it two and a half
ounces of unboiled milk. Among raw vegetables, you may eat
tomatoes, radishes, carrots, lettuce, etc. You should exclude salt.
You should take two or three lemons with water or with dates.
Probably it will be better to take it with water. If, however,
it sours your teeth you may not take it. You can also mix soda
bicarb with it.
I cannot discuss the question asked by Rajaji and others. That
would be violating truth. It can be done when a suitable opportu-
nity arises. My writings, however, contain a reply to every doubt.
I will admit all the shortcomings of the Ashram which you
may point out. But you will help me better if you also suggest
suitable remedies at the same time. Even if, however, you
cannot do that, I must have your criticism. I use my brain as
much as I can. I know this: the Ashram's shortcomings are not
its own, but mine. If the potter makes an ill-shaped pot, is that the
fault of the pot or of the potter? I literally believe what I have
said, and the shortcomings of the Ashram, therefore, are a measure
of my ignorance. But notwithstanding its shortcomings, I like the
Ashram, for I am not ready to say positively that I do not like
myself. I like myself in the measure that I do not feel the sense
of "I", and ceaselessly strive to overcome what still remains of
that sense.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10329. Also C.W. 6768.
Courtesy: Premabehn Kantak
