760. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 26, 1945
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,
I have had Jehangir Patel's letter. He also writes that only
the school building would be suitable. There should be some
more facilities there. There should also be provision for electri-
city and water. Dinshaw suggests going straight into the school
building when everything is ready. In that case it will take nine
months. I favour moving at once into the sanatorium building
and starting work there, and later shifting to the school building
when it is ready. Whether this is possible or not has to be
decided by you people. In the sanatorium building also more
pipes will be required for water. Maybe, something will have
to be done about electricity too. Water treatment requires plenty
of water. I see some difficulty in taking the school building. If
the school is to be housed there, it will be difficult to run two
institutions in the same building. If my idea takes shape, even the
present building may not be enough. For, my idea is that the
poor also have to be admitted and I shall be interested in run-
ning nature-cure clinics for them, too. It seems to me that from
the school building it would also be possible to serve the village
people as I have planned to do. Think over all this and let me
know what you feel would be best to do.
Let me also give you Sardar's view. He believes that I should
not interest myself in this work to this extent. If Dinshaw re-
quires financial help I should have it provided to him and then
stop at it. In going further at the moment there is a risk of
Dinshaw breaking down or my being disappointed and the great
affection which Dinshaw is showing for me today coming to an
end. I have no such fear. In my opinion Dinshaw can break
down, but his affection for me cannot wane. I know that he
had the same affection for me even when no question of money
was involved and when I did not even know him. But Sardar
understands human nature and he has too much consideration
for me; so I think it is as well to place his view before you so
that you may decide the question objectively.
Please do not think that just because I have been given
assurance about Nasik no other alternative should be considered.
Nature-cure work is of great importance. If carried on well it
can have far-reaching results the scope of which can hardly be
envisaged today. It must also be considered to what extent
Dinshaw can fit into this set-up. If you think it necessary to see
me before taking any decision in the matter and if you can find
some time, come and talk it over. But if the matter can be settled
through correspondence, you need not come. In spite of my
great interest in this work you should take it that I am acting
in a detached way. If I am to live for 125 years, there is also
this condition that my sense of objectivity, that is, non-attach-
ment should increase day by day and approximate as much to
perfection as is humanly possible. I do not know how this can
happen or whether it will happen at all. Why should I even wish
to know? Let me keep that ideal in view and do what I consider
to be my duty. I know this much that it is difficult to reach that
ideal. But my life has been spent in tackling difficult tasks.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8073. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
