246. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
CHANDA,
November 14, 1933
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I must have your letters regularly. You have made me
grow accustomed to them. We are in Chanda today. It is four
o'clock just now. At six we leave for Saoli.
I didn't like the manner in which things were done regard-
ing Vithalbhai. All the same, I have learnt much from here,
from the way in which people attended in large crowds. They
don't worship the man. They worship, in their own way and on
their own terms, the image of the man which they have formed
in their minds and which they love. I have not read the ac-
counts in papers and do not know details. But I have got a com-
plete picture in my mind of the whole thing.
I learnt from The Times [of India] about eggs having been
thrown during the students' meeting in Nagpur. I didn't see
anything in the hall. I didn't even see any commotion anywhere.
Nor do I know anybody else in the hall having noticed anything.
Chandrashankar told me only this, that an egg had fallen on
Om. Nobody knows whether it was aimed at her or the ex-
president sitting by her side or at me. The truth is that the paper
has magnified the incident out of all proportion. The students' love
was beyond words. They even gave me a purse of Rs. 700. It is
the same in the case of U.P.
Ansari came and saw me on Sunday.
[His] health is a
little better. [He] wished to see Vithalbhai, but could not. During
the last days he had become very restless.
Ansari had nothing
in particular to say. He had come only to pay a formal visit.
He has gone to see some patients in princely families. He left
the same evening. I was observing silence then, though not when
he arrived. So far I have experienced no difficulty in the
tour. It is now time for my meal and then to get into a
car. So I must stop here today. Ba and Swami left Wardha yes-
terday. Ba will go to Ahmedabad via Akola. Manu has gone to
Rajkot where Rami's daughter is ill. Always write to me at the
Wardha address.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 46-
