415. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF INDIA"
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
February 10, 1941
SIR,
Your word to me written so earnestly in your issue of Febru-
ary 7, demands a reply.
In spite of your disbelief, I must adhere to my faith in the
possibility of the most debased human nature to respond to non-
violence. It is the essence of non-violence that it conquers all
opposition. That I may not express myself that measure of non-
violence, and the rest may express less is highly probable. But I
will not belittle the power of non-violence or distrust the Fuhrer's
capacity to respond to true non-violence.
The illustrations you have cited in support of your disbelief are
all unhappy because wholly inapplicable. A man is not neces-
sarily non-violent because he lays down his arms. The Czechs,
the Danes, the Austrians, and the Poles may have all acted most
wisely, but certainly not non-violently. If they could have put up
successful armed resistance, they would have done so and would
have deserved well of their countrymen. Nor is it for me to
blame them for submission when resistance became vain. It was,
however, in order to meet such contingencies and in order to
enable even the physically weakest persons not to feel powerless
against physically strong persons fully armed with modern weapons
of destruction that satyagraha was discovered and applied in South
Africa in 19071. And it has since been successfully applied under
varying and even baffling circumstances. You will please excuse
me for refusing to draw a distinction in kind between the forces I
have had to cope with hitherto and what I may have to cope with
if the Fuhrer attacked India. The prospect of his killing every
satyagrahi causes neither terror nor despair.
If India has to go
through such a purgatory and if a fair number of satyagrahis face
the Fuhrer's army and die without malice in their breasts, it
would be a new experience for him. Whether he responds or not, I
am quite clear that these satyagrahis facing the army will go down
in history as heroes and heroines at least equal to those of whom we
learn in fables or cold history.
You are, however, on less weak ground when you doubt the
honesty or non-violence of my companions. You are entitled
to throw the Poona resolution in my face. I have already con-
fessed that the Poona resolution would not have been passed
but for my momentary weakness. As to the want of honesty or
defective non-violence, I can only say that the future alone will
show whether satyagrahis were only so-called or as honest and true
as human beings can be. I can only assert that every care has
been taken in making the selection to ensure a fair standard of
non-violence. I admit, however, that hypocrites have undoubtedly
crept in. But I entertain the belief that the vast majority will be
found to be true. The Congress President has been frank enough
to define the limitations of his non-violence. But so far as I know
his mind-and nobody does if I do not-his non-violence will be
proof against any temptation within the limits defined by him. I
should undertake to engage in non-violent resistance to the Fuhrer
if I had companions with the Maulana Saheb's circumscribed
belief. Whether such non-violence can stand the test or not,
is a moot question. I have achieved success till now with such
material.
You are incorrect in attributing to me a demand for unfettered
liberty of the Press or speech. What I have said is that there
should be unfettered liberty provided that it is not inconsistent
with non-violence. I am not aware that Congress Ministers'
restrictive action went beyond the proviso. If it did, it was
certainly against the declared Congress policy and can be no
guide or criterion for me.
The unkindest cut is contained in the insinuation that my
demand for free speech, subject to the proviso mentioned, was "a
device for squeezing political concessions from the British". There
would be nothing politically wrong if political concessions were
demanded even at the point of civil disobedience. But it is a matter
of public knowledge that the Poona resolution has lapsed. And in
so far as I am concerned, it remains lapsed so long as the war
lasts. Civil disobedience would certainly be withdrawn if free
speech is genuinely recognized and the status quo restored. I have
never stated during previous movements that they were likely to be
long drawn out. But I have done so this time because I believe
that there can be no settlement with the Congress, short of complete
independence during the pendency of the war, for the simple
reason that the Congress cannot commit itself to active help in war
with men and money. That would mean a reversal of the policy
of non-violence which the Congress has pursued for the last 20
years. And independence cannot come through any settlement
while the war lasts. Therefore so far as I know, the Congress will
be satisfied with the fullest freedom to grow in non-violence. The
Congress demand concerns all persons and parties.
You ask me in the face of all these facts whether it is "fair or
morally right to pursue his (my) present campaign". You have
answered the question yourself in the negative. But I may not
accept your answer. In the first place, as shown above, I do not
subscribe to your facts. Secondly, to accept your answer will be to
declare my utter insolvency. I would be untrue to the faith I have
unwaveringly held now for nearly half a century in the efficacy
of non-violence. I may seemingly fail, but even at the risk of being
completely misunderstood I must live and act according to my faith
and belief that I am serving India, Britain and humanity. I do
not wish well to India at the expense of Britain as I do not wish
well to Britain at the expense of Germany. Hitlers will come and
go. Those who believe that when the Fuhrer dies or is defeated
his spirit will die, err grievously. What matters is how we react
to such a spirit, violently or non-violently. If we react violently,
we feed that evil spirit. If we act non-violently, we sterilize it.
You ask me to devote myself to internal unity. Well, my
passion for it is as old as that for non-violence. Indeed, my first
non-violent experiment outside the domestic circle was to promote
that unity. And I had considerable success. I ask you, therefore, to
believe me that my effort for unity is not suspended but intensified
by the present movement. The great beauty of non-violent effort
lies in the fact that its failure can only harm those who are in it,
while its success is sure to promote all-round good.
M. K. GANDHI
The Times of India, 15-2-1941
