107. LETTER TO LORD CURZON
[JOHANNESBURG,]
January 27, 1909
TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE LORD CURZON 1
JOHANNESBURG
MY LORD,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of Your Lordship's note of the
26th instant, in reply to a wire from my Association requesting Your
Lordship to receive a deputation, in connection with the struggle that
is at present unfortunately going on between the Government and the
community represented by my Association.
My Association is deeply thankful to Your Lordship for taking
so much interest in the position of British Indians in the Transvaal;
and regrets that, owing to Your Lordship's brief stay, the Association
will be deprived of the opportunity of sending a deputation to Your
Lordship to pay its respects.
I now enclose herewith a very brief statement of the position as
it stands at present, a pamphlet published by Sir Charles Bruce, which
fairly summarises the position, and the petition of the Association
submitted to His Majesty's Government through the Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
As a Committee of some influential Europeans has been formed
in the Transvaal to help the Association in this particular matter, I
took the liberty of showing Your Lordship's note to its Chairman,
Mr. Hosken who, I understand, is also addressing a letter to Your
Lordship.
1 (1859-1925); Viceroy and Governor-General of India, 1899-1905; British
Foreign Secretary, 1919-1924
2 Lord Curzon had written: "I have only just arrived in Johannesburg and have
so short a time here being engaged all tomorrow, away all Thursday and leaving
Friday morning, that I am afraid I cannot receive a deputation. If however your
Association will give me as full a statement of their case as they can prepare before
Thursday evening, I will study it on my way."
3 Not available
4 Not available. Vide also footnote to the preceding item.
5 Vide "Petition to Secretary of State for Colonies", pp. 18-29.
6 As head of the European Committee, he had addressed a letter to The Times,
London, on January 6, of which a copy was forwarded to the Secretary of State
for the Colonies by L. W. Ritch. Vide Appendix XI.
If any further information is desired by Your Lordship, my
Association will be pleased to furnish you with it.
In accordance with Your Lordship's wishes, all communications
between Your Lordship and this Association will be kept private.
I beg to conclude with the hope that your intervention will result
in a happy ending to the struggle.
I have, etc.,
[ENCLOSURE]
STATEMENT OF THE INDIAN POSITION
FOR SUBMISSION TO
THE RIGHT HON'BLE LORD CURZON
THE INDIAN CLAIM
Apart from matters of detail, the following are the two outstanding
questions between the Local Government and British Indians:
1. Repeal of the Asiatic Act No. 2 of 1907.
2. The status of educated Indians.
ARGUMENT ON THE CLAIMS
As to the first, the Indian contention is that General Smuts was
under promise to repeal the Asiatic Act. The promise was not reduced
to writing, but, three days after the completion of the compromise of
January, 1908, General Smuts, in his speech at Richmond, which
has never been contradicted, stated as follows: "He had told them that
the law would not be repealed so long as there was an Asiatic in the
country who had not registered," and, again, "Until every Indian in
the country had registered, the law would not be repealed."
Apart, however, from the promise, the above Act has been declared
to be unworkable. The recent decisions of the Supreme Court have
emphasised the opinion; and the Act of 1908, which was passed in partial
fulfilment of the promise, in effect superseded the Asiatic Act 2 of 1907.
That the Indians understood that a promise had been made to
repeal the Act as against voluntary registration can no longer be doubted,
and it was in that faith that British Indians submitted to voluntary
registration. The leading Indians, in their eagerness to carry out the
Indian part of the compromise, did so at much personal risk, as even
the voluntary giving of finger-impressions was resented by many Indians.
The Secretary of the Association was, on his way to the Registration
Office, brutally assaulted, and, later, the then Chairman of the Asso-
ciation was also assaulted for the same reason.
The giving of finger-impressions as such was never made a funda-
mental objection. The objection was raised against the spirit of the
Act, based, as it was, on a false charge of an organized entry, on a
large scale, into the Transvaal of British Indians who had no right
to be in the country.
As to the status of educated Indians, it is contended that General
Smuts puts upon the Immigrants' Restriction Act of the Transvaal
an interpretation whereby British Indians possessing the necessary
educational qualifications become prohibited immigrants; and this
prohibition is brought about by means of the Asiatic Act of 1907.
British Indians submit that such prohibition, based on racial lines,
is a departure from the Imperial policy; that when the Immigrants'
Restriction Act was sanctioned, such a departure was not intended;
and that, in any case, British Indians hold that they cannot accept such
racial disqualification involving, in the words of Mr. Chamberlain1,
"an affront upon millions of His Majesty's subjects".
British Indians state that, legal equality for Indians possessing
educational qualifications being retained, they do not mind such an
administration of the Law as would, under a strict examination test,
prohibit the entry of all but six Indians of high educational attainments.
Such administrative inequality is today in vogue at the Cape, [in] Natal
and Australia; and British Indians, recognizing the prejudice, have
submitted to it, but they claim that the importing of a racial difference
in the matter of immigration would be intolerable.
PASSIVE RESISTANCE
In order to attain this end, British Indians have exhausted all
their resources, by way of petitions and deputations. At one of their
mass meetings, they took a solemn oath not to submit to the Asiatic
Act of 1907 and not to receive the benefits of the Act of 1908, until the
above redress was granted. Many Indians have, therefore, in virtue
of the oath, suffered imprisonment. The struggle has lasted now for
over two years; and over 2,000 Indians have undergone imprisonment,
mostly with hard labour. Hundreds have been deported, only to return
immediately. Many families have been ruined pecuniarily. Many Indian
merchants have suffered enormous loss. Some have even closed [ down]
their businesses. The Chairman of the Association, in order to avoid
confiscation of his property by the Government under fines imposed for
1 Joseph Chamberlain (1836-1914); Secretary of State for the Colonies, 1895-
1903
2 Vide Vol. VII, pp. 80-.
trading without licences, has accepted sequestration of his estate.
Several Indian merchants are ready to follow his example. Some
Indians have, no doubt, owing to their weakness accepted the Asiatic
Acts, and more are likely to succumb; but, after a very careful examina-
tion, the Executive of the British Indian Association as a whole will
remain solid in offering passive resistance until justice is done.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4916-
