125. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
COONOOR,
February 5, 1934
BA,
I have your letter. What you say about Bihar is correct.
Large numbers were killed and now in this cold thousands have
become homeless. Much help is being sent from all parts of the
country. From among the Ashram inmates, Panditji, Parnerkar,
Raojibhai, Soman, Bal, Swami and Dhotre have gone there.
Dhotre is the gentleman from Wardha. If more workers are re-
quired, I will send some others. I have had letters from all the
women. All except Velanbehn are well. Velanbehn has gone to
Baroda, taking Anandi and Mani with her. If necessary, she will
118
go and consult a doctor in Bombay. She has lost weight consi-
derably. It will take her some months to be restored. Durga
has gone to Bulsar. From there she will go to Belgaum. I also
will be there on March 6. Lilavati was having fever, but she has
returned to jail along with Premabehn. Devdas has not gone to
Patna. There is no need, even, for him to do so. Tara is fairly
seriously ill. She is in Ahmedabad at present. Mani Parikh is
at her maternal uncle's. Afterwards she will go to Kathlal. I
shall meet Rajaji tomorrow. Amtussalaam is here. She has
taken ill, but is better today. It seems she will go to Kashi and
stay with Krishnakumari. Muriel Lester, in whose Ashram I stayed
in England, will meet me tomorrow—Gangabehn has gone to
Wardha to see Surendra. He is working there with Jamnalalji.
Mahalakshmi is in Bombay with her children. I had letters
from Manilal and Sushila. Both say that you should not worry
about him. Sita is happy. Kallenbach was on a visit to
Phoenix for two days. There has been frost in Gujarat and other
parts of the country and most of the crops have been completely
destroyed. The frost was severe and lasted many days. We must
submit to God's will. Vallabhbhai is fairly well. There was a
letter from Mridula. She also is well. I have inquired about
Madhavdas. I will most certainly let you know. I have not
forgotten about it. There was a long letter from Ramdas. He
and Nimu and the children are in good health. Keshu and
Krishna are still in Wardha and are quite well. There have been
no letters from Radha recently.
Brijkrishna is fairly well.
He is slowly regaining strength.
There is a well-known
paper named The Hindu published from Madras. There was a wire
today saying that its Editor had died. I have sent a wire of
condolence. Prabhavati is well. She is still in Patna. I hope
you and the other women are in good health. I will start from
here tomorrow morning and go to see Raja. And now the dis-
course.
There is a saying among us: "One road, two purposes." What
road is that following which will always serve "two purposes"?
"Two purposes" should not, either, be understood to mean only
two. Here "two" means more than one. One may, therefore,
also say: "One road and a hundred purposes." In Bihar thou-
sands of people were buried alive in the matter of a minute.
This cannot but make us think that one should not waste a single
moment. "Make the best of today, for who has seen tomorrow?"
—sang Mira. We don't know what will happen even after a minute
or a second.
One may pass away even in the act of yawning.
What, then, is that golden road following which would serve all
purposes? There is only one, viz., helping others. That means
service of the neighbour. Another name for it is paramartha. The
word means 'supreme purpose'. A third name for it is Haribhakti.
We sing in the prabhatiyan of Narasinh Mehta that such bhakti
is not practised by telling beads or putting marks on the forehead
or bathing in the Ganga. Bhaktas tell us that it means pledging
one's head.
We should, therefore, always wish the world's good
all the hours of the day whether in jailor outside, and do
whatever service may fall to our lot in order to advance it. I
hope this will be enough for today's discourse.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 12-
