293. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Vaishakha Sud 2 [May 3, 1927]
SISTERS,
I have now received plenty of hand-made paper. Even
though the size of the paper is a little smaller than what you ask
for, I believe you will prefer hand-made paper. Our chief duty
today, of course, lies in regard to cloth; because from it our starv-
ing masses obtain their bread. There are not many who make
this paper. Yet as long as we find something that is made in our
country, and it is good, we must procure and use it.
It is very good that you have set apart some money for
postage. It does not matter if the amount is small; but keep
regular accounts so that those of you who can, may learn there-
by how to keep accounts.
I find your progress in another direction also praiseworthy.
Last week I raised the problem of protecting yourselves against
thieves. Do not lightly brush it aside. I wish you to falsify the
epithets 'weak', 'timid' and so on that are specially used about
women. They do not apply to all women of course. Who would
say the women of Raniparaj are 'timid'? How can you call them
weak? The women of the West, of course, take part these days
in everything. I do not mean to say that they should be imitated;
but at least they have been falsifying many of the assumptions of
men. The Negro women of Africa are not at all 'timid'. Perhaps
there is no such epithet in their language to be applied to them.
In Burma, it is the men who appear timid and as it were the
weaker sex. Women themselves carry on business of all kinds.
I raised the problem of thieves, not to frighten you, but to
make you think calmly about it. In the Ashram we all wish to
realize that we have a 'soul'. Now the soul is neither male nor
female; neither young nor old. The scriptures as well as our own
experience tell us that these are the attributes only of the body.
The same soul pervades you and me. How then can I protect you?
Is it not by learning the art of how to protect oneself? Only then
can I teach you.
There is enough for you to think over here. If I feel inclined,
I will take up the subject once again.
If any of you wish to write to me, do so without hesitation.
I learn that Valjibhai has frightened all of you. Do not get
frightened.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3647
