235. LETTER TO AMEER ALI
[LONDON,]
August 30, 1909
DEAR MR. AMEER ALI,
I have your postcard. I have purposely refrained from writing
to you, in order that I may not interfere with your rest. Had there
been anything striking, I should certainly have written. Moreover, I
waited for the letter that you promised in your postcard. Not having
had the letter, I concluded that you were too busy to write it.
The Transvaal matter is still the subject of negotiations. General
Smuts left on Saturday and gave the following message to Reuter:
I hope it is in a fair way to disappear from the horizon of Transvaal politics.
The vast majority of Transvaal Indians are sick to death of the agitation carried
on by some of their extreme representatives, and have quietly submitted to the law.
I have had repeated conversations with Lord Crewe and other important leaders
interested in this matter, and I think it will be possible now to find a solution
of this vexed question which all reasonable men will consider right and fair.
And there the matter rests at present. There is some ground, there-
fore, for hoping that a settlement will be arrived at. Lord Ampthill has
worked wonderfully in the matter, but if the negotiations are protracted,
it is now a question, in view of General Smuts' return to South Africa,
whether Mr. Hajee Habib and I should stay here or whether our place is
now in South Africa and, if necessary, in the Transvaal gaol.
As to the Natal deputation, Mr. Abdul Caadir and friends are mov-
ing heaven and earth. They are circulating the statement broadcast.
They have seen Lord Crewe and they are seeing, this week, Lord Morley
and Colonel Seely. They have also been in correspondence with the
Aga Khan, who is in Paris undergoing medical treatment. Sir Muncher-
ji is also in constant touch. A copy of their letter to the Indian public
shows the remedy they are now concentrating their energy upon. They
have sent you the statement. A letter has also been officially addressed
to the Viceroy, asking him to adopt the remedy of suspending Indian
immigration to Natal unless relief is granted. They are most anxious to
pay their respects personally to you, especially as they have been spe-
cially instructed to meet you and be guided by your advice. I would,
therefore, thank you to let me have an idea as to when you are likely to
return.
I hope there has been no further hindrance to the cure you have
been undergoing and that you will return thoroughly invigorated. I
may mention that a public meeting will be held tomorrow in Bombay
to protest against the Transvaal legislation.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
JUSTICE AMEER ALI, C. I. E.
HOTEL SCHWEIZERHOF
VULPERA TARASP
[SWITZERLAND]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5035
1 The Indian question
