321. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
BOMBAY,
Saturday [June 7, 1919]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I could not write this to you yesterday. There was a letter
from Ba today, in which she says that Keshu has again fallen
ill and Rukhi, too. There must be reasons for this illness. You
alone can discover them. If children repeatedly fall ill, how can
they go forward? It is likely that something is wrong with the
water there. It seems that unsuitability of water and similar
factors which will not upset those who do only manual work
may upset mental workers. It is not very likely that there is
any other reason, apart from unclean water, or unsuitable or
excessive food.
Chi. Shamaldas has decided to go over there. Shanti will
also go with him. The intention is that he should become an
expert in the matter of cloth. He will acquire the necessary
knowledge about looms. He will go and bring his mother in
a few days. See if you can rent for him some rooms in Miya-
khan's buildings.
Failing this, if he can get something else in
that locality, that will suit him. Shanti will also go with him.
If the arrangement suits all, I for one would be very happy. I
think Shamaldas should be able to work.
There is a gentleman named Chandrashankar who will also
go there to see our weaving factory. He is the man who has sup-
plied the money and arranged for the spinning of cotton here till
this day. I think the work here has been fast enough, but not
sound. The gentleman who has undertaken it has his heart in it
all right, but does not know much. In his ignorance, he has squan-
dered the money. The yarn produced does not seem likely to be
useful. It will be some time before weaving is taken in hand.
We should have a good number of indigenous looms at our
disposal. There must be plenty of them in Kathiawad. In
Umreth, too, there are some, I know. All of them have not
started working. Show everything to Bhai Chandrashankar there.
Let him also see how yarn is sprayed with water. Afterwards, sug-
gest to him that he should go and see things at Vijapur. From
there he will proceed to Kota. I have advised him to spend further
only after he has acquainted himself with everything.
The khadi dispatched to the old Swadeshi Store has been
bought up for the new Store. The money will be credited in
account here against the goods. The other amounts, too, will
be paid in. In all, Rs. 10,000 will be paid in. The stock lying
there may be packed and kept aside. They say that the Store
here does not have enough room for all that stock and so it
should be kept there. Send me the invoice, with a description of
the goods and the quantity of each item. I shall hand it over to
Bhai Vithaldas. You will not then be entitled to sell this stock.
Pack it all into a bale, with a label on each item, describing hand-
spun and hand-woven goods as No. 1, those with hand-spun woof
and mill-produced warp as No. 2, and those with both warp and
woof mill-produced as No. 3, and stating the length in yards. He
will buy up whatever we produce. It is not desirable, I think, to
produce any more stock of No. 3. Vithaldas is ready to sell the
goods at the prices we charge. He does not want to earn a single pie
by way of profit. On other goods, too, he will charge a profit of
no more than five per cent. We also should not charge any profit.
This is the only way in which we can popularize pure swadeshi.
Vithaldas also wants us to get some khadi dyed red for choliyu.
With all these facilities, do you see any need for selling stocks
from there directly? Vithaldas has undertaken to tell the manager
of the old Store that he should directly remit [to you], from
that Store, the payment for bills in respect of goods other than
khadi.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 7021
