41. LETTER TO MAHAVIR PRASAD PODDAR
August 17, 1944
MAHAVIR PRASAD,
I do not know whether Ghanshyamdas has told you
about my scheme for nature cure. If my ideas can be imple-
mented, I would have used, to the best of my ability, all
my God-given talents. These ideas came to me while I was at
Dinshaw's Arogya Bhavan . I shall not give a full account
of their evolution. Here I am giving you in short the ideas
in their final form.
Select a plot of a thousand acres near any village. It will
be better if the land is situated in a salubrious region. It does
not matter if the village is far away from a town or the
railway station. Select two such plots or at least one. Get a
layout of the land made right now—even before purchasing
1 Yashwant M. Parnerkar
2 & 3 Addressee's wife and son
4 At Poona
the land. Keep in view the following points while making the
plan. Have the roads marked out in the plan. One road shall
be broad but right now it will not be made motorable, only
bullock-carts or horse-driven carriages will ply on it. The plot
must be provided with fresh water. There should be a nice
swimming-pool, a gymnasium or two to provide facilities
for physical exercise. Arrangement should be made to grow
fruits, trees, vegetables and foodgrains. There shall be facilities
on this land to treat patients by nature-cure methods. Nature
cure will include the various methods of mud-pack, treat-
ment with water, such as hip-bath, friction-bath, steam-bath,
etc., treatment with light, such as sun-bath, suryanamaskara
moon-bath, watching the stars, utilizing all the lights of the rain-
bow through the medium of cloth, water, glass bottle, etc., treat-
ment with air such as pranayama subsisting on air, etc. In the
initial stage, use of modern devices like electricity, etc., will
be avoided. This is with a view to initially using mechanical
aids to the minimum and developing such devices as the vil-
lagers can use easily as also exploring their usefulness. Not
only will sick persons be treated in this institution, but even
normal persons likely to benefit from nature cure will be
admitted to it. We should try to give vigour and vitality to the
weak. Children will be admitted to the institution with this
view, and efforts will be made to build their health accord-
ing to the laws of nature. Health will be our prime concern.
Special emphasis will be placed on preservation and improve-
ment of health. Thus the aim of this institution will be self-
reliance in all respects and its message will be universal.
It will tend to become an ideal village with facilities for
basic education and village industries like khadi, etc. Initially
it will certainly require a lot of money but I cannot think of a
better use of money than this. A trust should be constituted for
this purpose. I had thought of Dinshaw Mehta, Ghanshyamdas,
and myself as trustees; Ghanshyamdas added two more—Devdas
and you. I had of course thought of you but I had no idea
how far you could go with this. If I accept your name you
should free yourself from all other work and devote yourself to
this work. Ghanshyamdas believes in nature cure and he can
either attract donations or give one himself. Devdas will fulfil
this function by becoming Ghanshyamdas's representative. I will
be the guide—since the whole idea is mine. It can be said that
I am a devotee of nature cure for the last fifty years. This
venture was conceived with the expectation that Dinshaw could
be put in charge of fully implementing the ideas. And I shall
like very much your joining this provided you can devote the
rest of your life entirely to this work. Meet me at the earliest
if you find these ideas good enough.
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
