348. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
September 13, 1936
MY DEAR SUBHAS,
I hope you were given my wire in reply to your kind enquiry.
My fever-an attack after twelve years of freedom-was the cause
of the lateness of my reply to your questions.
(1) Tea or coffee I do not consider to be essential to health.
They often do harm. They may remain harmless, if tea is weak
and straw colour and coffee drunk with plenty of milk with only
a spoonful or two of coffee.
(2) If received fresh from the udder well cleaned and from a
healthy cow, milk drunk fresh unboiled unwarmed is the best food.
Next best is pasteurized milk. For some stomachs sweet curds are
the best. They having the yeast obviate even the use of fruit.
(3) Leafy vegetables must always be taken, better if taken
as salads. All leaves are not edible in the raw state. Onion,
pumpkin with the skin, pandora, brinjal, lady's finger, turnips,
carrots, parsnips, cabbage, cauliflower are good additions to leaves.
Potatoes and starchy tubers should be taken sparingly.
(4) Dates are a fine food for a healthy stomach. Raisins
are more digestible. I can take both freely but all cannot. All
can take raisins and sultanas.
(5) Garlic and onion in a raw state are strongly recom-
mended in the West. I take raw garlic regularly for blood pres-
sure. It is the best antitoxin for internal use. It is also recom-
mended for tubercular patients.
I think the prejudice against these two harmless vegetables
is due to the odour which is the essence of them and it arose
with the rise of Vaishnavism. Ayurveda sings the praise of both
unstintingly. Garlic is called poor man's musk and so it is. I do
not know what villagers would do without garlic and onion.
(6) Yes, lemons and gur or honey are a good substitute
for sweet oranges.
I think this answers all your questions. I hope you are well.
I would like to know the result of Drs. Sircar's and Roy's ex-
amination.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
