120. LETTER TO THE PRESS
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
February 16, 1901
DEAR SIR,
Now that the Famine Fund raised in the Colony is closed, it
may be as well to give you its genesis. While the Indian com-
munity was agitating itself whether it would be possible, as in 1897,
in spite of the present distressing circumstances in South Africa,
to make an effort, the Viceroy's letter to the Lord Mayor of
London for further help was published in the local papers, and,
almost simultaneously with this, came a request to the Protector
of Indian Immigrants from the Natal Agent at Calcutta to collect
subscriptions from the indentured Indians. We thereupon bestir-
red ourselves, and, on behalf of the Indian community, H. E.
the Governor was approached with a view to secure his patronage.
He most graciously consented to become the Patron of any such
fund that might be raised in that behalf and promised to head
the list with £20. The Hon. Sir John Robinson, ex-Premier
of Natal, and the Hon. Henry Bale, the Attorney-General of
Natal, very actively espoused the movement. A strong Central
Committee was formed with the Mayor of Durban as Chairman
and the Protector of Immigrants as Honorary Treasurer, and an
appeal for funds was made in the papers which, too, rendered
great help. A local artist drew up a realistic cartoon which The
Natal Mercury consented to issue as a special. The excellent pic-
torial representations of The Times of India were pressed into ser-
vice. The result was that nearly £5,000 were collected, of which
about £3,000 were contributed by the Europeans, £1,700 by the
Indians and £300 by the natives. The magistrates in the
various divisions, chairmen of Local Boards, the clergy and
a band of Indian workers, besides the Committee members,
vied with one another in making collections. Lady Robinson,
supported by her friends, also rendered valuable help. Colour
prejudice was for the time being forgotten, and the best traits of
the character of the community were, in this instance, brought
into play. In 1897, the European contribution to the famine
fund was over £200 and the Indian was about £1,200—there was
no organization formed then for collections among the Europeans.
The Viceroy has acknowledged the generosity of Natal in
very suitable terms.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the office copy : S.N. 3777, and India, 15-3-1901
