4. LETTER TO RECEIVER OF REVENUES
[JOHANNESBURG,
January 4, 1908]
[F. C. BIGGAR, ESQ.
THE RECEIVER OF REVENUES
JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
My Association has seen the notice in the Gazette to the effect that
trading licences will not be issued to British Indians unless they can
produce registration certificates under the Asiatic Law Amendment
Act No. 2 of 1907, and undergo certain other formalities.
My Association understands, too, that several British Indians have
applied for licences and formally tendered the licence fee, but that
their licences have not been granted, because of the above notice.
On behalf of my Association, therefore, I beg formally to inform
you that, as the large majority of British Indians have for conscientious
reasons declined to submit to the Asiatic Law Amendment Act, and as
it is not possible for Indian traders or hawkers to earn their living
otherwise than as traders or hawkers, they are reluctantly compelled to
continue their trade without proper licences. I may further add that,
should the notice regarding licences be withdrawn, and should you
be pleased to grant licences, on a notification from you, the licence
fee will be immediately paid and licences taken out by British Indian
traders and hawkers.
I have etc.,
[Essop MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION]
The Star, 6-1-1908
Indian Opinion, 11-1-1908
1 This was very likely drafted by Gandhiji.
2 The date of this letter is mentioned in the reply sent by the Receiver of Revenues,
who said: "In reply I beg to point out to you that Indian traders who are disposed
to contravene the law in the manner indicated render themselves liable to the provisions
of the Revenue Licence Ordinance, 1905, which imposes heavy penalties on any persons
carrying on any trade or business without being in possession of a licence, irrespective of
whether the persons are offenders against the requirements of any other statute or not.
"The Press notice on the subject of renewal of licences, 1908, is not of a statutory
character, but merely an advisory notice inserted in the papers for the information
