6. LETTER TO MANUBHAI NANDSHANKAR MEHTA
LABURNUM ROAD,
GAMDEVI,
BOMBAY,
[August 4, 1919]
BHAISHRI MANUBHAI,
I was in Vijapur last Thursday. There, and on the way, I
met thousands of men and women. It was the movement for
swadeshi which took me there.
There is a prominent lady from Broach, a widow, in Vijapur.
Spinning, and now weaving as well, is being promoted there
through her. Her name is Gangabehn The aim behind this
programme is to increase the production of cloth in the country.
Women, and men too, who have free time should devote it to spin-
ning and, if they can, to weaving. In this way, it is hoped to res-
tore to the agriculturists an old-time subsidiary occupation of
theirs. As part of this programme, at present 125 women spin
in Vijapur and, depending on how much they work, earn daily
two to four pice or even more. These women did no work before
they took this up. Gangabehn and others work for the love of God.
A loom has also been installed recently. I saw that the insti-
tution was very much short of space. My request to the State is
this. Make one or two acres of land available near the station
and immediately get a building ready, in which people may
live and work. I am prepared to pay rent for it. If you can see
to this, the work there will progress better. If the Maharaja thinks
well of this work, I should like him to advise the officers also to
help. If I get some encouragement, I am hopeful that, in a very
short time, we shall have plenty of cloth produced in Vijapur
taluka and the agriculturists and others will have a means of sup-
plementing their income.
This is one matter on which I have to trouble you.
I saw that the passengers in the train were packed like so
many goats. The carriages are too few and there is only one
train. That is not enough. I should like you to do something about
this, too, if possible.
I beg to be excused for this letter.
Yours,
SHRI MANUBHAI NANDSHANKAR
DIWAN
BARODA
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand : S. N. 6796
