41. LETTER TO H. HARCOURT
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I wrote to you in my last letter that I will send for the copy
of your book you had kindly sent me. I have now got it and
having the leisure of a convalescent, I went through the book
from end to end. I read it with interest. I liked your humorous
touches especially with reference to the complainant who the ac-
cused said in his evidence had struck the latter's fist with his nose.
I have remembered that joke well because you have unwitting-
ly summed up my own belief. I have certainly run up my nose
against many a fist, and have hitherto come out unhurt. I have
found in my experience that when instead of putting up your nose
for the man with the fist to play with, you try to ward off his
play by holding it back, you really get the knock-out blow. But I
must not try to present you my philosophy of life if the method
I stand for can possibly be described by such a dignified word.
But I would say one word with reference to your estimate of
me. I ask you to believe me when I assure you that I en-
deavoured to see myself in your looking-glass. But I have failed
to recognize myself in it. I do not wonder at the picture you
have drawn of me. I hope that I do not entertain any elongated
notions about myself. But I cannot help expressing my grief that
a man so sincere like you should have failed to study an honest
movement which somehow or other caught the imagination of
thousands upon thousands of men and women who had hitherto
been left untouched, with more attention than you evidently felt
called upon to give. Many English friends are now beginning to
see that my movement was an honest attempt through non-co-
operation to bring about hearty co-operation of equals, instead
of an enforced and superficial co-operation between parties one
of which regarded itself as superior to the other.
I shall await your letter telling me what your challenge
was. And if I find it to be still capable of being taken up, and find
myself equally capable of taking it up, you may depend upon
me responding to it.
Yours sincerely,
H. HARCOURT, ESQ.
119, GIPSY HILL
LONDON S.E. 19
From a photostat: S.N. 12523
