502. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
January 15, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
It is four in the afternoon just now. Today is my weekly
silence day. I am writing this in Nagji Purushottam's bungalow
in Calicut. Devdas and Lakshmi arrived today. Thakkar Bapa
and Shankerlal will arrive tomorrow. I will see the Zamorin
tomorrow at 2.30 in the afternoon and then will leave for Trichur
at five.
The question is whether Lakshmi should go to Delhi for her
delivery or remain in Madras. She and Devdas will see Raja in
about two days. They will come to a final decision after that.
Devdas has got the permission to go to Delhi, but I think he
should spend about six months in Madras to gain experience.
Lakshmi would not like her delivery to take place in his absence
and Raja would not like it in his. Thus there is a problem
within a problem. Doesn't the meaning of life consist in solving
even such seemingly trivial problems in the right manner?
I have specially called Shankerlal here for a brief discussion
regarding khadi. I observe that perhaps needless expenditure is
being incurred in our department. I wish to place before him
what I have observed. I think we should stop the needless expen-
diture on sending khadi from one province to another. I incline
finally towards the practice followed in Anantpur. The practice
followed at Saoli also seems good. Krishnadas [Gandhi] and
Jajuji are experts and they complement each other perfectly.
Krishnadas is acquitting himself very well. Keshu is quiet. Ram-
das is discontented. He also will become calm by and by.
Devdas visited Ba. He is full of praise for her courage. She
is of course harassed a little. But without harassment there would
be no pleasure in being in jail.
I paid a visit to Guruvayur. There is no resentment there
at all. It is true, though, that the Varnashrama Sangh had sent
pahelwans from North India to demonstrate with black flags and
get beaten up a little. Two of them had taken control of the
dais. They got hold of a man by his feet, whereupon the young
men there asked them to get down. An altercation and fighting
followed. The pahelwans got beaten up a little. They are quite
all right, but they did their play-acting cleverly. I sent the two
to a dispensary and started the meeting and went on with it
as if nothing had happened. The crowds continue to be as big
as ever. Small and big contributions continue to come in. An-
other Annapurna, named Kaumudi, came into the limelight.
She gave all her ornaments. "Who can harm him whom Rama
protects?" So we will live as He ordains, do His bidding and
dance as He wills.
Two Hungarian women, mother and daughter, met me in
Bangalore. Both are expert painters. They lead a simple life. Just
now they have dedicated themselves to the service of India.
Bhajan music fills them with ecstasy.
N. seems likely to go to America. S. too may go. I have
not written much to you about their doings. What could I write?
Besides, I don't have the time either.
Amala is getting on fairly well.
A letter from Mani is enclosed. I have written to Swami
for slivers and the books. Since the books will not be of the
same size, I don't know whether he will be able to pack them
together. But Swami is resourceful and, if it is possible, he will
manage to do that.
Dahyabhai had sent to me Mani's letter to you.
If I go to Belgaum, I will surely try to meet both. But my
going there is not certain.
1 Professional wrestlers
2 Vide "Speech at Public Meeting, Guruvayur", pp. 465-71.
3 Vide "Speech at Women's Meeting, Calicut", pp. 480-2; also Vol. LVII
"Kaumudi's Renunciation", pp. 18-.
Write to Mani that one need not be with one's elders in
order to serve them. If one does their work, one serves them. It
is not wrong to wish to be near them. On the contrary, it is natu-
ral to do so. But there is no necessary connection between serv-
ing them and being near them. Poor girl, she would be
thinking that her letter must have been forwarded directly to you.
But you must have noticed that it had made a trip to Sabarmati
for a dip in the river. It thus got moistened at four or five places.
This is of course no new experience to us. But it is our resolve
-is it not?-to remain contented with whatever happens.
I have not been able to satisfy Gordhanbhai. But he doesn't
write to me now. Towards him, too, I have done my duty as I
saw it. I have asked him to let me know the total sum received
from Vithalbhai and also to send me the correspondence bet-
ween them. If I get it, I think I shall have to publish it.
Let him always write to me at Wardha. Even if, however,
he writes everything only to you and if I get every such letter, I
shall be fully satisfied. I want you yourself to guide him in this
matter. I take it that you will write about Ba. I have already
written to you about Lakshmi. I am writing to Mridula and
Nandubehn . Devdas went and looked up Brijkrishna. He is
quite well. He has survived. He needs rest, which he is taking.
It is certain that Raja will be released on 6th February.
You should learn not to go on thinking about things, what-
ever the cause. For that, you should either memorize the Gita
or learn Sanskrit or go on reciting the Ramadhun both in the
straight and the reverse order.
I get no time at all for worrying, so you needn't advise me
not to worry.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 62-
1 There being nobody knowing Gujarati on the staff of the Belgaum jail,
Gujarati letters written by prisoners were first sent to Sabarmati jail for cen-
soring.
2 Vijayagauri, wife of Dr. Kanuga
