280. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
MOTIHARI,
April 17 [1917]
MY DEAR HENRY,
I know you are saying "well done" all the time. I am recall-
ing the best days of South Africa. And to have them in a place
where Rama and Janaka lived! The people are rendering all
assistance. We shall soon find our Naidoos and Sorabjis and
Imams. I don't know that we shall stumble upon a Cachalia.
I am still without the necessary summons for contempt.
Evidently they little expected the answers I have given.
I sent you last night the papers to your Allahabad address.
The papers ought to have gone to Bankipore last night. But they
did not somehow. I am now sending you a special messenger.
Please show them to Muzharul Haque too. He has telegraphed
offering to come if required. I have replied saying he may come
after my imprisonment. Whilst I am free, I want only volunteers
who will go from village to village and hear what the people
have to say.
From the memorandum of instructions hurriedly drawn up
last night you will observe what is wanted. Two things may be
done by the leaders there: urgent demand for an impartial quick
inquiry, a body of staunch learned volunteers (100) who would go
to different villages and live there protecting the people from mole-
station and gathering information. If the authorities object to the
volunteers, they should not take 'no' for an answer. The volunteers
should be, so far as possible, Beharees. Theirs should be the credit.
I still feel that so far as you are concerned, you need not
throw yourself into the fray. I have asked Andrews to come.
I want you to feel free and prepared to go to England and settle
there. I cannot go into all the reasons just now.
Gorakh Prasad Babu here will give you all the information
during my absence. If there is no summons I disappear in the
villages tomorrow and may not return for two days.
With love,
Yours,
BHAI
Later—
You will see from the magistrate's reply that I am to be
'fixed up' tomorrow. So I do not go to the villages.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: G.N. 2821
