50. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Friday, [On or after February 25, 1907]
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter. There is a letter from Harilal Thakkar
in which he says he is unhappy about his condition. His imme-
diate demand is for £5.
Read my letter to Mr. West and do
what you think best. In my opinion, we suffer no loss by giving
£5. However, I have written in detail to Mr. West, so I don't
add anything here.
I am trying for paper. We don't want to have it on deferred
payment basis. I don't think there will be any difficulty as yet
in our being able to pay in time. I have called for an estimate
from Dickinson.
I am also inquiring how £7 came to be drawn from here.
How did you come to allow so much credit to Mrs. Wybergh?
Have you sent her the bills? I have written to her today.
I find that a cheque for 1,786 was received in October from
Suleman Ibrahim. Hemchand says that a credit note was sent
for this. Look into this. If you don't find the amount mentioned
anywhere, credit it now.
I will go through the poem you have sent. I got a copy
of Narmakavya through Motilal. I will look for the poem you
mention. This time, I should like to give, if I can find, some-
thing from an Urdu book.
I am making inquiries about the proofs of the Hamidia [Is-
lamic Society]. I am also attending to the matter about Gujarati.
The arrangement about Manilal is all right. In fact, even
if the hour had been between 8 and 9, no one should have
had any reason to complain. For if the men are trained up, it
is in the hope that the Press itself will have the benefit of their
training. All the same, it would be better for us to be careful.
I suppose all of you will get together on Sunday.
Ask Kalyandas to write and tell me, among other things,
what treatment he is taking.
I do realize that you must be working under pressure. I also
see the need for a Gujarati-knowing man under you and I give
my consent to employing such a person. Find out if the man
named Pragji who has recently joined will suit your purpose.
Sam, Sardar's son, will also be glad to take up work. He seems
to know English well. If you want to employ Ramanath, I
will not mind either; you may follow your own inclination in
this matter.
Harilal attends both to studies and to office work. He did not
find it possible to devote himself entirely to studies. I teach
him in the morning between 7 and 8 and, when possible, for half
an hour in the evening.
Make up your mind about Harilal Thakkar immediately and
let me have your reply. Or you may inform him.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 4689
