227. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
GOVERNOR-GENERAL
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 4, 1910
SIR,
The Committee of my Association has decided to approach His
Excellency with a view to the presentation of a humble and loyal ad-
dress of welcome, on His Excellency's approaching visit to Johannes-
burg; but my Committee has hesitated by reason of a hitch that occur-
red at the time of the presentation of an address to Lord Selborne. My
Committee was then at first advised that the Association's address would
be received at the same time and place as the other addresses from pub-
lic bodies, but, at the eleventh hour, a message was sent to the offices
of the Association to the effect that the address would be received pri-
vately by His Lordship, and it was ultimately so received. My Associa-
tion then understood that the decision to receive the address at the same
time as the others was altered because of the prevailing prejudice
against Asiatic and coloured communities in this country. My Associa-
tion is most anxious to avoid a repetition of such an awkward and
humiliating position, and, therefore, trusts that, if its humble address
may not be received in common with the other addresses next Friday,
His Excellency will be graciously pleased to accept this letter as testify-
ing its respect for His Excellency as His Majesty's representative. If the
1 At the meeting which passed a resolution thanking Kallenbach; vide "Johan-
nesburg", p. 289.
2 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was signed by A. M. Cachalia,
Chairman, British Indian Association.
3 Herbert John Gladstone (1854-1930); was the first Governor-General and
High Commissioner for South Africa, 1910-
4 Vide the following item.
5 High Commissioner and Governor of the Transvaal, 1905-10
address of my Association cannot be received publicly, my Association
can quite understand and appreciate the delicacy of the situation. But,
should His Excellency consider that the humble address of my Associa-
tion may be received publicly in common with the others next Friday,
I am desired to state that my Association would like to make a formal
presentation. May I request the favour of a telegraphic reply?
Indian Opinion, 9-7-1910
