278. LETTER TO ASAF ALI
January 25, 1920
MY DEAR ASAF ALI,
I was sorry to hear of your illness. I hope you are now
better if not quite restored.
I thank you for your frank letter.
I shall certainly take every step to see that there is no mis-
understanding regarding the cow-slaughter resolution. I quite
agree with you that no false hopes should be raised regarding the
Mahomedan attitude on [the] point and that all propaganda on
our (Hindus') part among Mahomedans should be avoided.
I am glad too that you have raised the moral issue and dis-
cussed it not on purely orthodox religious but on broad and
humanitarian grounds. I would however say on the orthodox
religious grounds that, when two great communities live side by
side, the religious sense of the one demands a scrupulous regard for
the practices of the other, so long as they are not immoral from a
universal stand point. For instance I see nothing wrong in
non-Muslims going to Mecca. But there is nothing immoral in
your prohibiting non-Muslims from entering it. And as the
sentiment of prohibition has grown during all these 1,300 years,
I support it.
So may it be for the Mahomedan regarding the cow-slaughter.
Now for the broad humanitarian ground: we shall probably
have to agree to differ; your view point seems to be so different
from mine. I consider that God has not created lower forms of
animal life for man to use them as he will. Man realises his highest
station not by indulging but by abstinence. I have no right to
destroy animal life if I can subsist healthily on vegetable life. I
have no right to slaughter all animal life because I find it necessary
to slaughter some animal life. Therefore if I can live well on goats,
fish and fowl (surely enough in all conscience) it is sin for me to
destroy cows for my sustenance. And it was some such argument
that decided the rishis of old in regarding the cow as sacred, es-
pecially when they found that the cow was the greatest economic
asset in national life. And I see nothing wrong, immoral or sin-
ful in offering worship to an animal so serviceable as the cow so long
as my worship does not put her on a level with her Creator. I
immensely appreciate the idea (so emphasized by Islam) that
special worship must be reserved for the Creator of us all. But I
must not mix up cow-worship and cow-slaughter. If you accept
the proposition that man is more man as he abstains more, you
will have no difficulty in allowing that cow-slaughter is indefen-
sible on moral grounds.
I agree with you that so far as the economic ground is con-
cerned, the slaughter for the Europeans is much the most impor-
tant. In my opinion the cry against the Mahomedan slaughter
on the Bakr Id is unbecoming so long as we Hindus remain dumb
about the daily slaughter going on in the public abattoirs. We
strain at a gnat and swallow a camel.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji's hand : S.N. 7064
