266. LETTER TO W. LUTOSTAWSKI
As AT THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
August 6, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
You will now see my reply to your questions in Young India,
and if you have any further questions, please do not hesitate to ask.
I like your three rules about preservation of health. The two
I understand thoroughly. For, I myself don't believe in worry
and always try to snatch moments for sleep and possess a fair
capacity for going off to sleep almost at will. Fasting too I
understand. But I do not do as you seem to have been doing.
You say you fast for 10 or 15 days before each voyage. This re-
quires explanation. 10 or 15 is a very vague number. For, 10 days
or 15 days make a great difference for a fasting man, at least such
is my experience. And what is this fasting? Do you take nothing
during the fast except water, not fruit, not milk?
Have you
record of your weight before and after fast? How often have you
taken these fasts? What is your weight now, and what is the
meaning of each voyage? What is its duration? Do you fast,
for instance, if you have to be at sea for one day only? You
say you take one meal about midday at a time of intense activity.
What does that meal consist of? And, do you take no fruit, no
milk, no other drink except water either in the morning or in
the evening? Then, again you say you fast only when you have
too much weight. Do you then say that you have always too much
weight before each voyage? And why do you ever have too much
weight if you are a spare eater as you evidently seem to be?
When you are not intensely active, how many meals do you take?
Then you say that you use at least 20 quarts of water to
clear your bowels every day, until the water is returned clean
and transparent and this you do when you have too much weight.
What do you mean by use of water? Is it enema, or do you
drink 20 quarts, even whilst you are taking your one meal per
day? If you drink it, do you work it out through the kidneys
or through the bowels? The experience of myself and all my
friends who have fasted for long lengths of time is that when we
have fasted the water has to pass through the kidneys, never
through the bowels unless we have taken the enema. As you may
know I am deeply interested in all experiments in fasting and die-
tetics whether merely for health or spiritual growth.
Yours sincerely,
PROF. W. LUTOSTAWSKI
JAGIELLONSKA 7 m. 2, WILNO
(POLAND)
From a photostat: S.N. 12513
