7. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 23, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your postcard and your letter, both received the
same day. What correction would you send me now about your
wire? 1 I think the thing is all forgotten, and for the sake of truth
what is now necessary is not a correction which is unwanted, but
mental alertness which will not be satisfied with unsifted facts or
loose arguments or expressions based upon those facts. It is not
possible for me to prove with perfect logic that the extent of un-
touchability in Madras is much greater than in Bengal. But for
our purpose, i.e., for the reformer who wants to get at the root
of the evil and to serve only truth, it is a completely proved pro-
position that untouchability is by far the greatest in the South,
because there it is not the caste Hindus on the one side and un-
touchables on the other, but Brahmins on the one side and non-
Brahmins on the other. Non-Brahmins include all Hindus and
all the non-Brahmins are undoubtedly untouchables, not perhaps
in accordance with the definition of the Franchise Committee or
the Census Commissioner, but most decidedly according to our
definition. There is untouchability as to water, as to food and
as to temple-going between Brahmins and non-Brahmins. But
there are grades of untouchability, the bottom list containing the
unseeable, who not only must not be seen but whose voice even
must not be heard by the Brahmins. The temples are not ar-
ranged in the South as in the North. There, there are barriers
for all the divisions. I do not even know the actual barriers
created, but there they are, and what you and I want to remove
is those barriers. I am just now to go through the illuminating
chapter on untouchability in the Bengal Census Report, but you
see now my point. No correction that you may make will answer
the purpose, but let us understand the position thoroughly for our-
selves and I would just now suggest to you: 'Dismiss the South
from your mind altogether. Don't go in for any comparison.' It is
bad enough wherever we go and if we go by the mental state,
then perhaps the comparatively more sensitive Namasudra feels
the comparatively lighter untouchability much more than the
comparatively less sensitive unseeable feels the grossest form of
untouchability.
Therefore irrespective of what the South does
or does not do, your own work is cut out for you. You have to
get rid of the untouchability of Bengal, whether it affects 50
per cent of the Hindu population or 5 per cent.
I understand what you say about Dr. P. C. Ray and Guru-
dev. I think that the more you study the situation the more you
will find, as I have found already, that educated Bengal does want
a revision of the Yeravda Pact and so far as I am concerned
it may have that revision if it can conciliate the Bengal Harijans
and all the other parties interested, provided of course that
there is no tampering with the joint system. That they are going
about it the wrong way is true and unfortunate. It is equally
unfortunate that non-Bengalis are being blamed for what hap-
pened. Bengalis should have come in their numbers to the meet-
ing in Bombay. There is a very fine legal maxim in Latin which
says: 'Equity serves the vigilant, not the dormant.' But you
cannot say anything to a person who is oppressed with grievances
and is angry.
Therefore I have adopted complete silence.
That by itself will produce a reasonable spirit, and I would ad-
vise you too to observe absolute silence. You have said enough
and you have given your word to the Harijans of Bengal that
so far as you are concerned the Pact is a sacred thing, not to be
altered without the unanimous consent of all parties.
Have I
made myself quite clear to you?
I see that you are now having a proper ebb in the circu-
lation of Harijan. But I do hope that you will not have to run
it at a loss, and if it comes to the losing point, you will stop
publication. If Bengal does not want 'Bengali Harijan', we may
not force it upon it. The circulation of Hindi, Gujarati and Eng-
lish editions is steadily increasing. The English has been self-
supporting almost from the beginning, and it is expected that
the Gujarati and the Hindi will be, perhaps, inside of a month.
Did I tell you that there was also a Tamil edition published
by Ganesan? He is a very energetic worker and has given himself
entirely to such causes.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19036
