229. LETTER TO BALVANTRAI THAKORE
[NADIAD,]
April 12, 1918
BHAISHRI BALWANTRAIJI,
I have your letter. It bespeaks your love for me. I am
grateful. I have already written to Natarajan that he has been hasty
in forming the opinion he has done. Instead of dealing with your
arguments, I would rather explain what I mean by "satyagraha".
Although I use the phrase "passive resistance", it does not fully
connote what I have in mind. Please forget all about it. I apply
to political matters the same law which regulates our conduct in
the family. In India, I find that people act under the shadow of
fear, do not tell the truth out of fear, deceiving themselves and
the Government. The juniormost police officer can ruin the repu-
tation of a big man of wealth. I think it is the duty of every
leader to get out of this state of mind. The officers are not amen-
able to the public. They think their actions are divinely inspired
and cannot conceivably be opposed. It will be a service to them,
and therefore to the State, to help them get rid of this notion.
Wherever, therefore, I find people submitting to injustice out of
fear, I tell them that, to shake off imposed hardships, they must
suffer voluntarily. This is satyagraha. To make others suffer
in order to save ourselves from suffering is duragraha, brute force.
When a bullock is hurt, he kicks. When a man is oppressed, he
should employ soul force to fight himself free, suffering voluntarily
to that end.
This is not the first time that hell has been let loose on the
people of Kheda district. In the past too they have suffered much.
Even the womenfolk of that place tell my wife of it. This time,
they spoke out against the hardship of having to pay the land
revenue. If they pay up, it will be done not willingly but
through fear. For doing so, many of them will have to part with
their cattle or have their valuable trees cut down. How can one
bear to see this suffering? I have seen it with my own eyes. What
is the way out? Should I send petitions? I did. Natarajan says
that we should approach the Viceroy or proceed to England. What
relief will this bring to the ryots? The trees will have been cut
down meanwhile and the dues paid. What will be the point of
agitating thereafter? Let it be understood that the struggle is not
for amendment of the law but against the manner of its adminis-
tration. What is the use of an appeal after a convict is hanged?
Many an innocent person has been so hanged and all that through
our indifference. We had only two courses open to us. Either resist
the tax collector by force or tell him in all civility that we would
not pay the tax. "He will recover it, all the same; in what way will
you have saved the people, then?" Surely, you will not put this
question? If you do, I have given my reply in the very beginning.
It happens, incidentally, that in this struggle the people are
being educated about religion, right conduct, unity, truth and non-
violence and the Government to respect public opinion. There is
no room for hatred at all. We have no desire to seek relief by
bringing pressure on the Government, but by awakening its sense of
justice. The outcome will in every case be good. In the end, people
will have but grown stronger in spirit. What will it matter even if,
being weak, the people surrender? Self-suffering never goes in vain.
If they fall, they will fall to rise again.
No step along this path is ever wasted,
No obstacle undoes the progress made;
Even a little of this dharma
Saves one from great danger.
You may write again if there is anything yet which troubles
you.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
