593. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
November 7, 1932
I am replying to your letter today. I had wanted to reply to
it much earlier, but while searching for verses [from the Gita] as
desired by you, I thought that it would be better if I selected at one
time all such verses which you could follow in life without diffi-
culty. I could do that today, and send with this the verses which
I have selected. I have mentioned the chapter and number of the
verse in each case, so that you can also look up the Gita and see
where the verse occurs. You will see that all the verses appeal
directly to the heart and are easy even for children to understand,
and also that the Lord has assured not once but several times that
He himself will awaken knowledge in the man who cultivates
bhakti for Him and will provide his needs. Bhakti means selfless
service of every living creature, in all of whom dwells the Lord.
This includes repetition of Ramanama for one's own peace of mind.
Moreover, you will see that even the verses selected from Chapter
VI contain what I wish to teach you just now. The verses from
Chapter XI are the sublimest part of Arjuna's sublime praise of
the Lord. And the last verse of Chapter XVIII explains the re-
ward of studying the Gita and of an earnest effort to put its teach-
ing into practice. That is, where there is Shri Krishna, who stands
for perfect knowledge, and Arjuna, who stands for action informed
with knowledge, everything else will follow. If you meditate
over these verses, you will see that one must never worry. A
student of the Gita ought not to worry any time. We are en-
joined to offer up everything as sacrifice to the Lord. Everything
means everything without exception. Do you think anybody who
does that would carry a load of worries in his head?
You must have discovered by now whether your disturbed
digestion is the result of too much thinking and excessive worry,
or whether it indicates the necessity of some change in your food.
Do not be overambitious, either, in your reading and study. The
resolutions which you have formed in your mind will now go on
slowly maturing. You will know your strength when you are re-
leased. Why should you worry now whether or not you will really
know it? There is no need at all to do so. You will find the
meanings of the verses in the Anasaktiyoga, and in any case Surendra
372
is there with you. You may, on your own or on the advice
of Surendra or others like him, add some more to the verses
which I have selected. I had made a note of the verses which
I wished to select. While doing so in my copy of the Gita, I
gave them the title "Ramdas Gita". Let us see how much they
help you.
I will now tell you about something which will amuse you.
Nimu asked me to suggest a name for your son. Sarita has al-
ready christened him Kahanji. I suggested Kahandas, thinking
that it would go well with your name and would also satisfy
Sarita's wish. But I should have known that Nimu would not
like a name ending with das. She disapproved of Kahandas and
asked me to suggest another name, but said that if you approved
of Kahandas, she also would accept it. Vasumati, claiming her
right, as aunt, to name the child, wrote to me and said that I,
being an old man, would naturally suggest a name which an
old man would like, but that she would not approve of any such
name. She, therefore, asked for a name which would please people
in this twentieth century. I have replied to her and told her
that it was the exclusive right of an aunt to name a baby and
that, therefore, she might give the child any name she liked. I
have suggested a few names for her approval such as Fakkadlal,
Chhogalashankh, Lakhtarlal, Bardolikar and Sabarmatiwala. In my
letter to Nimu, I have suggested Nirmallal, and also told her that,
if she did not like the name Kahandas, she was hardly likely to
be pleased with the name Ramdas either. I have, therefore, asked
her to suggest a new name for you too. I was about to suggest
one but checked myself. She should call you Nirmalkant. But we
would then be going back to the age of the Ramayana, instead of
living in the twentieth century, for in that age husbands were
known by the names of the wives. Ramachandra was called
Sitapati, Krishna was called Lakshmikant and Mahadev was called
Parvatipati. We find a number of such instances. If you wish
to throw any light on this profound subject, you are welcome to
do so.
You ask how I cultivated non-attachment. The thing was
very easy for me since everything I did was spontaneous, that is,
arose naturally from my devotion to truth. If one is filled with
a desire to serve the whole world, one can easily cultivate non-
attachment. If I had chosen to serve only our family, I would
certainly have been filled with ignorant love and even developed
attachment. I would also have suffered because of illnesses and
deaths. But suffering runs away from you if you dedicate yourself to
the service of the countless millions. Over whose illness would you
worry and over whose death would you grieve?
It would be al-
most impossible to do either. However, non-attachment does not
mean insensitivity, or cruelty, for after all one does wish to serve
the people, and, therefore, compassion becomes stronger instead
of becoming weaker, and one's efficiency and concentration in
work also increases. All these are signs of non-attachment. More-
over, the beauty of the thing lies in the fact that by serving the world,
one does not cease to serve one's family, for service of the family
is included in service of the world. I am perfectly sure in my
mind that I have served Ba, you and your brothers and other
members of the family no whit less than I could have done other-
wise. The service was pure because attachment was replaced by
equality of mind. I am sure that none of you has lost any-
thing in consequence and that I myself have gained much.
Thus I found non-attachment easy to cultivate. The word anasakti
occurred to me when, after I had finished the translation of the
Gita, Kaka asked me to suggest a title. It is not that I started
cultivating non-attachment after realizing that, if one wished to
serve the whole world, one could do so only with non-attach-
ment. I understood only gradually that I was acting without
attachment. Those around me saw that before I did. When
I returned to India, people started describing me as a karmayogi.
I used to read and study the Gita even in South Africa. But I
had not then thought about the meaning of karmayogi. But other
people saw all that in my life, and afterwards I also felt that
their description had truth in it. All cannot have such good
fortune. I had it because I think I have always loved truth right
from my childhood. But you need not go into these deep waters
just now. At present you should try to cultivate non-attachment
without attachment even to that aim. That is, you should do
with a light and happy heart any service for which you get an
opportunity and read and study at the same time whatever you
can manage. You need not worry either for Nimu or for the child-
ren. You will now see, with the new eyes which "Ramdas Gita"
will give you, that God is there to worry for them and for you.
You should not only believe this with your reason, but have faith
in it and live accordingly. You will then be happy and learn
everything you wish to. Fix firmly in your mind the Lord's assu-
rance in Chapter IX, that even the most sinful man will have be-
come a good man if he cultivates single-minded bhakti for Him.
The entire world might perish, but an assurance by the Lord
never proves false. I think I have written enough.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 214-
