139. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
July 2, 1932
CHI. MANI 1 ,
I got your letter. I hope you received my message. Since you
intended to send the slivers, you have earned the merit which you
would have done if you had sent them. You did well, however,
not to send any. No bad slivers are now left here. The slivers we
have got are enough. Mahadev has made as many as we need.
They have been accumulating for the last two months. Maha-
dev mostly uses the slivers sent by Chhakkaddas, because they are
made from superior cotton and with great care. I shall never
be able to spin on the Magan charkha as fine yarn as Mahadev
does. I have always held the view-and I am sure I am right-that
yarn spun for yajna should never be used for oneself. If a man who
spins for yajna is careless, he has been weighed in the balance and
found wanting.
The yarn spun for yajna should be spun with the utmost care.
It would be best if one gives away all the yarn spun by oneself
and uses whatever bad or good yarn one can get. If one does not
have the heart to do so, one should at any rate spare one hour or
half an hour daily for yajna and spin at least 160 rounds of yarn
as an offering to Lord Krishna.
I can easily understand your preferring group prayer, for you
started praying in that manner. But you must also pray by your-
self, even if it be only for one minute. Our aspiration should be
that ultimately we shall continually and silently go on repeating
God's name in our heart, and that is impossible unless one forms
the habit of praying by oneself. One can pray by oneself even while
lying in bed, bathing, eating or doing any other work. Thus it
can never be a burden. On the contrary, such prayer will lighten
one's heart—it ought to do so. If you do not get such expe-
rience, then you may know that your prayer is not from the
heart.
Dahyabhai's problem is a little difficult. But he is very sensi-
ble and, therefore, will himself recover his balance of mind. No-
body need advise him in this matter. If he wishes to marry again,
nobody can dissuade him from doing so. If, on the contrary, he
does not wish to marry again, nobody can tempt him to do so
either. Acquaintances will certainly pester him, but Dahyabhai
can deal with them. In any case you will be able to deal with
them. On such occasions, I feel the sacrifice of having stopped
seeing visitors, but it is our duty to bear such sacrifices. My left
elbow pains when I work with the arm in a particular manner.
A servant has been washing my clothes for about a month. I
use utensils supplied in the jail. They are not shining bright,
but are clean. Take care of your health and write to me regularly.
Blessings from
BAPU
SMT. MANIBEHN PATEL
C/O DR. BALWANTRAI KANUGA
ELLIS BRIDGE, AHMEDABAD
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 84-
1 Addressee's brother
