678. LETTER TO HASAN ALI
ASHRAM,
October 9, 1928
DEAR HASAN ALI,
I do not at all believe in the Shuddhi and Tabligh movements
as they are being carried on today. But I have repeatedly said
that if the Arya Samajists do wish to carry on Shuddhi nobody
can stop them. Nobody can forcibly prevent anyone from doing
a thing so long as that thing is not against morality.
The moment I cease to be an optimist I shall no longer
be able to live. Some day the Muslims are sure to co-operate.
Even today many of them are doing so.
Since you are determined, God will certainly help you to
observe the vow of brahmacharya. Frugality in eating and non-stimu-
lating food is a good external aid. The real means is heart-felt
prayer.
I have read some literature of theosophy, I like its general
principles, but not its occult experiments. I am unable to be-
lieve in the Jagadguru and in Krishnamurti. I am not interested
in the subject.
I do not believe in the traditional practice of shraddha. But
I do consider it right and necessary to pray for the dead as for
the living. I see great confusion about the meaning of the law of
karma. It only means that no action is without its effect. But
new actions mix with the old and continually produce new and
mixed results. And since the individual souls are intimately related
to one another, their actions also are so related. Prayer is a new
action producing good result.
Fasting without water certainly involves greater self-control.
But from the point of view of health water is necessary. One
cannot fast without water for many days. I have observed in
many Muslim friends during the roza that they almost wipe out
the merit of fasting for sixteen hours without water by eating at
night anything and everything in any quantity they like. Praying
for God's forgiveness does not wipe out a sin, but it purifies
the soul, and if one feels genuine repentance one desists from sin
in future.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32577/14
485
