276. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
Monday, Chaitra Krishna 5 [April 13, 1925]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,
Your two letters to hand. You have discontinued giving
dates in your letters. Please do give the dates, for if you don't,
I cannot know during my tour which letter was written when.
Hakimji has gone to Europe. I have enquired of Khwaja
Saheb if the money has been received. Please let me know when
you get any news.
On making enquiries from Jamnalalji's firm I learnt that they
have so far received Rs. 30,000. The accountant acknowledged
receipt for Rs. 10,000 on 1-11-24 and for Rs. 20,000 on 5-1-25.
If the doctors are hopeful, why do you have any apprehensions
about your wife dying? I know from experience that it is very
difficult to control our passions; but then that is our duty. In this
age of Kali 2 I regard Ramanama as a most invaluable thing. I
know of friends who have attained great peace by repeating Rama-
nama. Ramanama is only God's name. The [dwa] dashamantra also
gives the same result. It is better to chant a name to which
one is accustomed. One is always confronted with the question:
How can the mind be controlled in this passion-ridden world?
I am very sad to read journals that are published nowadays
propagating birth-control. I find many writers holding the view
that sex-enjoyment is our duty. In such an atmosphere my up-
holding the doctrine of self-restraint must seem very queer. But
how could I disregard my own experience? I have no doubt
that one can become completely free from passion. It is the duty
of everyone to try to do so. Of all the means for this, the most
potent is the chanting of Ramanama. Chanting Ramanama the first
thing in the morning and praying to Him to make one passion-
less does certainly make people passionless—some today and others
tomorrow, provided the prayer is sincere, from the depth of one's
heart. The main thing is that God's formless image should be con-
stantly present in our mind, before our eyes. This can easily be
done with practice.
1 From the circumstances mentioned, it is evident that the letter was
written in 1925.
2 Darkness; strife
I shall reach Bengal on the 1st and will leave Calcutta for
Faridpur the same day.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6111. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
