205. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 5, 1904
TO
THE HONOURABLE DADABHAI NAOROJI
22, KENSINGTON ROAD
LONDON, ENGLAND
SIR,
The matters have now reached a crisis with reference to the Indian
question. The Indian Opinion would give you all the information up to
date. The representation of the British Indian Association printed therein
will, I think, shew the position clearly. The proposals of the Association
are as moderate as they possibly could be and they represent the irreduc-
ible minimum that the British Indians are entitled to. You will
there see all the most reasonable objections of the Colonists met. Even
the point as to the educational test has been yielded, but the right of
review by the Supreme Court on the question of licences and the owner-
ship of land are absolutely essential. As to the latter, if necessary, certain
portions may be reserved for exclusive European ownership. As to the
licences, I may, at the risk of repetition, state the position clearly. Any
Licensing Act should leave untouched the existing licences and the right
to trade freely to those who were trading before war whether with or
without licences but who have not yet taken out licences since British
occupation mainly because they have not yet been allowed to return
to the Colony, unless, of course, with reference to these licences, the pre-
mises are not kept according to the sanitary requirements or because
the books are not kept in the English language. As to the new licences,
the Government or the municipal authorities may have full discretion
subject to the right of review. This will set the whole question at rest.
The proposal is based on the Natal model without its most unjust clause
depriving the Supreme Court of its inherent jurisdiction, a fact which
has rendered uncertain the position of every Indian trader there. If the
proposals of the Association are accepted, the appointment of a Commis-
sion would appear to be quite unnecessary. The licences could not be
1 Dadabhai Naoroji communicated the contents of this letter, excluding the postscript,
in the form of a statement to the Secretary of State for the Colonies (C. O. 291, Volume
79, Individuals — N) and the Secretary of State for India (C. O. 291, Volume 75, India
Office). The statement was also published in India, 7-10-1904, as a despatch dated September 9
from its Johannesburg Correspondent.
suspended, as suggested by the Legislative Council resolution. And if
the licences are not suspended, I hardly think Lord Milner will accept
a Commission. In fact, the object of asking for a Commission was to
secure indirectly what Mr. Lyttelton declined to grant directly. It would,
too, indefinitely postpone the question of licences and, if Mr. Lyttelton
agreed to suspend the issue of licences, there would be no hurry on the
part of the anti-Indians to have any definite legislation.
I note that the question of the Orange River Colony has not yet been
raised. I venture to think that it should be kept prominently in view
for, to my mind, it is nothing short of a scandal that the Colony is still
allowed to shut its gates almost entirely in the face of Indians.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M K. GANDHI
PS.
Sir Arthur Lawley, as also Mr. Duncan, the Colonial Secretary, left
last week for London. May I suggest that a mixed deputation should
wait on them and discuss the question with them? It might influence
them very greatly, and, in any case, it will shew them that influential men
holding different shades of opinion are absolutely unanimous in connection
with this question.
From a photostat of the typewritten original: G. N. 2260.
