19. LETTER TO L. W. RITCH
[CAPE TOWN,]
Sunday, April 9, 1911
MY DEAR RITCH,
I had a funny experience after I posted the letters to you
and Polak I thought, I would stroll down to the House just to
see what was going on. After reading the order paper1, I thought,
I would go away. But, on second thoughts, I decided to send
my card to Duncan He came and said, "Perhaps it would be
better for us not to talk lest it might be thought that you were
influencing me." I said, "Not [at] all. I have been informing
Lane about all my movements. He knows whom I see and talk
to." "But", he said, "you need not worry. I think you will get
what you want. It is high time the thing was over." "But", I said,
"do you know anything of the latest[?]." "Yes", he said, "General
Smuts showed me your letter to him. I think, we shall drop
the present Bill and adopt your alternative solution. But you will
not bring in anything more." I said, "How can you say that, Mr.
Duncan? You have yourself stated our proposition very fairly."
"Yes", he said, "I notice you have been quoting me. But you have
not always brought that point forward. I thought at times you
kept it in the background." "I could not help giving that appea-
rance at times," I said, "we had to give prominence to one point
or another as occasion required unless we were to overload every
speech and letter with details. It is General Smuts who has
always raised new points and each time granted less than our
demands, etc." He then wanted to know what I wanted about
children, whether I wanted them to get in without giving proofs,
etc. I assured him on that point. But I could not help noticing
how unfortunate it was that Smuts had seen him before I, and
how fortunate it was that I saw him yesterday whilst his talk
with Smuts was fresh in his mind. After this experience, I have
decided to stick here until the Bill is through or I am certain
that nothing is to be done. One may consider it to be pretty
certain that the general bill is doomed, and I am more than
ever hopeful that the alternative proposal will be accepted.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 5441
