31. LETTER TO J. L. MERRIMAN
MOTIHARI,
November 19, 1917
DEAR MR. MERRIMAN,
In the schools I am opening, children under the age of 12
only are admitted. The idea is to get hold of as many children as
possible and to give them an all-round education, i.e., a knowledge
1 It is not known what these were.
2 A measure of land
of Hindi or Urdu and, through that medium, of Arithmetic, rudi-
ments of History and Geography, a knowledge of simple scientific
principles and some industrial training. No cut and dried syllabus
has been yet prepared, because I am going along an unbeaten
track. I look upon our own present system with horror and dis-
trust. Instead of developing the moral and the mental faculties of
the little children, it dwarfs them. In my experiment, whilst I
shall draw upon what is good in it, I shall endeavour to avoid the
defects of the present system. The chief thing aimed at is contact
of the children with men and women of culture and unimpeach-
able moral character. That to me is education. Literary train-
ing is to be used merely as a means to that end. The industrial
training is designed to give the boys and girls who may come to
us, an additional means of livelihood. It is not intended that on
completing their education, they should leave their hereditary oc-
cupation, viz., agriculture, but make use of the knowledge gained
in the school to refine agriculture and agricultural life. Our teachers
will also touch the lives of the grown-up people and, if at all
possible, penetrate the purdah. Instructions will, therefore, be
given to grown-up people in hygiene and about the advantages of
joint action for the promotion of communal welfare, such as the
making of village roads proper, the sinking of wells, etc. And as
no school will be manned by teachers who are not men or women
of good training, we propose to give free medical aid, so far as is
possible. In Badharwa, for instance, Mrs. Avantikabai Gokhalay
who is a trained nurse and midwife and who, assisted by her hus-
band, is in charge of the school, has already dispensed castor oil
and quinine to scores of patients during the four days that she
has been at work and visited several female patients.
If you desire any further information, I shall be only too
glad to supply you with it. My hope is that I shall be able to
enlist in my work full co-operation of the local authority. I am
opening another school tomorrow near Shrirampur, about two
miles from Amolwa.
Regarding the raiyats' complaints about documents, evidently
the point I wished to make was not made by me. I know that
the raiyats can go to court about compulsion. The difficulty is
that they are neither trained nor organized enough for orderly
work. What is morally compulsion may not be compulsion in
law. My experience of the Champaran raiyat is that he is extreme-
ly unintelligent and is easily made to assent mentally to any pro-
position. I hold, therefore, that the Government, as the guardian
of such people, have to save them from their own ignorance. I
do not say that in the Saraiya case brought to your notice, any
compulsion has been used. I simply suggested that, in order that
there might be no allegation of compulsion after such documents
as I have referred to in my previous letter are signed, you might,
if you deemed it proper, inquire about the contracts now offered
to the raiyats for their signatures.
I am,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original signed by Gandhiji; also Select Documents on Mahatma
Gandhi's Movement in Champaran
