210. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
March 6, 1932
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,
You have kindly given me a copy of the fresh instructions
issued by the Government about the weekly visits.
I appreciate the trust reposed in me regarding the deter-
mination as to who shall be considered political inmates of the
Ashram. I am anxious to be true to the trust. But before I could
do so, there should be a common definition of the adjective 'poli-
tical' between the Government and me. I take 'political' to mean
those who are politically minded and are actually taking part in
politics as apart from civil resistance. For if by 'political' are meant
those who have been heretofore imprisoned as civil resisters or
are believers in the doctrine of civil resistance, then there is no non-
political inmate in the Ashram. If, however, the meaning is [as]
I have given it, there are only three political inmates. I mean
Sjts. Mahadev Desai, Pyarelal and Devdas Gandhi. But if I may
not see the first two, I may not see Devdas Gandhi for they are
like Devdas to me. As it so happens, they are all incarcerated.
I may also mention that at the present moment there are only
boys and girls and the few adults who are reserved for looking
after the youngsters and the multifarious industrial activities of
the Ashram.
It is difficult, too, for me to submit a list of non-Ashram
friends till I know the definition that the Government have in
mind of the term 'political'. I shall await reply to this before
I submit a fairly full list for approval. But, meanwhile, I give
below illustrative names of those friends whom I regard as non-
political and whom I would put in the same category as my re-
latives.
Lady Thackersey, residence-Yeravda Hill. She is a social
worker. She helped me during my serious illness in 1923 when I
was a patient in the Sasoon Hospital.
Prof. Trivedi of the Agriculture College, Poona. He stands
to me in the same close contact as Lady Thackersey.
Yeshvantprasad Desai, mill-owner residing in Matunga. He
nursed me during the same illness and took up his abode in Poona
for helping me.
182
Pyare Ali and his wife, living in retirement at a retreat near
Thana, where they have taken in a few Muslim orphans. They
lived nearly a year at the Ashram. They are a deeply religious
couple.
These friends are in no sense political.
Pending reply to this letter, I have written to the Manager
of the Ashram to send those inmates who may wish to visit
me.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 9554. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40), Pt. I, pp. 131-
