76. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Monday night [December 28, 1908]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Your letters to hand. Jagatsingh's is a regrettable case. As I see
it, it is more the fault of the Hindus. It was particularly their duty
which they have failed to discharge.
One should not be carried away by Jagatsingh's brahmacharya.
Lakshman and Indrajit were both celibates (brahmacharis) and had
conquered sleep and were therefore equally valorous. But the valour
of the former was divine, while that of the latter ungodly. This means
that the vow of brahmacharya and other vows are holy and bring happiness
only when they are taken as a spiritual discipline. If resorted to by a
demon, they only add to misery. This is a very serious statement to
make; but all the same, it is no doubt true. Lord Patanjali has shown
this very clearly in his Yogadarshan . This is the thing our religion
teaches us. The phrase madanugrahaya—'for my favour'—deserves to be
always borne in mind. If you do not follow what I say or if you have
any doubt about it, please write to me.
I am not surprised at your losing control over yourself. As you dive
deeper into yourself and have experience, your mind will become calm,
your passion will cool down and you will be stronger spiritually. Think
carefully of every step you take or a piece of work you do, analyze it,
always applying to it this test, namely, "Will this promote my spiritual
progress?" The question "Will this lead to the progress of the Hindu
religion or of India?" is covered by it. The country cannot rise, reli-
gions cannot advance by a step that will not lead to spiritual growth.
This has been found to be the result of the Swami's impatience.
It is very regrettable. It was because of such results that the venerable
Kavi often used to say that in modern times we should beware of re-
ligious teachers. Our experience also confirms his view. Everyone is
obdurate and wants to see his own opinion prevail. If instead of such
obduracy in regard to one's opinion one devotes one's energy to self-
realization, one will do good to oneself as well as to others. Other-
wise, both will face degradation.
Mrs. Polak will leave tomorrow. This letter also will reach you
the same day, perhaps later, for you must have gone to Maritzburg.
More from other letters.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4781
