491. LETTER TO IBRAHIMJI RAJKOTWALA
May 5, 1932
I got your letter. If you ask reason for proof of the existence
of God, what proof can reason give since God is above all rea-
son? For, if you say that nothing is beyond rational explanation,
you will certainly run into difficulties. If we give the highest
place to reason, we shall be faced with serious difficulties. Our
own atman is beyond reason. People have indeed tried to prove
its existence with logical arguments, as they have tried to prove
the existence of God. But he who knows God and the atman
with his intellect only does not know them at all. Reason may
be a useful instrument of knowledge at one stage. But anybody
who stops there will never enjoy the benefits of true spiritual
knowledge, in the same way that intellectual knowledge of the
benefits of eating food does not by itself help one to enjoy those
benefits. God or the atman is not an object of knowledge. He
Himself is the Knower. That is why we say that He is above
reason. There are two stages of knowledge of God. The first
is faith, and the second and the last is first-hand experience to
which faith leads. All great teachers of the world have testified
to their having had such experience, and people whom the world
would ordinarily dismiss as fools have also demonstrated their
faith. If we have faith, like theirs, one day we may have first-
hand experience too. If a person sees somebody with his eyes
but, being deaf, cannot hear him and then complains that he
had not heard him, he would not be justified. Similarly, to say
that reason cannot know God betrays ignorance. Just as hearing
is not the function of the eyes, so also knowing God is not the
function of the senses or of reason. To know Him a different
kind of faculty is required, and this is unshakable faith. We know
from experience that reason can be all too easily deceived. But
we have not known anybody, howsoever mighty he may be, who
could deceive true faith.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 136-
