76. LETTER TO "THE STATESMAN"
MOTIHARI,
January 16, 1918
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STATESMAN
[CALCUTTA]
SIR,
Mr. Irwin's latest letter published in your issue of the 12th
instant compels me to court the hospitality of your columns. So
long as your correspondent confined himself to matters directly
affecting himself, his misrepresentations did not much matter, as
the real facts were as much within the knowledge of the Govern-
ment and those who are concerned with the agrarian question in
Champaran, as within mine. But in the letter under notice, he
has travelled outside his jurisdiction as it were, and unchivalrous-
ly attacked one of the most innocent women walking on the face
of the earth (and this I say although she happens to be my wife)
and has unpardonably referred to a question of the greatest moment,
I mean, the cow protection question, without taking the precaution,
as behoves a gentleman, of ascertaining facts at first hand.
My address to the Gau Rakshini Sabha he could have easily
obtained upon application to me. This at least was due to me
as between man and man. Your correspondent accuses me of
"making a united attack on Saheb log (the landlords) who slaughter
and eat cows daily". This presupposes I was addressing a com-
paratively microscopic audience of the planters' ryots. The fact
is that the audience was composed chiefly of the non-ryot class.
But I had in mind a much bigger audience, and not merely the
few thousand hearers before me. I spoke under a full sense of my
responsibility. The question of cow protection is, in my opinion,
as large as the Empire to which Mr. Irwin and I belong. I know
that he is a proud father of a young lad of twenty-four, who has
received by his gallantry the unique honour of a colonelcy at his
age. Mr. Irwin can, if he will, obtain a greater honour for him-
self by studying the cow question and taking his full share in its
solution. He will, I promise, be then much better occupied than
when he is dashing off his misrepresentations to be published in the
Press and most unnecessarily preparing to bring 2,200 cases against
his tenants for the sake of deriving the questionable pleasure of
deeming me responsible for those cases.
I said at the meeting that the Hindus had no warrant for
resenting the slaughter of cows by their Mahomedan brethren, who
kill them from religious conviction, so long as they themselves
were a party to the killing by inches of thousands of cattle who
were horribly ill-treated by their Hindu owners, to the drinking of
milk drawn from cows in the inhuman dairies of Calcutta, and so
long as they calmly contemplated the slaughter of thousands of
cattle in the slaughter-houses of India for providing beef for the
European and Christian residents of India. I suggested that the
first step towards procuring full protection for cows was to put
their own house in order by securing absolute immunity from ill-
treatment of their cattle by Hindus themselves, and then to
appeal to the Europeans to abstain from beef-eating whilst resident
in India, or at least to procure beef from outside India. I added
that in no case could the cow-protection propaganda, if it was to
be based upon religious conviction, tolerate a sacrifice of Mahome-
dans for the sake of saving cows, that the religious method of
securing protection from Christians and Mahomedans alike was
for Hindus to offer themselves a willing sacrifice of sufficient
magnitude to draw out the merciful nature of Christians and
Mahomedans. Rightly or wrongly, worship of the cow is ingrain-
ed in the Hindu nature and I see no escape from a most bigoted
and sanguinary strife over this question between Christians and
Mahomedans on the one hand and Hindus on the other except
in the fullest recognition and practice by the Hindus of the re-
ligion of ahimsa, which it is my self-imposed and humble mission
in life to preach. Let the truth be faced. It must not be sup-
posed that Hindus feel nothing about the cow slaughter going on
for the European. I know that their wrath is today being buried
under the awe inspired by the English rule. But there is not a
Hindu throughout the length and breadth of India who does
not expect one day to free his land from cow slaughter. But con-
trary to the genius of Hinduism as I know it, he would not mind
forcing, even at the point of the sword, either the Christian or the
Mahomedan to abandon cow slaughter. I wish to play my humble
part in preventing such a catastrophe and I thank Mr. Irwin for
having provided me with an opportunity of inviting him and
your readers to help me in my onerous mission. The mission may
fail to prevent cow slaughter. But there is no reason why by
patient plodding and consistent practice it should not succeed in
showing the folly, the stupidity and the inhumanity of committing
the crime of killing a fellow human being for the sake of saving
a fellow animal.
So much on behalf of the innocent cow. A word only for my
innocent wife who will never even know the wrong your corres-
pondent has done her. If Mr. Irwin would enjoy the honour
of being introduced to her he will soon find out that Mrs. Gandhi
is a simple woman, almost unlettered, who knows nothing of the
two bazaars mentioned by him, even as I knew nothing of them
until very recently and some time after the establishment of the
rival bazaar referred to by Mr. Irwin. He will then further assure
himself that Mrs. Gandhi has had no hand in its establishment and
is totally incapable of managing such a bazaar. Lastly, he will at
once learn that Mrs. Gandhi's time is occupied in cooking for
and serving the teachers conducting the school established in the
dehat (interior) in question, in distributing medical relief and in
moving amongst the women of the dehat with a view to giving
them an idea of simple hygiene. Mrs. Gandhi, I may add, has
not learnt the art of making speeches or addressing letters to the
Press.
As to the rest of the letter, the less said the better. It is so
full of palpable misrepresentations that it is difficult to deal with
them with sufficient self-restraint. I can only say that I am try-
ing to the best of my ability to fulfil the obligation I hold myself
under, of promoting good-will between planters and ryots, and if
I fail, it would not be due to want of efforts on my part, but
it would be largely, if not entirely, due to the mischievous pro-
paganda Mr. Irwin is carrying on openly and some others sub
rosa in Champaran in order to nullify the effect of the report pub-
lished by the Agrarian Committee, which was brought into being—
not as Mr. Irwin falsely suggests at my request—but by the agita-
tion carried on, as your files would demonstrate, by Mr. Irwin
and his friends of the Anglo-Indian Association. If he is wise, he
will abide by his written word, voluntarily and after full discuss-
ion and deliberation, given by him at Ranchi.
Yours, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Statesman, 19-1-1918
