452. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
June 11, 1930 1
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,
You have told me that the Government will permit seven of
my blood relations to see me twice per week and the others only
by their special permission. This means that my wife, who is not a
blood relative, and naturally her brothers and other relatives, have
to obtain special permission. I am sure this is a mere slip. But
what is obviously contemplated is that those who are not related
to me by blood or through marriage can, except Shrimati Mira-
bai Slade, see me only by special permission of the Government.
If this decision is not revised, I fear I must not see my relatives.
I have in the Ashram and outside many widows, girls, boys and
men, who are perhaps more to me than many a blood relative.
If they may not see me on the same terms as relatives, to be just
to the former, I must not see the latter.
Although it is now a fortnight, I do not know what has
happened to the Ashram letters that were received and those that
I wrote. You told me that you had sent them to the I.G.
There is one more matter. I see Sjt. Kalelkar is to be brought
here as companion for me. He is an esteemed co-worker, but if
I conveyed the impression that I would like him to be brought
here to keep me company, I am sorry. I would not like him to
be torn from so many companions with whom he is placed at the
Sabarmati Jail and come here to share my isolation. If he could
mix freely with the other satyagrahi prisoners and keep company
with me, I would naturally value his company, but I have no
desire to have the joy of his company at his expense. What I
would desire is naturally to be able to see all my satyagrahi
friends who are in this jail. I repeat what I have told you so
often: I do not desire special privileges. But if an ordinary prison-
er may have the company of his fellows who may chance to be
in the same prison, it may be lawful for me to entertain such a
desire.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original: C.W. 9316; also S.N. 19974
