146. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
ASHRAM,
March 18, 1926
CHI. KISHORELAL,
I have both your letters. I wanted to write to you when I got
the second. I have been worried since you wrote to me about the
pinjrapole. It is my constant desire that you should reach Deolali
soon.
I had promptly gone through the article which you had left
for me regarding the question of monkeys. In the article, as in
your letter, you have offered no final solution of the problem.
What we want now is a solution which is perfectly consistent with
religion. Of course it will be implemented in course of time. How
can we get over age-old sentiments unless we have very grave
reasons? But we face now only the religious aspect of the problem.
Let us not forget we have been ourselves promoting the multi-
plication of monkeys and now we are a passive witness to their
destruction; (1) Englishmen and others destroying the monkeys
that visit their neighbourhood, and (2) the export to foreign coun-
tries of live specimens for experiments while yet alive. And the
third inconsistency is that we feel a secret joy at the fall in their
number due to these two causes. What can we do in such circum-
stances? If we can free ourselves from the sin of destroying a few
monkeys, it is perhaps our duty to do so; or as members of so-
ciety, it may be our duty to remain passive witnesses to it. What is
one's obligation towards the society of which one is a member?
Solution of the monkey problem will cover that of the pigeons. I
have no doubt we are deliberately promoting the breeding of
pigeons. The pinjrapole is a modern institution. I do not think
it functions with enlightened compassion. It is like swallowing
a camel and straining at a gnat. At the moment I am exa-
mining non-violence as a principle, and I have come to believe
that, in the case of monkeys and the like, our attitude is governed
solely by tradition; we pay no attention it seems, to their well-
being. There is another question arising out of non-violence. In
the event of violence to one's person, where may a non-violent aspi-
rant draw the line?
I write all this for you to think over at leisure. I am in no
hurry to have your answers. First think over them yourself, then
discuss them with Nath and let me know what conclusions you
reach after these deliberations.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19871
