284. LETTER TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
MUSSOORIE,
May 28, 1946
CHI. RAMESHWARI,
I have your three letters which are all very good. You
are doing the Agency work efficiently. I like what you write
about the building. What will it cost? Will it be all right if
the Kasturba Gandhi Memorial Fund advances the whole amount
on nominal interest? I see nothing wrong in offering money
for the building but the parent body cannot make an exception,
so I feel that the problem can perhaps be solved by offering the
money as a loan. Discuss the matter with the people there and
let me know what they say. It should not be difficult to clear
the debt in ten or fifteen years. The period of the loan may be
extended so long as the interest is being paid and in default of
interest-payment, the loan will have to be paid up or the custody
of the building transferred to the Trust. I shall be able to decide
further after I have your reply. In the meanwhile I am sending
your letter and a copy of my reply to Bapa.
Now your second letter. What you write about the Assembly
is correct, namely that in course of time my views will be appre-
ciated. This is not an opinion I have recently come to; I have
been holding it from the beginning. True workers will not enter
the Assembly. Keir Hardy was such a person. He commanded
respect in the House of Commons. He said that an honest man
could not remain a member of the House. And it is true. Mor-
ley had to suffer a fall. The situation in South Africa was no
different. It deserves to be noted that there was a great scram-
ble for membership and the candidates spent huge sums. But
I don't wish to discuss this matter. After all, what you write
in the concluding part of your letter is true. It is good to exer-
cise one's franchise to contact the mass of voters, to show them
the right path and to give for this as much time as one can.
For me it is enough that for some years the Agents should stay
out and devote their time to their work. Until now you have
not even touched the villages.
Now your third letter. The problem of Bhangis is a com-
plex one. It is all right to say that they should go on a hun-
ger-strike after having done their work or even while doing
it but one cannot work on an empty stomach. What I have
suggested is that society or say, city-dwellers, should strike against
the municipalities—they should go on a hunger-strike also. They
can do whatever they want to do. The only condition is
that they should do it non-violently. It will have its impact on
the municipality as well as on the Bhangis and society will
have done its duty. There is also another way. The Bhangis
should not strike for accommodation or for wages but they may
serve a notice of giving up the occupation. If the Bhangis strike
for accommodation or for wages, it may be that in the end the
townspeople may themselves take up the scavenging work. I
admit that if nobody does anything and the Bhangis do not get
justice, then they ought to have the right to strike work. I have
explained what the Bhangis, as city-dwellers, should do.
While dictating this I get your fourth letter. It is 8.30 p. m.
The wire can go only tomorrow. I think your not being on the
Food Board is not going to have any adverse effect.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi : G. N. 8009
