33. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
KANYAKUMARI,
January 22, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
This time I have not received your letter so far. But I write
this as per my rule. We are in Kumarika today. As nobody
lives here, the utmost peace reigns.
The only sound is of the
rupees being counted. The sea is just in front, but it is not roaring.
Devdas and Lakshmi must have reached Delhi now. They
visited Raja. He has not written to me after the visit.
Dr. Bidhan is all right now, though the bone has not set
completely. He was lying in bed and working.
It seems the Bihar earthquake has completely destroyed
Motihari. Rajendrababu seems to have plunged into relief work
as soon as he was released. There was a heart-rending wire
from him. I have sent him a wire of sympathy. Satisbabu has
rushed to Bihar. He informs me that 15,000 people have been hurt.
Many people were killed, but their number is not known. A
large number of even big houses have been rendered uninhabitable.
Muriel Lester is arriving in February.
Most probably she
will come and see me in Coonoor. I shall be there from 29th
January to 5th February. She is coming from Hong Kong.
Prithuraj is accompanying me on the tour for a few days.
He has joined from Calicut. He will then go to see Velabehn.
In other respects his health has improved very much. He has
been helping Chandrashankar. He needs help most.
I found no opposition in Travancore.
The crowds were as
big as at other places. The Ruler showed complete indifference.
C. P. did not come to see me at all. Devdhar is in Trivandrum,
where he is making some enquiries about the Co-operative Society.
His health has been affected, but he can work and is, therefore,
satisfied.
Most probably Kelappan will marry a Christian lady.
His
connection with the Harijan Sevak Sangh will then end.
The
lady is a good woman. His desire to marry her seems to be
six years old.
There is nothing immoral in his intention, but
I see that his views are not in harmony with the policy of the
Sangh.
I got a letter from Ba. There is nothing special in it. All
the same, if I can get a copy made I will send it. I hope you
got Mani's letter which I had sent to you.
All the women will be released today.
I have written to all
of them. Kishorelal is still bed-ridden. Jamnalal is going on with
his programme energetically. For the present Surendra has been
drafted to help in that work.
A German youth named Khuro, has arrived from South
Africa. He is in my party at present. He is said to be a corres-
pondent of The Hindu.
Poor man, he has been robbed of a sum
of Rs. 1,000. Thakkar Bapa has fallen in love with him. He
cheerfully works as watchman and porter. He is quite robust
and never feels fatigued. He is very active and highly educated.
He has become a British subject.
S. was taken away by the police. N. must have left by now.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 65-
