526. LETTER TO AKBARBHAI CHAVDA
SEVAGRAM,
December 2, 1944
CHI. AKBAR,
I have made arrangements for a watch for you. You will
get it soon. I have read all your letters. You have been doing
fine work. God will bless you with success.
You will soon get lots of drugs, but they will not be very
helpful. So long as water, fire and earth are available, drugs are
not necessary.
Give the people boiled water to drink. This will cure most
of the complaints. Use soda [bicarb] if you have it. Water
containing soda will stop diarrhoea. Food should be stopped. Per-
suade the people patiently to stop eating. You may even let them
die who do not listen to you. Search for village medicinal herbs.
You must have neem trees there. If you persuade the people
to chew its leaves and see that they fast, the fever will pro-
bably disappear. Boil neem leaves in water and wash the blisters
with that. The water should be bearably hot. Cover the blisters
with a mud-pack of clean earth. Get clean cloth for bandaging
the blisters. If you can get tamarind you can give a solution of it
in place of water mixed with lemon juice. Revive people's know-
ledge of nature-cure remedies. Local medicinal drugs should be
made available. Give rice water instead of milk. If you mix jag-
gery with it, it will provide more energy. Teach people the rules of
hygiene. If food is stopped to people suffering from fever or diar-
rhoea and they are put on boiled water, more than fifty per cent
of the cases will recover. I have no doubt in my mind about this
at all. Fifty per cent is a conservative guess. For guinea worm, try
fomentation with hot water and tie up the thing as it comes out.
Try also a poultice of onions. You must have received the sugges-
tions sent by Kishorelalbhai and Sushilabehn. I have suggested
only the simplest remedies. Let Devibehn send whatever she wishes.
If cows, buffaloes or goats are offered, accept them. To meat-
eaters you may unhesitatingly give meat-soup. Soup means water
in which meat has been boiled. These things should be served
hot after boiling them. This is not the time for doing our reli-
gious duty of propagating vegetarianism. Soup is bound to be
useful where milk is not available.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3236
