350. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
February 6, 1937
CHI. CHIMANLAL,
I got your letter. Sharda has reached an age when, unless
she offers her sincere co-operation, she cannot improve. In my
opinion, at present her only duty is to build up good health.
For that she should give up study. This does not mean that
she should read nothing. She may by all means read some-
thing that she will enjoy reading. But she should feel no strain
at all in that. She should stop reading the moment she feels
tired. She should read nothing regularly but should do physi-
cal labour daily. She should take slow walks in the open air
at regular hours. She should have hip-baths and friction-baths.
She should do slow pranayama. There is no harm at all in
having hip-baths in the condition that you have described, provi-
ded that at the time of taking the bath she does not feel
cold. After leaving the tub she should do light exercise and
pour warm water over the body. The whole body should be
massaged daily. She should take sun-bath, without any clothes on.
This can be easily done in any open place. An enclosure can
be made by hanging mats all round to ensure privacy. If sun-
bath is taken on a sand-covered ground like what we have in a
gymnasium, she can take the bath even rolling on the ground.
This treatment involves no expense. All that is necessary is
to have faith and to spare the necessary time. If there is no
faith, the treatment may become a burden and cause strain
on the mind. An asthmatic person can never afford strain.
Nerves play a very important part in causing asthma. If
Sharda's diet does not include milk and butter, she should get
sufficient ghee. She may eat fenugreek leaves, amaranth, mus-
tard leaves, dabho and other green leaves, uncooked ripe toma-
toes, gourd, brinjals, pumpkin, etc. These things should be
steam-cooked. No condiment should be used not even oil or
ghee for frying. Ghee or butter may be added afterwards. She
should eat some juicy fruit if available. She may eat fresh garlic
crushed and mixed with vegetables. Let her start with half
a tola. It must not be cooked at all. She may eat onions also,
either cooked or raw. Both will benefit her.
You may ask about anything else if you want to.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.G. 20
