565. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Y.M.,
August 28, 1932
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have your letter. I have been able to go up to 30 counts
on the Magan charkha up to now. I shall be satisfied if I go
up to 40 counts. The speed is very slow. It does not go beyond
a hundred rounds an hour. It may go beyond that if I draw thick
yarn. But I do not wish to do so. The cause of the noise that the
wheel was making was discovered. Mahadev guessed it. The rod
under the plate was broken and when the plate stopped func-
tioning altogether the defect was discovered. On the rod being
replaced the noise stopped and the plate also started functioning
perfectly. I, too, believe with you that there is much room for
improvement. None has occurred to me yet. I have got a box
fixed on the plant, in which I keep the tools, spindle, etc. I do
not consider this an improvement. For fine yarn we must have
fine spring and fine spindle. But I doubt if a fine spindle would
work. In the Ashram there is a spinning-wheel received from
Darjeeling which can be worked with the foot. Examine it.
It would be sufficient if you named the Almora Ashram just
Shail Ashram. The word Ashram itself carries a religious mean-
ing and religion includes service. Janasthan sounds pompous.
Kinkarashram is all right but does not sound pleasant. You can
call it Shail Udyog Mandir. But I favour Shail Ashram. Devaki
Nandan uses the word Sevashram and so it is clear that you
cannot use it.
It is well that you paid a visit to Rajkot. It would be good
if you rushed to Almora now. It is desirable that you should go
there in good health. You may then devote yourself wholly to
building the Ashram there as your only duty without having to
worry about your health. After going there do not build castles
in the air; but having formed a particular plan resolve not to
go beyond it, nor even to think of doing so. As for writing,
complete the work on the Ramayana, etc., if possible. Con-
centration on improving the Magan charkha, spinning and
weaving the local cotton and wool and the necessary carpentry
connected with it-these should be enough work. Since there is
land it will certainly be possible to grow vegetables and fruit
trees. Keep an account of every pie. Never go beyond the
budget. Write to me as long as I am permitted to receive
letters. Keep up the practice of repeating Ramanama whether or
not you feel any benefit from it. There is no doubt that ultimate-
ly it will purify and steady your mind.
From the Gujarati original: Gandhi Nidhi File. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library
