390. LETTER TO GULZARILAL NANDA
NANDI HILLS,
May 28, 1927
MY DEAR GULZARILAL,
I was delighted to hear from you. Whilst lying on my bed,
I have constantly thought of so many like you in whom I am
deeply interested and from whom, I expect many large and big
things if only God will give them the requisite health for the
task before them.
Your description of a truly religious life is accurate. I have
not a shadow of a doubt that this blessed state of inward joy and
freedom from anxiety should last in the midst of the greatest
trials conceivable. It admits of no exception whatsoever. Naturally,
it is unattainable except by the very fewest. But that it is attain-
able by human beings, I have also no doubt. That we do not find
in history evidence regarding the existence of any such person
merely proves to me that all the record that we have has been
prepared by imperfect beings, and it is impossible for imperfect
beings to give us a faithful record of perfect ones. The same may
be said of our own experiences. We have to be very nearly per-
fect in order to meet perfect souls such as you have described.
Nor need you think that I have laid down an absurd proposi-
tion inasmuch as it is incapable of being recorded, or being ex-
perienced by the average man. To raise such a doubt would be
begging the question, for we are here picturing to ourselves ex-
traordinary mortals, though mortals nevertheless, and surely extra-
ordinary powers are required to find out these extraordinary
mortals. This statement is true even of much lesser things, things
almost ridiculous, and yet very difficult of accomplishment, such,
for instance, as the discoveries of Sir J. C. Bose or the finest
paintings. Both these, we average beings will have to take on
trust. It is only the privileged few who have got the special faculty
for understanding and appreciating either those discoveries, or
those paintings. These do not appear to us to be incredible and
we are able to accept them on faith only because in favour of
these we have the testimony of a larger number of witnesses than
we can possibly have for the things of permanent value, such as
human perfection of the utmost type. Therefore the limitation that
you have accepted is quite a workable thing for the time being. For,
even inside the limitation, there is ample scope for widening the
field for the progress of the state of being and remaining un-
ruffled in the face of the onslaught of sorrows and trials, which
before regeneration would have paralysed us.
I am glad you have intensified your devotions. I do not know
what you are reading at present. And I do not know whether I
told you that we must arrive at a time when we do not need the
solace of many books but that we make one book yield us all we
want. In the last stage, of course, when life becomes one of per-
fect surrender and complete self-effacement, the support of even one
book becomes unnecessary. At the present moment, though I am
reading many things, the Bhagavad Gita is becoming more and more
the only infallible guide, the only dictionary of reference, in which
I find all the sorrows, all the troubles, all the trials arranged in
the alphabetical order with exquisite solutions. I think I did tell
you that the Song Celestial was the best rendering I had come
across of the Bhagavad Gita. But if you do not know Sanskrit,
I know that a knowledge of Sanskrit to enable you to under-
stand the Bhagavad Gita is easily within your power. You can almost
in a month's time know enough Sanskrit to understand the original
text. For, though the English rendering is grand and though you
might be able to get some Hindi or Urdu translation also, of course
there is nothing like the original. The original will enable you to
give your own meaning and gloss to the text. That book is not
a historical record, but it is a record of the concrete experiences
of its author, whether it was really Vyasa or not I am not con-
cerned. And if it is a record of anybody's experience, it must
not be beyond us to be able to test the truth of it by repeating
the experience. I am testing the truth almost every day in my
life and find it never failing. This of course does not mean that
I have reached the state described, for instance, at the end of the
Second Chapter. But I know that the more we carry out the
prescription given in it, the nearer do we answer the description
given of the perfect state.
I hope you are keeping good health. I am of course making
steady progress.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: C. W. 9641. Courtesy: Gulzarilal Nanda
