262. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
January 14, 1935
CHI. RAMDAS,
I have your letter. One ought not to stay where one feels oneself to be
burden on the hosts. I understand what you say about your having to find a
separate room. I see that the Rs. 25 per month shall not now be sufficient to
meet your needs. You need not mind that. Your peace of mind is what matters
most. I am writing to Jamnalalji but at the same time you also should talk
to him frankly. He will immediately understand your need. Pyarelal writes
and tells me that you are much better than you were at Wardha. I was pleased
indeed to hear that. You must have got my letter in which I mentioned the
suggestion made by the Delhi tailor. You need not get agitated by such a
letter from me. You may do what you yourself wish to do. I will be perfectly
satisfied with that. Your good lies in following the inclination of your own
nature. You alone can know what will satisfy your nature. There was really
nothing. . . .2 Does one talk about the chilblains one suffers from in winter?
But then, I am a Mahatma as they say, and so I must be an exception. But
now there is some relief even from that. I had been somewhat careless and
had therefore to stop going out for a walk for about four days. Today I took
one.
Your aunt has been ailing rather badly in Rajkot. Harilal looks after the
nursing. I will probably be able to leave here 3 on the 25th; if not on 25th,
then on the 28th certainly. Do you visit Mathuradas? I am sure you know
that you can have a place in Jamnalalji's store.
I should like you to be more regular in writing to me.
I had a letter from Sharma. He is better now. He has arranged for a
separate house for himself. He will come over by about the 20th.
I went and saw the school run by Giriraj. It did not appeal to me. He is
of course working hard, but how can he show the concern that a mother or
a father would?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1 vide Vol. LX, p. 79.
2 A word here is illegible in the source.
3 That is, Delhi, which Gandhiji left for Wardha on 28th.
197
