353. LETTER TO CHANCHALBEHN GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Sunday, Posh Sud 7 [January 8, 1911]
CHI. CHANCHAL,
I was very glad to read your long and interesting letter. Ba also
read it with interest. Harilal will read it on his release tomorrow. I
hasten to write this today as I have no time at the office. I am at the
Farm just now. It is 9 p.m.
You must be getting Indian Opinion regularly. Do you ever go out
for a walk? It is good that you have kept up the habit of reading.
I wish you not to wear jewellery for fear of being criticized if you
don't. There is no beauty in jewellery. The first and real ornament
for both man and woman is purity of character. That you possess such
character is in itself a precious ornament. Our custom of wearing
ornaments on the nose and the ears seems to me barbarous. I mean
barbarous, not in comparison with the whites, but according to our
own ideas [of civilized life]. That the poets have described Rama-
chandraji, Sitaji, and others as wearing jewels seems to me to be sug-
gestive of the custom prevailing at the time [they wrote]. Otherwise
I cannot imagine the benevolent Ramachandraji or the deeply devout
Sitaji carrying even a particle of gold on their bodies. Whatever that
may be, we can easily understand that there is no beauty in perforating
the nose and the ears and inserting something there or in wearing orna-
ments round the neck or the arms.
However, I say nothing about
putting on bangles round the wrists, as their absence would suggest
something inauspicious.
It would be enough if we put on these things to prevent talk. These
are my views. Think over them and do as you deem proper. You need
not be embarrassed and do anything because of me.
Ramdas and Devdas are quite cheerful. There are twenty boys
here, so they feel quite at home. I find Ba also happy as she has the
company of other women. She has given up tea at least for the present
and is now habituated to bathing in cold water.
There is talk that the struggle might come to an end within this
month or in February. Let us see what happens. Harilal will remain
free, as the Government do not make arrests nowadays. I know his
health was excellent in the Johannesburg Gaol.
Purshottamdas is also here after his release from gaol. A kiss to
Ramibai . My regards to Chhabalbhabhi . I shall await Bali's letter.
What can I expect from Kumi when she does not write at all?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9528
