78. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[About October 10, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have both your letters. I see there is an irreconcilable diffe-
rence of opinion regarding X2 in the Ashram itself. I would no
more trouble you about this affair. I have been writing some-
thing to Chhaganlal Joshi. Having done this I shall observe
silence for some time now and I shall try to reopen this chapter
in the month of January when I reach the Ashram. I still have
my doubts. Innocent people do not commit suicide. X's letters
to me make me suspicious. You know well that he was connect-
ed with the Jagannath incident. I did not succeed in subduing
this rebellion on the part of X. I have, therefore, been harbour-
ing a suspicion. I have a letter from Ramdas telling me about
the reasons for his suspicion. These are not strong enough but
the fact remains that Ramdas had his own suspicions. I think it
horrid for X to have gone away without informing anyone. I
don't think he is hiding himself anywhere. If this was the case,
I would be relieved from a great misery. Because at the moment
X as well as X and X whom I regard as my son and daughters
are victims of my suspicion.
I do not need rectification of the dairy accounts. I want a
co-ordinated report from both of you. The assurance you gave
me at Bangalore is enough for me. But Narandas wrote to me
there were 21 mistakes pertaining to figures and they pointed to
the loss the dairy suffered. I do not say you are slow of improve-
ment. My only concern was that if our mistake was such as would
misrepresent the results, we should issue a clarification. Please
therefore discuss the figures with Narandas and let me know the
actual results.
I have your third letter, in which you ask me to go over
there. As regards my health Mahadev has written [to you]
yesterday. I have no complaint. What can we say about the Press?
In case anything happens to me you shall certainly get a wire
from someone.
I am quite anxious to go over there. That is the place for me
whether the atmosphere is healthy or unhealthy; particularly since it
is unhealthy. Where can I run away from that unhealthy at-
mosphere? I am myself to blame the most for the unhealthy atmos-
phere prevailing there, for I have never stayed there for any length of
time. So I do not have to be persuaded to go there. I have got
stuck here, because I must not leave my work here unfinished and
we should, I think, get work out of the body as long as we can.
I, therefore, expect to be there by the beginning of January.
"But never say die."
"Never take a defeat even at the cost of your life."
Or,
"The way to Him is known to the valiant, it is not for the
coward."
Or,
"Having become unattached to happiness and unhappiness,
loss and gain, victory and defeat, you engage yourself in battle.
In this way no sin will come to you."
"It is only right to be strict with ourselves and magnanimous
towards our opponents."
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 7768. Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
