341. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 22, 1932
CHI. MIRA,
Your usual letter came in at the usual time but as yet with-
out the notes from the book you are reading. For the first time
perhaps I found your letter mutilated. Was it a reminder that
you and I were prisoners? But I do not mind nor will you.
Blessed are they that expect nothing.
You say our fears are not due to want of faith in God but
want of faith in self. But these are one and the same thing.
Want of faith in self comes from want of faith in God. It
betrays ignorance of what God is. Then again you say want of
faith comes from our want of self-restraint. This is true but it
connotes the same thing. Read the verse 59 of Ch. II, Gita. Objects
of senses are eradicated only by seeing God face to face, in other
words by faith in God. To have complete faith in God is to see
Him. Nor is the matter any better by assuming the existence of
the fourth dimension. It ultimately points to the same thing, "Seek
ye first the kingdom of God and all else will be added unto you."
When we meet Him, we will dance in the joy of His Presence and
there will be neither fear of snakes nor of the death of dear ones.
For there is no death and no snake-bites in His Presence. The
fact is that the most living faith, too, falls short of the perfect.
Hence there is no such thing as complete absence of fear for the
embodied, i.e., imprisoned soul. The possession of the body is a
limitation. It is a wall of separation. We can therefore but try
to shed our fear, i.e., increase our faith.
My weight is now 103½ lb. I have just now eliminated
bread and even vegetable and therefore also salt. The quantity
of milk is slightly less than 2 lb. Under heavy strain of work
milk and fruit is my diet. Ba and Bal are here. Jamnalalji is
getting better. He is adding to his weight.
The missing statements accompany this letter.
Our cats have suffered disgrace. The mother has been found
helping herself to foods without permission and during nights
dirtying our carpets and papers. Vallabhbhai has therefore cut
off the food supply. Thus interdining has stopped. What other
ordinances Vallabhbhai will promulgate I do not know. Ordi-
nance rule is the order of the day even for poor kitty!
Love from all.
BAPU
[PS.]
It is just 5.30 a.m.
From a photostat: C.W. 9512. Courtesy: Mirabehn
1 St. Matthew, VI. 33
2 Vide "Letter to Mirabehn", pp. 200-.
