128. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
November 30, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
I thank you for your prompt reply to my letter regarding
Appasaheb Patwardhan, but I am sorry for the attitude you have
taken up. Since the matter has gone up to the Government, I
would like to draw their attention to the following facts:
1. Appasaheb Patwardhan is wedded to the idea that he
should work side by side with Bhangis and it is most repugnant
to him to have to observe in prisons untouchability which he
does not do outside.
2. He had to fast in 1930 for this very reason.
3. I must adhere to my statement that Appasaheb Pat-
wardhan had been actually doing Bhangi work in the Ratnagiri
Jail, until he was stopped.
4. There was no question of his issuing any threat and, in my
humble opinion, statement of his moral claim and consequence of
rejection of that claim should not be considered as a threat.
5. In considering a moral or religious question, the question of
shortage of labour does not arise.
6. In my opinion it is unjust to say of an absolutely docile
prisoner like Appasaheb Patwardhan who has been always pre-
pared to do any task asked of him that he is fighting for "a
particular variety of work". He wants to do Bhangi work in
addition to whatever task may be given to him.
7. There are many prisoners in Yeravda, including us three,
who are anxious to do their own conservancy work, and it is be-
cause you have not looked upon it with favour that I have my-
self remained silent and with difficulty prevented my co-workers
from making it an issue of conscience.
8. As you are yourself aware the conversation about this
matter and about hand-spinning by civil disobedience prisoners
has remained in abeyance because of the more important matters
arising, and absorbing my time and attention. But these two are
matters of deepest importance to many of us.
9. With due deference I cannot help repeating that to pre-
vent Appasaheb Patwardhan from voluntarily working side by side
with his Bhangi co-prisoners because he does not belong to the
Bhangi caste is a perpetuation in prisons of the bar of untouch-
ability when that bar is being swiftly removed outside prison walls.
I would therefore implore you personally to revise the un-
compromising attitude you have taken up and to let humble
Appasaheb Patwardhan and his associates do conservancy work.
Believe me that there is no defiance in their request. Some of us
who are convinced civil resisters leave our resistance outside prison
walls and having entered them are anxious to carry out and
promote prison discipline to the utmost extent that our con-
science would allow and we do so in order to show that our
resistance is always civil and never incivil or criminal.
But if I cannot make you or Government appreciate this
obvious and just position, I have with the utmost regret to in-
form you that from Saturday the 3rd proximo, so far as I am
concerned, I must join Appasaheb in his protest and respectfully
claim to do my own conservancy work, and if he does not get the
relief, I must put myself not on reduced rations but on a complete fast.
I would ask you not to treat this as a threat, but as a human
being to appreciate the feelings of a fellow-being. I have already
hardened my heart, but I have not hardened it so as to see an
honourable colleague wasting away in defence of a cherished
principle without my at least sharing his agony and sacrifice.
Believe me it is no pleasure to me to have to write such letters.
Yours sincerely,
Home Department, Political, File No. 31/108-Poll., 1932, pp. 16-.
Courtesy: National Archives of India
