301. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
December 18, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I wrote to you some letters in the course of the week. This
one is in reply to your weekly letter.
I have decided to obey your order forbidding me to show
your letters to Chhaganlal. Of course I had to show him your
order. I think you, too, would not wish that he should remain
ignorant of what you wrote about him. I showed him the rele-
vant part of the letter and asked him not to read the rest. All
the same, I did not like your order. Why should any person in
the Ashram hide anything from another inmate?
I can under-
stand a child or a grown-up who knows no better feeling thus.
But what can you have to hide from anybody? The fact that
others read your letters doesn't lessen, but rather increases, the
sanctity of your letters. You should not at all feel embarrassed
if the whole world knows your thoughts. We have no right to
think any thoughts which others may not know. If we follow
this as a fixed rule in our life, we automatically learn to control
our thoughts. Every human being is God's representative on
the earth. He knows all our thoughts, but we do not know
that He does, because we do not see Him face to face. If, how-
ever, we look upon human beings as God's representatives on
the earth, we should not mind others knowing our thoughts.
Moreover, since we see a representative bodily, it becomes easy
for us to acquire control over our thoughts. I wish that you
should voluntarily withdraw your order. I had hoped that I
would be able to write with my right hand, but I see that I
ought not to use it and, therefore, I shall not perhaps be able
to write all that I wished to say. I don't mind your writing
about Ramabehn whatever comes to your mind. She does know
indeed that you will write nothing out of ill will for her. So
you may write anything you may wish to. I will carry out any
suggestion you may make.
You seem to have left the hospital much too soon. If you
are carrying out the doctor's instructions faithfully, there will
be no difficulty. It will be fine indeed if the operation succeeds
in its purpose.
230
. . . 's story is a sad one. I am not ready to blame . . .2
without knowing his side of the case. . . . is man of pure heart;
he is not cruel. He knows his duty. If I had more time
at my disposal, I would have explained the matter in greater
detail. You should serve . . .4 as well as you can. If she feels
lonely she is not altogether blameless in the matter. But she
should not be left uncared for because of that. . . .5 has quite a
few good qualities too.
Indu is of course careless. He is a simple-hearted boy and
loves play a little too much. I have written to his father and
told him that he should take the boy under his loving care.
Take milk and fruit for some time and think that they are
medicines. Don't eat kanji, etc., for a while. If you wish to eat
rice, you can. See the doctor regularly.
A letter for Sushila is enclosed.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10316. Also C.W. 6755. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
