271. LETTER TO JANAMMAL
February 11, 1935
Your Hindi writing is quite good. You have no difficulty
in expressing yourself correctly. And why do you expect me to
laugh at your English? It is a wretched habit we have culti-
vated of not merely wanting to write perfectly grammatical Eng-
lish but also criticizing those who do not, whereas the very best
men on the Continent think nothing of their mistakes in writing
English. They concentrate only on correctly giving their meaning.
I am glad you are arranging to have the device put up at
the Ashram for the hand-pounding of rice. But evidently you
are all still labouring under a mistake. You do not want the
pestle and mortar that is required for polishing. The removing
of husk is done by grinding on a very light chakki. I have now
discovered that chakkis for grinding are made of wood or pure mud
for the simple reason that it is only the outer husk we want to
remove without damaging the inner grain which can't bear much
weight. It is, therefore, a performance which even a child can
undertake without any strain. No further process is required for
preparing the rice for cooking.
My food is tomatoes, milk, almond paste and some bhaji, ordi-
narily palak, methi or luni. I have given up fruit just to reduce
the cost. It is purely an experiment. I am keeping up weight
at 109 lb. We are now living in the garden which you once visi-
ted. Prabhavati comes here every evening and passes the night
here. Ramdas is in Bombay trying to regain health and confi-
dence in himself. He is not doing badly.
Ambujam must have told you that the three girls who were
to come to Madras do not want to, and I do not want to force
them. Therefore, if you are opening the Ashram, you should do
so without any fuss or ceremony. In that case you can start even
with one girl as I have said to Ambujam in my talks with her.
Vasumati will gladly come if she is still required.
She is here
for the purpose of going to Madras.
It may be inadvisable to
bring her down there merely for the sake of two girls. They can
have such carding and ginning as Ambujam herself knows. But
if both of you require Vasumati, she will fulfil her promise.
I have just received Ambujam's letter. She may have to give
more attention to her son than she expected. In that case you
should be prepared to take charge of the Ashram. Can you
do so? I hope you can.
SHRI JANAMMAL
"NARMADA"
MOWBREYS ROAD, CATHEDRAL P.O., MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
