218. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
December 7, 1932
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Padma and his mother came and saw me yesterday. Devdas was with
them, too. They had brought two long letters from Prabhudas. For the present,
I have given them to Devdas to read so that I might know the impression
they make on him. Those letters and my conversation with Padma have given
me at any rate the definite impression that the two have become deeply
infatuated to each other. They regard their relation to each other as that of a
brother and sister or a father and daughter, but that is nothing but self-
deception. However, I believe that they have not completely fallen. The two
do not even know that they are sexually attracted to each other, but in fact
they are. Padma is a silly girl and still a child, is very talkative and also
affectionate. So probably she does not even know what it is to be sexually
attracted. But her ways and manners and the expressions on her face are
those of a wife to a husband. It is rather different with Prabhudas. He is full
of sexual fancies but is fighting hard to overcome them. While he had not
yet succeeded in that, he came across a girl like Padma. He is quite aware
that he must entertain no sexual feelings towards her. But what can he do?
That is why he keeps company with her. The two have met privately and
moved about together. What is poor Sarojinidevi to do? She is very much
upset and deeply hurt. Padma would not listen to her, would not wake up,
and as for Prabhudas, she does not have the courage to speak to him. However,
the atmosphere could not but become vitiated. The neighbours saw the impurity
of their relation which the two could not see. Sitla Sahay came to know of it
and was very unhappy. He has rushed to me with all of them to find a solution.
Though Prabhudas has not physically fallen, he believes himself so far guilty
that he has come to a decision that the two of them should not be together
any time and is asking my permission to undertake a fast of fifteen or twenty
days' duration so that he might learn to be vigilant. If he is not permitted to
undertake a fast, he wants to be permitted to marry. All this is not quite
LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
165
clear in his letters, but I have been able to read it between the lines. I do not
intend to permit him to undertake a fast, but wish to press him to get married.
He believes that he would be able to find a suitable girl. I think he will have
no difficulty in finding such a girl if he tries to look outside the circle of our
caste. I have no difficulty in making up my mind to this extent, but what is
to be done about Khali? Both Prabhudas and Padma need to stay at hill station.
It would be proper for both to stay in Almora and at separate places but it
would not be worthy of what we believe to be our poverty or what others
think to be our poverty. Our poverty may seem outdated, but then we must
put some limit somewhere. However, God will show us the way. I have written
all this just for your information and not to ask for your help in this matter
or to cause you worry. Prabhudas is no more a child. He wants me to show
him the way. Since he likes my advice, I will go on guiding him and in that
way things will come right in the end. Ultimately it will happen neither as I
wish nor as Prabhudas wishes. After all there is a limit to what human effort
can achieve. Prabhudas's aspirations have always been noble. He is not
deceitful and so, God will save him. He has struggled very hard to remain
a life-long celibate, but the Fates seem to have been against him. How is
Prabhudas to blame for that? He has come out safe from many difficult
circumstances before now and will do so this time, too. I will not think it a
misfortune if he marries. He will rather be happy, and so neither you nor
Kashi need grieve at all and make yourselves miserable. I am not going to
blame Prabhudas even in my thought, neither personally nor in my letters. If
anybody has been at fault in this, it was me, for I have induced all of you to
join me in a stupendous experiment as dangerous as putting one's hand into
a serpent's burrow. I do not at all repent having done so. The experiment
will certainly continue and its result is bound to be good. It will require
sacrifices though, and we shall make them. You yourself were thinking of
going to Khali. If you do wish to go and if you can hand over your Vijapur
work to somebody, I see no harm in your going. Your presence at Khali will
certainly be a source of consolation to Prabhudas, but your first duty is to
take care of the work of Vijapur. How will Kashi manage? She also is almost
a cripple. She just cannot tolerate the weather at Almora at this time of the
year. This needs to be considered, too. If, after taking into consideration all
this, you still wish to go and can go, you may do so. But do not think it at
all necessary to go there for Prabhudas's good. I cannot think of anything
more to write after this.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33067
