84. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 18, 1928
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter and I have a letter from Satis Babu too
giving me chapter and verse in answer to your letter of which
you had very correctly sent him a copy. Whilst I do not know
much about the manner in which Satis Babu is carrying on
propaganda to educate public opinion in favour of his view, I
must confess as I have said in my letter to Sjt. Sen Gupta that I
share the view Satis Babu takes of the Exhibition. In my opinion,
we must not take in everything, even in the shape of machinery
unless we are absolutely certain that it is beneficial and requires
encouragement without which it would not be taken up by the
public. I do not believe in distracting public attention by intro-
ducing in the Exhibition, even things that may be beneficial but
that may not require Congress patronage for use by the public.
Thus, for instance, I would not have in the Exhibition watches
which we do not manufacture but we do need but which the
various manufacturers have ample means of advertising. But in
this matter we may differ in our opinion and if such is the case,
there is no reason why each opinion should not be put before the
public without leading to bitterness or acrimony. If there is any-
thing definite against Satis Babu showing that he has been unscru-
pulous in his propaganda, I would gladly write to him about it.
I hope that there is no trace whatsoever of the illness you have
contracted whilst you were under detention in Burma. I have
received your telegram about Pandit Motilalji. Motilalji himself
is disinclined to accept the honour. I share his view and sub-
ject to Sjt. Sen Gupta's consent I had prepared an article for
publication in the forthcoming issue of Young India. But on
hearing from him in answer to my wire I cancelled the article and
I shall say nothing about the election in the pages of Young India
or elsewhere unless Bengal friends would let me.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 13641
