269. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 29, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your big packet of mail today. You will find with this
a detailed letter of suggestions to Purushottam. Ramabehn cannot
be got operated upon immediately. In any case do get her exa-
mined by Haribhai. So far as I can judge, the operation will not
be an easy one. I also doubt its necessity. Is it likely that the
arms which did not become limp all these years will become so
now? I cannot be easily alarmed by such a fear.
Kanu's case requires careful thinking.
Get him examined
again by Haribhai. Let me know what he says. The pain in the
arm seems to have lasted very long. I think it is not being vigorous-
ly massaged. He is likely to benefit if that part is also exposed to
the rays of the sun. I have had no experience as to whether it
would help better if the rays were passed through a red glass. My
experience means the experience of Hanumantrai. Ask Purushot-
tam to read Dr. Sharma's book which we have there and to try the
experiments described in it. Perhaps they may help.
I understand what you say regarding Narahari's letter. Dis-
cuss with him and other responsible inmates of the Ashram, the
suggestions which you approve of and let me know the result. I
think you will find most of the suggestions acceptable. That you
will be able to please Narahari is also an important consideration.
Mohan must have recovered now. His illness has lasted quite
long.
It is not that I want only scholars' criticism of Ishucharita. I
want yours and the women's too, if you and they have read the
book. Since the book has been written for the layman, Valji is
eager to know the opinions of all. He wants them no matter whe-
ther they are favourable or otherwise.
You should start utilizing Parachure Shastri's services now.
Has his son been given any work? Can he do anything? Can
you control him?
I will wait for your next letter for your views regarding
Shanta.
I have written to Santok regarding Keshu. You need not
write from there. She and Damodardas are coming tomorrow to
see me. I have a letter from Keshu written yesterday in which
he says that he may not now go there.
If Dhiru himself wants to learn painting in a spirit of dedi-
cation and agrees to observe the [Ashram] vows in Santi-
niketan and live there as an ideal student, if he is also ready
to learn whatever else he can learn there, I think he can do excel-
lent service afterwards. Painting also can be of two kinds, divine
and demoniac, sattvik and rajasik, moral and immoral. I believe
every word of what Dhiru has said. If he is so eager to learn paint-
ing, I think we should encourage him. Just as Panditji has dedi-
cated his art to service and people get its benefit and are likely to
get it in a still greater measure in future, so also can one dedicate
painting to service. Painting is silent music. We can see from our
experience of paintings which excite passion that, if a painter paint-
ed pictures which would purify us of passion, their power would
be felt even by the coarsest of men. There are pictures painted with
this aim. But of course there are very few painters of this type. If
somebody from the Ashram becomes such an artist, we should
admire him. Probably you do not know that we had started train-
ing Balkrishna to make him such a sculptor. He had even made
a few statues. He himself then gave up the work. He has even
given his reason for doing so in the letter which I received from
him this week. We shall not mind if Dhiru's effort to learn painting
also meets the same fate. I don't know how they teach paint-
ing in Santiniketan. But there is no better place in India at pre-
sent for learning this art. But I should also like to say that if any-
body else, following Dhiru's example, wishes to learn painting,
we may not readily agree. Dhiru's heart has been set on this art
for many years and his love of it is pure. He seems to be well-
behaved in other ways and has the strength and the will to ob-
serve the Ashram rules. He has also been living in the Ashram
for many years. If these assumptions are not correct, we cannot
send him. We cannot send him also if there is the slightest doubt
about the purity of his character. He can be sent only if he under-
stands all this, willingly accepts the conditions which I have put
in my letter to him and if all of you can trust his word, and if all
these requirements are fulfilled I think it is our duty to let him
go. All of you should consider the case from this point of view and
decide. Don't forget to invite Narahari to join in the discussion.
After the incident concerning . . .1, we should be careful. A
frightened man sees a cause of fear everywhere. If Dhiru indulges
in lustful fancies, if he is a boy with an impure mind, painting is
likely to prove a dangerous pursuit for him. These arts are alluring.
The world itself is alluring, and it is no wonder that the arts of an
alluring world should be equally alluring. But just as the world,
though it is alluring to the senses, can be a field, for attaining
moksha, can be a manifestation of the glory of God, so can art.
Out of a thousand artists one may become a bhakta. I know
that nine hundred and ninety-nine become lovers of the flesh. If
you have faith in Dhiru that he will be one in a thousand, if all
of you feel sure about that, let him have your blessings and go.
Having done so, we should trust to our fate. We will dedicate to
Shri Krishna our decision to send him.
I started writing this letter before the morning prayer and
end it exactly at four o'clock. It is still ten minutes before the
prayer starts.
BAPU
[PS.]
Anandi is now able to move about. She has been coming to
see me for the last two days.
There are nine letters in all, including this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8344. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1 The name has been omitted.
