118. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 8, 1929
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
Today is my Silence Day. I had to get down from the train at three
o'clock in the morning. I am staying in a Dak bungalow in a desolate
wasteland. It is only today that I am able to fulfil my desire to write to you
two brothers.
Chi. Chhaganlal has crossed all limits. I felt not anger but compassion.
How can one be angry with a son who ruins his father's work? He went on
doing this for years and all of you seem to have remained unaware of it. It
seems you did suspect something but I think you kept quiet as you did not
like to say anything to your father. But we have still not lost the game. It is
1 A word here is illegible in the source.
2 He was discovered to have been engaged in petty larcenies over a number of
years; vide Vol. XL, pp. 209-12.
98
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
necessary that you should tell him it is from the Ashram and not from him
that you hope to gain everything and thereby free him from his father's
attachment to you. I have given the same advice to Kashi. If Chhaganlal
sincerely repents what he has done, after all these sins he has committed, he
would indeed become a really good man. There is a saying in English to the
effect that the greater the sinner, the more likely is he to become a good
man. Does not the Bhagavata story of Ajamil and others suggest the same
thing? If Chhaganlal is to be purified, all of you will have to help him in
that. At present, he is crying his heart out. That is not sincere repentance.
There is no place for tears in genuine repentance. Why mourn for the body
you have laid aside? One should rather rejoice in the new body. Getting rid
of our impurity, we should feel lighter. There is no need at all to continue to
bear the burden of the impurity we have got rid of. But Chhaganlal could
not bear the displeasure of the Ashram and went on crying all the time he
was in the Ashram.
Carry out as much as you understand and can digest from what I have
written. But whether or not you are able to do anything, do not at all feel
dismayed.
I hope your work there is going on smoothly. A visit there in June is
quite in the air. It is also in the air that we may spend more time in Almora.
Let us see what happens.
I sent your article to be published in Navajivan and it must have been
published. These days, I am not able to look into the matter that goes in the
Navajivan and Young India. Despite many shocks and incessant travelling,
for the present at any rate, I am dancing with joy.
After going through the Dictionary, any suggestions you may have to
make for additions or corrections should be sent to Kakasaheb.
The present tour [of Andhra Pradesh] is planned for one and a half
months. For the present, address your letters to Bezwada. I will be reaching
Bombay on May 23rd. I will spend four days there. Then to the Ashram. I
wish to stay in the Ashram till June 10. After that, Almora. But the final
date of leaving for Almora will be decided later.
With me are Ba, Prabhavati, Imam Saheb, Pyarelal and Subbiah. Mahadev
was kept back by Vallabhbhai for himself.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 33031
