437. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
May 16, 1947
. . . There was a telegram yesterday saying that Jehangir
would be going to Japan for some time. I did not worry
knowing that he was by your side. I never stop thinking
about you. I was attracted by you and followed you and got
myself involved in nature cure. But having got into it I see
and am increasingly realizing that probably there is a great
difference between our approaches. I do not think I can change
my outlook now. Probably you cannot change yours either. And
so, we must both decide about our course of action. There is
no need for you to rush to me. I am passing through a pro-
cess of change, am trying to perfect myself. I have to be con-
stantly on the move. I am striving to perfect my non-violence.
I cannot divert my attention from it and take up other things.
For me nature cure too comes under non-violence. As for you,
your dharma, your sadhana consists for the present of two things.
You must serve Maji, remain by her side and give thought
to your own needs. This cannot be done by being with me,
because Maji is not with me and I am not with her. About
money too you have to think for yourself.
Now, the second thing is a matter of shame for me. Chi.
Manu always follows my instructions, and so, I was wondering
how far I could take her with me. Even while I was in Delhi
I had suspected that she had appendicitis. But my knowledge be-
ing absolutely superficial, how could I trust myself? Even so I
treated her with earth and water. I also laid down her diet. I
used to ask her to have enemas. After constipation she started
having motions. Then it was that her appendicitis was detected.
Two naturopaths came my way. But the poor fellows had very
little knowledge. I have still not come across a perfect naturopath.
I was eager to put you in that category. But in trying to do
so I realized that I myself was by nature a true naturopath,
though an imperfect one. Then I came here and since I had
to be here for ten days I found some spare time. Instead of
one, four doctors arrived. They recommended an operation.
Accepting defeat I allowed the operation. Today is the second
day. I am dictating this in the morning. I have received in-
formation from the hospital that Manu is well. I did not at
all like the idea of the operation. If I had expert knowledge
I would never have allowed it. What would you have done in
a similar situation? I am asking this question so that I can
have some help in future. You can reply at your own conve-
nience when you have the time. There is no hurry. Accord-
ing to my present information I have to be in Delhi on the
25th. God alone knows where I shall be tomorrow. I hope
your mind is at peace. Maji must be all right. . . . and both the
children must be fine.
[From Gujarati]
Biharni Komi Agman, pp. 373-
