251. LETTER TO SIR GEORGE BARNES
January 13, 1920
DEAR SIR GEORGE BARNES,
I enclose herewith a cablegram I have received from South
Africa. You will perhaps easily understand reference to the
Krugersdorp Case It means that the partial protection that was
attempted to be secured by the new Act has been undone by the
latest judgment. The judgment is under appeal, that assuming
that the appeal also is decided against us—the verdict cannot be
accepted. Courts of law provide no remedy where the law it-
self is defective. This was forcibly illustrated when a High Court
judgment upset the South African practice which recognized
Indians' marriages as lawful and you know that the legislation
of 1914 remedied the mischief created by the judgment in ques-
tion and I trust that you will see to it and instruct Sir Benjamin
Robertson that the right of Indians to hold landed property by
forming corporations otherwise is not in any way interfered with.
The second point raised in the cablegram is in connection
with the Commission that is now sitting to consider the propos-
ed extension of the power of the Municipalities. It does seem strange
that one should ever have to dread extension of popular power,
but here where the power is sought in order to crush the very
life of the unrepresented people, any further extension of such
power is really a crime. I hope therefore that Sir Benjamin Robert-
son will see that any law that may be passed to extend the exist-
ing powers of the municipalities of South Africa will duly safe-
guard the rights of Indians who are totally unrepresented in the
municipalities of the Transvaal and the [Orange] Free State and
only partially at the Cape and Natal.
The East African question is, you may have noticed, becom-
ing more and more troublesome. I enclose herewith a letter I have
addressed to the Press. You may have seen it. Will you not, if it
is at all possible, give me something for publication on it as you
so kindly did regarding South Africa? I hope, you received my
telegram in reply to yours. Will you kindly give my regards to
Lady Barnes, Miss Barnes.
Wishing you all a happy new year,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of a handwritten copy: S.N. 7053
