66. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"
DURBAN,
November 15, 1897
THE EDITOR
The Natal Mercury
SIR,
Perhaps in justice you will allow me to say a few words
on your remarks in your today's issue on my letter regarding
the alleged organization to evade the Immigration Act. I am
afraid my letter has been misread. I have not therein dealt with
the treatment of the Indians in Natal. I have, in order to avoid
the needless alarm, simply denied the statement that has ap-
peared in the papers to the effect that the Indians who
recently landed in Delagoa Bay were on their way to Natal,
and such other statements. I do not dispute the right of the
Europeans to be on the "qui vive, to see that the law of the last
Session is not evaded".
On the contrary, I say that the responsible Indians intend
to loyally abide by the Act so long as it remains on the
statute-book, and to help the authorities so far as they can.
What I do respectfully object to is the circulation of false
rumours and assumptions based thereon which are likely to
create uneasiness, and disturb the equanimity of the European
mind. The inquiry I have suggested, with due deference to your
opinion, is clearly necessary. There are two contradictory statements
before the public. The one is that there is an attempt at whole-
sale evasion of the Immigration Act, backed, in the opinion of
the "Man in the Moon", by an organization; on the other hand,
there is a total denial of the statement. Which story are the
public to believe? Would it not be better in the interest of all
concerned if there was an authoritative statement as to which
story is worthy of credence?
As to what I said in India, you have justified me. You were
good enough to say, when the matter was before the public, that
from an Indian standpoint I had said nothing to which exception
could be taken. And I am yet prepared to substantiate every
statement I made there. If I had no faith in the strong sense
of justice of the British Government1; I would not be here. As
I have said before elsewhere, I repeat here that British love of
justice and fair play are the sheet-anchor of the Indians' hope.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Natal Mercury, 17-11-1897
