148. LETTER TO M. M. BHOWNAGGREE
P. O. Box 182,
DURBAN, NATAL,
June 22, 1901
DEAR SIR MANCHERJI,
I acknowledged last week your two letters. Since then I
have received yours of the 24th ultimo. Your letters have revived
our spirits, and I beg to thank you on behalf of the poor sufferers
in South Africa for the great work you are doing. We on this
side entirely agree with you that so far as possible the thing
should be managed by friendly interviews, such as you have been
having with Mr. Chamberlain and others, for an unsympathetic
answer to a question in the House cannot but do a great deal
of damage—where justice is entirely on our side, and no difference
of opinion exists between the several parties. A constant reminder
to the authorities and unwearying vigilance are all that is needed
in order to secure the desired result. We have anticipated you
in the suggestion as to a combined movement in India, and
letters have been addressed to the leaders on that side request-
ing them to promote memorials and put questions in the Vicere-
gal Council. At the same time, I am not very hopeful of success,
owing to the absence there of any organized committee to deal
exclusively with the South African Question, or rather with the
question of grievances of the Indian emigrants. But a combined
powerful representation to the India Office from the East India
Association and the Congress Committee may well supplement or
take the place of what may be done in India.
I know that you feel very keenly in this matter of our dis-
abilities, and that they are bad enough to arouse righteous indig-
nation in the coolest head. But may I ask you not to mar the
sterling work you are doing there by precipitating a hot debate
unless you are sure of success. We fully realize that no man in
England is more capable of doing justice to this matter than
yourself owing to the warm interest you take in it, your position
in the House, your influence with the authorities and above
all your willingness to work.
The information supplied to Mr. Chamberlain by the autho-
rities in the Transvaal with reference to the cablegram sent to
you as to the permits is, I venture to say, misleading. I still
affirm that the cablegram is correct. The information was derived
from the report sent to the local newspapers by their special cor-
respondents. I went over yesterday myself to see the Secretary
of the Uitlander Committee and he told me emphatically that
most of the shops are open, and that the requirement that the
men should join the Rand Rifles is more or less a formality,
and surely, if they don't want the Indians to join the Rand
Rifles, it should not, to say the least, be used as a bar against
their return; and it should be recollected that many European
ladies have been allowed to proceed, and that it is a daily occur-
rence to see a crowd of families entraining for the Transvaal. I
regret to have to inform you that up to the time of writing
no further permits have been received, though six have been
promised—four for Natal and two for Cape Town. But, of course,
the question of permits is, after all, insignificant, and only a
temporary, though, while it lasts, a very severely felt, difficulty
compared to the all-absorbing question—what is to be the posi-
tion of the Indians under the new regime? There is yet no
declaration to the effect that, at the very least, the existing
legislation will be considerably modified. Our hopes are centred
in what the friends in London may, taking advantage of Lord
Milner's presence there, accomplish.
I hope to write more next week; in the mean while, with
renewed thanks,
I am,
Yours very truly,
From a photostat of the office copy: S.N. 3853
