106. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
Confidential
DURBAN, NATAL,
October 8, 1900
DEAR SIR,
In view of the approaching session of the Congress it may
not be out of place to draw your attention, and through you that
of our other leading men, to what we here think may be done
by the Congress. I know that we who know the value of your
services to your country have to see that we do not unduly encroach
upon your attention and thereby probably affect your health;
if, therefore, it is not possible for you to give this matter your
personal attention, I doubt not that you will be good enough to
forward this letter or copies thereof to the proper quarters. The
matter treated as affecting the whole of the emigration from India
seems to be of the utmost national importance. A draft resolu-
tion to be submitted to the Congress is enclosed herewith. A few
copies of the notes, specially prepared for the friends in London
at the desire of Sir William Wedderburn, are also being sent in
a separate packet. They will give an idea of the position as it
stands at present, and may be of use to the gentleman who will
1 The copy found among the documents in Sabarmati Sangrahalaya is
incomplete.
2 The Indian National Congress
3 The Congress passed the following resolution on the question of South
Africa: Resolved that this Congress once more draws the attention of the
Indian Government as well as of the Secretary of State for India to the
grievances of the British Indians in South Africa, and earnestly hopes that, in
view of the re-arrangement of the boundaries in that continent and the in-
corporation of the late Boer Republics into the British Dominions, the dis-
abilities under which the Indian settlers laboured in those Republics, and
as to which Her Majesty's Government owing to their independence in internal
matters felt powerless to obtain redress, will now no longer exist, and
that the serious inconvenience caused to the settlers in Natal, among others
by the Immigration Restriction and the Dealers' Licenses Acts of the Colony,
which are manifestly inconsistent with the fundamental principles of the
British Constitution as also the Proclamation of 1858, will be materially
mitigated, if not entirely removed.
4 Vide the preceding item.
200
take charge of the resolution which, of course, may be altered or
amended as the Subjects Committee think fit.
The matter derives special importance owing to the sudden
and unexpected activity of the Cape Legislature the members of
which, while, as you are aware, they are divided into two very
evenly balanced parties holding diametrically opposite views, seem
to be almost unanimous on the Indian question. A cutting
from the Cape Times giving a pretty full report of the debate
in the Cape Assembly, attached hereto, will give some idea of
what is going on in that part of South Africa. The Cape gentlemen
are evidently anxious to go further even than Natal, as if the
latter had not almost completely shut the door against newcomers
from India. They would not tolerate the Indian, whether as
a merchant, clerk or labourer. In Mr. Chamberlain, they have
a Colonial Secretary who is anxious to go any length in respect-
ing the wishes of the self-governing Colonies. The India Office,
on the other hand, appears to be terribly inactive. But, seeing
that there is unanimity of opinion between the Indians and Anglo-
Indians on this question, it may be possible to rouse that office
into proper activity, and obtain some relief. An influential deputa-
tion to wait upon Lord Curzon may go a great way in the
desired direction.
The attitude of the Cape Colony seems to show that the ser-
vices rendered by India, in that it was Sir George White with his
Indian contingent who was the first to be on the scene to check
the effective advance of the enemy, that it was the hundreds of
dhuli-bearers who rendered admittedly yeoman service during
the siege of Ladysmith, and at the initial reverses, not to speak
of the volunteers (Lumsden's Horse) equipped entirely from
money subscribed by the Indians, the Bhisti Corps and other
Indian followers who were sent in shiploads from India, and the
locally raised Indian Stretcher-bearer Corps, will be entirely
forgotten, and the Indian treated, if they had it all their own
way, as a social leper.
Natal for the present seems to be not quite ill disposed, but it
will not take much to draw it out and, it is to be feared, make it
return to its original opposition to the Indian. The gentlemen
who will speak to the resolution may be asked to gratefully
acknowledge Natal's magnanimous response to the Indian Famine
Fund, and a subscription of £100 collected for Prabhu Singh, an
indentured Indian who rendered signal service at Ladysmith, and
whose bravery was publicly acknowledged by Sir George White.
(This is the man for whom Lady Curzon sent a "choga" which
was publicly presented to him in Durban the other day.) The
subscriptions to the Indian Famine Fund amount to over £4500,
of which about one-half comes from our own community.
The Transvaal and the Orange River Colony ought to be
absolutely free to the Indian, but we are all very nervous about it.
As showing to what lengths the people in South Africa would
be prepared to go, what happened about a year ago at Umtali
in Rhodesia . . .
From a photostat of a copy: S.N. 3743
