98. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
COIMBATORE,
October 17, 1927
I got all your three letters. The one about theft reached me
rather late, but even so it was three days ago. Since, however,
your second letter, which was received before the first, did not
ask for an immediate reply, I did not send a wire, and I could
not get time before today to write. Your letter about truth was
received yesterday. I saw from it that you were awaiting a reply
to the letter about theft and, therefore, dispatched a wire today.
You must have got it. I could not, of course, explain everything
in the wire.
Though we live in society, there are matters in which we
should not or cannot follow it. Society may punish a thief be-
cause it does not believe in non-violence or cannot follow it.
But those who seek to follow it in their lives, who have the cour-
age to follow it, should remain neutral [in such cases]. If they
do not, they will learn nothing from their effort to follow non-
violence and society will make no progress. If this view is correct,
you certainly cannot go to the court to give evidence. You
should go, however, if you are summoned. In this case, at any rate,
you should courteously explain to the magistrate what you think
to be your dharma, so that the latter will punish the thief in-
dependently of you or may even let him off for want of evidence.
So far the course seems clear to me. You have, however, no
right to ask for mercy to be shown to the thief. When did you
feel compassion for him? If you had felt it when you found
him, you and Gomati would not have felt afraid and run after
him. You would have remained unconcerned if he had taken
away anything. But we have not risen high enough for this.
Fear has not left us nor the love of possessions. I, therefore, feel
that compassion is out of place, because unnatural. We may
strive, we have been striving to cultivate such compassion in us.
But so long as compassion has not become a permanent sentiment
in us, it cannot be regarded as springing from our heart and,
therefore, genuine. If indeed it has become a permanent sentiment
in our heart, we should take the thief in our hands, meet him
and try to reform him. Nor can the court accede to such a
plea for mercy. If the thief himself makes the request and pro-
mises to try to reform himself, the court may consider it. The
court may accept our request too, if we offer to keep the thief
with us so as to prevent him from being a danger to others. I
do not feel inclined to go so far and ask for mercy towards him.
I have not been able to think of a third alternative besides punish-
ment and mercy. When compassion does not produce as much
effect as even punishment, we should understand that it is not
genuine or sufficiently strong. I have practically stopped taking
interest in the Hindu-Muslim problem because I feel that the
compassion in my heart is insufficient or is unnatural. Unnatural
does not mean pretended, but only that it has not gone deeper
than the intellect. If it had gone deeper than the intellect, I
should have been able to discover an alternative to the method
of reprisal. But I am not in such a condition as yet. I have
been striving hard to cultivate that degree of intense ahimsa in
my heart. I must admit that up to the present I have failed.
I have not accepted defeat however.
I should like to correct an error you have made. I am sure
it is due to oversight. You say that the present-day law does not
regard theft itself as crime, but that theft is a crime only when
the thief is caught; surely it is not so bad as that. You would be
right if you said that the thief who was not caught escaped
punishment. But then, this must have been so even in the golden
age. God alone can visit every theft with punishment, and those
who believe in God actually hold that man has to suffer punishment
for every transgression. I assume that you mean no more
than this.
And now about the commotion in the Ashram. I am not
surprised by it. Nor am I shocked. We are only making an
attempt to cleanse our hearts and bring about complete understand-
ing among ourselves. Commotion like the one you mention is
inevitable in such an attempt. These developments convince me
that we did right in establishing an association. It is only through
such experiences that we shall learn the right manner of working
and discover new laws of community life, if there are any, which
conform to the principle of non-violence. If any of us were a
perfect being, he would have before now composed a new smriti.
But the truth is that we are imperfect beings who are, nevertheless,
making a sincere and devoted effort to become perfect. It would
not pain me if we decided to start a new institution for those who
could not live with us, provided the motive was sincere. There
will be differences among us so long as we have not succeeded
in cultivating true humility, that is, real non-violence. There will
always be some who cannot live in harmony with the others.
When such occasions arise, why should we hesitate to start a new
institution, if it could be useful? If all of us are progressing to-
wards non-violence we may unite again. If we do not, we shall
only be playing on different branches of the same tree and, there-
fore, see unity even in our differences. Hence I think it necessary
only that we make sure of this: that no one should be insincere,
that we should not suspect one another's motives or believe others
to be evil-minded and that no one should harbour selfish thoughts
or wish to appear other than what he is.
I shall not now discuss the problem about truth. I have
understood all that you have said, and I accept it too. How-
ever, there is another side, and a beautiful one to everyone of the
issues, and that should not be lost sight of. But I will take up this
subject some other time. I am not impatient. I believe that
both of us are seeking the same truth. I do not want, I do not
like, that you should sit down to write your letters to me at a
quarter past one at night; in fact I think it wrong of you to do
so. It does not befit Gomati to insist that she will go through the
treatment only if she gets your services. She ought to be able to
accept the services of anyone who offers them sincerely.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
XXXV-11
