321. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 3, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
Generally I get your letters on Wednesday immediately on
arrival. This time, too, I have received a beautiful question from
Indu:
"Can we practise sword and dagger exercises in the
Ashram?" I don't know or remember when swords and daggers
were introduced in the Ashram. Nor do I remember whether,
if they were introduced when I was there, I had been consult-
ed. Whether or not I was, I now think that these things have
no place in the Ashram. All of you should sit together and think
over this matter and, if you feel that their introduction cannot
be defended in any way, get rid of them immediately. It seems to
me that keeping lathis is the utmost limit to which we can go.
However, you and other responsible inmates of the Ashram
should think independently over this matter and discuss it among
yourselves. If there are any other issues besides this, small or
big, you should think over them too.
The other problem is about illness. Anybody who falls ill, as
Indu did, as soon as he or she comes to live in the Ashram,
should be sent away to some other place. For instance, Jamna
has returned there after gaining 12 lb. of weight. If she were to
lose it all now, I would certainly feel very unhappy. If a person
keeps better health at some other place than he does in the
Ashram, it would be good both for him and for the Ashram to
send him to stay at that place. We should try and discover the
deficiencies of the Ashram because of which some persons do not
keep good health there. The water there is of course one cause, but
there may be other factors too. These are air and food. We should
find out if we are polluting the air in any way. For this, we should
examine whether the arrangements for the disposal of night soil
and the excreta of cattle are satisfactory. If Anandi is always ill,
she should be sent somewhere. Sharda told me that if I did not
object, Velanbehn would send Anandi to live with her at Mathe-
ran. Really speaking, my permission is not required at all.
It
is for you to decide whether or not she should be permitted to
go. Personally, I see no objection to the suggestion. At present,
her expenses even in Deolali are borne by us. If, therefore,
Anandi can be sent to live with Sharda, that should certainly be
done. This solves the problem about only one of them. I have
asked you to think about the problem of all who keep bad health
in the Ashram.
Tell Valji that I have carefully preserved the translation of
Vratavichar and that, if possible, I will even return it. I feel now
that I shall be able to do so.
I understand what you say about Champa. Please remem-
ber that it is your responsibility to look after her.
You must have inferred from what I wrote above about
Anandi that Harjivan and Sharda came and saw me. If you can
1 Presumably, the addressee's wife who had gone to Bombay for health
reasons
2 Vide footnote 1, p. 41.
3& The Kotaks, khadi workers
ascertain how Lakshmi, Lilavati and others are doing, please write
to me about them.
I got the leather for repairing the soles and the books. The
difficulty which the officials feel in permitting me to see the
women prisoners lodged here is that they would have to be
brought to the men's jail. And I cannot certainly be taken to
the women's jail. Since this difficulty appeared genuine to me, I
did not insist. It was agreed, therefore, that we should be per-
mitted to correspond. I have already started writing. Ganga-
behn informs me that all are well in the Ashram.
Continue the treatment till your scabie disappears completely.
It will benefit you in other ways too.
Is the Ashram bulletin being issued? If it is, is a copy
sent to me every time? I have not seen any along with your
letters for some weeks past.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I got today Prabhavati's letter. She is in the Lucknow
Central Jail. Kanta also is there. She has been promoted to
'A' class. Prabhavati has been demoted to 'B'. According to
me Prabhavati has been promoted and Kanta demoted. Prabha-
vati seems to be keeping good health. She tells me that Jaya-
prakash is in Bombay. For this week, Mahadev has sketched a
fine word-picture which I send with this letter.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8217. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
