485. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR,
Night, November 30, 1930
CHI. PREMA,
I was very happy to read your letter. It is two days now
since you broke your fast. By the time you get this letter, you
will have forgotten all about the fast and will be enjoying new
youth. If you do not have that experience, I would not regard
the fast as a complete success. I expect that you will describe the
result of your fast in detail. Your experience should be a guide
to others. You know, of course, how to return to normal diet
gradually after the fast is over. You will feel very hungry im-
mediately after a fast, but you should certainly not eat as much
as the stomach demands. You should gradually increase the quan-
tity of milk and curds, and eat nothing between the meals. You
may of course eat juicy fruits. I hope you do not count expense
in that regard. Your body should become completely healthy. I
am not surprised to hear that you could work normally during
the fast. I have observed many people doing so. And that is
my own experience, too. Those who have been harbouring many
diseases in their bodies feel stronger during a fast. At any rate
there is a brighter light on their faces.
I am satisfied with the children's account sent by you.
Krishnavijay seems to stand first in every item. Is there no one
who can take Dudhibehn's classes in her absence? I know that
in the present circumstances you cannot ask anyone about this.
What can you do when so many women are outside the Ashram?
All the same, if there is any person to whom you can entrust the
work, do not hesitate to ask him or her.
Dhurandhar must have been released. Tell him that I re-
member the discussions I had with him. I also remember his
diary. Ask him to write to me. Let him describe his experience,
too. He should also write about his future plans.
Mathuri has a complaint against you, that you beat children.
Sometimes you even use a rod. If this is true, give up the prac-
tice. One should never beat children. Crosby has written a book
called Tolstoy as Teacher. Probably it is in our collection. Read
it. It has now been proved that physical punishment does not re-
348
form children. I know that anyone who is accustomed to use the
rod while teaching will find it difficult to give up the practice.
But that is also true of an armed soldier. He thinks that without
his gun he can get nothing done in this world. Our Ashram
exists to prove that we can do without a gun. This is true in
regard to children. I will not write more than this just now.
If necessary, I will go into further argument after I get your reply.
I hope that you had plenty of sleep during the fast, and that
now you regularly go to bed early. One ought to have sufficient
sleep. Man needs sleep more than he does food. Fasting in regard
to food benefits one, but fasting in regard to sleep wastes away one's
body. It dulls the brain and makes one restless. Do not, there-
fore, be careless about sleep. I would not complain if you sleep
soundly between 9 p.m. and 4 a.m.
You will read about my experiment in the letter to Mira.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10244; also C.W. 6691. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
