494. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
February 21, 1933
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,
I thank you for your letter. I can never take amiss any
intervention from you.
On the contrary, I have always wel-
comed it. You will perhaps be interested to learn that the ori-
ginal draft of the Resolution on Temple-entry and the like was
also framed by me and handed to Sjts. Purushottamdas and Ghan-
shyamdas Birla. The Resolution as passed at the Bombay meet-
ing is undoubtedly different from the one I had worded. The
essential features of my Resolution have however been kept in the
Bombay Resolution. Nevertheless I must apply to it the same
canon of interpretation as we apply to Government's ordinary
laws and the like. The intention of the author is irrelevant to the
interpretation of his work if that intention is not carried out in
his language. I have therefore mentioned the fact of my author-
ship of the original text as a mere matter of historical interest.
If you will read the first Resolution you will find the following:
This right shall have statutory recognition at the first opportunity, and
shall be one of the earliest acts of swaraj Parliament, if it shall not have
received such recognition before that time.
Therefore, the legislative aid was clearly contemplated by the
resolution. But I go a step further. The meeting further agreed
by every legitimate and peaceful means to secure an early removal of all
social disabilities . . . including the bar in respect of admission to temples.
In the course of the conduct of the campaign one discovered
that there was a legal obstacle in the path of the progress towards
reform. Surely, it is up to the caste Hindus to remove the obsta-
cles at the earliest possible moment. Every lawyer to whom I
have referred the matter has assured me that even when the trus-
tees and temple-goers desire a particular temple to be opened,
it cannot be done because of the state of the law. So far as the
defects in any of the Bills are concerned, they can surely be easily
remedied. If you have any doubt about the position I have
taken up, I would like you, if you at all can, to come over to
Yeravda and discuss the position before you differ. If, however,
you have no doubt whatsoever about your view of the matter, I
must not trouble you to come merely for my pleasure.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. K. NATARAJAN
KAMAKSHI HOUSE
BANDRA, BOMBAY 20
From a microfilm: S.N. 20310
