229. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
WARDHA,
December 9, 1928
CHI. MAHADEV,
I got your letter. I have no doubt that your experience will
prove very useful. I have some share in Mrityunjaya's foolishness.
He asked me whether he could write to me to inquire if he
would get an agency in case some newspaper reporters accompanied
me. I thought there was no harm. I had never expected such a
long business letter. How can I protest now that this is too
sharp a thrust?
Trivedi had sent to me, about a month ago, the original of
the extract he has sent to you. I have preserved it for use on
an appropriate occasion.
I have gone through the portion about the spinning-wheel
in R. B.'s speech. I will make use of it.
It would be surprising if Vallabhbhai did not do what he
asked others to do. He is out to win swaraj through Bardoli,
and he can succeed in that only if he identifies himself completely
with the cause. Tell him that before asking you to learn riding
he himself should do that. He is not too old for it.
My health is fairly good. In my experiment, which I am
carrying on with great caution, I have now included milk of
almond and fruits. Your forgetting to send the wire to Karsandas
is certainly unpardonable. I had to suffer much for your lapse.
Karsandas was in extreme distress. Surajbehn did not receive help
when she needed it urgently. But I have always forgiven even
unpardonable lapses by you. Hence I forgive this too. Please do
not make such a mistake again. In future, even if such a
task is entrusted by me, you may tell me that you would be
happier not to be burdened with it when you had come to
spend only a day or two with me. I remember now that there
was no one in the verandah at that time except you, and so I
placed the wire in your hand. But do not grieve over the matter
now. I have dwelt on it at this length only in order that you
may be careful in future. You had also forgotten to give my
message to Shantikumar, but that was about a small matter.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11440
