175. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
March 28, 1928
MY DEAR C. R.,
I have your letter about the proposed European visit. I have
myself no heart in it, nor have I any confidence in myself about
making it successful; but an interview with Rolland still remains
an attraction. All the reputation I enjoy in the West is borrowed
from him and I feel that if I meet him face to face, there may be
disillusionment on many points. It may be that we should come
closer than we ever were. I do attach considerable importance to
our knowing each other much better than we do.
I quite agree with you that there is nothing to gain from the
health point of view. I might possibly suffer, and health is no
consideration whatsoever in the proposed trip. From that point of
view any hill station in India would be infinitely superior for me.
I feel also with you that the withdrawal of my presence is
likely to unsettle things a bit especially in Bardoli. Foreign cloth
boycott can certainly make no headway during my absence. But
now that you are all gathering together at Calcutta, I would like
you to discuss the proposed visit at the Council meeting. I am most
anxious that I should not become exclusive and should be humble
enough to arrive at truth no matter from what source it comes.
I am sorry about the defalcations, but I shall accept your
warning not to disturb myself or discuss them.
I understand what you say about Ramachandran. I want
you to write him a warm letter and go out of your way to draw
him towards you. He is a kind of 'Chetty' also, for he did won-
derfully well in the way of khadi at Jamia.
I must not forget one thing, though, about your reference to
the defalcations. If the defaulter gives you Rs. 500 and tenders
an apology for publication, you should be entirely satisfied. But
this is an unconsidered opinion of a layman.
What do you say to my exploit in conducting an exclusively
milk experiment? I do not want to be told you swooned at my
saying it is a literally milk-and-water experiment.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 13123
