188. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
November 27, 1941
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
It is not necessary to give Jaggery to everyone. Some of the
guests sitting by my side sometimes take jaggery and sometimes
do not. Two children invariably take it. It could be offered to other
children also. It is not common practice to offer jaggery. Out-
siders have complained that a lot of sweets are served here and the
criticism is correct. This may lead to some dissatisfaction; but you
should face it and give your explanation. Starch and jaggery have
the same food value; but the processes of their digestion are different.
Starch has yet to be converted into jaggery.
Twig brushes can be cut only from babul or neem trees. It is
undoubtedly theft to cut them from trees not belonging to us. We
must get them from trees earmarked for us. Tell this to B[alvant-
sinha] and select a tree or two. Thorns may be used as fuel or put
to some [other] use.
Govindrao does not have the strength. He is not idle, he is
weak. If a man dare not touch a scorpion, even though each of us
can lift it with our hands, how can he be compelled to do so?
Govindrao is afraid of contracting leprosy. This fear is not peculiar
to him; many people have it. This work, it is quite obvious, can
be allotted only to a willing worker.
Cleaning of latrines should be completed before meals. If that
is not possible, let it be done at 2 in the afternoon. This should be
decided by common consent and from the point of view of hygiene.
Efforts are made to give advance intimation about guests. Lan-
terns may be bought if necessary. I do try to reduce to the mini-
mum the number of people staying here.
The contact with cities is inevitable. We have to watch
whether we earn in the cities or merely help in enabling the cities to
exploit the villages. Yes, we should try to reduce to the minimum
contact with cities.
We have to create love for physical labour. The difficulty is
that guests outnumber regular inmates in the Ashram. How can the
guests be expected to labour? Make a list of the regular inmates and
you will be surprised to see how few we are.
119
I understand the reason for your not coming to me.
Do whatever is proper in respect of jawar. I do not like that
question.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4406
