37. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
SEGAON, WARDHA,
August 10, 1937
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I got your long letter. I will see how the problem can be
solved. When we lack either time or space, we have to leave
some things aside even though they may be important.
Please tell Vimu that in her letter to me she was unwilling
to promise 25,000 rounds in the spinning yajna and had asked my
advice. But in the printed list of names with me, I see 51,000
against her name. Is 51 a misprint for 15? If it is not, how did
she get the courage to raise 25,000 to twice as much, or to treble
the 17,000 which she had intended? If she had the courage to do
that, why couldn't she quadruple 17,000 and make it 68,000? If
"scoffer-friends" then looked upon her as an idolator, she should
pay no attention to them. On the contrary, she should welcome
their blessings. Spinning 68,000 rounds in 68 days would be no
great achievement for a girl like Vimu. According to the calcula-
tions here, 1,000 rounds a day would require less than three
hours, for the average speed is taken to be 400 rounds an hour.
Even if, however, the work takes four hours, I wouldn't regard
that as too strenuous for her. Moreover, anyone who does this
job with zest and enthusiasm would learn to get absorbed in the
work on hand and automatically acquire the ability to do a
great many other things.
Narandas is hesitating to undertake the preparation of the
manual [of the science of khadi] though there is not the slightest
reason for such hesitation. If, however, you join him in preparing
the booklet, I think it can immediately be done. Anyone who has
complete mastery of most of the processes will find it easy to give
a methodical description of them and of the equipment required.
If you have not read any literature on the history of the subject,
you should read it up. If at least one booklet, covering all aspects
of the subject, is brought out systematically, it would be easy to do
further work in the field in future. Think over this . . .1
It was good indeed that you came and stayed here, though
it was but for a few days. If you can plan a ten to fifteen
days' programme for Rameshwari Devi, counting from the day
of her arrival, I think that would be more than enough. You
will be able to use her services to get a lot of Harijan and khadi
work done. She is a very capable, mature, thoughtful and
experienced lady, and is full of noble aspirations. You of course
have seen her here.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5543
