253. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
BELGAUM,
March 5, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI,
I got your postcard on my arrival here last evening. I find
it difficult to guide you or anybody else, for my mind is still in
Yeravda. I take interest in things outside only in connection with
Harijan work. I also feel that all of you should act as you wish.
Wasn't our last decision to the effect that everybody should act on
his own responsibility and according to his own inclination? Isn't
this the only way in which everybody would be tested? Neverthe-
less, I realize that I am in duty bound to advise a person like
you. I advise according to my lights anybody who consults me.
I am as eager to see you as you are to see me. But I suppress
my wish. My immediate reaction is that you should go to
Wardha, and observe things there. I shall be passing through it
on the 10th. You can join me a few stations before Wardha or
at Wardha and travel with me for a few stations beyond it, and
discuss your problems with me. Stay at Wardha and have some
experience of the work there. If you don't like this plan, you may
stay in Borivli. I would not advise you to go to Ahmedabad.
There are few places there where you can stay. The Red
Bungalow must be avoided. Nor can you stay in the Harijan
Ashram.
Thus Wardha is the only place where you can live
peacefully.
I understand what you say regarding your study. Reading
books is not enough. You should reflect over them. For that
you should read some of them over again. If you wish I would
make another list and send it to you. You should also study a
book on grammar. The Gujarati Vanchanmala series also is not bad.
Probably you will wonder why I don't call you to Patna.
Just now the conditions are very difficult there. I don't even
know what kind of accommodation we might get. People have
no peace of mind at all. There are fears of more tremors still.
In such conditions, I don't feel inclined to ask anybody to come
there to see me. But I shall be able to write to you more after
reaching Patna.
Durga is coming here today to see Mahadev. Probably she
also wants to take this opportunity to see me. It was only yester-
day that I came to know about her coming. Dahyabhai and
Chandubhai of Broach also are coming. I really feel how pleasant
it would have been if you had come, too, along with them. Per-
haps I shall find that you have indeed come. I am writing this
early in the morning after the prayer. My health is excellent.
From here we go to Nipani on Wednesday, thence to Bijapur and
then take a train to Hyderabad.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Where is Gangabehn? If she is there, please tell her that
she had promised to write to me again but has not done so.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9383. Also C.W. 628.
Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit
