59. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Sunday night [August 20, 1911]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Let me give you the pleasant news that after all the boring has
been successful - 80,000 gallons in 24 hours ! In reply to the note
I sent to the Irrigation Department, the Engineer whom you have met,
came down. Only he came down simply to inspect a very successful
well. He, however, discussed the whole thing fully with me. Acting
1 Gopal Krishna Gokhale (1866-1915); Indian statesman; President, Indian
National Congress, 1905; founded the Servants of India Society, 1905; member,
Bombay Legislature and Viceroy's Legislative Council, 1902-15
upon his advice we are now boring at the other end—the spot marked
by you. Boring there commenced on Friday. The dismantling and fixing
was done on Thursday. At my suggestion the engine was worked night
and day after water was found, in order to see the capacity of the
well apart from the test. In your name I have given Logan 10/- as
a treat for the success of their efforts. The second hole stands at 16
feet. It is very hard ground.
The holes for fencing continue. But I am obliged to use the native
boy at times for work connected [with] the boring also. Naidoo is not
on the Farm. He has not left altogether but will do so shortly. So I
shall be the only adult member of the family apart from Albrecht.
Amies has asked for a cheque for the keys. I am therefore sending
him [a] cheque without waiting for your answer.
I must not forget to tell you that the Engineer advised me to wait
for the windmill till after your return. And this I shall probably do, unless
for the sake of the Farm I find it necessary to fix up something.
The family continues to remain happy. Mrs. Gandhi has evidently
benefited very greatly by the Sodha incident. She is very nice and tactful.
The boys still continue to be saltless except on Sundays. But they are,
so it appears to me, more and more finding it out for themselves that
no-salt diet is better. Medh continues saltless. Pragji too is trying it.
The native inmates are behaving well. The school is flourishing.
I am still absorbed in it. It has never yet been interrupted. Ramdas
is getting [on] and so is Devdas and so are they all. I have not yet
worried the boys to write to you.
I fear that Miss Schlesin has not kept her promise to give you
a full weekly report. I hope to get out the balance tomorrow and send
it to you.
Today we had a host of visitors all brought by our foreman the
Indian carpenter. Isaac too graced the Farm by his presence. Gordon
has not met me at all since. Lapin wrote thanking me for sending I.O.
containing you. He said he was much interested in the account of
"our mutual friend". Hosken sent his regrets that he could not see
you off.
Have not seen or heard of Kennedy.
I think I have told you that I have offered to take and nurse Call
here if he could be brought. The Doctor has suggested that he could
not be kept very long at Pilgrims' Rest. Douglas told me he was going
there himself to see Call. I have also offered on your as also my behalf
to contribute towards any expenses that might be incurred in bringing
and keeping Call.
I have no time to give you translation of verses from the book 1
I alluded to, and which I have now got. I may do so next week.
Please remember me to your sister and the other relations. I am
looking forward to your description of their opinion of you and of your
opinion of Dr. Mehta.
And now good night.
All love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
