58. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
June 4, 1934
'Civil resistance' is a wider term, and also indicative of res-
pect. Civil disobedience is not necessarily an accurate expression
of the attitude indicated in 'civil resistance'.
'Civil disobe-
dience' may also indicate an attitude of the mind. The term
'civil disobedience' was first used by Thoreau. I didn't like it
because it didn't suggest all that I had in mind.
Looking for
a new phrase, I fixed upon 'civil resistance'.
The current
phrase was 'passive resistance'.
But my way of resistance or
the force which I had in mind was not passive.
It was active,
but 'active' might also mean violent. The word 'civil' suggests
nothing but non-violence. I, therefore, joined it with 'resis-
tance' .
The pledge taken at the start of the Dandi March certainly
did not mean that I would remain in jail till swaraj was won.
Nor is it always in our hands to be in jail.
If the Yeravda Pact required a change in the Award by the
Government, it also required the people to discharge their debt
to Harijans. Because the Government was aware of this condi-
tion, it was by implication bound to give me facilities for ful-
filling it. The Government had accepted a similar argument
during my first term of imprisonment and given me the neces-
sary concession. This correspondence has been published. How
can they go back on it now?
I have had no hand in Jamnalalji's appointment.
But I
approve of it. The post of secretary was not filled because one
secretary is out. If nobody was available, even that post would
have had to be filled. There is no principle involved in such
matters, the only criterion being propriety. What is wrong in
the same person being President and Treasurer?
What you say concerning the Parliamentary Board is cor-
rect. The priest ministers at the wedding, but cannot help the
partners to run their home. If we let ourselves be seen as we
are some day we shall become what we ought to be.
Now nothing till the 14th 1. However, if there is anything
special I will write or ask somebody to write.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 146-
