328. LETTER TO SURENDRA
April 4, 1932
I did get your letter in which you wrote about brahmacharya.
We shall certainly discuss the subject when we meet. The views
which I had expressed at Imam Saheb's place have become strong-
er and are becoming stronger still. That is, I find their truth
being proved by experience.
That alone is true brahmacharya
which remains inviolate at all times and in all conditions. It is
extremely difficult to cultivate such a state. But that should not
be surprising. We owe our birth to lust, and love our body
which is the fruit of lust. It cannot but be difficult to get rid of
this heritage of lust. However, when we realize that the body is
the abode of the priceless atman, our brahmacharya would remain
inviolate even if Rambha came down from heaven and embraced
us. To everybody, his mother is as beautiful as Rambha, and the
thought of this Mother Rambha banishes impure thoughts from his
mind. In like manner, the thought of any woman should banish
impure thoughts from one's mind. Need I go on? Reflect over
this again and again and understand all its implications.
If somebody is pleased by your punishing yourself 1 it is not
correct to describe that as the effect of ahimsa. But the matter is
not important. As your faith becomes stronger, your reason will
develop. The Gita seems to tell us that God Himself gives us the
light of reason. Our duty is to strengthen our faith. It is, of course,
necessary to understand the meaning of faith and reason in this
context. We cannot understand them through verbal definitions,
but can do so only through true humility. He who believes that
he knows, knows nothing. But he who believes that he knows no-
thing, acquires knowledge at the right time. Even God cannot
pour Ganga water into a pot that is full. We should, therefore, al-
ways stand before God with empty hands. Our vow of non-posses-
sion means the same thing. But I must stop here. You may write
to me whenever you wish. They will give your letters to me.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, p. 70
