16. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 23/24, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I was relieved to get your postcard. You must have received
the letter which I wrote to you yesterday. Narmada came and
saw me yesterday. She seemed to be a very good girl. She is
very eager to work. I have asked her to come again with
Lakshmibehn.
I will be very glad if the doctor fulfils our expectations of him.
N. has arrived here with her son. At present she seems to
be carrying out all my instructions with wonderful promptness.
If you have not written and communicated your decision before
you get this letter, and if you have arrived at a decision now, send
me a wire. If you have not consulted the others, please do so.
If you have copies of the Ashram rules, send a copy each in
whatever languages you have them. If you remember the circum-
stances in which Godavari and Pandurang Choudhari had to
leave, let me know. Prema is likely to know more about Godavari.
April 24, 1933
During a discussion among us about N., Chhaganlal ex-
pressed a view against her being admitted. I, therefore, asked
him to write down his view and also to say what precautions should
be taken if she was admitted. I have just read his note after
finishing the other letters. If you decide to take her in, we cannot
put on her the restrictions which Chhaganlal suggests. They will
not be for her good or that of the Ashram. We must utilize her
abilities in whatever way we can, conforming to Ashram disci-
pline. We should not send a new entrant outside the Ashram for
work. But I would certainly put Harijan children in her hands.
We should admit her, assuming that she has turned a new leaf in
her life, otherwise we ought not to take her in at all. But I
should like to explain this point at greater length. If your con-
sent is received, I will certainly send all necessary instructions.
It will be enough for the present if you understand that she is not
to be admitted as a sinner.
BAPU
[PS.]
Mahadev's opinion also is enclosed.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
