384. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
Unrevised
October 8, 1928
MY DEAR SATIS BABU,
I am fatigued and overworked. Arrears are increasing and
they worry me. Hence the delay in replying.
I was working out a solution for Hemprabha Devi and
Tarini. Meanwhile came your letter about their disposal. I was
unwilling to have them in the Ashram. For I knew that it did not
suit her last time. And I could not hit upon another place. Tarini
was none too happy in Wardha. Some place must be thought out
in or near Bengal. I am no further forward even now.
How happy I should feel if they could go to Comilla. I expect
you to conquer Abhoy Ashram even though the Pratishthan has
to suffer or to die. Only, the death or the suffering must be con-
scious and voluntary, not mechanical and forced. This reflection
arises out of your remarks about Utkal. So far as I can see,
various organizations will come into being as khadi progresses. It is
a condition of its growth. But the central or chief provincial orga-
nization has so to shape its course that by force of character and
ability, it commands attention and respect. One difficulty with the
Pratishthan is that it has not many self-sacrificing volunteers. This
is due to your own upbringing. Your own personal sacrifice was
phenomenal and so you carried few with you from the environ-
ment that you had created in the chemical works. Your sudden
change of life had to take root and grow into a big tree before
it could cover saplings. That you have only now begun to do. I
remember the conversation we had in Atrai, how you dispensed
with volunteers and got paid men and made of the famine work a
success. If your upbringing had been otherwise, you would have
made of the work a success with the volunteers. Success of ahimsa
depends upon the successful organization of voluntary workers.
And khadi is an attempt at working out ahimsa on a fairly large
scale. We will succeed if we have patience and tapasya enough.
I hope my meaning is clear. This letter must not put you
out or dishearten you. I want it to brace you for the future diffi-
culties. My letter is intended to be a stimulant. When I began
1 The source has "but".
it, I had no notion of the length it would run to or what it was
to contain.
Let Utkal be a lesson that Dr. Ray should not be taken for
any fixed programme. It is really too much to expect him to go
through a sustained effort in khadi. He has too many irons in the
fire, too many calls upon his time and he is now not a youth.
The marvel is that he is still available for tours, etc.
Why not Giridih again for Hemprabha Devi and Tarini?
You must send them to a salubrious climate.
With love,
From a microfilm: S.N. 13701
