272. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO LORD CREWE
[LONDON,]
September 18, 1909
SIR,
The following cablegrams have been received from Johannesburg;
the first from the Chinese Association and the second from the British
Indian Association:
1ST CABLEGRAM
JOHANNESBURG,
September 16, 1909
Eighty Chinese arrested, including Chairman. Increasingly determined passively
resist utmost.
CHINESE ASSOCIATION
2ND CABLEGRAM
JOHANNESBURG,
September 16, 1909
Meeting held yesterday enthusiastic, determined continue, resolutions congratu-
lating released, reaffirming complete confidence delegates, efforts greatly appre-
ciated, afresh pledging their support, protesting Vernon's statement which until
Government repudiate Asiatics interpret disclosure Government policy. Request
imprisoned Mohammedans special meal Ramzan refused.
In the humble opinion of my colleague and myself, these cable-
grams show that the British Indian community, as also evidently the
Chinese community, in the Transvaal are determined in their opposi-
tion. I may state that, if the number of arrests sent by the Chinese Asso-
ciation be not a cable mistake, it is for the first time that the Govern-
ment have seen fit to arrest such a large number of the Chinese. In the
course of the campaign, I cannot recall, even in the Indian community,
so many as eighty Indians arrested in a single place at the same time.
The cablegrams, however, make it clear that the measures adopted by
the Government, instead of weakening Asiatics, have nerved them.
Non-repudiation by the Government of the statement made by
Mr. Vernon, and referred to in my letter of the 10th September, to the
effect that it was the duty of white men to hound Asiatics out of the
country, is, I am sure the Earl of Crewe will agree, somewhat un-
fortunate, as is also the refusal of the request of Muslim prisoners for
special facilities as to their meals, for religious observance of the fasting
month. I venture to draw Lord Crewe's attention to the fact that when
last year I was serving imprisonment at Volksrust, I noticed that,
during the fasting month, special facilities were given to my fellow pri-
soners who were Muslims.
Will you kindly place this letter before His Lordship?
I remain, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 291/142; also, from a photostat of the typewritten
office copy: S. N. 5082
