168. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]
Tuesday [April 7, 1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You will remember the following in the 2nd Chapter of the Song
Celestial: "Anger leads to madness which brings on loss of memory.
Then the intellect becomes weakened till at last the man himself is
undone." Why did you give vent to anger? Manilal describes the apple
incident. Was that the cause? He says he retorted and was sorry.
Anyway your early rising must be for the sake of control of passions.
It is obvious we both fasted practically the same day. For me it
was the nativity of Rama. And I had decided in Cape Town that
as we laid so much stress on Ramayana, I would fast that day and
then I further decided to fast every eleventh day of the two halves
of the month as I used to before . There is no fixed limit for this,
1 Vide Vol. XII, p. 407.
2 ibid., p. 408.
178
so that I fasted on Saturday and then again on Monday. Hence I was
up this morning at 2 a.m. Manilal's was the first letter I wrote and
yours is the second. You know how little sleep I need when I am
fasting.
I have made a very drastic change here which I am asking
Jamnadas to describe in his letter to Manilal. He will do so and Manilal
must give it to you. Here I would only say that I took a vow on Sunday
that I would restrict myself to one helping only whilst at Phoenix. I
should endeavour to carry it out elsewhere also.
Mrs. Gandhi is lingering. She is taking a little food now but it is
next to nothing. At this rate she can't live many months if that. Yet
who knows?
Please return the inscription I sent you. I shall have it rewritten
in bold letter.
I see here a bag containing your papers. It has some letters from
Mrs. Mayo1, etc. I thought I would search there for your Standerton
papers but my search was vain. I cannot get over the loss of those
papers. I cannot reconcile myself to the idea of their having been
deliberately stolen. If they are not mislaid, they must have been lost
by you owing to your usual habit of rushing. I do not ask questions
but I have a vague fear that even now you are rushing and spending
money in what to me would be idle speculation. But it is as well I
am not with you. Let your progress go along your own line. How long
could I reason? Only think, think and think forty times before you do
anything at all. Haste is waste. 'Hasten slowly' was Lord John Russell's
motto.
And you seem to me to have been hasty in judging Andrews. I
fancy that I know him better. Anyway, he does not consider every
Indian to be a saint. Nor is he like Hearn. Hearn began by loving
the Japs, Andrews began by suspecting Indians. Remember he came
avowedly as a missionary to convert. But this is enough. I cannot begin
another sheet and must write other letters.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Mrs. Isabella Fyvie Mayo
2 Gandhiji had been arrested on Standerton Road on November 8, 1913 during
the third and last satyagraha campaign before he left for India; vide Vol. XII,
pp. 261 and 517-.
3 For similar references by Gandhiji to illustrate his point, vide Vol. XI, p. 196.
4 Lafcadio Hearn, British journalist, author of several works on Japan, who
married a Japanese woman and became a Japanese citizen
