318. LETTER TO MEMBERS OF ASIATIC CONFERENCE
JOHANNESBURG,
[Before November 18, 1910]
DEAR SIR,
I take the liberty of addressing you as one of the members of the
Asiatic Conference that took place in August, 1908, and at which you
were present.
You may have noticed from the papers that the Asiatic Depart-
ment have interpreted the Asiatic Act of 1908, which was partly a
result of that Conference, that Asiatic minors, sons of registered Asiatics,
1 In his letter of October 24, 1910, reproduced along with Smuts' reply dated
12-11-1910 in Indian Opinion, 19-11-1910.
2 The reference is to a Reuter report dated 14-11-1910, reproduced in Indian
Opinion, 19-11-1910.
3 This, along with the following item, was published in The Star, 19-11-1910,
under the title, "The Chhotabhai Case".
not born in the Transvaal or resident in the Province at the com-
mencement of the Act, are liable of necessity on reaching the age of
16 years to expulsion, notwithstanding their willingness to apply for
registration under the Act, and notwithstanding the fact that the names
of these minors appear on the registration certificates of the fathers.
An actual case has arisen in respect of the son of Mr. A. E. Chhota-
bhai, a prominent Indian merchant of Krugersdorp. The boy, whose
name is inscribed upon his father's registration certificate, on attaining
the age of 16 years, applied for registration under the Act; he entered
the Colony as a minor with his father, and with the knowledge and
consent of the authorities, as he had a legal right to do under the
Immigrants' Restriction Act. His application was rejected by the
Registrar. He appealed to the Magistrate, who upheld the Registrar's
decision, and ordered his immediate removal from the Province, which
was suspended, pending proceedings in the Supreme Court. The mat-
ter went before Mr. Justice Wessels in Chambers, who characterized
the action of the Government as "inhuman" and said "that when
known it would create a howl throughout the civilized world", but
the learned judge decided that the Act did not provide for the registra-
tion of such boys, and he therefore reluctantly dismissed the application.
The motion went in appeal before the full bench, which by a majority
upheld Mr. Justice Wessels' decision. Notice of further appeal to the
Appellate Court has therefore been lodged; the matter is accordingly
still sub judice.
But I wish, however, to draw your attention to the following re-
markable results of the proceedings. The judges have decided that the
Act of 1907 is virtually repealed by the later Act, and that whilst Asia-
tic minors, in the position of Mr. Chhotabhai's son, might be protected
under the Act of 1907, that protection has been withdrawn by the Act
of 1908. Mr. Justice Mason, who delivered a dissentient judgment in
favour of the applicant, has also held that the boy cannot be protected
under the Act of 1908, but that provisions regarding minors under the
Act of 1907 are not repealed. Besides this, Mr. Justice Mason and
Mr. Justice Bristowe have condemned the Government's action, as also
the Acts themselves, in somewhat scathing terms.
I have no doubt you will recollect the very lively discussion that
took place between several members of the Conference and Mr. Quinn
and myself, regarding the proposed repeal of Act 2 of 1907, but General
Smuts declined to consider the question of repeal. You will recollect
too the discussion that took place with reference to minors, who were
to be protected, no matter where born, by their names being inscribed
upon their father's registration certificate. There never was a question
1 Vide the preceding item.
of giving up any substantial rights already possessed under Act 2 of
1907.
I may be permitted further to add that: (1) General Smuts, at the
time of introducing the new measure into the Assembly, never stated
that it was calculated to deprive any class of minors of the right of
residence in the Colony; (2) Mr. de Villiers as Attorney-General, in his
minute to the Governor, stated that, among others, the Asiatic demand
regarding the registration of minors was conceded, and that both the
Acts were to run concurrently; (3) in no part of the British Dominions
are the children of lawfully resident Asiatics torn from parents at any
age, much less on reaching the tender age of 16 years. I venture to sub-
mit that you, as a member of the Conference, are concerned directly
with the results as to minor Asiatics being defeated by what must appear
to you, as it does to me, to be an entirely unexpected judgment of our
Courts.
I hope that I am right in suggesting that the honour of members
of the Conference is involved in the maintenance of the principles adop-
ted at the Conference, and I therefore trust that you will, if you can
do nothing more, publicly declare that you never contemplated a depri-
vation of the rights of minor Asiatics of the class referred to in this
letter.
A matter so important as this cannot, in my opinion, be left to be
decided by even the highest tribunal of justice, which according to our
Constitution, must be entirely unmoved by considerations, however
important in themselves, that may have led to the passing of certain
laws, and which is obliged to give effect to them, no matter how harshly
or morally indefensible these laws may be.
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 19-11-1910
1 Replies to this were received by Gandhiji from Albert Cartwright, Drummond
Chaplin, Opposition M. P. in the South African Union Parliament, and others,
who agreed that if the names of the minors "had previously been inscribed on their
father's certificate", their rights were automatically protected and that they were en-
titled to register on attaining the age of 16. The replies were forwarded by Ritch to
the Colonial Office on January 9, 1911.
