112. LETTER TO VAMANBUWA BRAHMACHARI
January 18, 1933
SHRI BRAHMACHARIJI,
Your letter. I can see you on the 25th instant at 2 o'clock
and shall reserve one hour for you. I shall not give this time to
anyone else. But according to my vow I regard it a duty to ans-
wer your doubts.
(1) I agree with all that you say in the first question but
there is the difference of interpretation which is almost impossible
to explain through correspondence. All human beings are like
blind men but all the devotees of truth are partially right in the
same way that the seven blind men were right on their part in
giving varying descriptions of the elephant on each touching
different parts of its anatomy.
(2) Untouchability as practised today is found nowhere in
the Shastras. This is the impression I have gathered on hearing
what many Shastris say.
(3) Everything can be found in the Gita. According to the
change of place, time and circumstances, conduct as prescribed
by the principle can change but never the principle itself.
(4) This too is a fact that we have degenerated and conti-
nue to do so because of failure in observing dharma.
(5) What you say is not true.
(6) In no way do I regard myself as more learned and wiser
than anyone else.
(7) I have never taken such a vow as you think I have.
(3) I do not appreciate the extreme rules of purification
and so on.
(9) The observation that things follow their natural bent
should be regarded as quite correct.
(10) Intermarriage and interdining have no connection with
untouchability. They are totally different; read what I have
said on this subject. Certain people, because of their hostile atti-
tude, grossly misinterpret it.
(11) The idea of founding a new religion has never occurred
to me even in a dream.
(12) It is perfectly right that the politics which does not
serve to protect dharma deserves to be wholly disregarded.
(13) I cannot either give up or take up fasting.
(14) What you say is almost correct.
(15) I have firm faith in the worthiness of the object for
which I am thinking of a 'referendum'.
(16) I hold courteous dialogue with whosoever wants to
talk to me, whether he is small or big. What more can I do?
Yours,
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 18956
