313. LETTER TO W. B. HEYCOCK
BETTIAH,
May 20, 1917
DEAR MR. HEYCOCK,
I have hitherto refrained from bringing to your notice state-
ments, which have continued to stream in, to the effect that the
raiyats are being prevented from coming in to me and that those who
have come in have been subjected to all kinds of pinpricks by the
kothi amlas and in some cases by the managers themselves. I have
discounted some of the statements. I have taken down a few. But
if what I have heard about the doings of the Belwa and the Dhok-
raha concerns is true, it is calculated to end on one side at least,
the friendly spirit in which the inquiry has hitherto been carried
on. I am most anxious to continue and to increase the friendly
spirit. I am straining every [nerve], so far as in me lies, to so con-
duct my mission that nothing but good-will should be left behind,
when its labours are finished. I send you the statements taken
regarding the Belwa and the Dhokraha concerns. If the statements
are true, they do not reflect any credit upon the concerns in ques-
tion. I enclose, too, my letter to Mr. Holttum which was written
before I heard of the fire and which was despatched before I took
the statements of the Dhokraha men last evening after 6.30 P .M.
I can understand and even appreciate the feelings which are
bound to fill those who are called upon to contemplate the prospect
of having to forego huge incomes which they have hitherto been
in the habit for a long time of receiving from their raiyats. One
cannot, therefore, mind any legitimate effort on their part to hold
on to what they have considered as their rights. But what is
reported to have happened at the Belwa and Dhokraha dehats
does not in my opinion fall under such a category.
It is a known fact that the desire of the planters generally is,
that my friends and I should not carry on our work. I can only
say that nothing but physical force from the Government or an
absolute guarantee that the admitted or provable wrongs of the
raiyats are to stop for ever, can possibly remove us from the District.
What I have seen of the conditions of the raiyats is sufficient to
convince me that if we withdrew at this stage, we would stand
condemned before man and God and, what is most important of
all, we would never be able to forgive ourselves.
But the mission is totally of peace. I cannot too often give
the assurance that I bear no ill-will against the planters. I have
been told that this is true of myself but that my friends are fired
with an anti-English feeling and that for them this is an anti-English
movement. I can only say that I do not know a body of men who
have less of that feeling than my friends. I was not prepared for
this pleasant revelation. I was prepared for some degree of ill-will.
I would have held it excusable. I do not know that I have not been
guilty of it myself under circumstances which have appeared to me
most provoking. But if I found that any of my associates were, in
the conduct of this mission, actuated by any ill-will at all, I should
disassociate myself entirely from them and insist upon their leaving
the mission. At the same time, the determination to secure a free-
dom for the raiyats from the yoke that is wearing them down is
inflexible.
Cannot the Government secure that freedom? This is a
natural exclamation. My answer is that they cannot, in cases like
this, without such assistance as is afforded to them by my mission.
The Government machinery is designedly slow. It moves, must
move, along the line of least resistance. Reformers like myself, who
have no other axe to grind but that of reform they are handling for
the time being, specialize and create a force which the Govern-
ment must reckon with. Reformers may go wrong by being over-
zealous, indiscreet or indolent and ignorant. The Government may
go wrong by being impatient of them or over-confident of their
ability to do without them. I hope, in this case, neither catas-
trophe will take place and the grievances, which I have already
submitted and which are mostly admitted, will be effectively re-
dressed. Then the planters will have no cause to fear or suspect
the mission of which I have the honour to be in charge and they
will gladly accept the assistance of volunteers who will carry on the
work of education and sanitation among the villagers and act as
links between them and the raiyats.
Pray, excuse the length of this letter as also its argumentative
character. I could not avoid it, if I was to place my true position
before you. In bringing the two matters which have necessitated
this communication, I have no desire to seek legal relief. But I
ask you to use such administrative influence as you can to preserve
the friendly spirit which has hitherto prevailed between the kothis
and my friends and myself.
I do not wish to suggest that the kothis in question are res-
ponsible for the fire. That is the suspicion of some of the raiyats.
I have talked to hundreds of them about the two fires. They say
that the raiyats are not responsible for them, that they have no con-
nection with the mission. I readily accept this repudiation because
we are incessantly telling the raiyats that this is not a mission of
violence or reprisals and that any such thing on their part can
only delay relief. But if the kothis may not be held responsible
for them, they may not seek to establish a connection between
them and the mission. Fires have taken place before now, and,
mission or no mission, they will take place for ever. Neither party
may blame the other without the clearest possible proofs.
There is talk, too, about the lives of the planters being in danger.
Surely this cannot be serious talk. Anyway, the mission cannot
render them less safe than they are. The character of the mission
is wholly against any such activity. It is designed to seek relief by
self- suffering, never by doing violence to the supposed or real wrong-
doer. And this lesson has been inculcated among the raiyats in
season and out of season.
Lastly, there is, I fear, ample proof of intimidation such as is
described in the statements thereto attached. Intimidation can
only mean more trouble all round without meaning the slightest
relief to the planters in the shape of retention of the present system.
I seek such help as you can vouchsafe in the circumstances I
have ventured to place before you.
I am sending a copy to Mr. Lewis.
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From the original typewritten copy signed by Gandhiji in the National
Archives of India; also Select Documents on Mahatma Gandhi's Movement in Champaran,
No. 84, pp. 144-
