38. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
BANGALORE,
Jeth Vad 7 [June 21, 1927]
BHAISHRI BHANSALI,
I liked your letter very much because you had opened your
heart in it. Manibehn has today given me the news that your
seven-day fast is progressing well. A seven-day fast is child's play
for you. I had not, therefore, felt worried over it at all. But I
see an error in the argument you have advanced about the reason
for the fast. The best thing is not to do a thing about doing which
we have a doubt. If we have started doing a thing, and then we
get a doubt about it, true expiation consists in abandoning it that
very moment. Any other atonement which excludes this is useless.
If your demand for a new house was wrong, you cannot atone
for that error by means of a fast. If you see no error in that
demand, atonement is not called for at all. If you have even the
slightest doubt about having committed an error, to seek to
cover it up by means of a fast amounts to committing a second
error, because by undertaking a fast we banish the thought of
error from our mind and we ought not to do this. Expiation such
as fasting is a form of self-punishment and punishment can be
only for a thing which we cannot undo. If we abuse someone
or beat him, we cannot take back the abuse or the beating. We
may, therefore, inflict on ourselves punishment like a fast; such
punishment brings about self-purification, and also restrains us
from making a similar mistake again. But suppose that we have
stolen someone's money. At the time of doing so, we felt that
there was nothing wrong in it but later on we got a doubt about
what we had done and felt afraid lest we had done a wrong;
then, at that very moment, we ought to return the money to the
owner and thereafter, if we so wish, we may undergo self-
punishment such as a fast. Returning the money is like returning
a loan and hence that does not amount even to punishment. You
may perhaps argue why you should return the goods so long as
you are not sure that stealing is bad, and tell yourself that you
will return them when you decide that it is indeed bad. Many
sins are, and have been committed in the world through such rea-
soning. Being moral requires that wherever there is a doubt, we
should decide against our own interest. But we may go a step
further and suppose that, so long as we have a doubt about
stealing being wrong, we shall also have a doubt about the desi-
rability of returning the money. Even then, in such circumstan-
ces a fast certainly is not a means of resolving such a doubt. On
the contrary, the fast may prove an obstacle in our effort to dis-
cover the truth.
Here I have only analysed the ethical principle for your bene-
fit. I myself have no doubt whatever in your case. You had a
right to ask for a roomier house in a quiet part, for the inmates
of the Ashram regard your living in the Ashram as conducive to
its progress. The best place for the experiments which you have
been making is the Ashram, and such experiments are an in-
separable part of its life. Hence any facilities which you consider
necessary for those experiments and which others accept as
necessary should be provided to you if the financial condition of
the Ashram permits them, and it is because this was the position
that a house has been got ready for you. Moreover, if hereafter
it is felt that such an arrangement ought not to have been made,
you can move into another small house that may be vacant. On
that score, too, we need have no fear. Moreover, Lilabehn may
get more accustomed to the conditions there and come to like
living in simplicity, and you may become so detached that the
atmosphere round you will not affect you at all; then you your-
self will decide to leave that house and ask for another. And if I
see that you or Lilabehn has become weak, I shall not, as an
elder and guardian, hesitate to speak to you about it. If I shrink
from doing so, I shall fall from my dharma. Thus you are safe
in every way. I could have explained all this in my reply to
your very first letter. It even occurred to me to do so. But I did
not think it advisable to do that and stop your fast abruptly. I
was also afraid that I might shock you by advancing such an
argument when you were about to start your fast. Hence I de-
ferred writing this. Now you are in a position to appreciate my
argument objectively, since the fast is now out of the way. There
is a sound reason behind my plea. If you remain complacent be-
cause of the fast and believe that there is no reason now to feel
doubtful about the propriety of having put up a new building,
that would not be right. The truth is that it is our duty to feel
doubtful about the propriety of everyone of our indulgences,
and it is complacency to feel no such doubt. If we do not feel
doubtful in this manner, we shall never be able to practise com-
plete renunciation. Hence this caution. I have also something
to say about the other portions of your letter, but this is enough
for the present. I shall attend to those portions when I have
the time. The matter is certainly not urgent.
Please have no hesitation in writing to me whatever you wish.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12194
