5. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
Silence Day, February 4, 1929
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
I hope you got the two letters I wrote to you during the
journey. A postcard, too, is a letter.
The portions concerning women in the accompanying letters
—to Kishorelal and to the [Ashram] women—are of general inte-
rest; therefore show them to all. You should read all letters en-
closed in an envelope addressed to you. When any such letter is
not meant to be read by you, I shall write the word "personal"
on it. You should spare sufficient time from your daily work for
general supervision over everything. Think in advance of the
time which each matter is likely to require, and try your best to
finish it within that time. Keep a note of things to be attended to
later and make it a habit to consult this note every day. Such a
practice lightens the burden on one's memory. No one can carry in
his memory all matters to be attended to.
I shall return there a day later. The programme here got up-
set and, owing to Monday being a silence day, alternative arrange-
ments could not be made except by extending the programme by
a day.
Make your body strong as a rock; this is possible. You should
take more milk and ghee. If oil agrees with you, I am not parti-
cular about ghee. If your stomach can digest almonds, I think
you will need no ghee at all. But you may make that experiment
after I return there.
You yourself should take charge of Vimu and Dhiru or
Rama should learn how to bring them up. They are fine chil-
dren, and only require proper attention.
I am writing all the letters for today in the early morning.
The post is cleared early and, since I chanced to get up at three,
I sat down to write letters. Compared to the temperature there,
it is less cold here. People say that the weather has changed since
yesterday.
I experienced no difficulty in travelling third class. For half
of the way there were very few passengers in the train. Every-
one had enough space to sleep during the night. The only diffi-
culty was about the lavatory. We, therefore, bought a second-class
ticket for the professor from Abu to Hyderabad, and he and Sub-
biah went and sat in that compartment by turns. This enabled
the latter to do his typing work and the articles for Young India to
be typed and dispatched. We saved nearly fifty rupees by travel-
ling in this fashion, apart from the greater peace which I en-
joyed. I could see that people liked my having resumed third-
class travelling.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5383
1 & 2 Addressee's daughter and son
3 Addressee's wife
4 Gandhiji's secretary
