36. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY, NATAL
14 MERCURY LANE,
DURBAN,
May 18, 1899
MR. C. BIRD
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PIETERMARITZBURG
SIR,
With some diffidence I venture to draw your attention here-
by to some aspects of the Bill to amend Indian Immigration Law,
now before the Legislative Assembly.
I understand the Bill has been drafted in reply to the com-
plaint of the Indian Immigration Trust Board as to the alleged
frequency of the complaints made by the indentured Indians,
which are said to be used as a pretext by the complainants to
leave their work.
The Bill proposes to remedy the alleged evil—
(1) by making it lawful for the Protector, the Assistant Pro-
tector or any Magistrate to cause any complainant to be sent back
after he has lodged his complaint;
1 Vide "Memorial to Secretary of State for Colonies", pp. 72-.
(2) by authorizing the employer under certain circumstances
to deduct the expenses of the safe return of the complainant;
(3) by making the complainant under those certain circum-
stances liable to be punished as if he was illegally absent.
With deference, it is submitted that this Bill would render
more difficult the precarious position of men serving under inden-
tured labour which has been acknowledged, by the Imperial
Government, to be a necessary evil and by those best acquainted
with such form of labour, to be "semi-slavery" or "a state perilously
near to slavery".
In my humble opinion, the existing law coupled with the
decision of the Supreme Court in the matter of Ramsamy and
the Protector of Indian Immigrants is sufficient to meet the
requirements of the employers, if it does not, indeed, act as a
deterrent even against bona-fide complaints. No law will be,
can be, sufficient for those who would not work and would rather
'rot' in the gaol than do honest work. If, however, the Govern-
ment consider it necessary to conciliate the employers and make
the existing law more explicit, I feel that nothing need be said
from the Indian standpoint against the proposed amendment so
far as the first two alterations are concerned. But I venture to
submit that the last clause, viz., the power to charge a complain-
ant with illegal absence when, rightly or wrongly, he fancies
he can leave his work with immunity in order to make a com-
plaint, is uncalled for and is calculated to interfere with the right,
reserved under the Law 25 of 1891, to leave his work for the
sake of making his complaint. An Indian may fancy that he
has a wrong to be redressed in that he does not get ghee instead
of oil. The complaint would, in all probability, be treated as
frivolous by a Magistrate or Protector; none the less, I hardly think
the frivolity is so great as to turn him from complainant into
defendant. I submit that every facility should be given to a
man, who honestly believes that he has a complaint, to make it,
and this the proposed amendment does not do, unless a legal and
logical mind is to be attributed to an average indentured
Indian.
The safeguards provided against frivolous complaints, it is sub-
mitted, are sufficiently severe without the addition of the penalty
clause. The deduction of wages is perhaps more painful for an
indentured Indian than imprisonment.
The fact that the Bill, if I read it rightly, is an enabling Bill,
does not, in my humble opinion, in any way weaken the above
argument. I have some little experience of the working of the
present law. The manner in which these trials take place does
not always favour the complainants and the Magistrates, being
unable to wade through a maze of exaggeration, are often obliged
to set down complaints as "vexatious and frivolous" though they
may be perfectly true.
The remedy, if I may suggest one, and if, indeed, it is necess-
ary, is to be found in a speedy settlement of such complaints.
An Act to give these complaints a preference to be heard before
all others, and enabling the prosecutor to bring these cases up on
the shortest notice, and perhaps compelling other work from such
men, while away from their estates, so as to discourage idleness,
would meet the evil if it does exist to any great extent, without
curtailing the liberty of the persons affected, or without rendering
it next to impossible for them to complain.
I beg to be excused for the lengthy argument; as I know the
Government are anxious to do justice between man and man and
to hear both sides of the case, I thought I would be failing in
my duty if I did not place before the Government the view that
the Indians have taken of it. The employers of labour from the
very nature of their position can take only one view of the ques-
tion. The free Indians, being the kith and kin of the indentured
Indians and not being employers, may be allowed to take a dis-
passionate view.
Under the circumstances, may I venture to hope that the
Government would be graciously pleased to take out the clause
complained of or so alter it as not to deprive the indentured
Indian practically of his right of complaint.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
M. K. GANDHI
Pietermaritzburg Archives : C.S.O. 1614, File No. 3842
