200. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
November 26, 1946
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,
You know I am staying at Srirampur all by myself, with only
Prof. Nirmal Kumar Bose and Parasuram as my companions.
The people with whom I am putting up are gentlemen. There is
only one Hindu family in the entire village, the rest are all
Muslims. They all stay widely separated from each other. The
hundreds of villages here do not maintain much contact with
each other through any conveyance after the water dries up.
The result is that work is possible only on foot. Therefore, only
desperadoes, hooligans, or able-bodied men can maintain contact
among themselves. I am living in one such village at present
and intend to spend more time in another village similar to this.
It is my intention to stay on here so long as the Hindus and
Muslims do not start living together as sincere friends. God alone
can keep man's resolve unshaken. At the moment I have forgotten
Delhi, Sevagram, Uruli and Panchgani. My only desire is to do
or die. This will test my non-violence, too. I have come here
determined to emerge successful from this ordeal. If you are
anxious to see me, then you can come over here. I personally do
not see any necessity for it. If you wish to send a messenger to
know something or carry letters by hand, you can do so.
I am not going into the Constituent Assembly; it is not
quite necessary either. Jawaharlal, Sardar, Rajendra Babu, Rajaji,
Maulana—any of these or all five can go—or Kripalani.
Send them the message.
If it is possible to arrange for a sitting of the Constituent
Assembly only with the help of the military, then it is better not
to have it. If it can be arranged peacefully, then the laws can
be framed only for the participating Provinces. Let us see
what the future of the police and the military will be. We
have also to see what the Muslim majority Provinces will do,
and what is to be done in the Provinces where Muslims are in
minority, how the British Government will conduct itself, and how
the Princes will react. I believe the State Paper of May 16
will probably have to be changed. The job is complicated
enough, if we want to work independently. I have only given an
indication of how I view the problem.
Friends will also do well to bear in mind that what I am
doing here is not in the name of the Congress. Nor is there any
thought of associating it with this work. What I am doing is
only from my personal view of non-violence. Anybody, if he so
desires, can publicly oppose my work. That in fact is his right;
it may even be his duty. Therefore, whosoever wishes to do any-
thing or say anything, let him do so fearlessly. If anybody wants
to warn me of anything, let him do that too.
Please send a copy of this to Sardar so that he may tell
the others named above. Or you can get copies made and send
them to the five friends yourself.
Do express whatever you wish to. Write to me direct so
that I may reply. Pyarelal, Sushila, etc., all are in different
villages. Pyarelal has been ill since yesterday. I hope you are
all right.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 8081. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also
G. N. 2212
