212. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
July 8, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,
What a question? Of course you pass through Wardha on
your way to B1. That means you may be here when the W. C.
meets. And here you will find yourself in a crowded room. But
that you don't mind.
How you manage to lose your voice from time to time!
You must go to a place where you can't be pestered. Is it
not Segaon[?] And now I can build for you also to your design!
J.'S letter to S. you have now, I hope.
The talks have
stopped of course. The reply has to go from W. C.
Yes, Jawaharlal is having a grand time. He is raising India
in the estimation of the West.
It is perhaps as well that you will be the only member of
your Peace Brigade. This work does not need thousands. True
immolation of a few will do the trick.
You are wrong. I began work among women when I was
not even thirty years old. There is not a woman in S. A. who
does not know me. But my work was among the poorest. The
intellectuals I could not draw. My appeals have always been
from heart to hearts. I have felt like fish out of water in the
company of intellectuals.
Hence you are wrong in laying down
the sweeping proposition you have. You can't blame me for not
having organized the intellectuals among women.
I have not the
gift. And then my method of organizing is out of the ordinary,
not necessarily superior. All I mean is that I have nothing to
show on paper. But just as I never fear coldness on the part of
the poor when I approach them, I never fear it when I ap-
proach poor women. There is invisible bond between them and
me. And why do you miss the agony I am passing through? Is
it not for womankind? I am wringing my soul for adequate purity,
to enable me [to] render greater service to them and through them
to the whole of humanity. Ahimsa, which is my sheet-anchor,
demands all this.
I expect your next letter to tell me you are well.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3631. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6440
