42. LETTER TO GENERAL MANAGER, C. S. A. R.
[JOHANNESBURG,
January 4, 1910]
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
30th ultimo, in reply to my letter addressed to the Honourable the
Colonial Secretary and dated the 23rd ultimo, with respect to the Regu-
lations affecting Natives and Asiatics. Whilst my Association is grateful
to you for your exhaustive, courteous and conciliatory reply, I venture
to point out that the spirit of my communication has been missed. My
Association is aware of the existence of departmental regulations or ins-
tructions prior to the publication thereof in the Gazette . If I may ven-
ture to say so, the instructions were a result of co-operation on the part
of the community represented by my Association, and undoubtedly a
proof of the amicable relationship that has hitherto existed between the
Railway Administration and British Indians; but the legalising of these
instructions gives the impression that the Administration is not satis-
fied with the spirit of forbearance and co-operation shown by them.
My Association has never resented the separate accommodation provi-
ded in the respective classes and the affixing of the "reserved" labels.
My Association has, however, never assented to the position that the
Indian community should be deprived of facilities for travelling by ex-
press trains.
As you are aware, the present bitter and exhausting Asiatic struggle
going on in the Colony is due to legal inequality and differentiation,
1 This letter, presumably drafted by Gandhiji, was sent over the signature of the
Chairman, British Indian Association.
2 Reproduced in Indian Opinion, 8-1-1910; vide "The Transvaal Railway Regu-
lations", pp. 122- & 125-.
3 Vide "Substance of Letter to Colonial Secretary", p. 104.
and not to departmental differentiation, which Asiatics have held to
be justifiable, owing to the existence of colour prejudice in the Colony.
The Railway Board, in legalising the Regulations, have ignored the
struggle, and accentuated a situation against which my Association
has been fighting.
It is difficult for my Association to give an opinion as to whether
legal power is required by the Administration in order to deal with
the Natives, but, so far as British Indians are concerned, perhaps it will
be admitted that such power is not necessary. My Association, there-
fore, ventures to trust that the Regulations will be withdrawn in so far
as they affect British Indians.
Indian Opinion, 8-1-1910
