482. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 11, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter.
I knew that the important letter which I wrote to you would
certainly put you in difficulty. I think what I expected you to do
was unreasonable. I was plainly guilty of violence. But I thought
it would be a great trouble to re-write such a long letter, and
this desire to spare myself increased the magnitude of my violence.
God knows how many times I must be committing such violence
everyday. The path of renunciation of work was discovered to
save us from such dangers. But only one person out of ten mil-
lion can follow it. Can a person who does nothing outwardly but
whose mind is always busy be regarded as observing non-violence?
For us, therefore, the only course is to go on working and commit-
ting errors and to strive all the time to remain inactive inwardly
and reduce the number of our errors from day to day.
I have wired to Kanu and told him that he may come, so that
his days may not be wasted. It seems my letters take four days to
reach you.
I am sending to you a letter which I have received from the
Superintendent at Dhulia. It will be sent by book post. I have
just given it to Vinoba to read.
I have still not received Mathuradas's reply. Lilavati may
certainly come here in the vacation. I know her very well. Her
unsteadiness is incurable.
The women are doing well as teachers. Even if only 50 per
cent of them became permanent here, the Bal Mandir will run well.
. . .1 had started indulging his passion as early as the time
when he was at Sabarmati. And he had no scruples in telling
lies either. He has now written a letter of repentance to Bal-
krishna and asked what he should do for atonement.
Amala's case is different. As she has got a job in Santi-
niketan for teaching French, she is quite cheerful these days. She
will go in a few days. She is only waiting for the final reply.
I shall be able to decide about the dairy at Sabarmati only
after Narahari has gone there.
Sumitra has trouble in one of her eyes, and so Ba is accom-
panying her to Bombay today for treatment.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8413. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
