107. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM,
[After November 1928]
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I got your letter of 26th August. The reason why I got it so late is that
it came into my hands after it had wandered among others who read it first
one after another. One naturally forgets about a letter which has not been
filed. That is what happened in the case of your letter. And once it is filed,
it comes into one's hand when its turn comes. However, I take it that the
delay has caused no inconvenience to you.
As long as you keep yourself within the amount sanctioned by the
Managing Board for the expense, you should continue to carry on that same
activity in the manner you think fit. I am of the opinion that you do not
need the Board's legal consent for that. Even so, I will place your letter before
the Board. However, if you can immediately proceed to Bageshwar, you should
do so. I see no difficulty in your doing so. Do not do anything in haste.
If necessary, you may lend upto Rs. 200 for completing the construction
of the building. Keep in mind the idea of buying some land in Bijoria as a
branch of the Ashram and putting up buildings on it, but first test it on the
anvil of experience and determine whether it is sound or unsound. You will
be able to decide more easily after you have settled down at Bageshwar and,
if you remain firm in that idea, I will consider it and have it considered by
others also. I will of course not worry about your health, but at the same
time, I will be apprehensive that you might not steadily cling to your work.
You can remove that fear only by convincing me by your conduct. However,
do not sacrifice your health by being over enthusiastic for, if you do so, it
will harm your work and we should regard that consideration as more
important than the question of your health. The point is that one should look
upon one's health as a trust and take as much care of it as possible. You
have done well to tell me in your letter that the cow is being neglected for
the sake of the pine-tree gum. I will have to think over it. You, on your
part, should forget about such things after you have passed them on to me
and, regarding them beyond your field of work, not let them weigh on your
mind. God has not given the necessary strength to any individual or
1 In the letter, Gandhiji asks Prabhudas to proceed immediately to Bageshwar
near Almora. Prabhudas was in Almora in April 1928 and the storm referred to in the
last paragraph may have been about the change of the name of the Ashram from
Satyagraha Ashram to Udyog Mandir. The change was effected in November 1928;
vide Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 22-.
87
88
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
organization to fight all injustice. If He were to do so, He would Himself
have produced His rival. We should believe that He is not so stupid as all
that and dance in our own circle.
One more storm is raging in the Ashram these days. But it is through
such storms that it is purified. I am therefore calm. I do not have the time to
give you a description of it. You may read something about it in the Ashram
magazine. The rest you will know from what Chhaganlal or Kashi might be
writing to you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : S.N. 33052
