98. LETTER TO J. B. PETIT
AHMEDABAD,
June [16]2, 1915
DEAR MR. PETIT,
I beg to submit herewith an account of the income and ex-
penditure as up to the 31st January 1915 in connection with the
passive resistance movement in South Africa.
Publication of the account has been delayed beyond my desire
and expectation. It was Mr. Gokhale's intention that the accounts
should be published along with a statement about the disposal of
the balance in hand. As he was the prime mover in India and
remained in closest touch with the movement to the end, I never
did anything without consultation with him, and through him with
your Committee. It was his intention that before the accounts
were finally published, I should confer with your Committee. The
cruel hand of Death having removed him from us, the matter of
publication has been further delayed, and it is only now that it has
become possible to submit the accounts to the public.
The income includes not only the monies received through you,
but includes also those received from Madras, Rangoon, London and
various parts of Africa, Passive Resistance School, etc. Thus, of the
£27,324.0.7, £8,424.. were monies other than those received
through you.
As to expenditure, there are some items which require expla-
nation. Relief which takes up nearly £3,000/- means assistance
given to Passive Resisters or their families, and it is a recurring
item. There are widows of Passive Resisters who died during the
struggle without leaving anything for those left behind them.
There are children of Passive Resisters and Passive Resisters
themselves who require support. Farm upkeep and improvements
mean expenses in connection with the Phoenix Settlement which
became the Passive Resistance Farm after the transference to Phoenix
of Passive Resisters from Tolstoy Farm belonging to Mr. Kallenbach.
Phoenix Settlement consists of 100 acres of land originally bought
by me for locating the printing works of Indian Opinion. Though
the legal title vested in me for some years, I never made personal
use of the property. During the struggle, however, I divested my-
self of the legal title and it is now held by Trustees for public
purposes defined in a registered Trust deed. This property is still
being used for housing Passive Resisters or their families. Settlers
who are living on the land receive no wages but take out of the
income from Indian Opinion, and other sources just enough for their
maintenance. The journal has never been and can never become
an entirely self-supporting proposition. The English portion of it
is mainly of an educative character for the European public
amongst whom it is distributed gratis. It was a powerful weapon
in the armoury of Passive Resistance and continues to be the only
recorder of accurately sifted facts about our countrymen in South
Africa and of Passive Resistance movement. It is in no sense a
commercial enterprise. This settlement will still need assistance.
The third item is Valiama Hall. This is an institution founded
in the memory of the late Valiama, a girl of 17 who died shortly
after her discharge from prison of fever contracted therein. Its
use will be chiefly educational. The Tamil portion of our country-
men have suffered most. Johannesburg is one of the largest Indian
centres. It gave the largest number of Passive Resisters, and the
Tamils were the foremost among them. The late sister belonged
to Johannesburg. No better use of the Passive Resistance funds
could be conceived than to have a permanent hall in Johannesburg
for the public needs of the community. The institution will be
registered in the name of Messrs Kachalia, the Chairman of the
British Indian Association, Thambi Naidoo and Polak for the pur-
poses mentioned above. This will cost probably £4,000. I hope
that this disposal of the funds will commend itself to your Com-
mittee as being strictly in accordance with the purposes for which
the monies were sent to South Africa, namely, relief of Passive
Resisters and furtherance of the struggle. The available balance
should, in my opinion, remain as it has done, in the names of
Messrs A. H. West and Maganlal K. Gandhi as a trust with
instructions to utilize the funds from time to time for furtherance
of measures being adopted to secure just administration of local
laws and the removal of the remaining disabilities and for relief of
Passive Resisters, if further relief than what I have already adverted
to is necessary. Co-operation of Messrs Cachalia, Parsee Rustom-
jee and other Passive Resisters is sought whenever extraordinary
expenditure has to be incurred. 1
Whilst the actual courting of imprisonment has ceased, the
struggle for removal of the remaining disabilities itself has by no
means ceased and this brings me to a brief statement of its results.
In its last stages, nearly 25,000 Indians actively participated in it,
that is, one sixth of the total Indian population in South Africa.
The balance of the community practically but with few exceptions
supported the struggle whether by contributions in cash or in kind
or by holding meetings in support etc. It began in the Transvaal
with the passing of the now famous Asiatic Registration Bill in the
year 1906, but as year after year the struggle rolled on with tem-
porary settlements, it included many other things besides the
Asiatic Registration Act, and covered the whole of South Africa till
at the time of the settlement the points in Passive Resistance were as
follows :4
(1) Repeal of the Asiatic Act.
(2) Removal of the racial or colour disqualification as to
immigration from the Union legislation.
(3) Removal of the legal disabilities of Indian wives.
(4) Removal of the annual Poll Tax of £3, which was payable
by ex-indentured Indians, their wives and grown-up
children.
(5) Just administration of existing laws with due regard to
vested rights.
All these points are covered by the settlement of the last year
which are considered to be a complete vindication of Passive
Resistance and I venture to state that if more has not been gained,
more was not and could not be asked for as an item in Passive
Resistance, for a Passive Resister has to frame his minimum as well
as his maximum and he dare not ask for more nor can he be satis-
fied with less.
But I do not wish to be understood to mean that nothing further
remains to be done in South Africa, or that everything has been
gained. We have only fought for removal of legal disabilities as
to immigration, but administratively it tells more heavily upon us
than other nations. In accepting administrative inequality, we have
given due regard to existing conditions and prejudices. We fought
to keep the theory of the British Constitution intact so that practice
may some day approach the theory as near as possible. There
are still certain laws in South Africa, for instance, the Law 3 of
1885, Trade Licence Laws of the Cape and Natal which continue to
cause worry. Administration of the Immigration Law is not all it
should be. For these, however, Passive Resistance [is not] applied
and is at present inapplicable, its application being confined to
grievances which are generally felt in a community and are known
to hurt its self-respect or conscience. Any of our grievances
referred to by me may any day advance to that stage. Till then
only the ordinary remedies of petition, etc., can be and are at
present being applied . Letters received from South Africa show
that difficulties are being experienced in some cases acutely by our
countrymen and if not much has been heard of them in India
just now, it is because of the extraordinary self-restraint of our
countrymen in South Africa during the crisis that has overtaken
the Empire.
This struggle has defined principles and removed disabilities
which were in the shape of a national insult. The larger question of
the treatment of British Indians who came there from outside can
only be dealt with here and for the question of the local disabilities
still unredressed, your Committee will have to exercise a ceaseless
watch and assist as heretofore the efforts of our countrymen in
South Africa.
I feel that I ought to place on record my strong conviction,
based upon close personal observation extending over a period of
twenty years, that the system of indentured emigration is an evil
which cannot be mended but can only be ended. No matter
how humane the employers may be, it does not lend itself to the
moral well-being of the men affected by it. I therefore feel that
your Committee should lose no time in approaching the Govern-
ment of India with a view to securing entire abolition of the system
for every part of the Empire.
Before closing, I am bound to mention that the struggle would
not have ended so soon and even as satisfactorily as it did, but for
the generous support rendered by the Motherland under the leader-
ship of the great and saintly patriot whose death we all mourn and
but for the very sympathetic and firm attitude taken by the noble
man who at present occupies the Viceregal chair.
M. K. GANDHI 3
SOUTH AFRICAN INDIAN
PASSIVE RESISTANCE FUND ACCOUNTS
AS UP TO JANUARY 31, 1915 4
EXPENDITURE
£ s d
Debit balance April 6, 1912 as per statement ren-
dered to Mr. Ratan Tata
43 1 3
Relief
2,868 10 1
Legal expenses
235 2 9
Telegrams and cables
705 15 10
Bank commission
117 4 6
Printing & stationery
169 15 0
Travelling
2,258 19 3
Johannesburg office
1,070 15 7
Medical expenses
92 9 10
Stamps
20 19 3
Railage and cartage
118 12 7
Maritzburg committee
125 0 0
Farm upkeep & improvement (expended)
976 19 2
1
— d o —
(unexpended)
2,023 0 10
Newspapers
94 19 0
Reporting commission sittings
183 10 0
Durban office
1,068 11 2
Commissariat
540 16 11
Funeral expenses Passive Resisters
67 0 8
Salaries
197 15 6
2Valiama Hall (expended)
877 0 0
— d o —
(unexpended)
3,123 0 0
London Deputation
400 0 0
London Committee
240 5 6
Sundries
4 13 0
Allocations to Valiama Hall, Passive Resistance
Relief and furtherance [of] struggle including
support to Phoenix Settlement
3,000 0 0
Allocation to Passive Resistance Relief
2,400 0 0
23,023 17 8
Balance in hand
4,300 2 11
- - - - - -
£ 27,324 0 7
- - - - - -
INCOME
Funds acknowledged in I.O.
1,054 17 6
Bombay
18,901 6 8
Madras
4,035 0 0
Rangoon
2,136 0 6
Nairobi
150 0 0
Zanzibar
33 6 8
London
386 11 10
Farm School fees refund
491 10 7
Goods sold
67 13 10
Johannesburg
64 17 0
Durban office refund
1 1 0
Travelling refund
1 15 0
£ 27,324 0 7
From a photostat of the handwritten draft with corrections in Gandhiji's
hand: S.N. 6211; published letter: G.N. 8224
