317. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
As AT THE ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
August 14, 1927
DEAR MISS SCHLESIN,
I have your letter of 24th June. Herewith receipt for £21
S. 10. If you still remember your Gujarati, you will make out
the Gujarati writing.
The cause of my illness so far as I can see it is the very
terrific strain I put upon the body and the brain, addressing
numerous meetings almost every day and motoring from place to
place. The day on which the breakdown occurred was one of
very high tension, and little rest on the previous night. This is
also the doctor's diagnosis. I feel however that I should have
been able to prevent it. And if I had taken a complete fast
on the day of the tension, I might have avoided it. As it
was, I had put myself on half diet during those days.
The first volume of what you call the autobiography will
be sent to you. The history of passive resistance struggle was
published three years ago, but the English translation is not
available. It is being published by Mr. Ganesan in quarterly
instalments in his magazine Current Thought. It would be ulti-
mately published, I expect, in book-form. But it will take time. You
can have the Gujarati copy if you will make up your Gujarati.
sal to renew his licence. The court had held that they had the right to inter-
fere only in matters of retail or wholesale dealers and as this was a case of
manufacturing licence they could not intervene.
My food at present is 30 ounces goat's milk with honey and
any fruit that is available and generally home-made bread like
Jewish passover cake unleavened. I take no nuts. Diet is restricted
to five articles, that is to say, milk, grapes, oranges and bread will
count as four articles, and if I add figs it will be the fifth.
I never knew that you had £150. I thought you had only
£40. I shall await your impressions of the visit to Manilal and
his wife.
I shall see your handiwork when Mr. Andrews returns and if
he has not given it away or lost it. Whether you could get over
the shock of your having me described as with one garment or
not, your surmise was quite correct that a poor man could not
consistently possess a tray such as you have described. You have
unconsciously altered the sense of my letter by mere atrocious
reading. For, I did not suggest as you make me suggest that I
could identify myself with the poor by merely wearing one gar-
ment. But I do say that even that little thing is something. To
understand the logic of such a step is probably expecting too
much of you now. For, there was a time when you appreciated
my change of dress I adopted in Durban for almost identical con-
siderations. I look forward to your description of your visit to
Mr. Sastri.
I quite agree with you that, if we are to do anything, our
womenfolk should have the same facilities that men have for
education, etc. And you will be interested to know that at the
Ashram here we have over 40 women of all ages excluding little
girls. They have a special class every day, and in my opinion they
are making very wonderful progress. The utmost freedom is en-
joyed by them at the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,
Enclosure
From a photostat: S.N. 12373
