355. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 6, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
Your letter came in only yesterday. I am beginning this be-
fore prayer 3.45. I overslept myself. Being the fasting day it
does not much matter perhaps.
You have done well in writing as you have done. The diffi-
culty about the execution is threefold. (1) The Ashram site has to
be removed or the other activities have to be. (2) There is no
one in the Ashram who would stay on the condition you name,
save perhaps Narandas. (3) The Ashram has not been conce-
ived in the manner suggested by you.
The last is perhaps the fatal difficulty. Mine is a novel ex-
periment, dangerous and, it may be, even impossible of achiev-
ing. The idea is to have a place where people can train them-
selves to lead the celibate life in the midst of ordinary tempta-
tions . . .1 and . . .2 fell not because they could not over-
come animal passion. They have not gone so far. But they sup-
pressed truth. Now truth can only be cultivated in the midst
of men and women of different temperaments and subtle tempta-
tions. It is easy enough for a few people of similar habits not
to deceive one another or be found out. That is no truth. It
has to be lived in the natural surroundings. Exception has been
taken even to the Ashram life as being not natural.
I wonder if you have followed me so far. If you have, you
must at once perceive that the first two difficulties are the natural
consequence of the deliberate creation of the third. Having cons-
tituted the Ashram as it is we have the men and women and the
activities that we have. And out of these men and women and
the activities we cannot create what you have contemplated.
What you suggest can only be done by withdrawing two
or three men and women and sending them to another place to
live their own life and draw some kindred spirits in due time. But
that would be to admit failure. I should not mind it if it be-
came inevitable. I am not at all convinced that it is. If out of
the present experiment a few of us lived of whom it could be
said that they fairly satisfied the test, I should be quite satisfied
that the experiment had succeeded.
In an experiment such as
we are making failures must be the order of the day. Each will
be a stepping-stone to success. The . . . incident has disturbed
me but not baffled me at all. Prompt measures have been taken
after the discovery and are still being taken.
You should know also my diagnosis. The fault lay in my
over-confidence in both these young people. The earlier fault lay
in their parents. . . . had the notion that his children will
better conform to the Ashram ideal if they were brought up in
isolation. . . . nursed the thought. And so the children
grew to be selfish, and exclusive and self-centred. The motive
behind . . . was good. And so I carried out the tradition
after . . .'s death. I was bound to as his heir to test its effi-
cacy. The result we know. I am not sorry. . . . had every
right to do what he thought was good for the Ashram. As for
. . . the way with . . . was reverse. But . . . did
not quite assist her husband. She had no policy of her own but
she herself could not follow out the Ashram ideal and so . . .
grew anyhow as the pet of the Ashram. The natural thing is likely
to happen now. The proud family of . . . will cut them-
selves from the Ashram and live their natural life. That will not
be bad. . . . has learnt her lesson. She will for. . .'s
sake more and more conform to the ideal. . . . was the
dupe, . . . was the villain (used not in its quite ugly sense).
The whole Ashram knows that truth at any cost will alone save
it. Things will tighten themselves along these lines.
Several other things will be gradually done. No violent
changes will be made. There is not the slightest cause for alarm.
You are perhaps unnecessarily harsh on Prema. She has her
grave blemishes but she has contributed nothing to the incident.
Her physical brahmacharya appears to me to be above suspicion
and she is truthful to the point of bluntness. She is meticulous
in the observance of the outward rules. She has a vile tongue.
She is trying to control it. Anyway there is no one who can con-
duct the Ashram better than Narandas. He must be left to
manage it to the best of his ability.
Now I want you to work at this exhaustive letter and give
me your criticism, ideas and suggestions unhesitatingly and with-
out reserve. You have plenty of time for hard thinking. I am
unperturbed. I am taking things easy, meeting each situation
as it arises. Narandas will faithfully carry out instructions. And
if I felt the call I am quite capable of disbanding the whole Ash-
ram in so far as I have the power which legally I have not. But
that is nothing. The moral authority is there. You may there-
fore make any drastic suggestions you like.
All well here otherwise. You will explain to Ba whatever is
said here in so far as it may be necessary.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 9673. Courtesy: Mirabehn
