284. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
Unrevised
RAIPUR,
November 23, 1933
MY DEAR MAHADEV,
On getting up at 3 a.m. I found your letter to Mira lying on
the little stool which is being carried from place to place as a
footboard for me to stretch my legs on. It took me nearly 40
minutes to go through it and yet without reading your comments
on the translation of the verses specified. It would take me at
least twelve hours to read up my translation [of] the original and
think out what I should say. It will take at least another three
hours to reduce them to writing. That time I cannot give just
now. Then there is the question—shall I help you much? I
fear, not. For what you say is quite true. I ought not to have
yielded to Swami's demand for my own translation except per-
haps for private circulation among friends. I realized my unfitness
for the task as I was proceeding but I continued. The defects you
have noticed are there. How can I give what I have not—
scholarship? Want of good knowledge of Sanskrit was a great
drawback. The remedy is clear. You should go on with your
translation taking such help as my translations can give to bring
out my thought but not always following my translation. Give
that rendering which is acceptable to you. Ignore the notes where
they are useless.
Give your own where they are necessary.
Having done that, take up the Gujarati, correct the translation
where it is defective and polish the language where it needs polish-
ing. Re-write and add notes where necessary. That will com-
plete your task. Then when the whole result comes into my
hands, I shall work on it and make such changes as I may deem
fit in order to bring out my meaning. This I can do easily. We
must then bring out a revised version of the Gujarati and publish
your translation in English. So doing, you do not need to
stop your work for want of my detailed reply to your comments.
I shall circulate your comments among friends and get their
opinion and let you have it all.
Your other messages will be attended to.
I am glad you are going through the trials of various sorts.
Only do not wash yourself out with mere literary work. You
should take plenty of exercise and keep the body in a fit condi-
tion. You must not damage your eyes on any account what-
soever.
No more today.
Love from all.
BAPU
From a copy: S.N. 26906
