135. LETTER TO J. CRERAR
SABARMATI,
March 10, 1918
DEAR MR. CRERAR,
In the hope that His Excellency is now able to attend to
public business without undue strain on him, I am addressing
this communication to you. I do however feel ashamed that I
should be at all a cause of adding to His Excellency's many
anxieties. I would certainly have refrained if I could have helped
it. I beg to enclose herewith a copy of my letter to the Collec-
tor of Kaira District. I am awaiting his reply. I have perso-
nally visited over thirty villages in the various talukas and I
must confess that the universal cry is that the crops have been
largely a failure. It is impossible therefore to think that all the
men are determined to tell an untruth. What is more, the crops
still standing confirm the popular view. If they yield a poor
return the kharif crops already cut must have been poorer still.
For it is admitted that the rabi crops and the longer-living
kharif are better than the crops already harvested. In the
circumstances I have not hesitated to tell the people that they
need not voluntarily pay their vigoti but should allow the offi-
cials to sell their belongings. I have been invited to make a
public statement but have declined to do so pending negotia-
tions with the Government for a settlement. I have declined
too to issue notices to the people giving general advice. And I
am hoping that if the evidence of my colleagues and myself is
not accepted, if even the prevalence of the plague is not accep-
ted as in itself a sufficient excuse for postponing collection as
required by me, a joint inquiry might be held. But [if] even
the last request is rejected there is for me no recourse left open
but to generally advise the cultivators to refuse to pay the reve-
nue dues and to allow their belongings to be sold or confisca-
ted and to issue a public appeal for support of their attitude.
In my humble opinion it is better that the people in a digni-
fied and respectful manner disobey the Government orders and
knowingly suffer in their own person the consequences of their
disobedience than that disappointment should deepen into
secret discontent. I had promised that I would humbly lay be-
fore His Excellency my views on the situation before taking any
extreme steps. I hope that my submission will receive His Ex-
cellency's due consideration. I shall gladly wait on His Excel-
lency should my presence be desired.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 10651. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi
