198. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
October 10, 1934
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter. As to the Ashram at Delhi, the fact that
there is the other Central one should not be overemphasized.
There should be an ashram or institution at the headquarters, and
the idea is that the office should be taken there, with accommoda-
tion for the whole of the staff, and provision for a technical insti-
tute.
If the provinces can raise sufficient money for themselves,
each of them can certainly have such training centres. Karachi
has almost a model institute where, under first class expert guidance,
all kinds of articles are manufactured from leather. Sewing is also
done there, and the ground is exceedingly well kept. The whole
thing is due to the enterprise of Mohatta Bros.
Now it has become
so popular that even non-Harijans are applying for admission.
Therefore, the idea of the Delhi institute is not in conflict with
yours, but on the contrary it is in support of yours—only Delhi
can't find the funds for other centres. Bangalore is also developing
such things. Kathiawar has three.
But they were there prior to
the establishment of the Harijan Board, and they have now come
under the influence of the Central Board. The establishment of
an institute at Delhi was an idea conceived by Ghanshyamdas
before Sabarmati was given [over].
It is, and will remain, an
all-India concern. Whether it will be so in fact depends largely
upon what the management is able to make of it.
I do not sup-
pose we shall get in the near future over 100 acres of land and
buildings worth over two lakhs. In acreage the Delhi plot is
nothing, but the situation is very good. And Ghanshyamdas wants
to develop the scheme after his own fashion, and to spend a lot of
his substance on it.
I do hope that my proposal to Devibabu and Bhagirathji
will be accepted and that we shall not have to lose the money
Satcowriebabu has taken away.
It is an unfortunate incident
which should be redressed so far as it is possible.
The paragraph you quote from McCarrison is very interesting.
McCarrison I have found to be a reliable writer, but he is some-
what hasty in generalizing. I have had considerable correspondence
with him.
Are you not sweeping in your statement that starch is identi-
fied with sugar as a food? Now sugar can be given with im-
punity to babies. I have never heard that starch can be given to
them with equal impunity. Then, starch can never be taken with-
out cooking.
Sugar requires no cooking. And even if rice is
cooked, surely you do not claim the same value for rice as you
would for raisins from the point of view of harmlessness.
I am testing just now the effect of unboiled milk, fresh from
the udder.
I have heard so much in praise of unboiled milk that
I want to try its effect myself. The only difficulty is that you can't
take all the milk that you want to at one meal. You have to
divide it, and you can't get the goats or the cows, as the case
may be, to yield the milk whenever you want to milk them. The
question then is: Does unboiled milk retain its full quality through-
out the day if you stored it in ice or kept in a corked bottle with
a wet towel wrapped round it? I have tried it myself. The
milk retains the full flavour.
Whether it retains the full quality,
I have no knowledge. If you can throw light upon it, please do.
I shall watch the development of your researches about the
full use of all the parts of carcasses.
Love.
BAPU
SHRI SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: G.N. 1626a
