82. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 3, 1938
I like your letter for its transparent love. It tells me no-
thing new, but it comes at a moment when I am most recep-
tive. The problem however is not so simple as you have put
it. If complete brahmacharya under the conditions I am trying
is like an attempt to climb the craters in the moon, what is the
value of the species that requires the nine fortifications? You
are quite right in describing my experiment as new. So is my
experiment in ahimsa. The two hang together. Remember that
my experiment has natural limitations. I may neither tempt God
nor the Devil. I have not the time to prolong the argument.
In your next letter you must tell me in concrete terms what
definite changes I should make so as to fit in with your idea.
Should I deny myself the service rendered by Sushila? Should
I refuse to have malish by Lilavati or Amtul Salaam for instance?
Or do you want to say that I should never lean on girls' shoul-
ders? Needless to say you won't pain me at all by telling me
frankly whatever you think I should do to get out of the terrible
despondency. Just now I am most in need of support from
those who surround me with service and affection, undeserved
as it seems to me, for the time being. In guiding me remember
that what I am doing I have done all my life you may say.
And my brahmacharya has become firmer and more enlightened. Of
course I have been far away from perfection. But I felt I was
progressing. That degrading, dirty, torturing experience of 14th
April shook me to bits and made me feel as if I was hurled by
God from an imaginary paradise where I had no right to be
in my uncleanliness.
Well, I shall feel pride in my being parent to so many child-
ren, if any of them will give a lifting hand and pull me out
of the well of despair. My faith in myself and my experiment
will revive and will burn all the brighter.
Love.
BAPU
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
