282. LETTER TO AMEER ALI
[LONDON,]
September 27, 1909
DEAR MR. AMEER ALI,
I thank you for your letter. I have now made a fair copy of the
draft letter sent by you, and it will be signed in the course of the day.
Mr. Anglia will bring it to you tomorrow at the time appointed by you.
The facts of the case referred to in the letter addressed to the Under-
Secretary, are briefly as follows :
1 Dated September 26, it read: "Thanks for the drafts. Will you kindly send
me by return post full particulars of the case you refer to in your letter to the Colonial
Under Secretary? . . . It will give me much pleasure if Mr. Anglia will come round
to the Reform Club on Tuesday at 3.30 P.M. I am returning one of the drafts. Will
you kindly get it typed and afterwards signed by the delegates and then send it to me ?"
The letter, however, is not available.
2 Vide "Letter to Under Secretary for Colonies", pp. 427-.
A Moulvi was required for the Mosque in Pietermaritzburg, the
capital of Natal. The Moulvi was to combine also the work of a Madressi
teacher. This Moulvi was to replace the retiring one. According to the
law of Natal, an intending immigrant must have a knowledge of one of
the European languages. This Moulvi did not possess such a knowledge.
The congregation of the Mosques, therefore, applied to the Government
to grant to the Moulvi not the right of immigration, that is, permanent
residence, but a certificate enabling him to reside in the Colony for three
years. The applicants undertook to give security that the Moulvi, during
his residence in Natal, would not carry on any commercial business and
that he would leave Natal at the end of the period. After a great deal
of waiting, the Government replied that they would grant permission
on condition that the certificate was renewed every three months, and
that each renewal bore a stamp fee of £1.
Mr. Anglia will show you the letter in question, and you will see
from its tenor how insulting it is. In my opinion, we as self-respecting
men cannot accept the offensive terms. The stipulation as to quarterly
renewals bearing a fee of £1 is, in my opinion, an impudent exaction.
I remain, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5096
