284. LETTER TO NIMU
April 30, 1927
CHI. NIMU,
Next year you will be married, and begin a new life. I want
you and Ramdas to get ready and prepare yourselves for it. I
write this to you after I have written to Ramdas. I have long
since been corresponding with Ramdas. Go through the enclosed
extract from Ramdas's letter.
I wish both of you would devote your lives to service; Ramdas
does wish to. You should earn your livelihood too from it, as
Maganlal does and many others too. I wish you two could become
an ideal couple, for which you should begin your efforts from now
on. Whatever time you can spare from your household duties
you may devote to khadi work, for which you too would be paid.
I have been doing it in two cases; one of Chi. [Kishorelal] and
Gomatibehn and the other of Thakkar and his wife. But you can
surpass them both. The job that you are required to do will be
easy but you will get the satisfaction that you can earn on your
own, and one should always try to prove that one can. You can
run your home along with this occupation, and, I think, you can
also look after your children when you have them. Thousands of
husbands and wives from poor families earn their living in this way.
You know yourself the cases of Dudabhai and Danibehn, of Ramji-
bhai and Gangabehn. We shall also remain poor alongside of
them. Only then shall we be fit to realize God.
For accomplishing this you ought to improve your ginning,
carding and spinning. Side by side, you must improve your know-
ledge of Gujarati and pick up some book-keeping. You can find
time for all this. You must improve your health too. Sanskrit and
so on are of course to be there.
*
*
*1
Consider all this and write to me frankly what you think
about it. Write to me as a daughter would speak to her mother
without reserve, or like two friends opening their hearts to each
other. Write to me what you want to do without bothering about
my likes. Tell me frankly about anything in my letter that you do
not approve. Nothing can be accomplished by force; something
will be by what you willingly undertake to do.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
