473. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,
June 30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
I have now received all your letters.
We have thought long about the trouble being given by the
Bharwads. To me our dharma is plain. It is the same towards
the entire world. We should win over the Bharwads by love, and
at the same time try to protect what it is our duty to protect.
That can be done only by giving our lives to the Bharwads. In
other words, we should lay down our lives in protecting our things
but should never attack the Bharwads in doing so. However, I
do not wish to blame anyone for what has happened. We can
follow dharma only within the limits of our capacity, otherwise
we would be guilty of artificiality. We should, therefore, do what
the impulse of the moment dictates. That impulse is the measure
of our strength. As for the future, I have no doubt that our dharma
is what I have stated it to be. But before and after adopting that
course for protecting our things, we should discharge two other
duties. I have been observing and saying for the last fifteen years
that we have not mixed with our neighbours. What pains me is
that I myself did not follow that path. I tried to persuade
Maganlal to follow it. Some kind of a start was made. There were,
however, difficulties in the way and the attempt was abandoned.
We are now paying for our indifference. But recalling the past is of
no value except for drawing lessons from it. Let us look to the
present. Just now, therefore, we should discuss the problem with
the Bharwads. We should ourselves try to plead with them in the
presence of persons who know them. We should also tell them what
we wish. If they want to graze their cattle [on our land], they
should pay us something. If, however, we have no land we should
explain that to them. We should also appeal to our neighbours to
plead with the Bharwads. We should render them whatever other
serVice we can, and should continue to do so irrespective of their
43-29
behaviour. We should explain to them why the Ashram has been
established and what it aims at doing. Even if we do all this,
it is possible that they will occasionally raid the Ashram. If they
do, those of us who can, may lay down their lives and let the Bhar-
wads take away what they will after killing them. If we do not
have the will and the strength for this, you may do what seems
best to all of you. I have only explained the duty, as I under-
stand it, that is proper to an Ashram. You should, however, put
out of consideration what I may write, for beyond expressing my
views I can do nothing. Moreover, an opinion expressed from a
distance is likely to be erroneous. What I might think if I were
present there may very well be different from what I think from
here. Moreover, no matter with what detachment a prisoner tries
to think, his conclusions are likely to be based on incomplete data.
You need not, therefore, attach much weight to my view. I shall
be satisfied if it helps you to come to your own decision. In any
case it was good that afterwards you treated the Bharwads for
injuries.
I am writing to Bhansali; read that letter. Your decisions
about Chandrakanta and Giriraj seem all right.
I am getting on well. These days I am also trying to learn by
heart verses from the Gita. I have completed Chapter XII and done
half of Chapter XIII. Does man know what he wants? I liked
Kaka's coming, but I also see that it has turned out to be an
obstacle. Since his coming my daily study has fallen behind.
Without him I would have proceeded faster with the Gita. Ac-
tually, I tried to prevent his coming, but failed. My reason for
doing that was quite different. I did not like that he, too, should be
confined within four walls as I was. But the Government had made
up its mind to provide me company and did so. I, therefore, tole-
rate Kaka. And he has to bear separation from the large com-
pany at Sabarmati. Thus we find the situation a mixture of all
sentiments-there are at least the pathetic, the humorous and
the heroic. However, if I have relaxed in one field of my daily
study, I have started Marathi. I would have become proud if I
had become altogether self-reliant. Now that I have been receiv-
ing invisible services from Kakasaheb, they will help me in remind-
ing me of my right place. Besides, the exercise which my
reason gets in sweet discussions about the Gita and other works
is an additional benefit. Thus I get an opportunity of another kind
for self-examination. I can, therefore, say that I would have
been content if Kaka had not come, and am also content now
that he has come. Who can weigh and decide whether his coming
is a gain or a loss to me? To him who believes that anything he
gets unasked comes from God, every such thing is a benefit-is a
gift of His grace. Kaka's coming, therefore, is such a gift. It does
not matter if the study of the Gita has slowed down.
Convey my greetings to Vallabhbhai. The question of Kaka's
diet has been settled. He gets two pounds of cow's milk, ten tolas
of butter, twenty tolas of fresh, uncooked vegetables and twenty
tolas of chapati. He turns the milk into curds. He is getting on
quite well. His weight has increased by one pound. By way of
vegetables, he gets brinjals and radishes by turn during the week.
He cooks the brinjals and eats the radishes raw.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8114. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi
