120. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
March 17, 1933
CHI. NARAHARI,
Why did you tear up your letter to Mahadev? Just think
how much anger and violence there was in your action. Narandas
put the pieces together, reconstructed the whole letter and sent
it here. It was not right for you to tear up the letter, no matter
how much at fault Narandas was. I have gone through your
letter and also the brief reply Narandas has sent to Mahadev.
I have conveyed to Narandas in short the impression which was
produced on me, and have suggested that he should show you
that letter.
It is true that my trust in Narandas is as complete as you
have heard it is. That is my nature. It is not that I have such
trust in him alone. I have similar trust in you, Panditji, Kaka and
others whose names you yourself can supply. I would never believe
anything against any of them unless I had direct evidence. Hence,
there was-should have been-nothing surprising in what you
heard. Apart from it, this is what I believe regarding Narandas.
He has in him the qualities of efficiency, patience, power of discri-
mination, balance of mind, impartiality and firmness, of the
highest order. They have cast a spell on me. I therefore wish that
you and other co-workers should appreciate his qualities and take
full advantage of his services. However, he cannot have these
merits, nor can others see them in him, simply because I attribute
them to him. How can you help if you fail to see them? And it
is clear that if you fail to see them, you cannot avail yourself
of his services even as much as you may wish. So much about my
faith in Narandas. Apart from that, however, I liked your letter
very much. It is not necessary, and I have not the time, to ana-
lyse the letter in detail or point out your errors that it shows. I
think I have drawn from it the necessary lesson. You will see this
from the suggestions which I have made to Narandas.
What I expect you to do is that you should see Narandas, have
a quiet discussion with him and persuade him to make the changes
which seem necessary to you. Do not press the points which
Narandas finds unacceptable. I don't think that you wish, or
believe it desirable, that the charge of the Ashram should be en-
104
trusted to somebody else. Do tell me if that is what you wish or
think. But if that is not so, your duty is to persuade Narandas as
much as you can. You are responsible for the welfare of the
Ashram quite as much as I or Narandas or others. We are what
we are, and it is we who will make the Ashram what it will be.
You cannot, therefore, regard yourself as an outsider and disclaim
responsibility for it, since the bond among the inmates of the
Ashram is an indissoluble one as that in a Hindu marriage. The
Gower Bill has not still been passed into a law; but even when it
has, those who wish to adhere to the present form of indissoluble
marriage will certainly do so. The Gower Bill has for its subject
matter forced marriages and ill-matched pairs. I am sure you
will not regard our marriage as of that type. It is a marriage
of choice. You should bear this in mind and know that you have
no choice but to endure what is inevitable and act accordingly.
I have read your letter in some haste. If there is anything in
it about which I should do something but which has escaped
my attention please do let me know.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9057
