145. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
CALCUTTA,
January 29 [1921]
MY DEAREST CHARLIE,
You have inundated me with love-letters and I have neglec-
ted you. But you have been ever in my thoughts and prayer. You
had no business to get ill, You had therefore be better up and
'doing'. And yet on your sick-bed you have been doing so much.
For I see more and more that praying is doing and that silence
is the best speech and often the best argument. And that is my
answer to your anxiety about the untouchables.
I look at the problem as an Indian and a Hindu, you as an
Englishman and a Christian. You look at it with the eye of an
observer, I as an affected and afflicted party. You can be patient,
and I cannot. Or you as a disinterested reformer can afford to be
impatient whereas I as a sinner must be patient if I would get rid
of the sin. I may talk glibly of the Englishman's sin in Jallianwala.
But as a Hindu, I may not talk about the sin of Hinduism against
the untouchables. I have to deal with the Hindu Dyers. I must
act and have ever acted. You act, you do not speak, when you feel
most. Not knowing Gujarati, you do not know how furiously the
question is raging in Gujarat. Do you know that I have purposely
adopted a pariah girl? There is today at the Ashram a pariah family
living again! You are doing an injustice to me in even allowing
yourself to think that for a single moment I may be subordinating
the question to any other. But I need not give addresses or write
in English upon it. Most of those who form my audience are not
hostile to the 'pariahs'. I had the least difficulty about carrying
the proposition about them in the Congress.
Moreover I cannot talk about things I do not know. The
Namsudra question in Bengal I know only superficially. It is perhaps
not one of untouchability but of the zemindar against the serf.
I am dealing with the 'sin' itself. I am attacking the sacerdotalism
of Hinduism. That Hindus consider it a 'sin' to touch a portion of
human beings because they are born in a particular environment!
I am engaged as a Hindu in showing that it is not a sin and that it is
sin to consider that touch a sin. It is a bigger problem than that of
gaining Indian independence but I can tackle it better if I gain
the latter on the way. It is not impossible that India may free
herself from English domination before India has become free of
the curse of untouchability. Freedom from English domination
is one of the essentials of swaraj and the absence of it is blocking
the way to all progress. Do you know that today those who are
opposing me in Gujarat are actually supporting the Govern-
ment and the latter are playing them against me?
I began to think about you and the question at 2 a.m. Not
being able to sleep I began to write to you at 4 a.m. I have
not written all I want to say on the question. This is no apology.
I have not been able to clear the point for you as it is clear to me.
What you have written in your letter about students is right. You
are thinking as an Englishman. I must not keep one thing from
you. The Gujarati is endeavouring to weaken my position on the
question by saying that I have been influenced by you in this
matter, meaning thereby that I am not speaking as a Hindu but
as one having been spoiled by being under your Christian influence.
This is all rotten I know. I began this work in S[outh] A[frica]
—before I ever heard of you and I was conscious of the sin of
untouchability before I came under other Christian influences in
S[outh] A[frica]. The truth came to me when I was yet a child.
I used to laugh at my dear mother for making us bathe if we
brothers touched any pariah. It was in 1897 that I was prepared
in Durban to turn Mrs. Gandhi away from the house because
she would not treat on a footing of equality Lawrence who she
knew belonged to the pariah class and whom I had invited to
stay with me. It has been a passion of my life to serve the un-
touchables because I have felt that I could not remain a Hindu
if it was true that untouchability was a part of Hinduism.
I have only told you half the truth. I feel as keenly about
the Kalighat as I do about the untouchables. Whenever I am in
Calcutta the thought of the goats being sacrificed haunts me and
makes me uneasy.
I asked Harilal not to settle in Calcutta on
that account. The pariah can voice his own grief. He can peti-
tion. He can even rise against Hindus. But the poor dumb
goats? I sometimes writhe in agony when I think of it. But
I do not speak or write about it. All the same I am qualifying
myself for the service of these fellow creatures of mine who are
slaughtered in the name of my faith.
I may not finish the work
in this incarnation. I shall be born again to finish that work or
someone who has realized my agony will finish it. The point
is, the Hindu way is different from the modern way. It is the
way of tapasya. You will notice the use of the word 'modern'.
For I do believe that the Christian way is not different from the
Hindu. I am still not satisfied that I have told you all that is
just now rising to my pencil. But I dare say I have said suffi-
cient for you to understand. Only please do not take this letter
to be a complaint if it is not to be taken as an apology.
Your reply to Sir William Vincent is perfect.
I know you will let Dr. Chimandas go, if he wishes to. What
is wanted is for Shantiniketan to come out boldly for non-co-opera-
tion in the religious sense. My fear is that Gurudev has not
yet realized the absolute truth and the necessity of it.
I am likely to leave here on the 4th instant on my way to
Delhi. I am in Benares on the 9th. I am sending a personal
note too, to Corbett s .
With deep love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 958
1 In Calcutta near the temple of the goddess Kali. It was then the
practice to sacrifice goats there to propitiate the goddess.
2 Gandhiji's eldest son
3 Member, Viceroy's Executive Council
4 Rabindranath Tagore. The term literally means godly preceptor.
5 G. L. Corbett; member of the Asiatic Inquiry Commission appointed by
the Government of South Africa in 1920
