284. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
February 1, 1933
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
NEW DELHI
DEAR SIR,
On the 30th December I sent you a telegram for submission
to His Excellency on the question of what is known as Dr. Subbaro-
yan's Bill regarding temple-entry. I have had no acknowledge-
ment of it, formal or otherwise. Nevertheless I deem it my duty
to make my submission to His Excellency on the decision just
announced regarding Sjt. Ranga Iyer's Bills.
Though I feel that it would have served the cause of humanity
better, in point of time, if Dr. Subbaroyan's Bill had been allowed,
I feel thankful that sanction has been granted for the introduction
of Sjt. Ranga Iyer's Bills, one of which is drawn after Dr. Subbaro-
yan's disallowed Bill.
My purpose in addressing this submission is to invite His Ex-
cellency'S attention to some considerations that warrant helpful ac-
tion by the Government of India regarding the consideration of
the Bills by the Assembly at as early a date as is consistent with the
importance of the object of the Bills.
Not knowing the procedure of the Assembly, I sought Sjt. M.R.
Jayakar's assistance and guidance which he very kindly gave me
yesterday. He told me that the Government, if they wished, could
make it possible to pass one at least of the Bills during the ensu-
ing session of the Assembly.
If such is the case, I would urge that the Government are mo-
rally bound to give such assistance as may be necessary for the speedy
consideration of the measures. By the acceptance of the Yeravda
Pact relating to the representation of the 'depressed classes', now
commonly described as 'Harijans', in the legislatures, they bound
themselves morally to facilitate as far as it lay in their power the
observance by caste Hindus of all the other conditions of the Pact,
which had reference to social and religious matters. Inasmuch as
His Majesty's Government endorsed the legislative part of the Pact,
they recognized the representative character of the Conference that
passed the various resolutions. One of them is as follows:
It is in due fulfilment of the pledge thus given to the Harijans
that the Bills have been brought. They are necessary inasmuch as
the English Law of Trusts bars the progress of reform in the shape
of opening temples to the Harijans. I am advised that the decisions
of British Courts hold it a breach of trust by a trustee who would
open temples contrary to the usage prevailing at the time of his
entering upon his trust. Therefore it is not open either to the
trustees or the congregations of the numerous Hindu temples even
if they so wished to admit Harijans if usage shows, as it would show,
that the general body of Hindu temples are not open to them
on the same terms as to the caste Hindus. But for decisions based
on the English Law of Trusts it would be possible for Hindu
pandits and the laity to vary the custom and introduce reforms.
The Bills are designed to remove this obstacle to progress and
restore the condition that existed prior to the decisions referred to
above. His Excellency may not know that cases have already occur-
red in which Harijans have been fined for entering temples in good
faith and for the sole object of offering worship. Hindu religious
usage warrants no such punishment. It enjoins purification of the
idol and the temple and prescribes purification of caste Hindus in
the shape of a bath, but no punishment of the offending worshipper.
Until therefore the Bills are passed or an equivalent is found by
the Government, the vital part of the Hindu pledge cannot be per-
formed. For me, personally, holding my life as hostage for the
due and timely fulfilment of the pledge, an indefinite prolongation
of the impediment is an intolerable agony. And as a prisoner I
have, I feel, a right to seek Government's active assistance.
I ask for no State interference in religious matters. I am per-
sonally opposed to it. In the present case what is sought is to re-
move the existing State interference.
I hesitate to point out how the Government can help the in-
troduction and consideration of the Bills. It would be presump-
tion on my part to make any such attempt. I hope however that
I have shown sufficiently clearly that this is a case for the Govern-
ment of India to facilitate the progress and passage of the Bills in
every way legitimately open to them.
Though I have shown this to some friends, I am not sending
it to the Press.
From a copy: C.W. 7925. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
