355. LETTER TO SHARDA
Shravan Vad 10, August 22, 1927
CHI. SHARDA,
I have your letter. Life is full of difficulties. If we can, like
the weaver, patiently unravel tangled yarn, only then can we
weave the pattern of our life properly.
You should know that if the Managing Committee or Maganlal
refuses to accommodate your brother in the Ashram that is after
full deliberation and you should remain calm and not get angry
with any of them. The Ashram is not an institution for correct-
ing the delinquent, but is one for giving good people education
for service and for preparing a field for service. The Ashramites
will be committing a sin if they believe that they are perfect;
"good" only means those who are like them. They would not
admit people who fail when measured by that yardstick. If we
would turn the Ashram into a home for the disabled, it must
have an altogether different set-up. You yourself can imagine
this position. And once it is turned into a home for the disabled,
which disabled person may not be admitted to it? A little
thought will convince you that we shall not then be able to start
and run dairies, tanneries, etc., but the whole pattern will have
to change. Remember one thing. You have abandoned those
family relationships which run counter to other larger relation-
ships. Your father and your brother are a father and a brother
to the same extent as those of comparable age in the Ashram or
outside. Towards these you will have the same attitude as towards
your own father or brother. Knowing this you should not grieve
because your brother cannot join the Ashram. Will your brother
be willing to go to some orphanage? Would he go to the Bardoli
Ashram? I am not sure whether he will be admitted there, but
as Bhai Jugatram is conducting a number of experiments there, he
may perhaps fit into them. But even if by chance Bhai Jugatram
keeps him, there will be the question of his maintenance. Will
your father pay it? Consider the whole question calmly and ob-
jectively and write to me without reserve.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
