54. LETTER TO WILLIAM SMITH
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
June 25, 1927
DEAR MR. SMITH,
I have carefully gone through both your papers. They are
interesting and useful for a sceptic. I am a confirmed believer,
but ill-equipped, ignorant man. I therefore want you to draw up
for me and persons like me—of this there is a respectable number—
a tangible business scheme which will enable the reader to im-
mediately put it into practice, if he has skilled assistance and
money. Could you therefore please give me such a scheme un-
embellished with argument? It would give plan and specifica-
tions, an estimate of the cost of plants, machinery, etc., and the
probable working cost of and returns from the enterprise.
I have been thinking deeply over what you and your men so
kindly showed me at the Imperial Dairy Institute. I have several
questions to ask. But for the present, I would like to say that in
order to make the institution answer Indian requirements, it needs
an addition of two things.
There seems to be no facility for studying methods of castra-
tion. The raising of the standard of the breed all over India seems
to me to be impossible until the promiscuous herding of cows with
bulls is done away with. Castration seems to be the only remedy.
The indigenous method is hideously cruel.
Secondly, it seems to me that a dairy to satisfy Indian re-
quirements has necessarily to become a tannery also. Countries
of the West have found a short cut to economic success by kill-
ing cattle which they consider to be a burden. We in India have
to deal with the economics of the cattle question subject to the
limitation that cattle have to be supported even when they give
inadequate or no return for their upkeep. Hence I feel that a
dairy scheme, which does not provide for and against this neces-
sary limitation, must be faulty from an economic standpoint. Whe-
ther the Imperial Institution can be expanded to cover these points
or not, is not for me to say. But could you give me any guidance
or recommend any literature on these points?
And generally what books will you suggest my studying in
order to enable me the better to digest the information I have
gathered during the few days' visit to the Dairy? If you have
any literature in connection with the activities of the Imperial
Dairy, and if it is saleable, I should like to buy it.
I cannot conclude this letter without thanking you for all
the facilities you kindly gave me in connection with my visits to
the Dairy.
Yours sincerely,
WILLIAM SMITH, ESQ.
IMPERIAL DAIRY EXPERT
BANGALORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 12927
