299. LETTER TO IFTIKHAR-UD-DIN
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
July 28, 1941
MY DEAR IFTIKHAR,
I have your letter of the 25th instant. You are doing good
work. I hope the District Committees will work so that Punjab
may become proof against goondaism. If the effort succeeds, it will
produce a tremendous impression on the whole of India. I regard
this work of yours as most important—much more than jail-going.
If those who have been discharged as a result of appeals do
not go again you need not worry. Their names should be re-
moved from the lists.
No member has asked me for permission to remain on. I
should not think of giving such permission. Every case of this
type or any other I have invariably referred to you.
I have read all about Dr. Satyapal. You should accept his
resignation and of others who have copied his example. You
have done well to refer to Rajendra Babu about the Parliamentary
resignation. But it follows that if [he] gives up the four-anna
membership, he should resign all other offices.
I personally think that you should ignore his Press state-
ments.
You are quite right in doing what you have about Brahma
Datta. He has written to me saying that he has apologized for
his conduct. He is very impulsive.
If I have kept a copy of my letter to Lala Dunichand,
I shall send it to you.
I share your grief about Lala Shamlal. I shall not accept
any resignation directly.
I enclose a letter of a Bhiwani cor-
respondent. He complains that you gave too short a time to
Bhiwani when you went there during your tour. He is afraid
that the atmosphere is tense there. You will see.
Farooqi is angry with me because I did not approve of his
statement of his visit to me. I told him that his statement was
in the nature of an advertisement and sent him a brief one. He
retorts that mine is an advertisement (I suppose for myself!)
My love to you and Ismat.
Yours,
BAPU
Encls.
1. Letter of Rajendra Prasad Jain-Bhiwani, 26-7-41
2. Letter of Shri Rama Sharma-Phatak, 27-6-41
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
