126. LETTER TO THE PRESS ON SATYAGRAHA PLEDGE
[February 26, 1919]
I enclose herewith the Satyagraha Pledge regarding the Row-
latt Bills. The step taken is probably the most momentous in the
history of India. I give my assurance that it has not been hastily
taken. Personally I have passed many a sleepless night over it.
I have weighed the consequences of the act. I have endeavoured
duly to appreciate Government's position. But I have been unable
to find any justification for the extraordinary Bills. I have read
the Rowlatt Committee's Report. I have gone through its narra-
tive with admiration. Its reading has driven me to conclusions
just the opposite of the Committee's. I should conclude from the
Report that secret violence is confined to isolated and very
small parts of India, and to a microscopic body of people. The
existence of such men is truly a danger to society. But the passing
of the Bills designed to affect the whole of India and its people
arms the Government with powers, out of all proportion to the
situation sought to be dealt with, is a greater danger and the
Committee utterly ignore the historical fact that the millions in
India are by nature the gentlest on earth.
Now look at the setting of the Bills. Their introduction is ac-
companied by certain assurances given by the Viceroy regarding
the Civil Service and the British commercial interests. Many of us
are filled with the greatest misgivings about the Viceregal
utterance. I frankly confess I do not understand its full scope
and intention. If it means that the Civil Service and the British
commercial interests are to be held superior to those of India
and its political and commercial requirements, no Indian can
accept the doctrine. It can but end in a fratricidal struggle
within the Empire. Reforms may or may not come. The need of
the moment is a proper and just understanding upon this vital
issue. No tinkering with it will produce real satisfaction. Let the
great Civil Service Corporation understand that it can remain
in India only as its trustee and servant not in name but in
deed, and let the British commercial houses understand that they
can remain in India only to supplement her requirements and not
to destroy indigenous art, trade and manufacture, and you have
two measures to replace the Rowlatt Bills. They, I promise, will
successfully deal with any conspiracy against the State. Sir
George Lowndes simply added fuel to the fire when he flouted
public opinion. He has forgotten his Indian history or he would
have known that the Government he represents has before now
surrendered its own considered opinion to the force of public
opinion.
It will be now easy to see why I consider the Bills to be an
unmistakable symptom of a deep-seated disease in the governing
body. It needs, therefore, to be drastically treated. Subterranean
violence will be the remedy applied by impetuous hot-headed
youths who will have grown impatient of the spirit underlying the
Bills and the circumstances attending their introduction. The Bills
must intensify the hatred and ill-will against the State of which
the deeds of violence are undoubtedly an evidence. The Indian
covenanters by their determination to undergo every form of suffer-
ing make an irresistible appeal for justice to the Government to-
wards which they bear no ill will and provide to the believers in
the efficacy of violence as a means of securing redress of grievances
with an infallible remedy, and withal a remedy that blesses those
that use it and also those against whom it is used. If the covenan-
ters know the use of this remedy, I fear no ill from it. I have
no business to doubt their ability. They must ascertain whether
the disease is sufficiently great to justify the strong remedy, and
whether all milder ones have been tried. They have convinced
themselves that the disease is serious enough, and that milder
measures have utterly failed. The rest lies in the lap of the gods.
I am,
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 6440; also The Bombay Chronicle, 1-3-1919
