272. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
WARDHA,
Silence Day, December 9, 1929
SISTERS,
When I was with you this time, there were so many things to
keep me busy that I forgot to talk to you about two matters. One
of them came to my notice so late that there was no time then to
talk about it. The other went out of my mind altogether.
I shall take up the second matter first. Our women do not let
themselves be examined by [male] doctors or even be operated upon.
This is a false sense of shame and has its origin in an impure state of
the mind. In this matter I prefer the practice in Western countries.
I do know that at times it has had undesirable consequences. When
an unscrupulous doctor has a simple-minded woman patient
whose passion is easily aroused, evil results have followed. But this
happens all over the world in any conditions. That should not
deter us from pursuing good and necessary activities. We should
have confidence in ourselves. I, therefore, liked it very much that
Santok got herself operated upon by Dr. Haribhai and my
belief in her courage was confirmed. In Phoenix we had made
this a common practice. When Devdas was born, a male doctor
was in attendance. Ba had a complaint of the vaginal canal and
required an operation. It was performed by a male doctor. Ba is
very brave but simple about such matters. She certainly requires
my presence at such times, but that is a small matter. Everyone
requires a trusted person by his or her side on such occasion, and
that is but right. My purpose in writing about all this is to explain
to you that in the Ashram we should cultivate this type of courage
and abandon false shame. Hundreds and thousands of women
suffer because of such shame. We have before us Vidyavati's
example. She would not let her private parts be examined even
by a woman doctor. We wish to cultivate the innocence of
Shukadevji. We should not, of course, pretend to have it so long
as we have not succeeded in acquiring it. There are men whose
passion is aroused by the mere touch of a woman, and there are,
likewise, women who are aroused by the mere touch of a man.
Such persons should certainly force themselves to live as untouch-
254
ables, even if that means their continuing to suffer a disease. Here
I have only suggested that you should give up false shame. Those
who are afraid of impure feelings being aroused in them by the
mere touch of a man should admit that candidly and behave with
due regard to the limitations of their nature. Such a passionate
nature is a kind of disease and a man or woman who suffers from
it should avoid the touch of a person of the opposite sex. The
disease will probably disappear in course of time.
Read this part of the letter several times and try to under-
stand its meaning. If you do not understand it, ask me. Valjibhai,
too, will explain it if you ask him. It is, of course, simple
enough.
The second point arises from Umiya's wedding. Immediately
after the wedding, she started wearing ornaments in her ears and
nose. I did not like this at all. The giver and the receiver were
both at fault. What was done was against our practice in the
Ashram. Umiya could have started wearing ornaments after she
had gone to live with her husband, but the poor girl could not
wait till then. I mention this incident not as a complaint, but in
order to draw a lesson from it. Let no other girl follow Umiya's
example. Poor Umiya, after all, has not been trained in the
Ashram. Jaisukhlal has not paid sufficient attention to her. Her
mother is a good-natured woman who follows tradition, good or
bad. Umiya's fault, therefore, is pardonable. I have drawn
Umiya's and her husband's attention to this matter. From him,
she has received nothing except a small choodi. I have, however,
mentioned this matter so that no man or girl who knows the
rules of the Ashram may act in this manner. I also wish to draw
another moral from this. Lustful men have degraded woman.
They have taught her ways of dressing and behaving which might
please them. They have taught her to adorn herself. Woman did
not see in all this her slavery and her degradation. She, too, was
attracted by lustful thoughts and, therefore, consented to get her
nose and ears pierced, put on fetters on her feet and became a
slave. An evil man can easily drag a woman behind him by
getting hold of her nose-ring or ear-ring. It passes my understand-
ing how any thoughtful woman can put on such things which
make them helpless. Real beauty is of the heart. Let every woman
in the Ashram save herself from external adornment and resist
being pierced in the nose. Is it not enough that draught animals
are so pierced? It is now six o'clock and so I stop here. I
remembered you so early in the morning, for I expect much
from you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3711
