112. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
June 29, 1932
DEAR SUMANGAL,
Your letter to hand. Your argument with regard to rape
seems convincing. In circumstances similar to those in which
you believe it right for a woman to take her life, it may be
right for a trustee to take his life when somebody tries to rob
the property under his care. But the woman and the trustee
themselves should think that it is their dharma to do so. You or
I have no right to accuse a woman of failing in her dharma if
she does not kill herself to prevent herself from being raped.
If, unlike her, the trustee dies while defending the property under
his care, we cannot assume, either, that he has done the right
thing. We can judge in either case only if we know the mental
condition of the person concerned at the time. Though I say
this from the point of view of justice, personally I believe that
a woman, if she has courage, would be ready to die to save her
honour. In discussing this matter with women, I would, there-
fore, certainly advise them to kill themselves in such circum-
stances and explain to them that it was easy to take one's life if
one wished to do so. I would do this because many women be-
lieve that, if there is no man present to protect them or if they
have not learnt to use a dagger or a gun, they have no choice
but to submit to the evil-doer. I would certainly tell a woman
who believes so, that she need not depend upon anybody's weapons
to protect her and that her own virtue will protect her. Even
if that does not happen, instead of using a dagger or any other
weapon she can kill herself. She need not consider herself weak
or helpless.
And now concerning hypothetical questions. I had under-
stood your purpose in asking the questions to be exactly what
you explain it to be, but I would describe such questions as hypo-
thetical. In some cases questions of this nature may be asked,
but it would be better not to ask any. In any case, you should
not make it a habit of asking such questions. Anybody who does
that commits the same error which a student of geometry who
asks his professor to solve riders does. Such a student will never
learn geometry well. That will also be the fate of a person who
seeks the solutions of problems arising out of a principle from
other people. Apart from this, however, there is a great flaw in
the very nature of questions raised on the basis of ethical prin-
ciples, namely, we never come across in life an instance exactly
similar to the one we had imagined. If there is ever so slight
a difference between the hypothetical case and the actual one,
the answers in the two cases are likely to be entirely different.
That is why I have cautioned you that, if you are not con-
fronted with a problem relating to an actual instance which you
have come across, you should not make it a habit to seek from
me solutions of hypothetical problems in order to be prepared
for such eventualities. If you do that, my answers to hypotheti-
cal questions will, instead of helping you in an emergency, pre-
vent you from finding the right solution. The mind of such a
person becomes incapable of original thinking. The better thing
would be to grasp the basic principle thoroughly and to assimi-
late it, and not to mind if, in applying it in solving your problems
or those of other members in your family, you make mistakes.
You will learn from such mistakes. But you should not
approach others, even those who understand the principle better
than you do, to seek solutions of hypothetical problems in order
to prepare yourself to meet them when they arise. Such a pro-
cedure destroys one's self-confidence. The author of the Gita
seems to have written verse 10 of Chapter X because he knew
this from experience. Doesn't the Lord tell us in that verse that
"to these, ever in tune with Me, worshipping Me with affec-
tionate devotion, I give the power of selfless action, whereby
they come to Me." If you substitute "Truth" for "God" in this
sentence, the meaning will be perfectly clear. I hope you now
understand what I meant to say. I do not mind your hypothetical
questions, but I fear that I may do you harm by encouraging
you to put such questions. I am sure at any rate that I would
not be helping you. Take, for instance, your question regarding
rape. Though I may give a definite reply now to your question
regarding a hypothetical instance, I would give quite a different
reply if an instance like that actually occurred, and support it
with convincing reasons. It is also very possible that I would be
able to point out a difference between the hypothetical case and
the actual incident. I write all this from experience about co-
workers. I will stop here now.
I am glad to learn that your health has improved.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 268-70, and Bombay Secret Abstracts,
Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. 11, pp. 75-
