324. LETTER TO H. KALLENBACH
NANDI HILLS (NEAR BANGALORE),
May 13, 1927
LOWER HOUSE,
As I lie in bed and look up old undisposed of correspondence
and revive old and sacred memories, I chance upon your letter
of 27th February sent with Andrews's letter from your home at
Inanda, and I revive so many pleasant and sacred memories.
Every letter that you have written during the last two years-
and you have not written many-has been a despondent letter,
distrustful of yourself; but as long as I live I am not going to
lose faith in you. I am hoping that some day as before you will
have a fatigue of the exciting things that give you momentary
pleasure and that you will at least come to India to meet an old
friend and renew many old acquaintances. You have made a
provisional promise to do so next September or October. Do come
if you can and then stay as long as you like or as little as you like.
I am glad you are having short spells of Andrews's company.
I have not come across a humbler or more godfearing man
throughout my varied experience.
You don't want me to say anything about my illness; because
I see you do get Young India and read it. I am at the present
moment taking my cure in a little hill in the State of Mysore
where an army of devoted volunteers and many of my closest
co-workers are looking after me. Mrs. Gandhi and Devdas are
with me. The names of others would mean nothing to you.
So I do not give them. But when you do come, you will see
them all and recognize them as having been with me on this hill.
This loss of strength came in the twinkling of an eye. Latter-
ly I had put such terrific strain upon the brain that I was af-
raid of a crisis and it came just when I was arranging to have
a lighter programme. But God seemed to say, 'I shall demolish
your pride before you recognize your mad method and show you
that you were utterly wrong in rushing as you have been doing,
thinking that it was all well because it was for a good cause.
You fool, you thought that you would work wonders. Have
your lesson now and learn whilst there is yet time that God
alone is to wonder-work and He uses whom He pleases as His
instrument.' I am taking the chastisement I hope in due humi-
lity and if He raises me from this sick-bed, I am making Him
promises that I shall reform my ways and shall seek still more
strenuously to know His will and do it.
I hope you are keeping in touch with Manilal. He has
got a girl with a strong character as his wife. She is the best
girl I could possibly have found for him. Chance put her my
way. She belongs to a godly family. Remember you are one of
the trustees for Phoenix and I look to you to discharge your trust.
Sastri will be in South Africa probably within a month of
your receipt of this. I have had long chats with him about you
and your associations with Gokhale. Do try to be close to him
and bring all our old companions in touch with him.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12350
