458. LETTER TO DR. H. W. B. MORENO
CAMP AZAMGARH,
October 3, 1929
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your letter.
I do not know how to console you.
You sent me a report and you did not want me to hide my
thoughts. I could not serve you by so doing. Why is 'half-borns'
a most degrading epithet? It has a well-known meaning and I
have seen it used in writings which are not intended to ridicule
the Anglo-Indians. Should I be wrong in stoutly resisting any
claim that may be put forth by anybody as by the ruling race?
This must be so of course because the claims put forth by the
ruling race are being resisted and are now in the melting pot. I
know that your birth is not a matter of your choice but the attempt
that is being made to conceal the birth is a matter for sorrow
even as an attempt made by Indians living in the colonies or in
Europe has appeared to me to be a matter for sorrow when they
have vainly tried to conceal their birth. Perhaps I am in much
closer touch with Anglo-Indians who do not even know the
name Anglo-Indian and who only know that their male parent
was a European who had deserted them and their mothers. Are
you sure that the leaders are "now prepared to throw in their
lot with the Indians"? I know that such is your own personal
wish but such by no means is the opinion even of the majority
of leaders. You ask me in the last paragraph of your letter to
reproduce it in Young India. I shall gladly do so if you insist but
I would dissuade you from so insisting. Your letter lends itself to
much hostile criticism. The Anglo-Indian problem is far deeper
than you seem to imagine and it cannot be dealt with by mere
writing in the newspapers. It can be dealt with by enlightened
Anglo-Indians realizing the gravity of the position and stooping
to lift those who have neither a fair skin nor money to live up
to the dangerously artificial life that the leaders are living. I must
confess that I am not so much interested in the affairs of the
microscopic well-to-do minority of Anglo-Indians as I am in the
multitude that are living in a state of awful isolation neglected by
their own and despised by those who consider themselves to be
full-born.
Yours sincerely,
MR. MORENO, GENERAL PRESIDENT,
THE ANGLO-INDIAN LEAGUE
2 WELLESLEY SQUARE, CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 15631
