250. LETTER TO N.
June 20, 1933
MY DEAR N.
I have kept under my mattress three of your letters among
others. But it is only now that I am able to dictate my reply. I
take the latest, just handed to me, first. Your letter to the Gov-
ernor of Madras is being posted today. It might have been word-
ed slightly differently but the change is not important enough to
warrant the delay in sending the letter. You need neither worry
nor be disgusted with yourself for being late at prayers three or
four times in two days. There is such a thing as being disgusted
with oneself and yet continuing the wrong. I have seen so many
such cases. Therefore, what I suggest to you is to calmly analyse
the reason for being late and to avoid it. You have given the
reason in these cases yourself for not leaving your work in time
for prayer. Therefore you should now be careful and leave the
work in time to reach the prayer ground in peace. Constant watch
over one's minutes guards one from all such difficulties.
Your long letter of 13th instant is too imaginative and too poe-
tic for me. You have plenty of poetry in you. Your imagination
knows no bounds. I want you to transmute these into an inexhaus-
tible power for real service.
We have all to aspire after being
childlike. We cannot become children because that is impossible.
But we can all become like children. In spite of the knowledge
gained, we can become simple, guileless, candid and natural like
them. Here the word 'natural' has a definite meaning. All the
virtues that we may prize should not be an artificial growth, pos-
sible only in a hothouse, but they must be as natural to us as
perhaps mischief is natural to children. We love their mischief
because it is so natural to them. The mischief of grown-up ones
lies in their being naturally good, restrained, humble and proof
against temptation.
I want to warn you against putting the construction you have
put upon the scarcity of the monthly flow. My fear is that the
decrease is not, in you, a healthy sign. You are not yet free from
the sex emotion, and unless you are entirely from it in thought,
word and deed, irregularity on scarcity in your monthly condi-
209
55-14
tion must be regarded as a sign of some internal derangement. I
am afraid that ordinarily speaking, you will take a long time to
reach that condition, unless you and I and the Ashram are so
blessed that you suddenly reach the requisite condition of natu-
ral purity that would stop the monthly flow and be a sign of
perfect health. When you reach that state you will have no
boils, etc., and no other bodily or mental ailment. You will be
the happy possessor of the qualities that we pray for every evening
at the prayer time. I refer you to the last verses of the second
chapter of the Gita.
Pray, do not disturb yourself over the milk treatment though
I know that 10 lb. of milk is an unnatural diet. As a medicinal
treatment it might have great potentialities. These are certainly
claimed for it by many people. Dr. Mehta, who is treating me,
swears by it. Anyway, for the time being it is suspended, and it
may have to be given up altogether. You must trust me to act
cautiously and with sufficient restraint. Though slow, my pro-
gress is steady. I am just now taking my ordinary quantity of
three to four lb. milk a day and a liberal supply of fruit, consisting
of oranges, pomegranate juice and grapes. This is meant for
both you and Amala who also is disturbed over my diet.
I see that you swear by Kashmir, but let me tell you that
it is not the climate that suits every constitution and in any case
I cannot go to Kashmir in search of health. I must find my
health where my work lies. That is what I did before also and
that, too, was after a fast. I happened to be in the Ashram and in
spite of importunities of friends I would not stir out of the Ashram.
The same God who saw me through 21 days will see me through
this convalescence, if such is His will, and the best thing that
you, Amala and others can do to quicken the progress is by dis-
charging your respective duties as fully as is possible for you to do.
In your last letter you had said nothing about your boils and
nothing about my suggestion as to the ways and means of re-
storing S. to his normal weight. After all he is not only to
reach his normal weight but he is to show an increase in his weight
and height, in general development both physical and mental.
I think this answers all your questions.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19102
