221. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
July 17, 1932
DEAR DEVDAS,
Received your letter dated 30th June, written on the back of
the Urdu letter of Hamid Ali, yesterday noon, that is, on the
16th July. Nowadays my post has become very irregular. It
comes to me after taking a big round. It must be said to be my
good fortune that I get it in spite of that-what rights a priso-
ner has? Imprisonment means absence of rights. As I take the
meaning of imprisonment to be this I can keep my mind steady.
Similar is the case with visits. For the most part you will be
able to see Mahadev. But there cannot be prepared a time-
table as you think. Either you should take the risk of not being
granted an interview or you should give up the desire of visit-
ing him.
I would have been glad no doubt to see you and
Lakshmi if I could, but the step taken by me certainly seems
to be proper. Ba will feel the shock the most. But she is born to
endure shocks. All those who form or keep connections with me
must pay a heavy price. It can be said that Ba has to pay the
heaviest. I have this much satisfaction that Ba has lost nothing
by it.
As soon as I received a telegram about Varadachari I also
wired to him. I also wrote letters. I got receipt of my wire
also by wire through Rajaji. Yesterday I received a letter from
Lakshmi to that effect; in it there is no receipt of my letter on
the subject. But my post about that time went the wrong way.
None of us had the idea that you are to be released in Sep-
tember. It does not seem that you will be transferred from
there, though I got a detailed report of your health from H.E.
the Governor. I hope that your health will not suffer now. The
presence of Hanumanprasad proved to be much peace-giving
to me. I find from Hamid Ali's letter that he had sent Ramacharcha
also. I am reading it. I read the stories about martyred lad,
agriculture, alchemist, etc. It is true that I could not under-
stand some words. Otherwise there was no difficulty. I have
not got yet the book on arogya, i.e., sanitation, from anywhere. It
will be better if Al-Faruk is not received from Delhi. We had a
copy in the Ashram. I have asked for it. I will read it after I
finish Ramacharcha. I like it. I now remember to have read it
before. I find the meanings I had noted down in it. It is not
wrong if this book is read two-three times. You must be writing
to Hamid Ali and others in English. You must form a habit to
write in Urdu. My idea is to write a short letter in Urdu to
him. His handwriting resembles that of a professional writer. He
must be a professional writer. We have lost the art of writing. It
is still preserved in Urdu.
The reason why I am taking milk is the (persuasion of the)
Superintendent of this place. He was disturbed and my health had
a little bit given way and hence I am taking milk. There was no
necessity for it. It was likely that the health would become nor-
mal soon. But I thought it wise not to carry on experiments
here. I do not see any benefit of taking milk in particular for the
present. The weight which had gone down had increased, that
is, it is 105½ lb. It had gone to 103 lb. I do not see any effect of
taking milk on the hand. The pain was already there when I
was taking milk. But this pain cannot be said to afflict me. Because
it aches only when the elbow is given a particular movement.
When that movement is stopped there is no pain. Such move-
ment is (almost) stopped. There is no cause for anxiety at all.
Vallabhbhai has begun spinning on the Gandiva spinning-
wheel and also the study of Sanskrit. When he heard that Rajaji
was studying it, he became enthusiastic over it. He has begun the
study in right earnest. He had sent for the 24 parts of Satavle-
kar's guide. He has finished (in six days) the first part thereof.
Now he is reading the second part. His study is going on very
briskly. The books by Satavlekar are on the whole good. They are
easy to learn. Perhaps you must have seen and read them also.
My study of Urdu, astronomy and political economy is going on.
At intervals I read some religious books also. As for instance I
read Vaidik Vinay of Abhay Sharma Now I am reading a book
called Swadhyaya Samhita . It contains selections from the Vedas
and other books, and below them there is a translation in Hindi.
Mahadev is learning French and reads something else also. He
writes for me if there is anything. He devotes one hour for
Vallabhbhai. He also cooks bread for me. I take bread instead of
the bread from the bakery. There is no chaff in the bread from the
bakery, while it is contained in the bread prepared at home. That
is the reason of going back to the ratio I am writing letters with
my own hand because mostly while observing silence I am
writing letters. I also get most of them written (by someone).
Whatever I write I do not feel any difficulty in writing with my
right hand. I am not allowed to write with the left hand, and
hence I use the right hand. I am writing the history of the Ashram
during leisure. I hope to finish it in a short time. I am spinning
on the Magan spinning-wheel.
Jalbhai Naoroji can now move about. He has escaped just
from death.
I have returned Rajaji's letter to you. I am wondering
about your letter dated 2nd June. I will cause a search to
be made here again. Whatever (blessings) you like from my
companions.
Blessings from
BAPU
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(3), Pt. 11. p. 331. Also Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 296-
