588. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
WARDHA,
September 12/[13]2, 1935
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,
Your letter. Your suggestion that the expenses should be
reduced is quite pertinent. Let Krishnan Nair remain in Calcutta
for a year. In the mean time you and Hardhyan Singh can do
what you can. Any enterprise that depends solely on one person
is bound to break down ultimately, and how long can you keep
Krishnan Nair in Delhi?
This time I chanced to notice the secret hatred K. N. bears
towards the rich. He too realized that his heart has yet to digest it.
What you write is quite correct. His stay in Bengal should prove
beneficial. Gradually he will acquire mastery over everything.
Meanwhile the other Ashram inmates too will have been tested.
Only those can be defined as Ashram inmates who have no financial
or any other kind of obligations towards parents and other relatives,
whose wants comprise only food and clothing and who are ever
alert in the observance of ahimsa and the other eleven vows. That
is why one who is inclined to put aside even the smallest amount
is disqualified as an Ashram inmate. Keeping this in view no one
should be paid more than Rs. 10 and moreover anything saved
over and above food, etc., should be returned to the Ashram.
But we can employ on a salary those whose services are needed
and who in spite of their spirit of service cannot, owing to their
other obligations, work except on a higher remuneration. We
should strictly limit our expenditure in accordance with the sums
available in the budget. You can circulate this to all the workers
currently employed. This will shift the responsibility from your
head and have the desired effect. My health is satisfactory. The
diet consists of milk, vegetables and occasionally fruit. Part of this
letter has been written by me and the rest dictated, with many
interruptions in between. In the mean while Rajaji arrived yester-
day and informed me of your having fallen ill; how is it? I
hope that you have recovered by now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2434
