481. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
NANDI HILL,
May 18, 1936
MY DEAR REBEL,
You must have seen all I have written about Dr. Ansari.
I may weep over his death selfishly. But there need be no sor-
row over his death, if one is certain, as I am, that it is only
the perishable body that has perished, not the indestructible
soul within. Having put off the old garment, it will put on a
new and better one. His services are not lost. If we have
faith we may be sure that he is serving even now though in an
unseen manner. Being used only to relying upon the feeble and
often unreliable evidence of our senses, we refuse to believe that
things go on which transcend our senses and which are far more
durable and useful than the passing show our senses note and
make us alternately weep and laugh. Enough of this wisdom-
spinning.
Yes, I shall try to secure for you ivory goods and the rest
within the limits assigned by you.
Ku. is flourishing. Dr. Subba Rao will examine him and
Shanta about the 20th instant.
I hope you have been able to persuade Dalip to take "rest
and be thankful". The court work will go on without him for
a few weeks or months. The services have taken good care
about their work.
Why do you worry about your inability to invite Mira?
These are limitations of a joint family which both you and I
must recognize. Friendships do not exist, must not, for selfish
gratification. Mira is quite happy though she is melting in
Wardha heat. She is joyous in that she is superintending the
creation of my hut. She is looking after the minutest detail
with the greatest care. And she is glad too that I shall be her
neighbour in the very near future D. V.
You are exasperating. When you meet me you will forget
all about Kallenbach. Why not out with the talk? Let me
share the joke or own up the shame, if I see any in what I
might have said. But I hear so many things about myself about
which I am an utter stranger that I shall not be surprised if what
you have heard ranks among them.
Love to you all.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3573. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6382
1 A German architect who became a friend and associate of Gandhiji in
South Africa; vide also "Letter to Amrit Kaur", p. 451.
