75. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
March 20, 1920
DEAR FRIEND,
I hope you have read my proposal about the observance of
what may be called the Satyagraha Week from the 6th to the 13th
April. I am hoping that during the week there will be no diffi-
culty about collecting ten lacs of rupees. If there are volunteers
of known respectability and unquestionable honesty we need have
no receipts but simple collection from all and sundry. Monied
men and women can go out and collect in the quarters best
known to them. But it is not so much the manner as the matter
which I wish to emphasize. I hope that there will be no diffe-
rence of opinion as to the desirability of passing the week in the
manner suggested by me or of having a memorial in connection
with the massacre of the 13th. In presenting the case to the
people I would advise that the memory of the dead and not of
the atrocity be treated as the impelling motive.
I trust that those who do not approve of the method of satya-
graha will not on that account refrain from participating in the
collection. This should be a truly national memorial.
But there is fasting and prayer too on which I myself lay
even greater stress than on the memorial; for if there is universal
fasting and prayer I know that money and whatever we want
will rain down from heaven without further effort. I wish to
give you my experience in this direction as a specialist par excellence.
I do not know any contemporary of mine who has reduced fast-
ing and prayer to an exact science and who has reaped a harvest
so abundant as I have. I wish that I could infect the nation with
my experience and make it resort to fasting and prayer with
intelligence, honesty and intensity. We would thus, incredible
as it may appear, do millions of things pertaining to the nation
without elaborate organization and checks upon checks, but I
know that fasting and prayer, to be as effective as I have found
them to be in my own experience, have to be not mechanical
things but definite spiritual acts. Fasting then is crucifixion of the
flesh with a corresponding freedom of the spirit and prayer is a
definite conscious longing of the soul to be utterly pure-the purity
thus attained being dedicated to the realization of a particular
object which is in itself pure. I hope therefore that if you believe
in the ancient institution of fasting and prayer you will dedicate
the 6th and the 13th to the purpose and induce your neighbours
to do likewise.
Then there remain the three meetings which I doubt not you
will organize and make them a thorough success.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Letters of V. S. Srinivasa Sastri, pp. 74-
