515. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 13, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,
I had offered to write to you in English if you had difficulty
in deciphering my handwriting. Today I have to dictate if I am
to write to you at all, not because I have not got the time to
write but because the heat is so terrific and some kind of insects
are so pestering me that it is better for me to dictate than to
write.
I am anxious to know how you have taken this walking
pilgrimage and, if you have appreciated the step, I want you to
throw yourselves heart and soul into it. If you are in Calcutta,
I would like you to collect as if I was in Calcutta and a purse
had to be presented to me. That very purse can be sent to me
here. I have told Dr. Bidhan that about the middle of June I
should come to Calcutta for two purposes: first to talk with those
who would wish to about the Poona Pact and secondly for collec-
tions. But I am developing a reluctance even for doing that. On
the contrary, if nobody would care to come to me to discuss the
thing, I need not go to Calcutta for it. It can be attended to in
August wherever I may be. There is no hurry about it. As to
the collections I should have faith enough that whatever is to come
will come whilst I am performing the walking pilgrimage. Every
day makes me stake all on this walk.
I have discussed the whole
thing with Satisbabu.
He must give you some of his own exper-
iences. Of course I am having experiences which I would not
have on any other account.
I read your letter to Chandrashankar. In the altered circum-
stances I have given up the idea of having any rest. This easy
walk every day obviates the necessity of rest. Therefore we can
meet now only at some point in the tour. It is no use thinking of
my inviting you to Patna. After finishing Patna, that is on the
morning of the 20th or the night of the 19th, I leave for Cuttack
or some point in Orissa to resume the walk and to continue it till
the middle of June, that is, till the rains set in here. You could
easily come and pass one or two days in the pilgrimage or pass a
Tuesday with me, because on Mondays there will be no march and
on Tuesdays also none except in the evening. The idea is to re-
sume the march at 5.30 on Tuesday.
Here is a letter from Gopi. You can perhaps throw more
light upon what she writes.
I have already written to you telling you what action Dr. Ansari
and Rajendrababu had taken about the National Call. I would
like you to furnish me with all the cuttings that you may come
across.
In view of Sahni's letter I do not despair of his abiding by the
instructions that might be given to him. That should be enough
for us.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 7958. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
