449. LETTER TO "THE STAR"
Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 30, 1907
TO
THE EDITOR
THE STAR
[JOHANNESBURG]
SIR,
You have raised the bogey of the "Indian Peril" and based it on
Mr. Ritch's able letter to The Morning Post. Fortunately for the country,
you have evidently mis-read Mr. Ritch's letter and ascribed to him a
demand not made by him for political rights on behalf of British Indians.
If you will be good enough to re-read the letter, you will find that, instead
of claiming any such rights, Mr. Ritch has repudiated the claim more
than once. He says:
In deference to the demand of the white colonist for protection against
an unrestricted influx of Asiatics, the qualifications imposed by an Immigration
Restriction Law, upon an educational basis, are assented to. He (the Indian)
seeks no political power, and admits the right of municipalities to control
the issuing of trading licences, with power of appeal to the judicial tribunals
of the Colony against inequitable administration.
If words have any meaning, you have, in the above sentences in
the letter you have printed, a complete denial of the charge made against
the community.
The ground, therefore, being cleared as to the allegation of the
British Indian wanting to have political power in South Africa, with
your permission, I would venture to draw your attention to the fact
that you are creating animosity between two communities living under
the same flag without the slightest occasion, and, in support of my
statement, I ask you to read the compromise offered by the British
Indian Association, whereby everything that will be done by the Regis-
tration Act can be done immediately and without Imperial sanction
being necessary. Greater identification is the cry raised. British Indians
have themselves offered to exchange their lawful documents for those
bearing sufficient identification particulars as may be mutually agreed
upon. Not that the present documents do not contain enough details
to identify the holders. The compromise has been offered to soothe
the agitated mind of the colonist. Moreover, the compromise, strange
as it may appear, goes further than the Asiatic Act itself, in that the
former includes the taking out of permits by minors who have reached
the age of discretion, the same to be decided by the Colonial Secretary.
You may ask why, if the offer is sincere, should there be any fuss
about the Act. The answer is obvious. British Indians do not wish
to be classed as criminals, as they undoubtedly are by the Act. They
repudiate totally the suggestion that there is any illegal influx on a
wholesale scale, or that there is any countenance of such influx on the
part of the leaders of the community. Repressive legislation is required
when those to whom it applies are not compliant and do not do voluntarily
what is asked of them. British Indians have always claimed to be law-
abiding, and, therefore, object to the class legislation which is a denial
of the claim. You may call this sentiment, if you will. Still, it is one
which is very real for the community I have the honour to represent,
and it is hardly necessary for me to give you illustrations of sentiment
having ruled men's actions from the time of Adam.
The suggested compromise can cost little. If there is any doubt
as to its effectiveness, why not give it a trial while the Act is being
considered? Will it not be better and more Imperialistic for you to
advocate the adoption of the compromise than unnecessarily to inflame
the populace against harmless subjects of the Crown?
I am, etc.,
M. K. GANDHI
The Star, 30-4-1907
