206. LETTER TO A. CARTWRIGHT
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 9, 1908
DEAR MR. CARTWRIGHT,
I am very much obliged to you for your note and for the great inte-
rest you are taking in the troubles of my countrymen. I would lose
much rather than the sympathy of public men in the Transvaal. The
burning of the certificates next Sunday will, therefore, be postponed.
I take it that you are closely following the development of the struggle.
Mr. Sorabji, as you know, is not now to be tried under the Immig-
rants' Restriction Act at all. 1 Indeed, to secure conviction under that
Act will, in the case of an educated Asiatic, be, I am sure, impossible,
without the instrumentality of the Asiatic Act. It just proves my conten-
tion. Owing to the stupidity of the Prosecution and the greater
stupidity of Mr. Chamney, I was able to take advantage of a flaw in the
evidence for the Crown, and Mr. Sorabji was discharged. To show the
vindictiveness on the part of Superintendent Vernon and Mr. Chamney,
he was re-arrested immediately, Mr. Vernon saying the re-arrest was be-
ing effected under instructions from Mr. Chamney. As luck would
have it, I went over with Mr. Sorabji to Marshall Square Police
Station and saw Deputy Commissioner Potter, who, I believe, per-
ceived the mistake that had been made, and almost immediately
after I had seen him, ordered Mr. Sorabji's discharge from custody. I
do not know what will happen tomorrow. I am half inclined to think
that there will be a bungle again. If so, I propose to take advantage
of it and secure a discharge again. Ultimately, of course, Mr. Sorabji,
1 Vide "Trial of Sorabji Shapurji-I", pp. 345-.
unless some settlement is arrived at, must pay the penalty for wearing
a brown skin and go to gaol. He seems to me to be a determined young
man, and wishes to offer himself as a sacrifice on behalf of his educated
brethren.
I enclose for your perusal a letter that has been signed by
Mr. Hosken, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Doke, Mr. Perry, Mr. David Pollock
and Mr. Kallenbach. It will be forwarded to General Smuts today.
You have, I dare say, seen the letter addressed by Mr. Essop Mia.
Another is being addressed today, informing him of the postponement
of the mass meeting of which, too, I send you copy herewith.
I hope you will pardon me for inflicting all this upon you, but, as
you are there, amid your many activities, doing the Asiatic work also,
I thought I should pass on to you all the information in my possession.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
A. CARTWRIGHT, ESQ.
PRETORIA CLUB
PRETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4832
