172. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
October 27, 1933
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,
It is three days since Mani, Mridu, her uncle and Babo
arrived. Babo doesn't feel shy with me this time. His health also
is fine. He and I play on the Japanese sadhu's drum. The sadhu
is a jewel. He is extremely frank, humble, cheerful and courteous.
He is learning Hindi. He also spins on the charkha and the
takli. He observes all the rules scrupulously. I have given many
hours to both the young women. This morning I gave nearly
two hours.
I will give more time still at 11.30. They have
come in great haste and are in equally great haste to return.
They have, therefore, given me notice that they intend to return
today by the Mail train.
Mani's leg seems to require electric
treatment and Mridu has to attend on some women who are ill.
The two have formed an excellent pair.
. . .2
Pattabhi was here. I hardly met him for ten minutes. He
had turned up without intimation. Jamnalalji rarely permits
anybody much time with me. Even to the representatives of mill-
workers [from Ahmedabad] he permitted one and a half hours
in all in three sessions. He guards me with the strictest vigilance.
I was certainly grieved by Vithalbhai's death, though for
himself it was a deliverance. We had well known that he would
die in a foreign country. He seems to have been looked after
very well. Subhas, it seems, was beyond all praise. From all
sources I hear reports of his wonderful attention to Vithalbhai.
I have written to him. You also should write. My letter was
posted before the news of Vithalbhai's death was received.
Swami will remain here for some time yet. Thakkar Bapa
has gone to Brindaban in search of N. His compassion has
no limit. The woman is out of her mind.
She never mis-
behaved here.
She had gone insane. She has still not come
out of the woods. If she comes back, I will take her in again.
Amala is working hard at present. Duncan has buried himself
in a village. Mary Barr is still here. She has recovered from her
illness. Vinoba has been doing wonderful work for Harijans in
villages.
Mani has gone with Anandi. Bablo has left too.
Devdas writes to me regularly. Dr. Datta paid him a visit.
Khurshed seems to be a little ill. I have written to Dr. Datta
and asked him to see her too. Do not worry about my tour. I
will take care of my health. It is Rajaji's wish that I should tour
the South first. Anandi went and saw Lakshmidas. She is firm
in her resolution not to marry [just now]. Give my blessings
to Chandulal.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 36-
