234. LETTER TO A. J. BEAN
JOHANNESBURG,
March 7, 1906
DEAR MR. BEAN,
I have your letter about Mr. Mannering. I am sorry that he feels
unsettled on account of the conversation with him. I intended to talk to
him when I was there, but I hadn't the time. When I went to the Press,
I was incapable [sic]. I have been thinking over the alleged understanding I
gave to all. The circumstances were these, so far as I can recall them. I
was talking about Pillay or somebody at that time. I did say that no-
body, because he taught or did anything, need feel that he was to go as
soon as he finished it, that everybody should consider himself absolutely
safe in the Press, so long of course as the Press was not actually starved. I
do not know whether Mr. Mannering was at that time on the pay basis
or whether he was a schemer, but the assurance was not given after Mr.
Mannering left the scheme and returned again. I believe that when he
was taken over I told Chhaganlal — the letter must be in his possession —
that if Mr. Mannering was taken back, he should do so on a monthly
basis. I may not be correct, but such is my impression. In any case,
I certainly never had the intention of giving any assurance that every-
body, that is to say, those who did not belong to the scheme, was to con-
sider himself safe under all circumstances, and at the salary he was get-
ting. All I wanted to convey was that there was not the slightest intention
of driving anyone out when others were raised to take his place. To that
opinion I adhere even now. I do not know what Mr. Mannering intends
doing, but so far as I am concerned, I am quite willing that he should re-
main on at £8 per month, at least up to the end of this year. I know
that you think that he should get a higher wage, and if the schemers
agree, I have not the slightest objection; also if the schemers consent to
it, you may treat this letter as binding on me and Mr. Mannering may
rest assured that no matter what changes my personal opinions may under-
go, he should consider himself a fixture, at least up to the end of this year.
I am writing to Mr. Mannering also separately in the matter.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A. J. BEAN, ESQ.
c/o Indian Opinion
PHOENIX
From a photostat of the original : S.N. 4318
