258. LETTER TO LORD LINLITHGOW
ON THE WAY TO BENARES,
May 9, 1939
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW,
I purposely restrained myself from troubling you whilst you
were touring and taking part-holiday.
Many thanks for your prompt reply about Talcher. The
condition there defies analysis. One day hope rises high and
then it is dashed to pieces. It is not now the Raja's plighted
word, it is that of the representative of the Paramount Power
that is being weighed. The people won't understand the fine
distinctions as to when an official speaks with authority and
when he speaks without. I know you are watching and feel
confident that you will see that the people of Talcher are freed
from harassment well before the rains begin.
The very simple affair of Jaipur still hangs fire. I just
understand that some prisoners have been discharged. Civil dis-
obedience having been discontinued there seems to be no cause
for keeping any prisoners and that too in a snake-infested old fort.
Nor is there any meaning in keeping Sheth Jamnalalji practically
in solitary confinement, the cause for his detention having
disappeared. The authorities were afraid that he was entering
Jaipur State to promote civil disobedience. And the demand of
the people is less than elementary. They would be satisfied if
they have the guarantee of civil liberty. I should have thought
that Jaipur would present no difficulty.
Lastly, Rajkot. The Award has been a halter round my neck.
The situation has taxed and is still taxing all my resources. I
am applying what appears to me to be a new and difficult
technique. Though I am not giving up the support of the Para-
mount Power, I am keeping it as much as I am able in the
background and am trying to woo Durbar Shri Virawala. On
going back to Rajkot from Delhi I saw that I had a moun-
tain of difficulties to face owing to the Award itself. They are
all still there. And they are piling up. But I see that even for
decency's sake I must not run to you or your representative
on every pretext. I shall come when I must. Meanwhile, I shall
try to woo Durbar Shri Virawala and see if I can get anything
approaching the Notification of the Thakore Saheb. If you have
leisure you will watch what is happening in Rajkot. I must
say that my experiences of the working of the political department
are not happy. I observe that the Viceroy, no matter how strong
he may be, is not powerful enough to carry out his intentions even
as the Congress President is not with his voluntary departments.
You will not mind the comparison. A knowledge of our little
difficulties enables me to send out my sympathy to you instead of
blaming you for what appear to me to be innumerable pin-pricks.
Having wandered in Calcutta and Brindaban, an out-of-the-
way village in Champaran, I return to Rajkot hoping to reach
there on 12th instant.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: Lord Linlithgow Papers. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
