292. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Unrevised
SEGAON,
December 26, 1938
CHI. JAMNALAL,
Recently there was a thought for the day in English. It
means: Man should not think about his shortcomings but
should think about his virtues, for man becomes as he thinks.
This does not mean that one should not see one's faults. One
must see them, but one should not brood over them and lose
one's balance of mind. We find the same advice in our Shas-
tras. You should, therefore, have confidence in yourself and be
sure in your mind that you will be an instrument of good. You
have already been so.
You should overcome excessive greed. You should give up
private business even if it is intended to help you in public ser-
vice. If you cannot do that, you must lay down strict limits.
You should try to retire from politics.
If you think that
you must remain in it, and if you can do so on your own
terms, you should devote yourself exclusively to the advancement
of the C. P. But your real field is altruistic business. Hence you
should again use all your ability for the Charkha Sangh. That
activity can make full use of your intellect, your moral qualities
and your business acumen. In politics lots of dirty things go on.
You are not likely to get much satisfaction from it. If the Char-
kha Sangh succeeds fully in its object, we shall easily get purna
swaraj. If you take up that work, you can also do some work
for village industry, eradication of untouchability, etc. But that
depends on your inclination. I have said this only to dissuade
you from excessive greed and to suggest to you work which would
give you heart-felt satisfaction.
The other thing is impure thoughts. This is a rather diffi-
cult problem. If I understand you rightly, I feel that you
should stop the practice of being nursed by women. All cannot
digest it. In our circle, it can be said that I am practically
the only one who follows such a practice. The measure of my
success or failure will be judged after my death. For me the
thing is still an experiment. I cannot confidently claim that
I have succeeded. I yearn to reach the condition of Shukadevji.
I am miles away from such a condition. If you have confidence
in yourself I have nothing to say. But if you don't have it,
and if I understand you rightly, you should examine yourself
deeply and make the necessary change. I am not suggesting
here stopping of women's service.
If none of these things find an echo in your heart, you need
not do them. Continue to consult me on the matter. There
is no cause at all for despair . You are not a fallen person, you
are a votary of truth. There is no possibility of a fall for such
a person.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2998
