163. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
Friday, Asadha Sud 6, July 16, 1926
CHI. JAMNALAL,
The land in the possession of Joshi Girijashanker which we
had been thinking of acquiring must have been purchased today.
The total area is 19 vighas from which he will retain one vigha
at the extreme end. Land measuring 18 vighas and the buildings
will be bought for a total of Rs. 21,000. The owner or his tenant,
whoever lives there, will be entitled to draw water from our
well. This right will cease if he sells that one vigha. When he
sells it, we shall have the right of pre-emption at a price to be
fixed by a panch . We have to pay Rs. 5,000 just now as guarantee
money and shall have to pay the remaining 16,000 within one
month. The name of the person in whose name the land will
be registered is not being entered [in the sale-deed]. I can think
of three possibilities: 1) in the name of the Ashram; 2) for cow-pro-
tection activities; 3) in your name: If you wish to buy it in your
name, you may.
Personally, I am inclined to buy it in the
name of the Ashram and use it, if necessary, for setting up a dairy
or a tannery. Alternatively, we may set up the dairy and the
tannery on some other plot of the Ashram land and use this land
for agriculture and residential buildings. We are very much short
of buildings just now. Whatever the purpose for which we buy
the land, you will have to arrange for the money there.
If necessary, you may also see Jugalkishoreji and Ghanshyam-
dasji in this connection. I think we shall have to start construct-
ing a few more buildings as soon as the rains are over. Please wire
to me what is to be done about the money and in whose name
the document should be registered. We have had fine rains here.
The river is in flood almost every day.
The Hindu-Muslim quarrel is growing there from day to day.
Try if you can discover the cause. Write to me in detail.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2868; also S.N. 12202
