283. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
March 31, 1933
MY DEAR HORACE,
Your long letter pleased me immensely. You should repeat
the performance whenever the spirit moves you.
You will see that I have made use in the current Harijan of
one important portion of your letter. The other important part
is with reference to reproducing in the Harijan the views of Dr.
Ambedkar and those of the sanatanists. This is not always possi-
ble. I gave much thought to it. To make the paper self-support-
ing, to refuse all advertisements, as the initiator of the movement
to give my views as exhaustively as possible on the current happen-
ings about Harijans, to combine all these things in one paper
becomes almost an impossible task. And then the reproduction
of sanatanist views and those of the Ambedkar school was unnece-
ssary for the vast majority of readers, because they knew all the
sides of the question and they had been published in the daily Press.
It could then be of use only to the foreign readers, of whom
there are naturally but a select few. Whether few or many they
could not be neglected, and I knew that they were being well-
supplied with the literature outside what could be handled by the
Harijan. And this extra reading they had to do, whether through
the Harijan or through the original sources, and I came to the
conclusion that I must leave them to gather the different view-
points through the original sources. And because I have done so,
it has been possible for me, even from almost the beginning, to
make the Harijan self-supporting. I have certainly taken extra-
ordinary precaution not to give any colouring to the views of the
other sides, whenever it has been necessary for me to give them.
More than this I must not say.
Thus, though I am not able to give effect, as you would wish
it, to this part of your letter, you know that everything you say
must produce its invisible effect upon my mind, and therefore
whatever you think is worth passing on to me you should do un-
hesitatingly. The freer and fuller the criticism of friends and asso-
ciates like you, the lighter and better will my work be, and such
criticism will itself be an important part of our contribution to
the Harijan cause.
Please share this letter with C. F. Andrews, Jack Hoyland
and others.
I hope you are now so well that there is no occasion even to
make any enquiry about your health.
Love to you all from us all.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1420
