4. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Posh Vad 10 1971, Monday [January 11, 1915]
CHI. MAGANLAL 2 ,
I have your letter. I was filled with tears of joy when, nearing
Bombay, I sighted the coast. I am still beside myself with joy.
I don't like Bombay, though. It looks as if it were the scum of
London. I see here all the shortcomings of London but find none
of its amenities; this is also one of the benefits of living in India.
It would seem that Lady India had resolved to exhibit nothing but
the scum of London lest we should be thrown off our balance by
the amenities. I feel suffocated by all this public honouring. I
have not known a moment's peace. There is an endless stream of
visitors. Neither they nor I gain anything.
My health is good, on the whole, and the same is true of Ba .
I am divided in my heart over three places, Rajkot, Porbunder and
Bolpur. It will take more than a month before I am there . You
do well to stay on patiently there. A farmer should not go about
from place to place. A farmer's son would be violating his dharma
if he were to neglect sowing, that he might go and see his father.
You have spread your fragrance there; it must be that some good
deeds of yours and mine are now bearing their fruit. Mr. Andrews
writes much in praise of you. We are to meet before long, so I
won't write much. This letter is meant for you all.
I think all of us should know the Hindi, Urdu, Tamil and
Bengali scripts. It would be good if the children could be taught
all these. I gave much thought to this matter while on board
the ship.
I have made considerable progress in the study of Bengali. I
shall leave here on the 16th for Rajkot. I shall return before
February 5, to leave for Poona immediately and from there proceed
to Bolpur. Let me know the shortest way to that place. Ask
Mr. Andrews or Mr. Pearson about it. I am glad that your diffi-
culties about food are over. I have been living entirely on fruit,
subsisting mostly on bananas, groundnuts and lime.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Tell me if I should bring anything. I have not been able to
bring any books from England. We may get them here, if you
send me the names. Mr. Kallenbach has not been able to come,
since he did not get the permission.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C. W. 5660. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
