606. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
PESHAWAR,
October 8, 1938
MY DEAR IDIOT,
I am glad my wire went to you before your letter and wire
came into my hands.
I offer no apology for not telling you anything about the closing
of the experiment. I had prepared you for it. And then I wrote
a note announcing the termination. There was no desire to keep it
from you. A copy of the note herewith. Mahadev may not have
it handy. He must read it to you, if you can't. It is Kanu's hand.
No apology either for suppressing Mahadev's letter. Mahadev
had guessed (wrongly) that something which I forget had happen-
ed on the basis of your talk with him. As it had not, and as
Mahadev had told me not to deliver it to you if his guess was
wrong, I did the right thing. It would have been wrong on my
part even to have mentioned the thing to you and taken your
time [and] my time for nothing. Supposing somebody swears at
you thinking that you had been painting your face every day, I
would correct the person but would certainly not feel the call
[sic] that that person had done you an unintentional wrong. Now
you understand, I hope. I won't ask for your apology.
I have never enjoyed so much rest as Khan Saheb gives me.
No visitors, no talks practically even on slips of paper. The result
is I have been able without effort to write five articles for Harijan.
You will give me your reaction to the articles on the Euro-
pean situation.
Your estimate of N. N. Joshi is correct. He prevaricates
without knowing that he is doing so. But he is a good worker.
This tour has taught me one lesson. I must not put such
heavy burdens on you.
What I had hoped would be a light
thing evidently was a serious drain on your energy. I hope that
you will soon regain your lost health such as it is.
I know that Mahadev & Co. will flourish under your grand-
motherly care. I was anxious for M. to accept your invitation.
And Shummy is there-first class for such occasions. I shall look
forward to your daily bulletin.
We are flourishing. There is no cold yet. I have never
been so fit as I have felt latterly. There is an interruption be-
cause the old devil in the shape of animal passion is at me. When
he assails me, I do feel worried. But the thing will wear away.
So you see the most relevant thing I do share with you. But you
are not to disturb yourself over this. It worries without disturbing
me or making me morose. I seek the presence of God.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3638. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6447
