59. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS GANDHI
January 1, 1931
BHAISHRI MANMOHANDAS,
I got the pages of your booklet. I have gone through them.
You have collected some useful statistics. But the title of the
booklet is certainly not appropriate. It gives more and more
reliable information about mill-cloth than about handloom cloth.
After reading it, I felt that its title "How to Compete with
Foreign Cloth" was too ambitious for the contents. You have not
attempted a careful and detailed examination of hand-spinning.
If you have realized that the master-key for the solution of the
problem is hand-spinning, you should put the truth in your own
manner. If you are not convinced that it is so, you should not
give it a place in your scheme yielding to the present atmosphere.
I am becoming more and more convinced that, without hand-
spinning, permanent boycott of foreign cloth will be impossible
and that even hand-weaving cannot survive without it. If you
share this view, you should explain it convincingly.
Despite my partiality for hand-spinning, I don't think that
Talchekar's contention is supported by facts. I have even had
correspondence with him on the matter. His claim that hand-
spun yarn is superior is not borne out by experience. By care-
fully co-ordinating a variety of factors, it may be possible to
produce hand-spun yarn which would be stronger than mill-yarn,
but the ordinary hand-spun yarn will always be weaker than mill-
yarn. But what does it matter? As compared to hand-made
bhakhari, the biscuit produced in a factory with the help of dies
will always be perfectly round in shape, smooth and attractive
in appearance, and still the former will continue to be preferred
to it. You have tried to convince the readers that mill-cloth and
handloom cloth can supplement each other. It may be possible
for some time to regulate things in that manner, but not per-
manently. The division of the booklet into sections is not accurate.
Go through it again. I have nothing more to add.
Vandemataram from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8
47
