89. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 10, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,
I also had a letter about Rohtak, and had read about the
matter in the papers too. Lala Sham Lal, though he is in Lahore,
has assured me that he will look into the matter on behalf of Rohtak,
especially as he is minting money in Lahore.
We have no choice but to put up with Mr. Young's antics.
After all, the axe can strike at the tree only if a wooden handle
helps it.
You seem to have upset Mathuradas. I read a copy of his
letter to you. I wonder what you could have written. Whatever
that was, I know that Mathuradas is not at fault in the least.
He is always very careful about things. But he easily gets angry.
Nobody should get angry with old men like us who have grown
up as slaves, even if they blurt out anything thoughtless. But can
we expect young people to bear with old men? Please, therefore,
apply some balm. I shall of course write to Mathuradas. A
copy of the letter to Dr. Bidhan is enclosed. I have sent a copy
of it to Devi Babu and also written to him in Hindi.
I enclose the letter received from Assam, and also a copy of
my reply.
I see that I shall be confined here till November 7 at any
rate. In a way I like that, because slowly I am disposing of the
work which has accumulated and can give time to the visitors.
Probably I shall also regain more strength during the time.
Jamnalalji had unexpectedly to go to Bombay to help a friend,
and so he might not have been able to send you a draft of the
programme here.
He will return within four days. If you leave out the C.P.
and draw up another programme as I have suggested, you will
be ready with it sooner. The entire C.P. must be covered at one
time. Our party will include (1) you, (2) I, (3) Mirabehn, (4)
Chandrashankar, (5) Ramnarayan, (6) Nayar and anybody else
whom you might bring with you.
Sastri wants to shift Harijan to Madras. His argument seems
convincing. He is rusting in Poona. It is, therefore, likely to be
shifted in about 15 days.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1126
