454. LETTER TO PYARE LAL GOVIL
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
November 19, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,
Your touching letter of 28th ultimo has been given to me.
My sympathy goes out to you in your affliction and I should be
glad indeed if this letter brings you any comfort.
In my opinion you are in no way to blame. Having got the
lady doctor you were quite right in trusting her. I do not be-
lieve in constant change of doctors and hakims. We must trust
those whom we get to tell us when they need assistance or are
in doubt as to their diagnosis. Sometimes it may be found that
the trust was misplaced. But these are risks and chances of life
which we must take always. I hope therefore that you will not
worry yourself over what you consider was your negligence. This
much you know yourself that you did not wilfully neglect anything.
More no man can do.
Now for the answers to your questions:
(1) No prayashchitta is needed because in my opinion there was
no carelessness on your part.
(2) No one can give rest to another soul. Her rest will come
from herself.
(3) It is impossible to say what would have happened if
other assistance had been procured. In spite of the ablest expert
help kings have to die.
(4) There ought not to be much sorrow or fuss over an
inevitable event. Death is the lot of every created thing, nor need
it be considered as a calamity. Death is in reality a deliverance.
(5) What the soul does after discarding a body is in each
case surmise but it is a certainty that the soul does not perish
with the body. Let us trust the laws of God or nature for the rest.
(6) States before birth and after death are invisible as the
Gita affirms and experience confirms. But we can infer from our
present state that the condition after death is at least likely to be
a second, though modified, edition of the present.
(7) We the survivors can certainly help the departed dear
ones by wearing into our own lives all that was good in them.
For if they know anything of what happens here they must be
consoled by the knowledge that we are treasuring their memories
by adopting what was best in them.
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
[PS.]
One question has been omitted by oversight. God is never
powerless. But His laws are immutable. We do not know them.
Nor do we know His will at a given moment. Therefore we adopt
within bounds such remedies as may commend themselves to us.
Prayer is to the God within. It does not provoke God to change
His will but it enables us to know His will which is everything.
M.K.G.
From a copy: C.W. 9305. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar; also Harijan, 15-2-1948
