229. LETTER TO PYARELAL
April 16, 1938
CHI. PYARELAL,
Now you may know the reason why I feel light at heart.
If I want to act on your letter, who is there to stop me? But
you should know my decision. Sushila's pure love has showed
me the way. For your sake she is starving herself. I was over-
awed when I learnt about it. There is no pretence, no outward
show. I was terribly perturbed. If Sushila has to starve herself
as she is doing, is my love so only in name or does it serve any
purpose? Mother's tears made me resolve that if Pyarelal's life
could be put on the rails then I would be qualified to keep
Sushila. If that does not happen, I would stand disqualified in
my own eyes. If my non-violence is not capable of melting your
heart, how would it help in winning swaraj? You have become
part of me. If I cannot keep you, I am worthless. Mother's
words were not the words of an ignorant woman. Her candid
words emanated from her great anguish. They went direct to
my heart, and she was fully entitled to tell me all she did.
When others hear such words of truth, it will only benefit them.
Hence, at that time I lightened my heart by taking the decision
that if Pyarelal cannot convince me of the justice of the step
he wishes to take, he should give up his fast, whether complete
or partial. If in his innermost heart he cannot be persuaded, he
can by all means abide by his decision and then I will eat when
he eats and starve when he starves. When he fasts I will fast
too. If he should leave, my fast will commence from that very
moment. This thought occurred to me after I heard about
Sushila. I made my resolve after seeing Mother's anguish. She
will tell you everything on reaching home. God has willed other-
wise. If you go from here, you will be breaking your vow. I
cannot quietly sit at Segaon till the visit to the Frontier Province
materializes. And (at Segaon), you should start nothing until I
am settled there (Segaon).
But this is making a mountain out of a mole-hill. A new
phase has begun for me. My love for you will be as much as
135
for swaraj. If the spark that Sushila has kindled is enough, God
will grant me the strength to quietly adhere to my resolve.
If you have become part of me, then your duty is clear.
You must do as I say. By doing so, you will benefit yourself,
me, Sushila and Mother, who is like a cow. Then all of us
will strive together for swaraj. The happiness and peace of
many others like Mahadev, for instance, depend on your peace
of mind. If you can believe it, do this much in good faith.
Nothing should be given up for fear that I may resort to fast-
ing. Duty should never be forgotten. If you think that it is
clearly your duty to go, who am I to stand in the way? If
there is any room for the slightest doubt, give the benefit of it
to me whom you have accepted as father.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
