202. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[ JOHANNESBURG,]
July 6, 1908
THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
A mass meeting of over eight hundred British Indians was held
yesterday at the Hamidia Mosque to consider the Indian position as
it is affected by the Supreme Court decision on the application for the
return of the voluntary registration applications. My Association still
respectfully trusts that these forms may be returned. The mass meeting
decided to hold another next Sunday for the purpose of burning voluntary
registration certificates, in order that, in the event of the claims of
domiciled British Indians and others not being considered by the
Government, they may range themselves alongside of such Indians
and suffer with them. My Association is most anxious to avoid such
a drastic step and, therefore, once more humbly approaches the Govern-
ment for assistance.
My Association reminds you of the speech delivered by you at
Richmond just after the compromise, and reported in The Star of the
6th February last. In that speech, you are reported to have stated as
follows: "He had told them, that is the Asiatics, that the law would
not be repealed so long as there was an Asiatic in the country who had
not registered." And again, "until every Indian in the country had
registered, the law would not be repealed". This shows that the only
condition of repeal was complete registration. My Association need
hardly say that practically every Asiatic in the Colony has made
voluntary application in terms of the compromise. But now my
Association understands that the Government, in exchange for repeal,
ask British Indians to consent to the following:
(a) That British Indians holding Dutch registration certificates,
for which they have paid either £3 or £25, should become prohibited
immigrants, whether they are within the Colony or outside the Colony.
1 This appeared in Indian Opinion under the title "The Ultimatum" and was part
of the precis forwarded by Ritch to the Colonial Office along with his letter of July
22, 1908.
2 At this meeting, Sorabji Shapurji declared his determination not to submit to
the registration law. He also claimed as an educated man free right of entry into the
Transvaal.
3 On February 6, 1908
(b) That pre-war Indian refugees, who have not yet returned to
the Transvaal, should become prohibited immigrants.
(c) That the voluntary applications which are now under con-
sideration by the Registrar of Asiatics should be finally decided by the
Registrar without the right of appeal to the Supreme Court.
(d) That British Indians who can pass the severe test under the
Immigrants' Restriction Act should also be treated as prohibited
immigrants.
My Association ventures respectfully to submit that it is highly
unfair to ask the British Indian community of the Transvaal to consent
to a deprivation of the rights of some, in whose name the community
cannot even speak with any effect. It would be one thing for the Govern-
ment to pass legislation independently of the community affected
thereby, and another thing to ask the community to consent to such
legislation restrictive of the liberty of a portion of that class.
With reference to (a) and (b), my Association ventures to state
that their claims have never been summarily rejected, as it is now proposed,
but that pre-war refugees have received more or less consideration and
have been granted permits to return. The repeated declarations of
responsible officials after British occupation have made it perfectly clear
that the domiciliary rights of pre-war Asiatic residents would be respected.
In wishing to treat such people now as prohibited immigrants, a most
novel and, for British Indians, painful, position is sought to be created.
My Association is quite willing that the burden of proving bona-fide
ownership of registration certificates should be thrown on the holders,
and that the claims of those pre-war residents who do not hold
registration certificates should be limited to residence for a fixed period
of, say, two years, such residence to be proved to the satisfaction of a
court of law, always with the right of appeal to the Supreme Court,
so as to bring decisions of different lower courts into harmony. My
Association further, in order to prevent any possible frauds, is prepared
to accept a reasonable period within which all these outstanding claims
should be submitted. It is within the knowledge of my Association
that at least one Indian is outside the Colony who paid, in 1885, the
sum of £25 to purchase his domicile in terms of Law 3 of 1885 before
it was amended, and who holds European credentials, and has not
yet been allowed to return. There are several such cases, though not of
payment of £25 but of £3. My Association invites your attention to
the following clause in Law 3 of 1885, which shows clearly that the
fee of £3 was imposed to entitle the payer to settlement in the country:
Those who settle in the Republic for the purpose of carrying on any trade
or otherwise shall be bound to have their names entered in a register to be
separately kept for the purpose by the Landdrosts of the various districts, in
accordance with a form to be prescribed by the Government. On such
registration, which shall be effected within eight days after arrival, a sum of £25
sterling (subsequently £3) shall be paid.
With reference to (c), it would be manifestly unfair to deprive
those Indians who have already applied for voluntary registration of
the right of having their claims examined judicially, when the claims
of those who are entitled to return may be judicially examined. My
Association fails to see any reason for such a differential treatment
between Indians having similar claims.
With reference to (d), my Association cannot help feeling that
the proposal that Indians domiciled in the Transvaal should be consenting
parties to the deprivation of the rights of Indians with high educational
attainments, professional men, to whom British Indians in general are
always prone to look up for assistance, is extraordinary. My Association
respectfully contends that the interpretation of the Immigrants' Restriction
Act leaves it open for Indians with European education to enter the
country, and the fact that Mr. Sorabji, who has entered the country
to test such interpretation, is now to be tried under the Asiatic Act for
failing to produce a registration certificate, seems to uphold the contention
of my Association and to show that the Government have abandoned
their interpretation of the Immigrants' Restriction Act. My Association
thinks that, so far as the European Colonists are concerned, in this
question there is no substantial point involved, whereas it is one of deeply
cherished sentiment to British Indians. In effect, the vast majority of
even educated Indians will be shut out of the Colony because of the
stringency of the test, and my Association does not object to any reasonable
stringency, so long as education of a real type is respected and recognized
as much in an Indian as in a European. In Natal, where the test is by
no means so severe as in the Transvaal, according to the last Immigration
Report, only a few Indians entered under the test. Australia, which
has also a similar education test, has successfully solved the problem
of Asiatic immigration. My Association, therefore, ventures to trust
that the Transvaal will not be an exception, and that the Government
will be pleased to spare the natural feelings of British Indians in the
matter.
My Association, in conclusion, respectfully trusts that the Govern-
ment will take into serious consideration the above representation,
and finally close the Asiatic question so far as it is affected by the Asiatic
Law Amendment Act; and thus, not only fulfil its part of the compromise,
but give the lawful Asiatic residents of the Colony the rest and peace
to which their conduct during the recent trouble has, by universal
acknowledgement, entitled them; and, last but not least, to save the
1 The India Office source mentions the figure 81.
2 Vide "Natal Immigration Department's Report", Appendix IV.
British Indians from the step to which they are committed, as above
mentioned, in the event of the Government's unfavourable decision.
I have etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 11-7-1908
Also India Office, Judicial and Public Records: 2896/08
