134. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
BARDOLI,
February 3, 1922
CHI. MAHADEV,
I hope you got my reply to your letter. I make use of your
letters regularly.
I do not see any difficulty as long as you do everything with
the permission of the jailor. There can be still less difficulty when it
is necessary to break the jail rules deliberately and openly. I have
already written to explain when the rules may be disobeyed.
1 The original has "1921", but on February 3, 1921, Gandhiji was not at
Bardoli, nor was the Bardoli problem an issue under discussion; the year 1921,
therefore, is evidently a slip for 1922.
You must have seen that a decision has been taken that Bar-
doli should make the start. I have now, according to our practice,
sent an ultimatum to the Viceroy which expires on the 11 th. This
means that we have got to do something tangible on that day. My
letter must have reached the Viceroy today. If he concedes the
demands put forth in it, civil disobedience will be suspended for
the time being. The demands are that the Viceroy should with-
draw his notification, should release the prisoners and declare
that our peaceful activities will not be interfered with. If he con-
cedes these demands, we would resume our work of organizing our
movement peacefully. Freedom of the Press is covered by our
demands. The Viceroy will not perhaps grant this demand, but
he will have to ultimately, if Bardoli shows its strength of self-
sacrifice and if the other parts of the country remain peaceful.
You must now be running self-government there. You should
elect the president and other office-bearers and see to it that
everyone accounts for every minute of his time.
Ramdas and Krishnadas are with me. Gangabehn too has
come. In a few days, I shall call some weavers, spinners, etc., from
the Ashram. True, weaving activity here is progressing rather too
slowly.
Vithalbhai will most probably stay here.
Your health ought to become very good.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 7866
