235. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
'PARNAKUTI', POONA 6,
June 15, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
As soon as I was able I wanted to deal with two of your im-
portant letters. Your telegram and your letters have helped me
greatly, but I must not deal with the past for I have still to
be miserly in the expenditure of my energy. I am glad you are
there able to look after your brother to a certain extent.
You were quite right in thinking that, if I thought that your
presence was necessary here, I would at once write or cable
as the occasion required. But I am more than convinced that
your place is essentially there. I am not so sanguine as you
are, as to your influence. The meaning I put upon the India
Office listening to you is that they are much more courteous
than they used to be. I want you there for a higher pur-
pose and a higher influence. You being there are able to hold
together all those who are friendly to the cause and what is
more you must be silently and imperceptibly permeating the
best English mind with the truth that is in you. All this will
tell in the end. Whilst God is great and omnipotent and works
in mysterious ways and therefore all things are possible for Him,
humanly speaking I see not the slightest immediate cause for
hope of improvement in the present position which so far as I
can see is as bad as it can possibly be. This Ordinance rule has
struck the people dumb. The ignorant mass have become
terror-struck. They do not know what is in store for them on the
morrow. The well-to-do are trembling in their shoes simply
through a vague fear of their being overtaken by some Govern-
mental Act. They feel that their only safety lies in an abject
surrender to the will of what to them is a power which seems
even to override Providence itself-a power that will compel sub-
jection to its will at any cost. And so there is a kind of dead
calm which even in my bed, isolated though I am from contact
with people through the orders of doctors, I can't help sensing. It
is the peace of the cemetery as Lord Irwin once or twice said in
1930 when he refused to make further use of the terrible powers
which it was possible for the Government of India to use when-
ever they liked. Though therefore I see no hope in the near
future, whilst you and I do not ignore it, we have in view the
distances in working for and at truth. Time does not count, or
if it does, it counts in our favour. For here there is all hope, no
cause for despair, for there is a certainty of the final triumph of
truth, so long as there is some living representative of it. Thanks
be to God, so far as I can see there are certainly several, if not
many, representatives of truth today in India who will count
no cost too great for the vindication of truth.
Having got this immovable faith in me in the rightness
of the cause, there is no danger on this side of any precipitate
action. Every step that is necessary will be taken with the great-
est deliberation. I shall personally leave no stone unturned to
secure an honourable peace. So far as I can judge I shall fail,
but that does not worry me. The harder General Smuts became
the harder and the oftener I knocked at his door till it was
banged in my face, but patience was rewarded and so it will
be in this case. Abdul Ghaffar Khan cannot be sacrificed.
Khorshed Naoroji over 30 years in age, a woman free of
hysterics, full of faith and spirituality, went to the Frontier,
lived with Abdul Ghaffar Khan, came in intimate touch with
people. Devdas next went and both these told me that they
were convinced that there was no guile about Abdul Ghaffar
Khan, that he always said what he meant and meant what he
said. They admit that he is hot-tempered, hasty in action, but
has no belief in violence, is in secret league with neither Ama-
nullah nor anybody else. His sole ambition is to see his people
happy and free from terrorism. My own personal experience is
that he is amenable to control and discipline. I do not re-
member his having ever refused to carry out his promises. He
has come to me whenever I have wanted him. My own firm
opinion is that he is much misrepresented in the official circles
and that what they do not want is his influence among his people.
This he undoubtedly has, because he is self-sacrificing, simple
and brave. It is once more a repetition of the old policy of
cutting off tall poppies. If what is insinuated about Abdul
Ghaffar Khan is true, that must be proved by an impartial
tribunal and neither the Congress nor I personally would have
anything to say if the charges against him are true. But the
tribunal must be an acceptable tribunal. I do not want a
second edition of the Meerut Case. As you know full well I
have no sympathy with Communism, most of the Meerut priso-
ners were daggers at me. They missed no occasion to vilify
or insult me. But that is of no consequence. They have been
punished for holding particular opinions, not for any act that
they have done! And what a punishment! But that is merely
symptomatic of the deep-seated disease. There is no intention what-
soever on the part of the Indian Civil Service to give up power
and all it means, nor for that matter is there any intention on
the part of Mr. Baldwin or Sir Samuel Hoare to do otherwise.
Now for your important argument about untouchability.
But there is this initial flaw about it. My life is one indivisible
whole. It is not built after the compartmental system-satya-
graha, civil resistance, untouchability, Hindu-Muslim unity
and several other things I could name are not different things
to be taken and handled. They are indivisible parts of a whole
which is truth. I can't devote myself entirely to untouchability
and say: 'Neglect Hindu-Muslim unity or swaraj.' All these
things run into one another and are inter-dependent. You will
find at one time in my life an emphasis on one thing, at an-
other time on other. But that is just like a pianist, now em-
phasizing one note and now other. But they are all related to
one another. Therefore you see how it is utterly impossible for
me to say: 'I have now nothing to do with civil disobedience or
swaraj!' Not only so, if 1 attempted any such thing, 1 could
not do it. Full and final removal of untouchability 1 can show
you to your satisfaction, is utterly impossible without swaraj.
This letter will be too long and unnecessarily so, if 1 gave you
chapter and verse to prove my statement.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 1300; also S.N. 19097
