25. LETTER TO ANANDSHANKAR DHRUVA
August 17, 1918
BHAISHRI ANANDSHANKARBHAI 2 ,
Your worrying on my account bespeaks your love for me.
Here is an exact description of what I have been through: On
Monday and Tuesday, I suffered unbearable pain, even worse, if I
could apply a stronger adjective still. I remained almost unconscious
on those two days. I wanted to scream all the time, but controlled
the urge with great effort. On Wednesday I felt better compara-
tively, and since then I have been improving day by day. Mov-
ement is still out of the question, thanks to extreme weakness.
I shall have to be in bed for some days, but I am hopeful that
everything will be all right in the end. The position being this,
the question of taking medicine, as suggested by you, does not
arise. If you indeed want to know my views on medicine, I shall
certainly let you have them some day. Any doctor will admit
that it would have been almost impossible to overcome an ailment
such as mine in so short a time. What I have said should suffice
to reassure you.
I have read your award. The workers were waiting for it
as people do for the rains and now they will have peace. I, too,
was awaiting it. Although they have been getting 35 per cent, I
believed your award would greatly strengthen their position.
I must tell you the cause of my ailment. I have often re-
volved in my mind, while lying in bed, a line from a bhajan we
often sing in the Ashram. Shri Krishna says to Uddhav :
Mysterious is the way karma works itself out.
To be sure, we cannot do otherwise than sing to this effect,
for our ignorance of many things is boundless, but, in fact, the
working of karma is not so mysterious as all that. It is quite strai-
ght and simple. We reap as we sow. We get what we deserve.
In this illness, I can see my own fault at every step. I must ad-
mit that nature had given me many warnings. I paid no heed
to them and persisted in my ways, committing one mistake
after another. I got punished for the first mistake; the punish-
ment for the second was severer still. This went on, the severity
of the punishment increasing with every lapse, as was but just.
I see most clearly that there is no kindness like nature's. Nature
is God and God is love; and every mistake is punished in love.
I am learning much through this illness.
Yours,
MOHANDAS
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. IV
