111. LETTER TO G. E. CHATFIELD
ASHRAM,
September 29 [1919]
DEAR MR. CHATFIELD,
Anasuyabehn has just shown me the order regarding the levy
to be made from the inhabitants of Ahmedabad including the mill-
hands on account of the April disturbances. I observe that the
levy from the mill-hands is to be collected today by the mill-owners
paying to the Hazur Deputy Collector one week's wages out of the
amount held by them as caution money on their account. I venture
to think that this levy will come upon the mill-hands as a perfect
surprise. Will it not be better to give them some time to realize
the situation and to make individual or collective payments
themselves. The proposed summary procedure may be suitable
from the Government standpoint, nay, even be agreeable to the
mill-owners. But the principle of leaving totally out of consideration
the party that is to pay seems to me to be dangerous and demoraliz-
ing. I should imagine that the Government are interested in the
mill-hands realizing and recognizing their own dignity and becom-
ing conscious of their own responsibility.
Moreover, I do not know whether you are aware that the com-
ing days are auspicious days for both Mohammedans and Hindus.
The Moharram festival is always, all over India, a time of anxiety
for the Government. I have no doubt that this matter has been over-
looked by you as well as others who are responsible for fixing the
time of levy. But you will agree with me that the mill-hands who
are even ordinarily suspicious will jump to the conclusion that the
time chosen for collecting the levy has been specially selected in
order to wound their feelings and cause them embarrassment. I
therefore venture to suggest that the collection from the mill-hands
may be deferred till after the Diwali holidays. Meanwhile I need
hardly assure you that you will depend upon those who are at all
connected with the mill-hands doing their best to facilitate col-
lection. I know that you will treat this matter as very urgent and,
if you at all agree with my argument, issue the necessary orders. 1
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the handwritten draft : S.N. 6904
