173. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
ANDHERI,
March 18, 1924
DEAR MOTILALJI 1 ,
I have your telegram about rejection of the Finance Bill. I
rejoice because the victory gives you joy, but I cannot enthuse over
it, nor am I amazed at the victory. With proper discipline and
tact it was not an impossible feat, and I never doubted your very
great tactfulness and persuasive eloquence and your patience with
threats, and I entirely agree with you that, if you had more time
for organization and a larger backing from the country, you would
have carried everything before you in the Provincial as well as the
Central Legislature. What, however, I cannot get over I explain-
ed somewhat to Lalaji . Since then my views have developed
further along the same line, and at one time I thought of dictat-
ing a fairly long letter setting forth my views, but I held back for
three reasons. I doubted the wisdom of the course. Knowing how
busy you are, I felt I ought not to inflict a long letter on you, and
thirdly, I wanted to conserve my energy for the things I must do
from day to day. If you are able to carry out the original pro-
gramme, we shall meet before long.
I hope in the midst of your very wonderful activities you are
keeping good health.
Yours sincerely,
[PS.] I have just received your second wire. How I wish I could
see eye to eye with you and thus share your joy to the full.
PANDIT MOTILAL NEHRU
25, WESTERN HOSTEL
DELHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 8525; also C.W. 5118
1 Motilal Nehru (1861-1931); lawyer and politician; co-founder of Swaraj
Party; elected to Central Legislative Assembly in 1923 and 1926; presided over
Committee which drafted Nehru Report, 1928; President of the Indian
National Congress, 1919 and 1928
2 On March 17, on a motion by Madan Mohan Malaviya, the Central
Legislative Assembly had withheld leave to introduce the Finance Bill by
60 votes against 57. Motilal Nehru's telegram, dated March 18, said: "Finance
Bill again introduced today with Viceroy's recommendation. Assembly refused
leave without division."
3 Lala Lajpat Rai
