107. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
BORSAD,
Unrevised
July 1, 1931
DEAR SATISBABU,
I have your letter. Don't expect any donation from Ahmeda-
bad. What I would like you to do is to discuss the whole thing
with Mr. Birla. You should also find out ways and means of
interesting the middle class Bengalee and the zamindar class in the
khadi work as also in the amelioration of all the poor people.
Why should there be no response from the Bengalees either for
khadi or for famine relief? There is something wrong about the
method of work here. You should do this work through Rashtra-
bani . The poison that you see about you will be neutralized only
by the most correct conduct on our part. It needs utter self-
effacement. I wanted to talk about all these things to you when
we met, but it was no good. Bombay is about the worst place for
me to hope to have any quiet chat with anybody. There is an end-
less stream of visiting friends whom I must not repel. But if you
are in any way dejected or despondent you must come to me
without fixing the time-limit and hang on till we have, in leisurely
fashion, thrashed out every conceivable problem that we could
think of.
It is good that the Atma Katha is in demand. Do you under-
stand Gujarati so well as to be able to translate directly from it?
If anybody else asks for permission to translate the Atma Katha,
I don't need to refer him to you. I will flatly refuse permission.
I have a vague recollection that Anil Babu of Shantiniketan did
get from me the permission years ago.
I am glad that your weight and strength are increasing.
Remember the verse about fasting in the verses of the second
chapter of the Gita that we sing every evening. Fasting is good
enough up to a point. But if we are nervous about our percep-
tion of Truth and Ahimsa, the moment we begin to satisfy real
hunger, we have reached the danger point, and our ascribing
a better perception of Truth and Ahimsa to fasting or semi-
fasting may be pure hallucination. Hard work must be consistent
with hard and clear thinking. Conversely, hard and clear think-
ing I hold to be impossible if a person has become physically a
perfect wreck. A healthy mind in a healthy body is a correct
maxim.
Love.
BAPU
SYT. SATIS CHANDRA DAs GUPTA
15 COLLEGE SQARE
CALCUTTA
From the original: C.W. 7891. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
