532. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
Thursday, Vaishakh Sud 2 [May 13, 1926]
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,
I have written an article on the Centre for the next issue of
Navajivan; please go through it and let me know if I have omitted
anything. These days I find in your letters a mixture of sadness,
impatience and despair. I also see that you did not like Shri
Lakshmidas's criticism. But there is no reason for you to feel sad or
give way to despair. And one must not be impatient of criticism.
It is not always that a critic can do well what he criticizes in
others. It is your duty to accept and use as much from the criti-
cism as you can. You should let Lakshmidas know and have a dis-
cussion with him about what you cannot. If you do this, you may
learn something. The present widespread demand for khadi is
the result of a sentiment. It is your duty to nurse and strengthen
this sentiment. If you work from there in a spirit of self-sacri-
fice, you will be able to get more work done and also improve the
quality of yarn and khadi. It is only by improving their quality
that you can nurse and strengthen the love for khadi. You ask for
some person to examine the quality of khadi produced by families
which had kept back some cotton from their crop. Where can I
find such a person? I explained to you, when you were here, that
you should cut out a strip three to four inches wide, from every
piece woven and send the strips here, so that every roll can be
examined. Both the rolls and the strips should be numbered, so
that whenever a strip is rejected the corresponding roll can be
promptly identified. This will consume some time; but I think
that is inevitable. If people get a return for their money, why should
they lose faith in khadi? If you cannot do this, I can only tell you
that you may pay only for such khadi about the quality of which
you feel sure. There should be no difficulty in doing this if the
payment is to be made at one place. When payments are to be
made at several places, inspection of the material should be carried
out at one place; otherwise this arrangement will not work. You
may do whatever you think best in the circumstances there. I
am leaving for Mahabaleshwar today. I expect to return here
on Saturday the 22nd. I shall receive letters in Bombay up to
Monday. Perhaps you know that Devdas is in a hospital. Kusum
and Dhiru, too, are in Bombay. They wanted to be with Jaya
during the time [that Devdas was in hospital].
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19554
