149. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
Aso Sud 13, 1981 [September 30, 1925]
BHAISHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,
I have your letter. It is good that you have discussed the mat-
ter in detail. Let me first take up what you have written about the
franchise of the new khadi organization. You must have come to
know from the newspapers that there are two categories of franchise.
[A member ofJ the first category has to spin and send one thousand
yards every month, while [a member of] the second has to spin
and send two thousand yards every year. We can include the pro-
fessional spinners in the second category, but we shall not do so
just now. We should so work that we do not give rise to the
fear that we may capture the Congress with the help of these
voters. In this way we can free the Swaraj Party from fear and
suspicion. It does not mean that we want to restrict the number
of new spinners. We should enrol as many of them as possible, and
herein lies the success of this Association. By putting a contribu-
tion of two thousand yards for the second category, we have
made it easy for the new spinners. Even half a pound of cotton
is not consumed in spinning two thousand yards of yarn of five
or six counts. This much cotton would cost less than 4 annas and,
if the yarn is finer, it would hardly cost 2 as. Whatever the mem-
ber contributes to the Association over and above the cost of cotton
is like his respectful offering to the spinning-wheel. And at pre-
sent the Association would welcome even this. So you see this
suits your wishes. Now let us consider the next problem raised
by you, that of the production and sale of khadi.
In regard to the sale of khadi the procedure of the old Asso-
ciation is quite clear. It gives interest-free advances against good
surety to traders in khadi. The margin of profit has been kept
at 6¼ per cent so that they should not be tempted to charge higher
prices and exploit the people's love for khadi; in case of loss, the
association undertakes to compensate it by a bounty of 2 per cent.
In this manner, the traders will gradually stand on their own, and
the Association will have little to do in this regard. Thus, you will
find that there is nothing to object to in this procedure, seeing
that it involves little botheration and has the additional advantage
of getting the use of the traders' capital.
Now let us come to the question of production. This involves
training people through the spread of education in schools to spin
and wear clothes made out of their own yarn. This work must
continue. The result of this effort, however, will be visible only
in the long run. Therefore, it would not be right to depend en-
tirely on this. The more I observe the more I notice that we have
not yet been able to reach those areas where the spinning-wheel
is natural and cheap. In some of these areas, the work is going on
in such a way that they can afford to maintain skilled workers and
pay them adequate wages. We can easily put the khadi work on
a sound footing by deputing to such areas adequately paid experts
in the craft and the economics of khaddar to remedy the few defects
found there. If we cut down on this, it would be short-sighted
economy. Therefore I think it necessary to employ paid experts
in the trade and technique of khadi. I see the need of many such
men. But we do not have trained men. Therefore, we must find
men who claim to love this work and undertake to train them. I
have also seen from experience that it won't do to have men who
have had mere superficial training. It is essential to give them
thorough training. For this purpose, we should have one or more
centres to impart all-round training in khadi.
Thus, we will try to infuse life in those areas which show signs
of hope, but which are dormant and backward. At the same
time, we shall have to put in great effort in some areas which
seem to be recalcitrant. We shall have to patronize the weavers also
for some time. Otherwise, there will always be danger of every
kind of deceit and frequent depression, and it is quite likely that
our work may be washed out. In order to cope with all these
problems, I think we need an army of efficient, staunch and
honest workers. We must not be impatient in this matter. We
should be careful in the choice of men. We should also practise
strict economy. I am sure all this work will not be difficult if
we are alert. I have no doubt that as and when these areas get
stabilized, they will earn the hire of the workers. I am already
noticing several such instances.
Besides this, there are many other matters which I wish to
explain to you. But I leave them for another occasion. Remem-
ber that khadi has to be produced also to prevent famine. We
may not turn back a single woman who wants to spin for her
livelihood. Hence we will need houses, etc.
Vandemataram from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5727
XXVIII-17
