568. LETTER TO PYARELAL
December 30, 1946
CHI. PYARELAL,
You certainly should have proper food. A soldier must keep his
body fit. You must always keep with you roti or biscuits. If you take
with it some coconut it makes a complete diet. If you ad to it some
gur it will make a complete, diet ( I have tried all this). So, even
while being on the march, it can be eaten at fixed times. You will
have read in the History of [Satyagraha in] South Africa that during
the march to the Transvaal, I ate while walking. If you do this you
will never have to depend on anyone. You can take whatever fruit
is locally available.
You have agreed that you and I should never talk keeping Manu
apart. You cannot entertain any doubt about her at all. Hence I advise
you to convey to her the purport of our talk. Show this also to her.
Then whatever bad feelings she may be having will automatically come
to the surface. Affection can never last till the end. It will certainly
did not last in this case. Hence you must be cheerful and confident
and inspire in her as much confidence as possible. Letting her know
of your doubt will be an act of loyalty. Then you must do whatever
you can without entertaining any doubt. God belongs to everyone. He
will do as He wills. I am doing only that. I am having her sleep close
to me. She sleeps naked but sleeps soundly. She has to be woken
up whenever there is work, be it at 2 o'clock or 3 o'clock, I consider
it a very good sign that she is able to sleep like that. I have known
it since the Aga Khan Palace days that she is quite unself-conscious.
The main thing was that she should be with me, in my care and associate
with you and learn. That has happened. Now we must all wish that
only what spontaneously occurs to her will happen. Only then will she
be completely free from fear.
That you want to conquer is my own expression. You must learn
to understand my language. The English word 'conquer' is of no use
to me. I can never utter the word in that sense. The conquest that
I am talking about has to be achieved by everyone. It is religion. We
have to conquer untruth by truth, violence by non-violence. How nice
if you could unlearn English reading and English thought ! What I am
asking for is that you narrate to Manu all the incidents you have
mentioned. It would be nice if you could let me know. I should follow
it better in the written form. This would be an act of service to Manu.
It would never mean betrayal of her.
For the present we cannot all three of us hope to be together.
What is possible is that when you come, the three of us may occasionally
sit together.
It is not proper that I would keep you with me right now. The
present sadhana consists in our being apart. The most glaring example
of this is Abha. Abha has risen thereby and I think she will rise still
higher. Bapa is happy and looks happy. As we absorb ourselves in
our work, God will bring us together. And even if we have to sacrifice
ourselves while being apart, no harm will be done. I shall not feel sorry
in the least if Amtussalaam passes away while she is fasting. She is
brave and it seems what she has done now has been after proper
thought.
I agree that you are missing something by being away from me
at this time. But what you are gaining in the process is much greater.
Hence, you must know that the time of disappointment is now past.
I do not think I have anything more to say now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
