85. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday [January 11, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Just a line to say that I got the message about the fares for the
Naidoo boys all right.
Here we are quite comfortable but I do not know that you could
stand this life. We were most of us on the verandah sleeping side
by side. Jeki was next to me. We all sat at the same table last night
to dine — we were 20. The work is good but hard. I have been up
since 4.30 a.m. and now it is 5.40 a.m. I woke up the boys at 5.20
a.m. We are in all 23 in one household. In the light of what happened
at the station, in the light of what is happening here, consider my letter
well. Over my meal yesterday I could not have taken more than 10
minutes. I think I took the least time of all and I did not gulp. I have
simply found out, I hope, the right food for me. One can only die in
the attempt to find the truth. I am passionately in search of it. May
you not for the time being follow my career from a distance ? Poor
Mrs. Gandhi and poor you ! Mrs. Gandhi must have felt simply shocked
to see her neat little home turned into a menagerie. But she took it
all quite calmly. Your case is somewhat different. She is bound up
in my life. She is not on the fence. You are not bound up in me and
you are on the fence. All these things should put you on your guard.
I therefore urge again : do not be hasty, nurse your office in terms
of my letter, come to Phoenix whenever you like partly to share my
life but not wholly, and you will test yourself. Watch me just now not
with a friendly eye but a highly critical and fault-finding eye. Assimilate
the joint life as we have lived it hitherto but in my flight now hesitate,
watch and wait. More when you come here. You will observe things
for yourself Please understand me. I do not want to put you off. If
you will take the full step in spite of my warnings, I will not stop you.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Jayakunvar, wife of Manilal Doctor
107
