335. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
February 7, 1933
MY DEAR HARIBHAU PHATAK,
I have your letter. I am sorry that Mr. Mate should think
that I betrayed any impatience or anger in carrying on the argu-
ment with him the other day. If there was any such betrayed,
I must apologize to him. It was certainly not intended. He can
come and discuss the whole thing with me. I promise to observe
complete silence and listen to him whilst he is speaking. After
all, my business is to deliver my message and convert those who
think differently from me. I have no desire whatsoever to impose
my views on anybody, and I cannot convert anybody by being
impatient or angry. He may bring any friend he likes. Let there
be a previous appointment made so as to avoid disappointment.
Now that I have to attend to Harijan I must not give any appoint-
ments for Wednesdays and Thursdays. Fridays and Saturdays
would be quite good.
1 The addressee had written: "It is yet not a settled fact that the un-
touchables are really Hindus."
2 Literally, 'impression'; here, a ceremony, especially of initiation
242
As to the subject-matter of your letter Mr. Mate is quite
wrong in thinking that any but Hindu voters will have the right
of voting under the Temple-entry Bill, and I can show quite clearly
that there is absolutely no question whatsoever of compulsion.
Nor is there the slightest desire to see the Bill passed if the Hindu
Members do not want it. The first Bill has no reference even to
temples. It is the most innocent that can possibly be conceived.
It simply takes untouchability out of the penal law of the land.
Surely, it was wrong when the courts were first called upon to give
a legal status to untouchability. I should very much like to know
in what respect either Bill constitutes an interference with any-
body's liberty.
I am sorry to hear about Yashoda Bai. I shall certainly write
to her.
With reference to the charkhas as you know, Kanitkar was
manufacturing the very thing in Poona. His boy knows the thing.
I had suggested slight improvements in the pattern that was
brought to me. To have them from Bardoli would mean
probably four annas railage, if not more, for each charkha, when
the whole thing is capable of being made locally and cheaply.
But if they must be had from Bardoli, I can easily get them.
Please thank the makers of the oils of the two bottles. I
have still a lot left of Narayan Thaila. I would plead with them
not to send any more till I ask for it, and I undertake to ask for
it when I have exhausted the stock so kindly sent by them.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm : S.N. 20175
