272. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 29, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
It is now 5.30 a.m. Thursday. Your letter is before me.
lt makes me glad to think that you are well again and daily
gaining strength. We have to acquire the faculty for keeping
well under all weathers-a difficult task I know. But it is not
beyond human reach. The mind plays a great part in it. If we
can completely detach ourselves from the externals in terms of
the 6th chapter, we can attain that state. That it appears to be
beyond our reach for the present need not baffle us. The author
of the Gita invites us to the effort and says from his abundant
experience that it never fails. It may take long but success is a cer-
tainty.
Yes, I did not take salt during the fast. It was a virtue of
necessity. I simply could not take it. I never attempted it be-
cause there was repugnance towards it and there was no neces-
sity for it as there was about soda which therefore I took willy-
nilly.
My weight yesterday was 97¼ and I walked altogether 44
minutes in three periods without feeling fatigued. It was there-
fore a good record. Nor is there difficulty about some conversation.
Radha and Keshu are with me just now. Radha is some-
what better. She goes back to Deolali today. Keshu will be with
me for a few days to finish his conversations.
Poor Prabhudas! The contemplated tie is off. Therefore
there has to be a further search.
Devdas and Lakshmi and Rajaji with his widowed daughter
and his son are still here and are likely to be for some time.
As for the Mahabharata reading, you should take down the
names of all the persons with their short history and their con-
nection with one another and have an alphabetical index to enable
you at once to find the history of any name in your note book.
The preparation of such a book will clear your mind and be of
great use to others too, if it is accurately prepared.
You are quite right when you say that a Hindi translation
reads better than English however well made. This is natural
because Hindi is akin to Sanskrit.
Prabhavati is by me and sends you her love. Radha has
today left for Deolali.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6282. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9748
