259. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
'PARNAKUTI', POONA,
June 26, 1933
DEAR DR. MAHMUD,
Domestic sorrow dogs your footsteps, no matter wherever
you go. I see now that Begum Mahmud is probably suffering
from typhoid and that you have taken her to Delhi. A big risk,
but I suppose it was worth taking in order to put her under
Dr. Ansari's care. I hope that she is making steady progress.
Devdas showed me the presents that you had brought. Whilst
I appreciated your and Jalbhai's affection underlying those pre-
sents, I felt that silk things ought not to be accepted because
consistently with the past profession and practice, Lakshmi could
not, if she can help it, wear silken things. Having given that
opinion, I left the decision to Lakshmi, Rajaji and Devdas. They
all felt like me, as to the use of silken things, but they had some
delicacy about returning such gifts to friends who had presented
them out of affection. I undertook to perform the task if they
agreed that such gifts should be returned. When Mrs. Naidu
heard all this discussion, she said that if perchance your gift was
not accepted she should take charge of it. I, therefore, took the
liberty of returning your sari to her. Jalbhai's sari is being re-
turned to him. Mathuradas is presently going to Bombay for a
day or so when he will take it. But the bag and the other con-
tents have been retained and I hope that you will be satisfied
that they would be a constant reminder to Devdas and Lakshmi
of your affection. The third friend, who sent silken sans, was
Ghanshyamdas Birla. I spoke to him about them. He appre-
ciated our difficulty and gladly took them back. The moral of
this, I would like to point out. Next time you happen to make
presents to friends you should make yourself acquainted with their
capacity for taking and using them. Romain Rolland thought
that he should give each of us a memento of our visit to his her-
mitage, and he seems to have passed an anxious night discussing
with his sister what he should give me. He could not think of
books, or any other useful articles. Therefore, he parted with a
trifling but a most artistic box, meant possibly to be a snuff box.
Even that is too valuable a treasure for me. It will, therefore, go
to the Vidyapith Museum. Of course, I had no compunction
about accepting that little box. I have mentioned this very beauti-
ful incident as it is so relevant and as I know it would please
you and at the same time emphasize what I want to say.
I do not know as to what your movement will be. If you
are not able to come this way and that pretty soon, I would
like you to give me your views on the political situation. What
will you have me to do and what should be done by Congressmen
in general? Where is Sherwani? If this reaches you in Delhi,
I would like you to, at least, share this part of the letter with
Dr. Ansari and if he is not likely to see me early next month, I
would like him to give me his opinion.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. SYED MAHMUD
C/O DR. M. A. ANSARI
1 DARYAGANJ, DELHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5089; also S.N. 19106
