326. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Not Revised
May 6, 1929
Knowing your nature my caution against your coming to
Nellore has disturbed me. I hope however you will reconcile
yourself to the inevitable. I do not know what Pyarelal wrote to
you. My instructions to him were that you should join me at
any point you chose after the tour. Jamnadas wired to come. I
had to wire to him too not to come. Almost the whole of the
tour is being done by motor and those in charge are hard put to
it to find room for an additional person. To have you with me
in your convalescent state in this tour is too great a risk. If
you are not comfortable at the Vidyapith you may go to Bom-
bay. Bombay is cool enough in May and on Revashankerbhai's
terrace, it is quite good. You could even go to Matheran and
stay with Mathuradas. Now you will make your choice and be
and feel happy.
This tour has been so uncertain that even the dates I have
sent you are subject to variations. These do not much matter so
far as the post is concerned. They do matter for telegrams.
However now there are practically only two weeks left. This
letter will be sent by a cyclist who will have to ford two streams
and cover a distance of twelve miles to reach a branch line sta-
tion. Whether it will catch the correct mail train I do not know.
Well you cannot expect Western conveniences in typically Eastern
tracts. And I see nothing wrong in people living miles apart not
corresponding with one another daily through letters or wires. It
used to be enough that they corresponded through their hearts.
The so-called destruction of distance through physical extraneous
means is not by any means an unmixed blessing. Whilst therefore
we may make use of these Western contrivances as a concession
to our weaknesses, let us not disturb ourselves when we cannot
have them. On the contrary let us feel the freedom of the absence
of these when it comes naturally to us.
It is early morning on the silence day and I have allowed my-
self a little relaxation. For it is relaxation to write what I need
not. But now I must stop this love-letter. I must write other letters
and edit Navajivan before 11.30 when the cyclist must leave. If you
are in Patna by the time this reaches Bihar, you should get this
on Thursday at the latest.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5373. Courtesy: Mirabehn
