407. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 21/22, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I get your post regularly on Wednesday every week. I got
it yesterday too. The results of the spinning competition were
excellent. I had certainly guessed that your speed would be very
high, but the speeds reached by the others, too, are very good. I
should be happier if all this makes a difference in the total output.
49-22
The pain in my left elbow is of the same kind as in the
right-hand thumb, and the doctor has been advising me for some
time that I should give up spinning for a few days and give
complete rest to the elbow. I told you about this in my last
letter. At the moment, all that I can say is that my experi-
ment is continuing. I can draw yarn with the right hand with
fairly good ease. It is too early yet to say whether this will
cure the pain in the elbow completely. However, there is no
cause at all for worry. I shall give you definite information on
Tuesday when I seal the letters in a packet. I have started dictat-
ing this letter on Thursday.
I was glad that Mathuradas came and saw me. It would
be a good thing if Tilakam goes to Calicut, but we should not
send him at our own risk unless somebody there offers to take
care of him and treat him well. As regards Amtul, I am
writing to her. Read that letter. I told you in my previous
letter what I wrote in reply to the letter I had from Darjeeling.
You may come here whenever you wish to. You will be able to
see those women whom the previous visitors did not see.
I have been trying to do for Kaka everything I can from here.
Use Soniramji's money as you think proper. It should cer-
tainly be used for supplying free copies of the Gita whenever you
think it justified.
The person who stole things from your room must have
known what it contained. I cannot resist the temptation of say-
ing that Jamna deserved the lesson. Nobody should keep a single
pice in his or her room. Anything one has should be deposited
in the safe of the Ashram and that, too, only when the person has
no other alternative. Except for books, a few spinning-wheels and
such other articles necessary for our work, we should have nothing
in our rooms. Even the clothes should be the minimum we
require for our daily use. As a rich man feels happier the long-
er the list of his possessions, we should feel happier the shorter
it is.
Our ideal is to have no possessions worth keeping a record
of. So long as we continue to possess things, our burglar friends
are bound to claim their share. Since we do not voluntarily offer
it, they seize it by force.
You will of course read the letter which I am going to write
to Kusum. It would certainly be good if she learns nursing. I
1 Vide p. 343.
2 From Mahavir Giri; vide pp. 317-.
also believe that Mrs. Lazarus will treat her well. But it seems
to me that at present the work is beyond Kusum's strength. If
she cannot preserve her own health, how will she be able to help
others to preserve theirs? Nursing the sick imposes no small strain
on one's strength. Sometimes a nurse has to be on duty the
whole of the day and the night. And she is on her feet all the
time. Most of the patients have little endurance. They are
irritable and demand immediate attention. Hence anybody who
is sincere in taking up this work must make her body and mind
strong. Of course this is true only about a woman who wishes
to be a devoted nurse. A nurse who doesn't care for her patients
and whose heart is not in her work is a disgrace to her profession.
A nurse's job, if done sincerely, is more arduous than a doctor's.
Good doctors have always given credit to the nurses and claimed
none for themselves. If Kusum has understood all this and if
we can be sure that she can make her body strong enough for the
work, I would certainly encourage her in her idea. Personally,
I have always been of the view that a nurse should remain un-
married. The best nurses in the world are found among the
followers of the Catholic Church, and that religion also supplies the
largest number. All of them are required to remain unmarried.
This is a special merit of the Catholic Church. Another note-
worthy fact about it is that all teachers, from the primary to the
highest level, are unmarried persons. We see very few other
teachers who can excel them.
April 22, 1932
Dhiru had asked me in his letter whether he might send a
Magan spinning-wheel or himself bring one, and I had replied
to him and told him that he could send or bring one. How is
it that it has not yet come? I thought about that spinning-wheel
especially because of the pain in my elbow. Padma, too, has in her
letter urged me to use that model, and so I am more keen about
it today than I was when I wrote to Dhiru. If the spinning-
wheel is ready, send it with anybody who may be coming to see
me. If it reaches Bombay, even Dahyabhai will bring it. He
comes every Saturday. I have already written to you in my
previous letter asking you to send me some cotton.
Read the letter which I have written to Vinabehn in regard
to Kusum. I need not write anything more. Manibehn will be
released from the Belgaum jail on May 14. I had a letter from
her, in which she says that Keshu had agreed to make a spinning-
1 Matron at the Vadilal Sarabhai Hospital, Ahmedabad
wheel for her. If it is ready, ask him to send it to Dahyabhai in
Bombay. If it is not ready, ask him to make it by and by and
send it.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8221. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
