120. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 11, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
I received your letter yesterday at 3.30 p.m. I was in
the midst of appointments. I hasten to reply at the earliest
opportunity.
I have said in my letter to you, it is implied in the
Rajaji Formula and I have stated publicly that I have approached
you as an individual. My life mission has been Hindu-Muslim
unity, which I want for its own sake, but which is not to be
achieved without the foreign ruling power being ousted. Hence
the first condition of the exercise of the right of self-determination
is achieving independence by the joint action of all the parties and
groups composing India. If such joint action is unfortunately
impossible, then too I must fight with the assistance of such ele-
ments as can be brought together. I am glad, therefore, that
you did not break off our talks when I refused to assume or ac-
cept a representative capacity. Of course I am pledged to use
all the influence I may have with the Congress to ratify myagree-
ment with you. May I remind you that the Rajaji Formula
was designed in the first instance for your acceptance, and submis-
sion thereafter to the League?
It is true that I said an ocean separated you and me in
outlook. But that had no reference to the Lahore Resolution
of the League. The Lahore Resolution is indefinite. Rajaji has
taken from it the substance and given it a shape.
Now for the points raised by you :
1. I have already answered this in the foregoing.
2. The constitution will be framed by the Provisional Gov-
ernment contemplated in the Formula or an authority specially
set up by it after the British power is withdrawn. The indepen-
dence contemplated is of the whole of India as it stands.
The basis for the formation of Provisional Interim Govern-
ment will have to be agreed to between the League and the
Congress.
3. The Commission will be appointed by the Provisional
Government. "Absolute majority" means a clear majority over
non-Muslim elements as in Sind, Baluchistan or the Frontier
Province. The form of plebiscite and the franchise must be a
matter for discussion.
4. "All parties" means, the parties interested.
5. "Mutual agreement" means agreement between contract-
ing parties. "Safeguarding defence, etc.," means for me a central
or joint board of control. Safeguarding means safeguarding
against all who may put the common interests in jeopardy.
6. The power is to be transferred to the nation, that is,
to the Provisional Government. The Formula contemplates peace-
ful transfer by the British Government. So far as I am concerned
I would like the transfer to take place as early as possible.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
