389. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILLS,
May 28, 1927
CHI. MIRA,
I have your two letters as also your telegram. In order not
to delay replying for two days I am resorting to dictation. I do
not want to break the rule as far as possible of not writing letters
myself except during silence. Both your letters are precious. I
now understand the Ashram much better than I ever did before.
It is almost like having been there myself and seen it. So
characteristic is your account, and it is usefully supplemented
by Valunjker's letter.
You did well in not entering into the comparative merits of
respective parties, and I do hope that you will remain unmoved
even if you hear comparisons that may not please you. Those
who enter into comparisons do so honestly. That it is improper
to enter into such comparisons they do not know. And what is the
use of being ruffled by listening to an expression of views honestly
held?
This use of bhang is a disturbing factor, and if it is not check-
ed in time, it will prove the undoing of that institution. But you
are again right in not insisting on the reform. You have not gone
there as a supervisor or an inspector to make reforms. You have
gone there to perfect your study of Hindi and in so doing to give
such service as you can and as may be acceptable. And that
brings me to your Hindi.
You have been quickened into action yourself. Of course our
formula has been Hindi first, everything else after. I had felt
that the formula was being somewhat overlooked. In my letters
whilst you were in Delhi, I had emphasized this thing when you
were discussing the various limitations of the Delhi Gurukul. But
I thought that to bring the formula up and further in my letters
would be undesirable, and I knew that you were yourself on the
watch and would pull yourself up if you found yourself napping.
This you have now done, and I am glad and quite satisfied. Of
course there are innumerable things you can do usefully wherever
you are placed. And the test of the possession of the religious
sense really consists in one's being able to pick out the 'rightest'
thing out of many things which are all 'right' more or less. This
is the meaning of a verse in the Bhagavad Gita which says: "Better
even to die doing one's duty, however lowly it may be, than
doing some other's however grand it may be." And so, I have
myself not a shadow of doubt that you will be entitled to pass by
many things which you can easily do, if the one thing for which
you have left Sabarmati has at all to be sacrificed or neglected.
And, if there or at any other place, you become an unwelcome
visitor because of your insistence upon that one thing, that is
sufficient warning for you to leave the place. And when you feel
that imperative call, you will simply not listen to any other sug-
gestion. But that burning overpowering desire must come from
within. I must not goad, I will not goad. I shall be entirely
satisfied with what progress you can make, no matter how slow it
is. You will do your Hindi in the way that you think is best,
and if you find that it is more conducive to your peace of mind to
have several other occupations side by side with Hindi, you will
take them up. Do not therefore please continuously think of what
I would like, but do what you think you can easily, without im-
pairing your health, of both body and mind; and in the execution
of your plan when you want my assistance or advice, you shall
fall back upon it immediately, as for instance about going to
Brij Kishen. Your telegram leads me to think that now there is
no occasion for you to leave that Ashram. But you evidently do
not know that Brij Kishan has not been keeping well and has
therefore been sent to Mussoorie. But if you desire to go to
Delhi, I doubt not that you could go to Brij Kishen's house al-
though he himself is not there. And of course there are many
places where you can be sent for your Hindi, if Bhagwadbhakti
Ashram does not give you all you want in the shape of Hindi.
With love,
Yours,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5231. Courtesy: Mirabehn
