200. LETTER TO TOWN CLERK
JOHANNESBURG,
February 10, 1906
TO
THE TOWN CLERK
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,
The attention of my Association has been drawn to certain recommen-
dations made by the Manager of the Johannesburg Tramway system, for
adoption by the Town Council, as regards the use of the electric tram-
cars by the Coloured people.
My Association ventures to think that, in making these recommenda-
tions, the Manager has taken no note of the sentiments of the Coloured
community, or rather the British Indian community, with which my Asso-
ciation is concerned. My Association feels that the recommendations
are scarcely meant to supply the want of British Indians. If Coloured
servants may use the roofs of the tram-cars when they accompany their
masters, it is very difficult to see why other Coloured people may not use
them. The suggestion to run special tram-cars is hardly feasible, as the
Coloured community will not then be able to have the same kind of
service as the European community. The recommendation that trailer-
cars should be attached to the ordinary cars, for the use of Coloured
people as well as for carrying parcels, is, in the humble opinion of my
Association, highly insulting. My Association submits that British Indians
are entitled to the same facilities as any other community in Johannesburg,
with reference to the use of the tram-cars. At the same time, my Asso-
ciation fully recognises the prevalent prejudice and, therefore, suggests
that the inner portion of the tram-cars may be reserved for Europeans
only. That would leave the roofs free to the other communities. Indeed,
there is no reason why compartments may not be made even in the inner
portions of the tram-cars, but failing that, my Association trusts that the
suggestion above made will be accepted by the Town Council. I am to
place on record that, as the position stands at present, Coloured people
are by law perfectly free to make use of the municipal tram-cars. It is
only their forbearance which prevents them from making use of the cars.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDUL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
The following are the recommendations of the General Manager
above referred to:
1. That Coloured people should be allowed to travel on the same cars as
white persons when they are domestic servants and are with their master or mis-
tress, and that they be required to sit only on the top of the car and occupy
the back seats arranged at the head of each staircase, viz., on the four seats
at each end. To be charged ordinary fares.
2. That, where traffic is sufficient on any route to pay to run special cars
for Coloured people, arrangements be made for Asiatics to occupy the inside of
the cars and Kaffirs the outside, or vice versa. This to be experimented with
on the Fordsburg and Newtown lines.
3. Should it be found later that the Coloured traffic is not sufficient to
enable special cars to be run at a profit, experiments be made with single-
deck trailer cars coupled on to ordinary cars, and that this trailer type of car
and also ordinary cars used for Coloured people be used for the parcels delivery
business, which it is proposed to inaugurate at a later date.
Indian Opinion, 17-2-1906
