383. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 14, 1941
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I got your letter yesterday. I was glad to receive it, but
was pained on reading it. Mahadev did write to me about
your health having suffered. But your letter suggests that it
has got much worse. If that is so, what is the use of having
Dr. Gilder there? If he cannot improve your health, you will
be dismissed.
Personally I would prefer your living for some time on fruit
juices. It would clear the obstruction, if any, in the bowels.
If you take as much juice as you can of grapes, mosambis, pome-
granates and pineapples, you are bound to benefit. If you can
take the juice in sufficient quantity—say, 60 ounces—there is no
reason why you should grow weak. And along with it if you
apply mud-packs on the abdomen at night, I am sure it will do
you good. It must not become necessary to release you because of
illness. Keep me regularly informed. Drop a postcard if nothing more.
The workers in Gujarat are being tested well. They seem
to be working all right. Mahadev also is gaining fairly good
experience. I don't experience any difficulty, since Kishorelal is
staying here. He is indeed a great help to me. My health may
be said to be generally good.
Ba has regained good strength. She walks about three quarters
of a mile every evening, besides working the whole day. She is
able to eat well. There is no cause at all for worry.
Jamnalal also is better. He is having change of air in Simla.
He is regaining strength. He is Rajkumari's prisoner there, eating
the food she permits, walking eight miles a day, playing chess
and enjoying himself. He has the atmosphere he wanted.
Janakibehn and Madalasa are with me and they have their
meals with me. Both are well. Janakibehn can run fast for four
or five miles. Madalasa is in the family way. It is the seventh
month. She had ulcers in the mouth, but they have disappeared
now. This time the delivery is likely to be normal.
Gurudev having passed away, I have had to take up the
responsibility of collecting the Deenabandhu Fund as quickly as
possible. God's will be done.
240
Kusum [Desai] is here at present. She helps me a little. She
will stay for about a month or may be more. I have left it to
her.
Blessings to you and to all your companions from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 249-50
