344. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
SEGAON,
June 16, 1937
BHAI JETHALAL,
I have your letter. Now observe the 30th July but instead
of the 30th you can observe the 31st because July has thirty-one
days. Do send the book to Vinoba. I suppose the Mobile
Weaving School of Travancore must be mentioned only in the
pages of his book; I somehow could find no trace of it there.
There is no explanation for my going to Gujarat. Of course, I
was expected to go there for two or three days to inspect the
site for the Congress. But then I also have no reason for not go-
ing either. I may say that Sardar's keen insistence dragged me.
But this is no real defence. If Sardar's insistence can persuade
me to do something wrong, his other importunities may persuade
me to commit greater wrongs. In spite of knowing all this I
could not withstand his insistence.
Now about cow's ghee. I charge Rs. 3 per seer or even
two and a half. I charge according to the cost. I am able
to get this much because there are people like Jamnalalji and I
am able to insist on their using cow's ghee prepared in Wardha.
But I shall not be able to carry on this Rs. 3 per seer business
for long. Your ghee of course cannot be sold even free of cost
because we cannot accept an agency for buffalo's ghee. More-
over your ghee is adulterated. It is my firm belief that this
business of yours is wrong. As you do not abide by the regula-
tions of the Goseva Sangh, you do not get any help from them
and therefore make adulterated ghee at home. Naturally it
fetches lower price in the market. Nowadays ghee made out
of pure buffalo's milk fetches a good price in the market. Ghee made
from pure cow's milk fetches a lower price. So if at the moment
you make no distinction between the cow and the buffalo, you
should engage yourself in making ghee only out of buffalo's milk.
You will surely succeed in it. I can understand that it will not
give you mental satisfaction. But if you derive any mental satis-
faction from mixing cow's milk with buffalo's, it is a false satisfac-
tion. Hence it is my sincere advice that you should either make
ghee out of pure cow's milk and sell it at the normal rate or,
failing that, find some other occupation which would be bene-
ficial to the villages. Obtain from the public whatever cannot
be met by the income from the business.
But this after all is my opinion. There is no absolute rule
that you have to follow my advice in such matters. Of course
I would never insist. So think over my argument and do only
what you think proper. Kishorelalbhai will of course read this,
and, if possible, Vinoba, too. I shall try to send their opinions
along with this.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9862. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat
