165. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
7 BUITENSINGLE,
March 20 [1914]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
You seem just now to be the busiest man in our circle. Your
correspondence is invariably (almost) written in the train. Well, I hope,
the result of this activity will be greater peace for you and a great
benefit to the circle. I am not joking. I am serious though naturally
I am sceptical about the value of such restless activity. But under
exceptional circumstances it may be the lesser evil.
You asked me a question about the counting of beads. I forgot
to deal with it. There is undoubtedly great efficacy in knowingly and
deliberately uttering some sacred name as often as you can. The love
of the owner of the name then grows on you and you ultimately merge
in Him. Now every rosary has a stated number of beads. The Hindu
rosary has 108. You take the 108 names of the deity once every turn
of the rosary. And as the number of the beads is fixed you never
omit a name. Thus you simply contemplate the name without worrying
to know how often you have taken it or whether you have omitted
any. The Muslims have 99 beads to correspond to the 99 names of
God. Some Hindus simply mutter the same name. In that case the
number of beads is of no consequence so long as it is the same rosary.
You are in a position to know then how often during the day you have
taken the sacred name. Thus to mutter the name of the Highest without
a selfish purpose is a most desirable practice. Hence the universality
of rosaries. I want to continue the counting if I can. The more secretly
it is done, the better of course. The early morning and sunset are the
best times and I try to keep these times at present. I do not - cannot
for my eyes - get up very early nowadays. I am going to try again.
I cannot just now have my eyes examined or take another pair of
spectacles. I want to observe the effect of the Indian climate on the eyes.
Another question of yours was why was Indian Opinion
transferred to West and Maganlal? Simply because the Trust-deed
contemplates it and the Trustees should not [be] made responsible for
what may appear in Indian Opinion.
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 From the contents
2 Of September 14, 1912; vide Vol. XI, pp. 320-.
176
