189. LETTER TO RAMNIKLAL MODI
KALAKANKAR,
November 14, 1929
CHI. RAMNIKLAL,
I have your letter. The laxity about sacrificial spinning which
is growing among us strikes me as dangerous. It is of course
necessary that those who do not spin should give the reason why
they do not do so. But these external remedies are just attempts
to keep up appearances. Those who do not spin should declare
what their real faith is.
I have held for many years that one external step remains to
be taken. All activities which are looked upon as yajna, that is,
dharma or duty, have a fixed time assigned to them. The
namaz, the gayatri, etc., are performed at fixed hours. This is the
meaning behind the notion of muhurta. It would therefore be
worth while to fix the hour for sacrificial activities as we have fixed
hours for meals. If we put upon these activities the same value
in our hearts as we do with our lips, we would be able to solve
all the difficulties which may arise in fixing such a time. I can
understand that all the members of an institution cannot spin at
the same hour. For instance, those who are engaged in cook-
ing cannot spin at the same time as others. We may even fix a
separate hour when such persons may spin. Think over this
suggestion and, if you think it is practicable, discuss it with others.
We shall discuss it further after my return and then do what
seems best. If you do not think it has any significance, ignore it.
You may, if you wish to, remove the rule about the length of the
time [for spinning]. If my suggestion can be carried out, the
question of removing that rule will not arise. If, however, you wish
to fix the hour for spinning and not the length of time, you may
do that. Adopt whichever method will safeguard truth.
I had a wire from Mahadev today, telling me that Santok
had been operated upon for piles and fistula. This seems to have
been a sudden development, for I did not even know till now that
Santok suffered from piles. Of course it was good that she was
operated upon. I shall know more details when your letter ar-
rives. It would be good if you get Manu's tonsils also removed
just now. You need not wait for me, for the operation is a simple
one.
Nath must have arrived there. I understand what you say
about Marathe. By trying to keep his art a secret, he limits
its scope and obstructs its progress. If Nath can convince him of
this, Marathe will be happier and have more peace. Ishwarlal
told me that, because of this defect of his, students did not like to
work under him. I felt that there was a good deal of truth in
what he said. I shall have no objection if you wish to show this
portion to him. Tell Surendra that, though I write nothing
concerning him, I have been every day looking for a letter from him.
Ask Bal to write. Enclosed is a letter for Bhansali. Pass it
on to him after reading it. I have discussed some principles in
it which it would be good for you to know.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4151
