21. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BORSAD,
June 19, 1931
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letters. I understand what you say about Dwarka-
nath. I am in correspondence with him.
We should not pay the premiums on Sorabji's policy. I see
little possibility of our getting back the original sum. I can
think of no remedy against this.
Has Jamna completely recovered now? Was it that she took
too large a dose of the medicine through mistake, or was it the
fault of the vaid?
Panditji wanted to talk to me about the students. He believes
that the arrangement by which Premabehn teaches Gujarati is
not right. It is not sufficient either. He, therefore, requested that
Shivabhai should be employed. You acceded to the request but
put him in the office. He had also much to say against Prema-
behn's temper. The reading-room remains closed while she is
in it, so much so that it is not opened even for Maganbhai. After
hearing all this, I merely said that, if I intervened in the Ashram
17
47-
affairs just now, it would amount to my living in it, but that,
when necessary, I might give some guidance. I, therefore, advised
him to discuss the whole matter with you and solve the problem.
I think you should have a frank talk with him. He is a straight-
forward man. If he has not talked to you about all this, you
should use this letter and discuss the matter with him and re-
assure him. You may consult me if necessary.
Champa must have arrived there today. I have advised her
to stay in the Ashram. If she does not do that, let her stay in
the red bungalow or anywhere else. Some special arrangement
will have to be made about Shashi's education. It would be
best if you could secure the services of a good lady teacher.
Consult Kakasaheb. Savitabehn, too, may be able to guide you.
Balvant, Champa's brother, wants to be permitted to live in the
Ashram. I have told him that he may do so if he agrees to
obey the rules. He is also eager to stay with Krishnan Nair.
I have written to him.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I will leave this place on the 23rd and spend the 24th and
the 25th in Bombay. I then return to Bardoli on the 26th. This
last is not definite.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
