28. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 21, 1932
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the post from the Ashram today, after I had waited for
it for many days. I was getting worried since I had received
no reply. As you posted the packet as a parcel, it was delayed.
On previous occasions, too, that is what happened. I see, how-
ever, that posting things as parcel costs less. You may, there-
fore, continue the practice if you wish to. You can do this. Send
the many other letters as parcel and send yours separately, by
ordinary post. That will save expenditure and I will get one
letter immediately. Ordinarily you or anybody else will be able
to write to me as often as necessary. Most probably I will get
the letters immediately.
You have done nothing wrong in reproducing in the "Ashram
Samachar" the extract from my letter.
Anyone from the Ashram will be permitted to visit us. Others
too, who have not become prominent in the political field, will
be permitted; for instance, Pyare Ali2, or Rama (Ranchhodbhai's).
Three or four can come at a time. We are permitted to receive
visitors once a week. But we don't wish to waste money in this
manner. You may, therefore, permit people to come as and when
you think proper. I wish to tell you what is permissible and
what my general view is, and leave the rest to you. Don't think
that I am putting any restriction. How can I judge what the
circumstances there require, or measure the depth of people's
feelings or their foolish attachment to me?
Allow Krishnamaiyadevi and others to go to Darjeeling. It
will certainly mean expense, but that will be worth incurring.
I suppose in Darjeeling they will stay with some friends and we
shall have to pay only the fare. Give them the fare for the out-
ward journey. As for the return fare, tell them that you will
send a note which they can show and get money from Bhai
Jivanlal of the Birla Brothers. That is, you can send them a
letter of recommendation when they intend to return. Will
Mahavir also go with them? If he does, let him stay there for
five or six months. After he has recovered, he can take up some
public work in Darjeeling. Similarly, send away the girls when
they wish to go.
Where is Abbas Saheb? How does he keep? Inquire and let
me know. How is Raojibhai's Vimala? Where is Raojibhai
Manibhai of Sojitra? Where is Shivabhai?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Venilal was very ill in Bombay. How is he now? You say
that Navin has come to live there for the present. What exactly
do you mean? Where does he stay just now and what does he
do?
The letters to the others will be posted on Tuesday. Take
this letter to have been written for Dalbahadur Giri's family and for
Kusum. My compliments to Kanti1, Bal2, Prithuraj and other
warriors. I will write to them later.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I Also C.W. 8202. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
