205. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 26, 1933
CHI. MIRA,
This is before prayer time Thursday. I get your weekly letter
Wednesday noon and I write the reply Thursday morning after
prayer or sometimes before as now. So whenever you get my letter
later than usual or not at all, you will know that there has been
151
no delay on my part. But accidents will happen in the best of
all possible worlds. There is no such thing as accident in God's
dictionary. The world is a chapter of accidents. For accidents
are events which we cannot control and often can't find causes
for even after they have occurred.
As you see I have again taken to writing by the right hand.
I do not do much writing. Some Gujarati every day not more than
two hours and the weekly English letter to you. That cannot in-
jure the hand. At least no one has suggested that as the cause.
The wheel was blamed. But even that seems to be an exploded
theory. I recommenced moderate spinning on Tuesday last. But
I shall not be obstinate. I shall give it up, if the pain increases.
The weight went down 2 lb. yesterday but the little fluctuation is
a matter of no concern whatsoever.
Now about yourself. Whatever the cause of that giddiness,
you ought to discuss with the doctor. If it is due to the stenches,
you should be transferred to a better place. If you do not mind
I would like to write to the Government myself. You have a
very sensitive nose and therefore are more readily acted upon than
others by foul smells. Shall I apply for transfer? Perhaps you will
be allowed to answer this question apart from your usual weekly
letter.
Blind Morris will appreciate your letter. It will be an event
with him for many days. This reminds me of Mrs. Aiman. Did
you know her? Andrews says we all did. Mahadev remembers
her. I cannot. If you do, you may know that she is no more.
Aiman is connected with 112 Gower Street. Andrews made me
write to Mr. Aiman.
The expression "There is no prayer without fasting" is tho-
roughly sound. Here fasting has to be of the widest character
possible. Fasting of the body has to be accompanied by fasting
of all the senses. And alpahar, the meagre food of the Gita, is also
a fasting of the body. The Gita enjoins not temperance in food
but 'meagreness'. Meagreness is a perpetual fast. Meagreness
means just enough to sustain the body for the service for which
it is made. The test is again supplied by saying that food should
be taken as required, not for taste but for the welfare of the body.
'Meagreness' is perhaps better rendered by 'measured quanti-
ties'. I cannot recall Arnold's rendering. A 'full' meal is therefore
a crime against God and man-the latter because the full-mealers
deprive their neighbours of their portion. God's economy pro-
vides from day to day just enough food for all in just medicinal
doses. We are all of the tribe of full-mealers. Instinctively to know
the medicinal dose required is a Herculean task. For by parental
training we are gluttons. Then when it is almost too late it
dawns upon some of us that food is made not to enjoy but to
sustain the body as our slave. It becomes from that moment a
grim fight against inherited and acquired habit of eating for
pleasure. Hence the necessity for a complete fast at intervals
and partial fasts for ever. Partial fast is the meagre or measured
food of the Gita. Thus 'There is no prayer without fasting' is a
scientific proposition capable of verification by experiment and
experience.
Yes, I remember Manorama. Poor girl. If I know where she
is to go, I would gladly write to her. If she is there, here is a
note for her. The Superintendent will kindly hand it to her or to
you for giving it to her or if she is transferred, send the letter to
her.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6260. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9726
