341. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY FARM,
Magshar Shud 11 [December 12, 1910]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I have your letter.
I do not think it proper to comment on the addresses given at
Maritzburg. Both deserve to be condemned. Fearing that my criti-
cism might be misunderstood, I gave up the idea of writing about
1 A Gujarati saying
2 It appears from the reference to Coomaraswami's book that this letter was
written after "Letter to Maganlal Gandhi", pp. 354-5; in 1910, Magshar Shud 11
corresponded to December 12.
them. If anybody refers to this omission, you may say that I am res-
ponsible for it and that I did not deem it proper to comment on
them.
The book of bazaar medicine has been found here.
I am positive I saw Coomaraswami's volume among Mr. Polak's
books. It has a white cover.
I do not think we can do anything about it if Dada Sheth dis-
continues all his advertisements. Let him do so if he chooses. I should
prefer it if we could do away with advertisements altogether. I think it
proper not to write to him at all. I shall talk to Omar Sheth when
I meet him. It is better to forgo the advertisements if Dada Sheth is not
agreeable.
I shall write to Gora Sheth only after you let me know for certain.
His advertisements, too, may be dropped if he so desires.
What you write about the effect of the Rs. 25,000 is quite true.
People are still miserably ill-educated in this matter. Constant purity
of mind is our only remedy for this. Meanwhile we have to be patient.
Personally I hate to take anything from the Al Islam property. But
Mr. West wanted to. Considering that in these matters my attitude
differed from that of you all and to avoid making any major changes so
long as the struggle lasted, I was silent and allowed some necessary
articles to be taken from it. I shall, however, be glad if we fail to get
anything out of it.
I think I have written to you saying that, if you have not got your
daughter vaccinated for small-pox, you may postpone it for the present.
We shall think over it.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 4948
Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri
