90. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT, YERAVDA
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON,
September 6, 1923
THE SUPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON
SIR,
With reference to the names sent to the Government of certain
visitors intending to see me, you have today informed me that the
Government have now decided to restrict the number of visitors
to be permitted to see me to two, and that of the names sent, only
Messrs Narandas and Devdas Gandhi may be permitted to see
me for this quarter's interview.
As the Government have hitherto permitted me to receive five
visitors, I must confess that the present decision has come upon
me as a surprise. But I welcome the decision inasmuch as they
have refused to grant similar permission to my colleague Mr.
Yagnik who is kept in the same block with me. Had it not
appeared graceless, I would myself have waived the facility which
I then saw was exclusively allowed to me.
The case, however, of restricting the permission only to Messrs
Narandas and Devdas Gandhi stands on a different footing. If
it means that henceforth I am not to see any but such blood re-
lations only as may be allowed, I must deny myself the usual
privilege of receiving visitors twice every quarter. I had thought
the question of the qualifications of persons who were to be per-
mitted to see me was decided once for all. I have no desire to
weary the Government by reiterating the argument contained in
the previous correspondence on this subject. I can only state that
the three friends whose names have been sent to the Government
fall under the category of those who have been permitted to see
me since the correspondence referred to by me. And if I may
not see these friends, whom I regard in the same light as my
blood relations, I must simply not receive any visitors at all.
I observe that the Government have taken over a fortnight
to give the decision you have conveyed to me. May I ask now for
an early decision on this letter, so as to avoid unnecessary sus-
pense both to those who are eager to see me and to myself.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
No. 827
From photostat: S.N. 8036; also Young India, 6-3-1924
