19. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
MAHABALESHWAR,
April 26, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,
I got your three letters together. I have observed that
when you write so many letters at once, you are agitated. It
is so this time, too. Why is that? You are agitated when I
am in the Ashram and also when I am not. Maybe, the nature
of your agitation is different in the two cases, but the effect on
your health is the same. This shows that your unhappiness
springs from within, and that its supposed external causes are
1 Amritlal V. Thakkar, Secretary, Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial
Trust
2 Swami Anand
10
nothing but imagination. How can it be that your old co-work-
ers themselves harass you? The harassment is imagined. Differ-
ences of opinion do not constitute harassment. What is the
use of my ordering you? After all it is with your co-workers
that you have to work and you must, therefore, work in har-
mony with them. This is what is meant by public opinion,
"democracy". Work of this nature can be done only by accepting
the majority opinion or the decision of the person who has
been selected as the leader. Why should one feel unhappy about
this, or think that one's self-respect is being offended? This is
the only way of serving other people-not in the manner we
like, but in the manner that they desire. Only if you do this
cheerfully you will gain wisdom, rise higher and do the utmost
possible service. My advice, therefore, is that you should remain
there and go on working patiently and cheerfully. I should,
of course, like you to deal with the so-called servants as you
would with your own brothers and sisters. That will bring credit
to you, and if you succeed, the results will be excellent. Ser-
vants have always been with us in their capacity as servants.
The only difference is that now we wish to draw them nearer
to us and give some time to them. If you do not show discre-
tion in this, you will fail. But even if you fail, what does it
matter? Success lies hidden in failure. He who fails will one
day succeed. One who does nothing for fear of failing will
achieve nothing. If you start re-counting from the point where
you went wrong, you will get the figure right.
By losing yourself you will gain yourself. One becomes one-
self only if one ceases to be oneself. Why, then, need you fear
losing your individuality? Let it be lost.
I had a letter from Kanchan today, which I am sending
for your perusal. Let her stay where she is. She will get trained
there. Amtussalaam also mentions her in her letter. I am, there-
fore, sending that too.
I tear up your letters. You should never preserve your
letters. They contain your sarcasms on the impulse of the mo-
ment. There is no point in re-reading or recalling them.
All of you have been kept fully informed about ourselves.
We shall be here up to the end of May, then June in
Panchgani and then Sevagram. This is my intention. Only
His will be done. Our hosts here are Premlilabehn and
Shantikumar1, and in Panchgani it will be Nanji Sheth. In
addition, Bachchharajbhai is of course at both the places.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 8456. Also C.W. 5575. Courtesy :
Munnalal G. Shah
