137. LETTER TO R.
March 18, 1933
MY DEAR R.,
I hope you will not resent this letter, nor my dictating it. The
impression left on my mind by long conversations with N. is that
you and other young men who have come under her influence
have not really benefited by it and that you have contributed
to your own and her fall. She happened to show me one of
your letters. I did not like the unduly familiar style of address, nor
the contents of your letter. I fear very much that you have taken
liberties with her which, as young men of self-restraint, you and
your associates should never have taken with a stranger. N. tells
me that you are talking about spiritual marriages or spiritual
friendships bordering on marital relations. This is nothing but
playing with fire and an echo of very subtle sensuality. I therefore
fervently urge you and the other young men not to play with fire,
and not to be instrumental, consciously or unconsciously, in pre-
venting the moral progress of N. who has only just begun to per-
ceive the immorality of her past life. You should recognize that
she has a pliable nature. She has hitherto not even understood
that what she was doing was horribly untruthful and essentially
immoral. I hope you will not misunderstand my letter. Probably,
when I was convalescing in Bangalore some years ago, I saw all
of you young men, but whether I did or not, I have no other
feeling towards you except that of a parent to his children, and it
is under a sense of that self-chosen responsibility that I am writing
this letter to you in the hope that you will put yourself right, if
what I have said carries conviction to you, and by refraining from
any familiarity with N. help her to outgrow her past life.
You can share this letter with your associates and I would
like you to share it with N. I feel for her deeply because I believe
that in spite of her untruthful and immoral past she has great
capacity for sacrifice and service.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20624
