331. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG,
January 31, 1907
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL,
I have your letter and the list. We have to publish, on Mr. Adamji
Miankhan's departure, his photograph as a supplement, and we have
also to give a brief account of his life. The account I shall send from
here. I have asked Mr. Adamji to let us have his photograph. He
will send one on to you there. As soon as it arrives, you should have
the block made, so that we can make use of it when necessary and may
not be rushed.
I should like you to let me have the total of complimentary copies
and the total of exchanges we send, dividing [them] into two heads,
complimentary copies and exchanges for Natal, and [those for places]
outside Natal. The receipts for January are not quite bad. In the
expenditure for the month, you have not shown the wages at all. Has
the balance-sheet been started?
Who is to form the riddles, before we can think of prizes? Personally,
I am of the opinion that we are not yet ripe for branching out in this
direction.
What prescription has Dr. Nanji given for Kalyandas, and what
reason does he assign for the sores on the hands?
1 Honorary Secretary of the Natal Indian Congress during Gandhiji's absence
from South Africa. He left for India in February, 1907. Vide "Adamji Miankhan",
pp. 314-.
6‒20
I have duly received your list of advertisers for Johannesburg.
They have all consented to pay. Chhotabhai has already paid; you
must have received the Credit Note. Please inquire and let me know
whether you have or not. The others will pay. You may, therefore,
continue the advertisements.
It would be very good if you could collect the £3 from Mrs. Jamieson.
I feel that I should refund the £3 to Vyas. Henceforth, you should
not give notes of introduction to men in whom you cannot put a reasonable
trust.
Do not overwork yourself. What about Mothoo? I have not yet
received the Parsee Chronicle or the Patrika. The names of subscribers
against which you have put a cross should be retained until you hear
further from me. The others may be struck off. I will, however, inquire.
I am glad you had the meeting on Sunday. How did the ladies
take it? What did they understand? What pains were taken to explain
to them what was read? Who gave the explanations? Where was
the meeting held? It is a step absolutely in the right direction, and
should be continued at any cost.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. G.
From a photostat of the typewritten original: S. N. 4693
