562. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got your letter. You will find with this a letter for Bhag-
wanji and one for Panditji. I believe that up to a certain quantity
(12 ounces) milk is supplied to a prisoner at the cost of the jail.
Personally I am glad that you have told Hariyomal that he
could come back. Such persons learn only through experience.
Your suggestion regarding Parvati is excellent. If it is acted up-
on, both will be free.
We must bear the expenses of Prabhudas's journeys. He is
rather timid. He will probably take time to find a partner, and
it may even be a difficult task. He will not get over his restless-
ness till he marries. The forcible repression of his strong desire
to marry was the cause of his restlessness.
Your remaining firm about the problem of Lakshmi is very
necessary. I cannot understand Dudabhai's opposition. I have
had no letter from Purushottam. I did ask him to write to me.
I don't think fasting will do him any harm. If he knows how to
break the fast gradually, he is bound to benefit from it. If the
bone-setter knows his job well, there will be no harm. It will
probably be safer to get Kanu examined by Haribhai. If Ma-
thuradas remains firm in his resolve, Motibehn will give up her
opposition. It has been my unfailing experience that if one of
the two parties is firm and the other party knows that he or she
cannot be shaken from his or her resolve, the latter resigns her-
self or himself to the situation. As we forget in time our grief
even over the death of one who was dearest to us, so also this
folly leaves us by and by. The truth is there is some weakness
in both parties and that is why they need each other's support.
Really speaking, such support is of no avail. If it helps any
couple to keep their resolve, the fact must be counted as an acci-
dent. How can a blind person lead another blind person? How
can one who is drowning save another in the same plight as him-
self? How can a person who is not free from passion help his
or her partner to be so? The reasoning is quite simple.
You need not take any trouble to enlist subscribers for Hari-
Jan. We will send five copies to the Ashram addressed to no
particular subscribers. You may use them in any way that you
can. See if you can maintain a file with four out of the five
copies, or with the copies which remain unsold. Some day they
will be useful.
I got Satyarthaprakash, the slivers and the leather for the soles.
Kellogg's book must have been sent to Dhulia jail for Madhavji.
Or it was with somebody in Vijapur. I am sure about this.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I; also Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, pp. 35-
