55. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
JOHANNESBURG,
March 3, 1908
THE EDITOR,
INDIAN OPINION
SIR,
The honour of the Indian community has been vindicated and a
great victory won. It has earned the admiration of the world and gained
more prestige. During the early stages of the struggle the white
population of the Transvaal and South Africa laughed at the community,
and it was only after the movement had gathered momentum that those
among the whites who valued truth and were men of conscience came
forward to help us. In England, the brave Ritch, neglecting his dear,
bed-ridden wife and his children, rushed about working like a convict
under a sentence of hard labour. He roused public opinion throughout
England.
His impassioned eloquence touched every heart [and
evoked] the sympathy of the nobility, the rich and the poor alike. The
spark [that he struck] broke forth into a warm burning flame in the
hearts of the Transvaal Ministers. Indian prisoners were set free as a
result and their offer of [voluntary registration] was accepted. Indeed,
God has saved the community's honour.
The Indians' success is the first example of its kind. Its value
cannot be exaggerated. Every Indian ought to be proud of it. If one
adheres to truth, succour from God or His servants will follow in-
evitably. If we are to keep alive the memory of that divine succour
in the minds of our descendants, every Indian will agree that the
Federation Hall is a necessity. All those who have Indian blood in
their veins will work sincerely to promote the cause in every possible
manner. Since the hall will serve as a memorial, both the poor and the
rich must help in every way, financial and other.
It has been decided to build the hall in Johannesburg. The
collection will start in a few days. Every Transvaal Indian must pay
10 s at the least and a receipt will be issued to him under the signature
of the Chairman of the British Indian Association. Businessmen, pro-
perty-owners and other well-placed Indians must contribute more than
10 s each—the most they can. Any Indian who misleads the people on
this issue or indulges in scheming will be an enemy to the country and
truth. I want to make a special appeal to every Indian to keep clear
of the net that such persons may spread for us and, holding God and
truth dear, to come forward and help in every way possible. It is hoped
that the rich will contribute anything between £50 and £100 at the
least. Those who have registered under the old law are in no way
distinct from us. Here is an occasion for them to do their duty and
make themselves really useful. We hope that they will contribute a
handsome amount.
It is especially needful on this occasion to express our appreciation
of Mr. Ritch, the brave man who has worked tirelessly in England as
the truest soldier of this campaign at all stages. The Association has
resolved to offer him only £300 on behalf of [Indians in] South Africa—a
paltry amount indeed since, owing to other pressing demands, it will
be unable to send a larger sum just now. It is essential that this money
be raised as quickly as possible. Indian leaders all over the South African
1 Vide also "To Those Who Submitted to the Obnoxious Law", p. 63.
Colonies should collect contributions and send them in time to the
British Indian Association at Johannesburg.
Yours etc.,
Essop ISMAIL MIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 14-3-1908
