414. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
April 22, 1932
CHI. PREMA,
I have already written to you about Dhurandhar. He has
not gone on hunger-strike.
I think you should not force Anandi to go out for a walk with
you. If she has no strength, she will not be able to walk. It will
be enough if you teach her pranayama and some passive exercises.
Do you know what passive exercises are?
Regarding conversion, I don't mean that it is never justified.
But no one should invite another person to change his or her
religion. In my view, the belief which underlies such practice,
namely, that one's own religion is true and another's false is an
error. When, however, a person has changed his religion under
compulsion or in ignorance, there should be no objection to such
a person rectifying his error, that is, returning to his original reli-
gion; on the contrary, he should be encouraged to do that. His
action is not conversion. If I think that my religion is false, I
should give it up. And I may, I ought to, accept what seems to
me good in any other religion. If my religion seems to me im-
perfect, it is my duty to try to make it perfect. It is also my duty
to try to rid it of any evil which I may see in it.
I regard Mirabehn as a Christian, and now she also regards
herself as a Christian. I see no inconsistency in her being a Chris-
tian and reading the Gita with devotion. Persons belonging to
other faiths also join in our prayers with sincere feeling.
I really don't know what we shall do after we get swaraj.
God will lead me then, as He does today. A man who believes in
God does not plan what he will do in future. He who plans is
not a man of faith, or rather his faith is weak.
There are not three separate paths, knowledge, devotion and
action, for the realization of God. The three form one single path.
That one path is divided into three aspects for the sake of conve-
nience [of discussion]. Water is a compound of hydrogen and oxy-
gen, but it is neither the one nor the other. Similarly, knowledge
is not a self-sufficient path of God-realization, nor is devotion. It
may be said that the path of God-realization is a chemical com-
pound of all the three factors. This metaphor is defective, but it
explains what I mean.
The protection of Draupadi's honour is not a miracle like
the conversion of water into wine. The faith that God succours
his devotees when they are in distress helps one, and the examples
which support such faith are worth cherishing. If, however, a
person cultivates devotion in expectation of such help, his devo-
tion is of no value.
I do not approve of a policy of compelling people to become
strong. There should be no compulsion at all in this matter. I
have not known anyone who liked to remain weak in body. This
is a matter for education.
We should put before the people the ideal of reducing their
needs to a minimum. Having done so, we need not concern our-
selves with the result. Where is compromise in this? The question
of compromise does not arise at all. The standard of life of the
starving poor ought to be raised. But this is not a new idea.
Even now we are making efforts towards that end.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10282. Also C.W. 6730. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
