213. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
JOHANNESBURG,
September 19, 1904
TO
THE HONOURABLE DADABHAI NAOROJI
22, KENSINGTON ROAD
LONDON, S. E . , ENGLAND
DEAR SIR,
From the Blue book received this week on the Indian position, I
notice that Mr. Lyttelton has laid stress on the question of the sites for
Indian bazaars.
As you will have seen from the British Indian representation in
reply to Sir Arthur Lawley's dispatch, the statement is reiterated, and
lest the matter may be overlooked, I again emphasise the fact that most
1 Dadabhai Naoroji reproduced the text of this letter in a communication which he
addressed to the Secretary of State for the Colonies and the Secretary of State for India.
(C.O. 291, Volume 79, Individuals — N., and C. O. 291, Volume 75, India Office).
2 Vide "Memorial to Colonial Secretary", dated "Prior to September 3, 1904".
of the sites are certainly unfit for trade. The statement has been made
not without totally independent testimony from Europeans of standing
and all those reports have been furnished to His Excellency. In Krugers-
dorp alone is the site chosen at all good, and therefore, without any compul-
sion, those who wanted Stands have applied for them. In other places
where new sites have been established, practically no applications have
been made.
The chief thing, however, is to avoid compulsory segregation. So
far as the principle of Bazaars is concerned, people may be induced to
take up sites by setting apart Bazaars in suitable localities and the problem
will solve itself.
I hope you will see the leader in the Indian Opinion on the Cape Admi-
nistrator's Proclamation, prohibiting the entry of Indians into the Trans-
keian Territories without permits. This is a fresh restriction the reason
for which it is difficult to understand, and the Territories mentioned in
the schedule to the proclamation are the dependencies of the Cape.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten original: G. N. 2261.
