436. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
October 19, 1932
BHAISHRI VALJI,
I got your letter and the book. Expecting that this letter
will reach you, I am not sending it by registered post to save the
cost. Do write to me, however, when you get it.
I may say that almost as soon as I got the book I went
through it. I find your language sweet, so I did not pay at-
tention to it. If I did I might, in my wisdom, want to suggest
a few corrections, but they seem to be immaterial.
I was not favourably impressed by the book. You call it
Ishucharita1, but I do not see anything in it to justify the title.
If I remember correctly, you once told me or I told some-
body that I believed you thought yourself too humble to pro-
duce anything original and that you were satisfied with trans-
lating the best that the ancestors had left to us. If I accept this
argument, I would perhaps approve your book. But I do not
accept the argument. If it is accepted in your case, it should be
accepted for others too. And if all acted accordingly, the only
result would be that we would drown ourselves in the waters
of our ancestors' well. I believe that it is our duty to augment
the legacy of the ancestors and to change it into current
coin and make it acceptable to the present age. Mere trans-
lation cannot achieve this. What you have given in your book
is already available in Gujarati. The translations brought out
after immense industry by Christians themselves are not bad.
Why should we not put them in people's hands? I am sure you
do not write such books so that people may read your sweet
language. Even if you do, your purpose will not be served.
In my view this book is an example of a kind of lethargy. I
am sure that you would not call a man industrious merely be-
cause he reads much and writes much. As for you, I believe
that you have a mania for reading and translating. You ought
to get rid of it. What I should like you to do is this. Give us
by all means a book on the life of Jesus. Read the New Testa-
ment as often as you please, but then put the book on a
shelf and create a living picture of Jesus from what you have
read.
Do not think that because the book has been printed, you must
give it to the people. If you find substance in my view, cancel
the printed matter and don't mind if so much money is wasted.
Try to write something original as I have suggested.
If
you feel that it would be too much trouble to do so, keep quiet;
give up reading and engage yourself in physical activity to im-
prove your health. I have seen many persons both in India
and elsewhere who suffer from the mania of reading. You also
have that disease. To get rid of it take walks, contemplate the
beauty of God's creation, read the book of nature, learn the
language of trees, listen to the music of spheres in the sky, watch
the drama enacted in it every night; and during the day spin,
when you feel tired, do sewing or, if you can, carpentry or shoe-
making. I know that your hand gets benumbed if you strain
it, but with practice that will disappear.
There are in English many beautifully written books on the
life of Jesus. We can get some material even from them, but I
would not put that burden on you.
The portion relating to Angels, etc., in your book should be
left out. Why add to the superabundance of things that we
already have. Even if in fact the Angels and the wise men had
not come, Jesus's fame would not suffer. My complaint is that
you have failed to raise before the reader a vivid image of Jesus.
You have merely given the teaching of Jesus and that, too, through
quotations. Will anyone disbelieve you if you give it in your
own words?
I do not know what type of readers you had in view in
writing this book. If you have the general mass in view, you should
not have inflicted foreign names on them. A man like me whose
reading is very limited cannot make out whether you have deck-
ed the Biblical names in clothes of your make or in borrowed
clothes. I am afraid there is not much to be gained from things
of this kind. If your intention was to give names that might sound
well in Gujarati, you should have coined fitting Gujarati names
suggesting the same meanings as the corresponding Biblical
names, as the latter are always significant.
If, regardless of my criticism, you decide that the book
should be published, it is not necessary to offer the book free,
charging only postage. Do not mind if people do not buy it
even at cost price. The book is bound to sell as it will bear your
name. (But don't take that as a test of the quality of the book.)
Your work ended with the writing, it will be up to some philan-
thropic institution which distributes such books free among
people to give copies of this one, if it so wishes, to those who
cannot afford to buy it even at cost price. It is best that one
person should not attempt to ride two horses at a time. Let
that sum of Rs. 150 grow with compound interest.
I have written much more than I had intended. Moreover,
I have let myself go in my criticism, which means that I have
yielded to ignorant nature and so I have decided to spend money
on registering this.
Do you like the takli because you can spin on it while walk-
ing? One can spin on it while resting. Excessive greed for any-
thing is the root of all evil. Your present task is to make your
body as strong as steel.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7441. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai
