482. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
April 15, 1933
BHAI MUNSHI,
You seem to have decided to write by turns.
How can a Gujarati who does not know about Narmadashan-
kar be called a Gujarati? It was as early as in my childhood
that I first came to know about him. I am never tired of singing
his poem: "The bugles blow: Let us all go to battle and vic-
tory." The fascination which began then deepened in South
Africa. I had by then become a devoted lover of the Gita. Nar-
madashankar's preface to his translation of the Gita deepened
my love for it and increased my respect for him. My only re-
gret is that my numerous activities did not permit me to acquire
as much knowledge of a writer and poet like Narmadashankar
as I should have liked to do.
I hope you don't expect from me more than this just now.
Even this little I have been able to write to you because I got
up at 3 o'clock in the morning.
To dedicate one's life to the service of Harijans is indeed
difficult; it is still more difficult to become fit to die for them.
How demanding is Satyanarayana ! How finicky He is. He would
have spotlessly pure sheep, the very best pumpkin, the heads of
sinless men, and how are we to get them for Him?
For, He
would reject one for a single impure thought that might cross one's
mind ! ! Still it is impossible to leave Him. So jealous is that
Poet of poets that He simply would not let me worship any other
poet. To whom may I complain about this?
I assume that your pain has completely disappeared.
I hope Jagadish is improving.
Now about the Kabibai Trust. I have gone through all the
papers relating to it. My reading of it is that there can be no
objection to taking in Harijans if room is left after the so-called
"high class" Hindus have been fully provided for. The Trust
does not exclude Harijans. However, if all you lawyers so in-
terpret the terms that Harijans should have no place at all even
if pupils from "high-class" Hindus do not seek admission to the
school in sufficient number and some benches or seats are left
vacant, I have nothing to say.
The next issue is a purely educational question. On what
type of education is the Trust money to be spent? This is not a
subject which can be discussed through letters. I have not been
able to convince many people of the correctness of my views on
education. On the one hand I want selfless teachers of the type
dreamt of by Gokhale and, on the other, a system of education
from which the dying villagers can derive benefit. This country
cannot afford to imitate any other country, and so we have got to
think independently about our educational problem and devise a
plan of our own. However for the present all this is only a fond
dream of mine. And you also have no time just now to think
about this subject.
I am progressing in your books only at a snail's pace. But
I have kept up my reading. Have you seen the tiny cart
driven by the tiny Ahmedabad bullock?
The speed of that
bullock would put the Aga Khan's race horse to shame, and it is
at that speed that Sardar has been reading your books. Let me
admit that we have a motive behind all this, as we wish to take
plenty of services from both of you. Shouldn't we fully know
those from whom we expect so much?
You can know from this that we often think and talk about you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7528. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
