377. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Phagan Vad 7 [March 29, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,
I got your three letters together. You want to have a letter
every week but, since I do not have one from you so frequently,
I do not know how I can meet your wishes. However, I shall
try to write oftener.
After the stipulated period of six months is over, you need
not persist in saltless diet. It is not intended that in clinging to
it one should sacrifice one's life. We have adopted diet without
salt and sugar in the belief that we should be healthier without
them. If that does not happen, we are not bound to give up
either. For us, a saltless diet is not, like vegetarianism, a matter
of ethical principle. When we come to think of it as such, we
will not eat salt. About milk, I do feel that way. Speaking for
myself, I seem to do very well without salt, sugar, vegetables,
pulses, etc.
I am rather unhappy that you cannot have sour lime, etc.,
there. I can see many defects in your experiments. You are not
in the least to blame, though. Not being conversant with the
thing, you have not been able to make any changes. Moreover,
you cannot make your own independent experiments. If, therefore,
you are still going on with the saltless diet, etc., and if it does
not suit you, do please give up the practice.
To enable you to preserve my letters, I shall try to use paper
of uniform size when writing to you. Some of the letters may
possibly deserve being read a second time. Moreover, as you are
very eager to know my views, in case you do not get a letter from
me in any week, you can re-read instead the latest ones received
in preceding weeks.
Do not hesitate to ask me any questions in any words.
Let it not worry you that you went [to India] against my
advice. My only concern in trying to stop you was that you,
all by yourself, would not be able to strengthen your ideas. But
when I observed your keen desire to serve Khushalbhai and
Devbhabhi, the other thought appeared of secondary importance
beside this desire. It was therefore all to the good that you went.
Moreover, the bitter experience you are getting is also a kind of
training for you, for your ideas are noble, all of them, and you
aspire to raise yourself up.
Our use of Urdu words like madari Jaban is perfectly in order.
If we would preserve Gujarati as simply a branch of Sanskrit, Parsis
and Muslims should not be regarded as Gujaratis. This is not pos-
sible even if we wish it to be so. Gujarati has, and will continue
to have, a number of Urdu and Persian words in use. The
language used in the Opinion must be such as will find favour with
both Hindus and Muslims. In making it so, we may use Allah
and Parameshwar both, as occasion may require. If any Englishmen
settle in Gujarat, we may even introduce some English words into
our language. The English words being taken over at present
are just so much ostentation, ignorance or flattery. Behind this
borrowing there is no thought of developing the language.
If the Hindus are faced with anything similar to the Turkish
War, they too should raise a row. Italy and the Balkan States
are both in the wrong in this war and we do nothing amiss in
pointing to the fact of their being so. There is no ill will towards
Italy in this. Many of the journal's readers being Muslims, it is
our duty to give them as much news of the invasion as possible.
We claim the Opinion to be a medium of moral education, but how
could it serve that purpose if there were no readers? By giving
the news about the war, we humour readers in a harmless fashion.
Moreover, readers ought to keep themselves informed about the
war and to that extent the issue involves a moral principle.
Finally, though morals and publicity to our hardships are its
chief concerns, it is not the intention that the paper should carry
no news at all. Maybe, you have more racial discrimination there,
but it does not affect the masses. Here it is they who are specially
affected.
The reason why in the sacred centres of pilgrimage oil is
forbidden and ghee is regarded as pure can be explained by the
conjecture which I have made. At one time, India was entirely
a meat-eating country but, when someone converted the land to
vegetarianism, ghee came to be considered specially sacred. And
so we use unlimited quantities of ghee in our diet. The more
ghee there is in any preparation, the more highly we value it.
Can there be a greater instance of ignorance than this! And yet
this is what people believe. In consequence, ghee is assigned a
high place in holy centres of pilgrimage as well. The reformer
must have imagined that if people consumed plenty of ghee
they would not miss meat very much. With this same object, in
England, too, vegetarians take eggs in excess in the absence of
meat, and even fall ill. There are hardly any preparations of
theirs in which eggs are not used. They have assigned almost a
sacred place to eggs.
It would have been very good if you had undertaken to
teach the bania. You would have been partly cured of your restless-
ness and the earnings would have been some help.
Do not take my going there as in any way certain. There is
a possibility that satyagraha may be revived on issues affecting
wives and minors. In that case, I think I shall have to stay on.
Should satyagraha be revived, how could you join it now? I do not
think it will be right for you to come away from there. Your
purpose in going away was service to your parents. With that
as your chief concern, do whatever is best. For this same reason,
you cannot go to Baroda or elsewhere to learn weaving.
I knew the verse you have quoted about controlling the
palate. My criticism applies all the same. One verse can make no
difference. They attached no importance to this subject. Had they
done so, there would have been no feeding on delicacies in the
havelis and other places on every pretext and no gifting of pro-
visions with ghee and jaggery on every sacred occasion, nor the
feasting of Brahmins either. These days, even rishis and sadhus do
not master their palate, but are found to have been mastered by
it. This is a long story. If we said these things by way of fault-
finding, we would incur sin. When, however, our chief object is
our own and others' welfare, it is our duty to take into account
whatever imperfections we observe even in the most respected
personages.
This closes the reply to one of your letters. As to the other
letters, I shall try to answer them later, that is, next week, so that
I may have something to write to you every week.
Here, so many things happen which it is impossible to write
about. I do not have so much time. But some of the things will
find their way in as I deal with the questions you have asked.
Manilal is fully engrossed in his studies. I leave him not an
hour free, so that it is in vain to expect him to write to you.
He may possibly answer your letters. Jeki, too, is busy; but, apart
from this, she is disinclined to write letters and does not quite
know how to. Do not, therefore, put much hope in her either.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: C.W. 5643. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
