606. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
RAIPURA,
February 15, 1947
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,
I sent you a letter through Sushila. But I have been upset
somewhat by Sardar's letter. Devdas's letter is still ringing in my
ears. I do not remember what I wrote to you, for I have not
kept a copy of it. All I wish today to write is that you should
give up your attitude of neutrality. Sardar is quite clear in his
mind that what I look upon as my dharma is really adharma.
Devdas of course has written as much. I have great faith in
Sardar's judgment. I have faith in Devdas's judgment too, but
then, though grown up, in my eyes he is still a child. This
cannot be said of Sardar. Kishorelal and Narahari too are grown-
ups; but it is not difficult for me to understand their opposi-
tion. The link between you and me is your faith that my life
is pure, spotless and wholly dedicated to the performance of
dharma. If that is not so, very little else remains. I would, there-
fore, like you to take full part in this discussion, though not
necessarily publicly—for I certainly do not want your business
to suffer. But if I am conducting myself sinfully, it becomes the
1 Ramkrishna Bajaj, addressee's brother
86-30
duty of all friends to oppose me vehemently. A satyagrahi may
end up as a duragrahi if he comes to regard untruth as truth
—that being the only distinction between the two. I believe that
is not the case with me; but that means little, for after all I am
not God. I can commit mistakes; I have committed mistakes;
this may prove to be my biggest at the fag end of my life. If
that be so, all my well-wishers can open my eyes if they oppose
me. If they do not I shall go from here even as I am. What-
ever I am doing here is as a part of my yajna. There is nothing
I do knowingly which is not a part and parcel of that yajna.
Even the rest I take is as a part of that yajna.
I am dictating this with a mud-pack over my eyes and
abdomen. Shortly afterwards I shall be going to the evening
prayer meeting. This business about Manu is taking up a lot of
my time, but I do not mind it because even her presence here is
for the sake of that yajna. Her test constitutes a part of that yajna.
I may not be able to explain it to you — that is a different
matter. The point I must make my friends grasp is this : When
I take Manu in my lap, do I do so as a pure-hearted father or
as a father who has strayed from the path of virtue? What I
am doing is nothing new to me; in thought I have done it over
the last 50 years; in action, in varying degrees, over quite a
number of years. Even if you sever all connection with me, I
would not feel hurt. Just as I want to stick to my dharma, you
have to stick to yours.
To come to another matter, the Hindu weavers here—
known as tantis—are very angry. Their spinning-wheels and
houses have been for the most part burnt. If they do not get
a supply of yarn they have either to be idle or take to earth
work as labourers. The officer in charge here tells me that the
Government cannot provide them yarn unless the Central Gov-
ernment helps. I told him I might be able to obtain the needed
supply if they were prepared to pay for it. He has agreed. Can
you supply the yarn? If yes, then how much, when and at
what price? Will it be necessary to obtain the sanction of the
Interim Government? Please let me know in detail.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 8086. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
