122. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
October 19/20, 1933 1
CHI. THAKKAR BAPA,
Every day I think of writing you a long letter and it is
postponed every day. Jamnalal can help avoid interviews, but
who can stem the increasing flow of correspondence? I have got
to go to bed early and so some letters do remain unattended
piling the heap of papers up. I carry on in this pitiful state.
What should I write about N.? I have done my best for
her. I think she did try honestly to restrain her passions. But
she slipped during her attempts and ultimately ran away. If she
drowns herself, I would neither be surprised nor sorry. If she
is alive, I would not give up hopes for her improvement. I do
not at all repent having readmitted her. It was my duty to do
so. She was basking in affection not only here but at Sabarmati
also. She used to write to me that she never experienced such
affection even from her parents. All were content with whatever
little restraint she voluntarily accepted. How can one be changed
so suddenly, who remained unbridled for several years? I have
not yet judged . . . .2 I have never noticed any fault on his part
in connection with N.
The Agra affair is very sad. We reap what we sow. Let
Hinduism perish if the so-called sanatanists fail to wake up and, in
their vanity resort to goondaism with the help of the masses. It is
enough if we continue doing our duty. God's will prevails ulti-
mately. The affairs at Samartha and Dholka are not only sad
but shameful for us also. Similar petty cases take place here too.
I intend to write something in Harijan about this matter.
I think it is good that Harijan is shifted to Madras. It was
the only way to utilize Sastri fully. Kodanda Rao had arranged
a small function in honour of Sastri. Deodhar spoke there. He
hinted at the same thing.
He said Sastri was withering in
Poona and will blossom in Madras. Sastri has gained confidence
to run Harijan. He will get help from some others. It will be away
from Delhi; but that is no inconvenience. The Hindi edition is
already based in Delhi. If Sastri could not settle in Poona to
devote himself fully to Harijan he could do so much less in Delhi.
His suffering was mental and genuine. Since we were to bring out
Harijan with the help of Sastri, it was our duty to look to
his convenience.
I shall send you Sastri's letter, if I have
not destroyed it, which will give you an idea of his mental dis-
tress. It has always been my opinion that the English edition
can be produced best and cheapest from Madras. However, you
may write to and arrange with Sastri directly in case you and
Ghanshyamdas are not fully satisfied with my letter.
My mention of rest on Sunday and Monday may be consider-
ed an oversight. You are welcome to include Monday and Tues-
day in the programme that you may chalk out.
Tour programme for C.P. will be completed within the
time prescribed by you. Dr. Khare has already issued the tour
programme for C.P. (Marathi). You may have seen it. He
wished to write to you also. Satisbabu has written from Bengal.
He has also written to you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1133. Also C.W. 10489. Courtesy:
Harijan Sevak Sangh
