7. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
PESHAWAR,
October 15, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,
Jivraj writes to say that you should not climb uphill. You
also say that it does not produce a good effect.
There are rick-
shaws there. One can use them in illness. You may get into a
rickshaw wherever there is a climb. In this way you can go
to a new place every day for a walk. I see nothing wrong in
this. This is the only way of deriving full benefit from your
stay in Simla. Shummy seems to be advising exactly the opposite
in regard to Durga. If so, my advice should be disregarded. If I
were present there, I would of course wrestle with Shummy.
You know that when there are letters for others along
with letters addressed to me, I do not read them. This is my
nature. There were two letters by you to Sushila in reply to
the same letter. I read them. I can give for this no excuse
other than curiosity. From your previous letter, I have forgotten
everything except the drawing of the moon. Yesterday's letter I
regard as important. I do not know what Sushila wrote to you
regarding physical passion, but for me it has become a ques-
tion of my veracity. You have told her that my last statement
should reassure them all. This pricked me. We cannot be
complacent regarding physical passion in anybody's case, but, as
for myself, I should say that had I, at the time of my last state-
ment, been having such experiences as I am having now, I
would most certainly have not issued it. I cannot say, either,
whether I would have stopped my experiment. Hence neither
you nor anybody else can remain complacent regarding me. I see
no need as yet to withdraw the last statement or issue a revised
one. This does not mean that any of you should start worrying.
For the present, I will not go further than this. I found the
time to write this much as being necessary in the interest of
truth. You will naturally be curious to know more. But restrain
your curiosity.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Tell Rajkumari about physical passion so that I need not
write to her separately.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11663
