465. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR AND B. D. KALELKAR
February 19, 1933
CHI. KAKA,
I got your letter.
If milk, when taken without any other food, is not digested,
it does no harm, but the milk which seems to be digested with
the help of other food is not really digested but mixes with the
food, and remaining in the body in the form of poison, it harms
the gums, etc. This is the view held by more and more doctors
and seems to be correct. You can have with milk oranges,
grapes, pineapples, pomegranates and other juicy fruits. They
will prevent milk from causing constipation. You should, there-
fore, start the experiment of milk-diet as soon as possible and
accustom your body really to digest it. I make no distinction
between milk and curds. Some doctors, probably most, believe
that curds are more easily digested. The curds should not taste
sour at all-the curds which we used to make by adding drops of
lemon juice to milk would be the best. You should not drink the
milk but sip it slowly. It would be better to take a spoonful at
a time. To start with, you should take a quarter pound every
hour. Do not mind if you get diarrhoea. It will stop in a few
days. You may drink the fruit juice separately at any convenient
time. In fruit juice, you should have the juice of six mosambis
or of one pound of fresh grapes in two parts. You should take
about four pounds of milk or curds, and mix with it as much
butter as may be necessary. If you take milk in sufficient quanti-
ty, I doubt the necessity of butter. But it will do no harm if
it can be digested even in the absence of other food. Doctors
believe that, like milk, butter too does no harm if taken by itself.
See how I have described the benefits of milk. But I have no
choice. I can find no plant or herb which can equal milk in
food value. There is certainly some truth in the belief that milk
is a wholesome food even for yogis.
It is the only substitute for
meat. Only our vaids could have discovered a vegetable substi-
tute for milk, but, lacking zeal for dharma, they made no such
attempt. I have failed in my search and given it up. We do
not know if anybody else will take it up and succeed. Perhaps
in the West they may succeed. Among us there is no one who
possesses the necessary medicinal knowledge to make such a dis-
covery. We do not regard it as our dharma to acquire such know-
ledge and to make experiments with that aim. Anybody who
wishes to undertake the task should be inspired with zeal for the
welfare of the cow. He should be convinced that no milk other
than the mother's milk can be the proper food of a human being.
Such a person should then study medicine. We do not have at
present men with such a spirit. If India is destined to discover
such a substitute, God will send among us a person with the ne-
cessary gifts. Till then, let us sing praises of milk and do the
duty which lies before us. I hope you will feel satisfied that I
have replied to your question in greater detail than you had ex-
pected. I also hope that you will understand the relative impor-
tance of the issues involved. Think over all this and do what
seems right to you, for even in such matters the final decision
should be one's own. What I have said is true only about people
with weak health. Those who are healthy will eat normal food
and may even be able to digest it. If you want to experiment
with milk-diet in a scientific manner, you can do so only in the
Ashram or in the neighbourhood of a dairy where we have a
right of entry; it is only then that we can get fresh milk. I sup-
pose you know that yogis mix crushed neem leaves in milk
before drinking it.
Write something for Harijan when you feel like doing so.
I think innocent eggs are laid by hen without having been insem-
inated by a cock. You will get more information from the friend
at Sangli. An innocent egg is one from which no chick can be
born.
Personally, I very much liked the design for the title page
of Harijan. It was entirely my choice. At first we had thought
of getting a block made. But I liked the design better after it
was printed and so the idea of getting a block made was
dropped.
Shastra does not mean the pronouncements of men of spiri-
tual experience in the past. It means the words of living men
today who have had first-hand spiritual experience, that is, who
have realized the Brahman. Shastra is something which is daily
embodied in somebody's life. What exists only in books and is
not followed in life may be philosophy, or it may be foolish chat-
ter or mere hypocrisy. Shastra must be immediately capable of
realization in experience, it must spring from the living experience
of the person who utters it. It is only in this sense that the
Veda is eternal. All else is not Veda, but theorizing about Veda.
If . . .1 is resolved to marry . . . 2 he should ignore our
opposition and do so. There is no harm in doing that. The Gita
verse, "What can self-control avail3", applies in this case. But
then the couple should have courage and confidence in themselves.
If the people ultimately see that they lead a life of self-control,
the world will forgive the couple. It is such action which forsakes
the rule of Shastra. If it is inspired by a pure and noble ideal,
it is ultimately condoned. But just now such conduct will be
and ought to be disapproved. Our duty, therefore, is clear. We
should not directly or indirectly give our consent to his marriage
to . . . . If, however, he does marry her and if the people
ultimately approve the marriage, we also will join in the applause.
I think . . . is now forgetting . . . .
Blessings from
BAPU
5 a.m.
[PS.]
I wrote this letter between 3 and 5 and in the morning,
excluding the time spent in prayer. I did not intend to give so
much time to you-I cannot afford to do so. But-?
CHI. BAL5,
Since children emulate their elders, the latter also should
follow a child's praiseworthy example. Hence I follow yours.
The news about Shankar is certainly good. But I will try and
know more. Since I have given too much time to Kaka, I
will not write more than this for you.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9495. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
1& The names are omitted in the source.
3 III, 33
4 A reference to the Gita, XVII. 5-.
5 Balkrishna D. Kalelkar
6 Satish D. Kalelkar
