87. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
June 30, 1926
MY DEAR C. R.,
I have your letter about Tirupur khadi. The complaint is
not about seasonal khadi.
The comparison has been set up
between last year's and this year's production. And the corres-
pondent, who was himself a lover of khadi and an admirer of
Tirupur khadi, contends that it has been progressively deteriorating.
And as you see, Jerajani endorses the verdict up to a point.
Whether a public statement is made or not, I think a more thorough
investigation is necessary. If the hot season causes deterioration,
we must either find out ways and means of combating the evils
of heat or we must frankly tell the public that they must expect
two qualities according to the seasons and, therefore, also two prices.
With reference to your tour, I have well-nigh despaired of any
tour coming forth during the year through no fault of anybody.
It is difficult to get you all ready at the same time. And you
will insist upon having some unavoidable thing at the last moment
and postpone your departure which is the conjunction of your
stars. I would suggest complete cancellation of touring unless
you have courage enough to go out even single. Manilal is not
available till the first of September. He has been postponing the
work of his Railway Association from time to time and I cannot
put any pressure upon him when he pleads the cause of his asso-
ciation. Jamnalalji never cancels a programme he accepts, but it
is unjust to him and unjust to the cause to bind him to a program-
me which is not irrevocable. I have therefore freed him from
all obligations. He will join you when you are ready if he at all
can. Nobody wants to tour without you. You are therefore
the central figure. Seeing that your own movements are erratic
and beyond your control, the only thing to do is for you to say
when you will move out and such men as can be got together
will form the company. And if you have not the heart to under-
take the job on these conditions, by all means give up the idea
of touring this year, only remember this much that the Mahara-
shtra tour has been fixed up after your definite instructions. But
if these instructions were conditional upon Manilal Kothari and
Jamnalalji joining you, let the Maharashtra tour also be cancel-
led. Please wire to me your decision. And do not hesitate to
say no if the touring is really beyond you, whether on account of
your difficulties at Tiruchengodu or any other.
It is no use
trusting to chance.
Devdas is still at Mussoorie. He is gathering strength and
helping Punditji. In what way, he does not state. Laxmidas
and Lalji are with him. Jamnalalji was here. He has gone for
a few days to Ranpur to examine Amritlal Seth's undertaking.
Rajendra Babu left yesterday. Pyarelal is still with Mathuradas
who, as you know, has gone to Panchgani, and is rendering in-
valuable help to Mathuradas. I have now a German lady. She
came here on Saturday. Thus the Ashram is fairly full.
Chhotalal has now calmed down and is trying to specialize in
spinning and weaving, etc. There is no question therefore now
of his travelling with you or coming to you.
Yours,
From a copy: S.N. 11199
