77. LETTER TO MAHOMED ALI
September 8, 1924
MY DEAR BROTHER,
It is now just after five, Monday morning. I have commen-
ced to use ink but somehow or other the hand has not yet settled
down to the ink pen yet. And I want to talk to you without
avoidable impediment.
Only yesterday I realized what you wanted.
Remember
that though I have been successfully at the head of two Presses,
I know next to nothing of the details. I have not yet been to the
Navajivan office. I never knew what was brought from Delhi and
what was not. I thought I was bringing something that was
mine. Now I am sending something that is yours. What is mine
is yours-Swami included. But where he fails, or you find him
wanting, you should fall back upon me. I cannot supply his
ability, but I shall find the money somehow, if money can make
up for lost time. I believe Swami when he tells me he could not
have managed to send you the machines earlier. Why can you
not have both Comrade and Ham dard printed elsewhere for the
time being and ask me to find the deficit?
Swami says the Press will take time to set up in all its details.
He says he never understood that he was to put up everything. He
thought, and I too, that he was wanted for the machines only.
He says he was not willing to cart all the furniture here. Neither
he nor his agent had the requisite knowledge at the time. The
agent who actually took delivery knew very little of Press things.
But the point is not what A or B understood but what you
need, and what I can do. Even whilst I was in Delhi I did not
understand that the sole delay was due to the delay caused on my
side. I thought that even after the machines had been set
up there were many things that had to be done in Delhi by you
before we could make a start.
Now please use Swami freely. After all he is among those who
are the closest to me. If he fails, I have failed. A man who is no
judge of men is a failure even though he may have a heart of
gold and may have the best of intentions in the world. He must
then cease to deal with men and things. I have therefore always
said that I must be judged by the test my closest companions pass
through. You, Swami, Mahadev, Hayat, Ashfaq, Moazzam,
Devdas, Krishnadas, Shwaib are among them. It is not enough
that I can pull on well with you; Swami, Mahadev, Devdas, etc.,
also ought. If they cannot, they should disappear from my pub-
lic life even as Ba has, at any rate, for the present. They are the
instruments through which I work, as Hayat, Moazzam are the
ones through whom you work.
I am therefore sending Swami so that you and he can come
near each other and know each other better. For me a proper
regulation of these personal relations means more for swaraj and
unity than a thousand public documents.
With deepest love,
Yours,
M. K. G.
TO
MAHOMED ALI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan
Desai
