65. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
July 27, 1946
I believe that Kanchan will not be happy till you set up
a house with her. It will be different if she herself gives it
up later. Where you should stay is for you to decide. If you
two willingly observe physical brahmacharya, i. e., do not touch
each other for the satisfaction of physical craving and sleep
in separate beds, I will have no objection to your staying
in the Ashram. Do not Shakaribehn, Kashi and Gomati live
thus? If Kanchan wants only that, the matter is quite simple.
I unhesitatingly agree to your working in the office, irrespective
of whether or not Kanu is there. I have some work also for
you. Both of you will have to be ceaselessly vigilant and strive
to banish thoughts of passion from your minds; otherwise you
will both burn up. You will be listless all the time, be unhappy
and make others unhappy. If you are going to burn with pas-
sion inside, you may as well live in a separate house away from
the Ashram, gratify the desire for sex pleasure and, after you have
tired of it, see what you can do. Show this letter to Kanchan.
You may show it to others also. Even if you live away from the
Ashram and pursue sexual enjoyment, I will still give you work.
I must not be pressed to decide about it just now. I must
watch and you also will have to consider how you can find time
for work, and how much, from your pleasure-seeking. You will
feel as if you had been but recently married. I know the plight
of newly-married couples.
I have never thought even in my dreams that you would
knowingly tell a lie. But when you get excited while speaking,
you behave like a man out of his senses and your face and
words seem like those of a mad man. In a sense all of us are
mad. But at such moments you seem to be the maddest of us
all. You will not be cured of this madness unless you decide to
speak as little as possible. I think the cause of this madness in
you is self-suppression. For all I know it may be something else.
I understand about Uruli. I will know more if Kanchan
explains it to me.
Show me the exercise book in which you write Urdu. You
should not get up at night at two o'clock and write. It would
70
be better to write a little whenever you get the time during the
day.
It will save space if for writing the time you use the space
to the left of the red line. The exercise-book should be kept as
tidy as possible.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C. W. 10244. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah
