21. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Jeth Sud 10 [May 31, 1917]
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I am sure you would have paid attention to the construction of the houses
1 From the combination of place-name and Gujarati month and day, the year is
evidently 1917. Jeth Sud 9 in that year corresponded to May 30,
2 Presumably in newspapers regarding progress of the Champaran Satyagraha in
which Gandhiji was involved at the time.
3 Some words here have faded out in the source.
4 The National School in the Ashram at Kocharab; vide letter to the addressee,
Vol. XIII, pp. 427-29, in which, however, the date is wrongly given as May 30, 1917.
Jeth Sud 1 was May 22 and not May 30.
5 Jeth Sud 10 in the year 1917 corresponded to May 31. The year is evident from
the contents; vide Vol. XIII and footnotes 1 and 2 on the following page.
20
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI
and factories of the jail and also to the condition of kitchen, etc. Someday,
when I reach there, I will make arrangement for the children, too.
I think they do everything except making the woof in the jail. I feel that
we should see how a woof made of yarn works. If the instrument meant for
use as woof can be made of yarn, it may be necessary to have it for finer
work like that of silk.
At present we have to see how much we can weave without the help of
machines. Seek the opinion of Lalji also in this connection.
Did you again get information regarding the goods sent to Shivpujan?
These things should not get lost in transit. Have you again received a letter
from Shivpujan? Write to him. Let him return the goods. I have received the
bundle of clothes.
I hope you know that one has to obtain permission from the Collector
before building a house. I enclose herewith a letter to the bank.
I will leave for Ranchi on Saturday and reach there on Monday. At
present, the headquarters of the Bihar government is Ranchi. Keep sending
the post as you have been doing till now. There will be some new development
in Ranchi.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have written from here a letter of request to respected Khushalbhai.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32923
