55. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
August 6, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I have your very good letter from Hutchinson. Hope you received
my letter on board as also a joint wire from here (the Farm).
Before I received your cheque book, I had paid out, of course from
your account, £ 25 to A.R.M. Roodepoort, £ 15 Partridge & 0-4-
Shimwell Bros. There was a notice from the A.R.M. saying that you
should deposit a further £ 25.
The engine is still working on the same hole. I do not know what
is going to happen. I visit the works daily. They have not measured,
they say, but have gone down more than 300 ft. I think. The soil varies
from day to day. They got from Pretoria a new coil of rope.
Albrecht 2 thought he would first prune the fruit trees. I did not
interfere. He has now nearly finished pruning. There is only one native
boy working. He is certainly a splendid boy. He asked that we should
feed him too. I thought I would not haggle. He therefore has food
from the kitchen beyond 30/- per month. John wanted me to give him
some ground within the fence, as he said he had not the means of
ploughing the ground outside. In spite of your expressed wish to the
contrary, I thought I would use my discretion in this case. I thought
I should not go wrong if I let him make use of the ground for one
year only. I have therefore pegged out a small portion hardly 30 acres
beyond the fruit trees. He is to pay £15 for the year. I have also given
him permission to use the small plot in front of the trees to the right
or the left as we pass out at the first gate going to the station for
1 The signature is in Kallenbach's hand.
2 This, the correct spelling of the German name, is variously spelt by Gandhiji
as "Albert" and "Albret", wherever it occurs; vide also Vol. XXIX, p. 202.
planting potatoes. I thought we could but do better than at least having
the ground cleared out. I hope the arrangement will commend itself
to you. We have the right to get potatoes for household use.
The native boy has been working at weeding. He is now clearing
up the trees. Strict instructions have been given not to use him for
household or any other work.
Fencing is likely to commence on Tuesday. Everything will depend
upon our friend Albrecht who I may add has been keeping very well
indeed.
I have not seen nor heard from Kennedy.
Quinn has been on the Farm for the last three days. I think his
people are worrying him as his two men are not yet released. He is
likely to be here yet for some days. He works at the garden. Govindji,
the piles patient, goes tomorrow (Monday) completely cured. Miss
Schlesin came here today chiefly to discuss your letter to her and to
discuss her own future. We discussed over the dinner her affairs and
your letter. You will be perhaps angry. If I had not done so, how could
I have taken my school which in my opinion is daily progressing. No,
my dear L.H., we may not use even our dinner hour for our pleasure.
Every minute of ours is pre-mortgaged, seeing that we are born debtors.
We are born only because we owe. We come into the world again
and again until we have paid out what we have incurred on the score
of karma. Life is Duty.
Have not heard further about Call.
Mrs. John leaves us tomorrow, Mrs. Phillip will do so in 3 or 4
days. Krishnaswamy will probably stay. He is the brightest and most
promising student, so far as learning goes. The boys again begin saltless
diet tomorrow. They alternate. Krishnaswamy and Ramdas have
remained saltless through and through. They took dholl for today. But
they revert to the saltless diet tomorrow. They all tell me they are feeling
extra heavy today.
L.J. Van Wyk of Van Wyk's Rust came in on Thursday and said
you owed him 7/ for his trouble in coming to fetch coal from Lenz.
He says the coal of course was not brought. I told him I should refer
to you before paying. Shall I pay ?
I have not understood what you did regarding the draft of £ 100
or £200 you wanted to take with you. I see no entry in your cheque
book as to your drawing. I only see £30 drawn. But I propose to await
news from you before doing anything.
As you gave special instructions, the £25 and the £75 cheques were
sent to your office for depositing in your account.
We all miss you, and Mrs. Gandhi most of all. In the rush of work,
I certainly forget you but she cannot.
P. K. Naidoo and his wife too are leaving in a fortnight's time,
so that I shall only have Mrs. Sodha 1 on hand besides Mrs. Gandhi
and the children. I do not mind it a bit. I shall probably value the
greater leisure I shall enjoy.
You have gone on a brave mission. May God grant you all the
strength you need for resisting temptations. You are deliberately making
your life one of great purposes. I feel sure that your way will be fairly
smooth. If we are clay in the hands of the Potter, all we need do
is to be and remain receptive. I have written much otherwise, so I
shall not indulge in further reflections.
I am most eagerly looking forward to your letter from Madeira.
Nothing further has yet been heard of I.O. prohibition. I did not
give you the addresses of Maud and others.
I hope you have got them from Maud Polak and even seen some
of the people by the time this reaches you.
With love,
[PS.]
Yours,
UPPER HOUSE
I am not revising this letter. It is getting late. I have forgotten to
deal with two most important points arising out of your letter. Although
therefore it is now after 10 p.m. I must deal with them. The word
'bravo' in my telegram had no reference to your forgetting the cheque
book. It was meant to congratulate you on your having passed through
the whole ordeal so very creditably. Your bearing at the station pleased
all. Your having forgotten the cheque book was a most natural thing
in that rush. The wonder really is that you put in so much work that
morning with so much self-possession and forgot only the cheque book.
You know our mutual canon of interpretation : 'not to put an unfavourable
construction upon a man's writing or action so long as a favourable
one is possible'.
You were hurt at my simple remark about the charge of your not
being the same whether I was with you or not. I have not in my wildest
dreams suspected you of having withheld anything from me. Indeed
one of the binding links between us is my invincible belief in your
absolute and natural frankness with me. All I said and still say was
and is that when several people bring a charge against us, we should
proceed to examine ourselves upon the assumption that there is some
truth in the charge. We need not jump to the conclusion that it is
1 Rambhabai, wife of R. M. Sodha
SV-VI : 5
baseless. Our friends often know us better than we do ourselves. The
reason is that all of us being not perfect do things unconsciously of
which we are not witnesses but our friends are. There was no rebuke
ever meant when I made the remark, much less any mistrust. Have
I made myself understood ! It hurts me to think that I should have
even unwittingly hurt you on the day of your departure.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
