96. LETTER TO THE PRESS
JOHANNESBURG,
January 20, 1909
[SIR,]
The Indian community is now entering upon the third and, per-
haps, the final stage of the struggle, which has now been raging for the
last two and a half years. Hitherto, it has not been necessary for the
British Indian merchants to sacrifice their goods entirely, and to reduce
themselves to poverty. They have, in order to free themselves for the
struggle, largely contracted their businesses, but not given them up
entirely. The saying that, under an unjust Government, only those
who countenance and participate in their injustice can enrich them-
selves or retain their riches is about to be realised in the present case.
In order further to circumvent us, and seeing that gaols have ceased to
have any terrors for us, rules have been framed under the Criminal
Procedure Code, laying down the mode of selling the goods of those who
may be fined by Magistrates without the alternative of imprisonment.
This move is clearly aimed at Indian merchants. They have, therefore,
to face voluntary poverty, enforced poverty, or disgrace. They have no
desire to enrich what is to them an unjust Government at the expense
of their creditors or themselves. They have no desire to face dis-
grace. My advice, therefore, to my countrymen, both as a merchant
and as Chairman of the British Indian Association, is that they must
all for the present cease to be merchants, and return the goods they
have to their creditors, if any, or otherwise close down their stores. To
set an example, I have myself decided to take the first step, and I am
doing so with the greatest deliberation, though not without some
hesitation. No formal vote of the Association will be or can be taken
as to the momentous step. It is most difficult to expect all Indian
storekeepers, who have remained hitherto true to the struggle, to sell
their all and follow the narrow path chosen by some of us. If they can-
not rise to the occasion, I think that, even then, they will have deserv-
ed well of their countrymen, if not of the Colonists, in that they have
braved dangers and difficulties during the past thirty months. Yet, if we
prize our principle better than our pockets, the only advice that I can
tender to my countrymen is that they should rise to the occasion and
take this final step. Then will the Colonists realise, if they cho[o]se to,
that this is not, so far as the Indians are concerned, a struggle for retain-
ing our hold of the trade we have, or for unfair competition, or for
bringing into the country men who have no right to be in it. The only
question, so far as we are concerned, is that of national honour and our
conscience. In other words, we are endeavouring to show that we are
worthy to be citizens of South Africa. It is likely that many Indians,
during the last stage of the struggle, may fall. We see, also, that the
struggle will be prolonged. Attempts are being made by ill-disposed
persons within our own ranks and by interested Europeans to sow
dissensions in our own camp. All these things we expected, but they
cannot deter us from the course we have adopted; and whether, after
of the judgement creditor, for the bailiff to attach goods sufficient to cover the
costs of execution as well as the amount of the warrant and for the term of imprison-
ment to be reduced in the proportion of the amount of fine realized. Vide Indian
Opinion, 9-1-1909.
1 The European merchants reacted differently to this move. The Natal Mercury,
January 21, in a special telegram reported, "Hitherto, it has to be remembered that
the commercial community has been practically solid in supporting the Government on
the Asiatic question. The stand which is being taken by the Chairman of the British
Indian Association is, therefore, construed into an attempt by Mr. Gandhi and his
fellow-agitators to force their hands."
many have fallen, we are a small or a large body, our sufferings will
continue until justice is satisfied.
I am, etc.,
A. M. CACHALIA
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 23-1-1909
