156. LETTER TO M.M. BHOWNAGGREE
25 & 26 COURT CHAMBERS,
RISSIK STREET,
JOHANNESBURG,
May 23, 1904
TO
SIR MANCHERJEE BHOWNAGGREE, M. P.
196 CROMWELL ROAD
LONDON, ENGLAND
DEAR SIR,
His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, Sir Arthur Lawley, while
passing through Heidelberg, in reply to an Indian deputation which
presented His Excellency last week with an address said in effect that
the liberty of the Indian to trade unrestricted in virtue of the decision
in the test case will not be tolerated and that Mr. Lyttelton has already
been approached with a view to sanctioning legislation in the desired
direction.
The position of the Indian as defined in Law 3 of 1885 as amended
in 1886 and interpreted in the light of the test case is this:
(1) An Indian can immigrate into the Colony without restriction.
(2) He can trade anywhere he likes in the Colony. Locations may
be set apart for him but the law cannot force him to reside only
in Locations, as there is no sanction provided in the law for it.
(3) He cannot become a burgher.
(4) He cannot own landed property except in Locations.
(5) He must pay a registration fee of £3 on entering the Colony.
With the exception, therefore, of the prohibition as to holding landed
property, even in virtue of the above law the condition of the Indian is
now not altogether precarious.
Freedom to immigrate, however, has been almost absolutely taken
away by making what is, after all, an unjust use of the Peace Preservation
1 A copy of the letter was forwarded to the Colonial Office by Bhownaggree. India,
in its issue of 1-7-1904, published the text as from its correspondent.
2 Vide "Address to Lieutenant.-Governor" May 18, 1904.
Ordinance which was passed to restrict rebels and other disloyal people
but not law-abiding British subjects.
In what form it is now intended to introduce legislation, it is difficult
to say, but seeing that before it can even be introduced Mr. Lyttelton's
consent is necessary, I trust that you will approach him and discuss the
question with him, for, after he has given his sanction to a particular
course, it would be very difficult to get redress.
What I venture to suggest is that the Law 3 of 1885 should be entirely
repealed as also the town regulations regarding foot-paths and other laws
specially disqualifying Asiatics; that an Immigration Act on the Cape lines
should be introduced but so as not to taboo, in the educational test, the
Indian languages and; [that] a Dealers' Licenses Act should be introduced
on the Natal lines provided that the right of appeal to the Supreme Court
be granted against decisions of the local authorities on licensing appli-
cations and provided that the existing licenses are not touched by it except
in so far as the shops may not be in accordance with sanitary or ornamental
requirements.
Thus, the great bogey of immigration will be set at rest once and
for all, and there would be no question of undue competition in trade.
The local authorities will be able to regulate the number of licenses.
All that the Indians claim is that they should have the right, under
the general laws of the Colony and so long as they conform to Western
requirements, to trade and to hold landed property and to enjoy other
rights of citizenship.
I would also remind you that Lord Milner has committed himself to
some such legislation and not legislation specially disqualifying British
Indians, and also that British Indians of education or standing should
be entirely exempted from any restrictive legislation.
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 291, Volume 78, Individuals‒B.
