460. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
SEVAGRAM, WARDHA,
March 4, 1942
CHI. JAWAHARLAL,
Received your letter yesterday. Hope you will not find it
difficult to read this letter.
About Indu's marriage, I hold the firm opinion that no one
from outside need be invited. A few persons who are at Allaha-
bad may, however, be called as witnesses. You can send invita-
tion cards to as many people as you like. Ask for blessings from
everybody but make it clear that no one in particular need take
the trouble of coming. If one person is asked to come, others
cannot be left out.
It has to be considered whether or not Indu likes to go to
this extent of simplicity. In case you too do not like to go so
far, you can rule out my suggestion.
I have seen your statement about Indu. I like it. I re-
ceive letters [concerning her marriage] every day.
Some are
horrid. I have destroyed all of them. In reply to all these, I
have sent a note in Harijan1, a copy of which I am sending
herewith. The note was written on Monday. Since yesterday,
letters from Muslims are pouring in, making Sarup the target of
their attack. This will go on.
I will do all that is possible for the Indian States. Funds
will be a constant difficulty. Jamnalalji had taken all the respon-
sibility upon himself; how he would have done it was not
decided. I am now wondering how to raise the money. I am
consulting Pattabhi about the paper. Balwantrai will not be able
to come. That will not make much difference. We shall be getting
help from here. When you come here, we shall talk over the matter.
Menon is going to Bombay today to complete the work there.
I saw Chiang Kai-shek's statement.
It was good. Your
consent was received but I thought that there was no need now
to make that letter public. The subject has become stale.
Bhagirathi has come. It is rather difficult to keep Chandra
Singh. He is very much given to indulgence; and she is very
weak. He quarrels on petty matters. I will not be surprised
if he beats up someone.
I, however, find him hard-working.
You need not worry. If you feel any difficulty in reading my
letters, I will try to write more legibly. But it is our duty to
start writing to each other in the national language. After some
time we will find it easier to do so. The poor will be immense-
ly benefited.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Hindi original: Gandhi-Nehru Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
