420. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
JOHANNESBURG,
August 25, 1906
TO
THE HON. THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,
I have the honour, on behalf of the British Indian Association, to
enter its respectful protest against the Draft Asiatic Law Amendment
Ordinance published in the Government Gazette dated the 22nd instant.
In the humble opinion of my Association, the Draft Ordinance in
question is calculated to provoke the bitterest irritation among the Indian
community and to wound its susceptibilities to an extent which it is diffi-
cult to measure.
The Draft, it is respectfully submitted, is a complete reversal of solemn
promises repeatedly made by British administrators, and is in contravention
of the despatches of Mr. Lyttelton and Lord Milner.
The Draft gives to the British Indians in the Transvaal absolutely
nothing, and takes away from them much, and that too in a manner
which, to use Mr. Chamberlain's words, "puts an unnecessary affront"
upon British Indian settlers in the Transvaal.
My Association respectfully urges that, if the object of the Draft Ordi-
nance is to remove from the Colony any British Indians who may not
be residing in it by lawful authority, an inspection of the documents at
present possessed by them would absolutely meet the case without hurting
the feelings of British Indians and without causing to the Colony a heavy
expense which the machinery proposed by the Draft Ordinance must
necessarily do.
My Association has no hesitation in saying that the Draft under dis-
cussion shews unmistakably the power possessed by a strong party over
helpless men who have done nothing to offend the former and it shews
a desire to wield that power with the greatest rigour and in total disregard
of the feelings of the helpless victims. This would appear to be strong
language, but, examining it from the British Indian standpoint, the language
used represents the honest convictions of those British Indians who have
studied the Ordinance.
My Association draws the earnest attention of the Government to
the following among other most objectionable features of the Draft Ordi-
nance:
(a) Section 2 sets the seal of approval on the part of the British Govern-
ment on the insulting and false definition of the term "Asiatic" given
by Law 3 of 1885, which ignorantly includes "the so-called Coolies,
Arabs, Malays, and Mahomedan subjects of the Turkish Dominion".
Such a definition is degrading to the Asiatics, in that it takes note only
of coolies and perpetuates the use of the term as applied to all the inhabi-
tants of Asia. The definition is false because there are hardly any Arabs
and Mahomedan subjects of the Turkish Dominion, and does grave in-
justice to the Malays who have never yet been molested under Law 3
of 1885 and who have not suffered the misfortune in common with British
Indians of being classed as competitors in trade with the Europeans.
(b) While the Draft subjects to innumerable pinpricks every Asiatic
resident in the Colony, it leaves the position of the pre-war residents of
the Transvaal who have not yet returned to the Colony as indefinite, as
vague and as painful as heretofore.
(c) It takes no note whatsoever of the elaborate registration carried
on by Captain Hamilton Fowle. It may be here mentioned that the
5‒26
registration carried out by Captain Fowle was arranged in consultation
with the Indian community, which, courteously and gracefully bowing
to the advice given by Lord Milner, consented to the registration although,
as was acknowledged, there was no legal sanction for it so far as those
who had already paid the £3 to the old Government were concerned.
Of this, and all such voluntary acts of the community, the Draft Ordi-
nance makes no acknowledgement.
(d) Section 3 deliberately narrows even the advantages enjoyed by
the Indian community under the Peace Preservation Ordinance. As
the Government is well aware, there is a magisterial decision to the effect
that possession of old Dutch registration certificates by a British Indian
entitles him to enter the Colony without any further permit. The effect
of the decision would be nullified by sub-section 2 of Section 3.
(e) Whereas under Law 3 of 1885 and under the recent decision
of the Supreme Court, only male adults who intend to settle in the Trans-
vaal for purposes of trade are required to undergo registration, the present
Ordinance would compel every Indian, male and female, over the age
of eight to be registered. If the apprehension of my Association is correct,
the Law will needlessly violate female modesty, as it is understood by
millions of British Indians, and would ride roughshod over sentiments
cherished dearly for ages by the community represented by my Association.
This law of registration, if it is carried into effect, would mean that His
Majesty's Government condemned every Indian as a criminal. So far
as my Association is aware, such a law is unknown within British Dominions
so far as the free Indian population is concerned.
(f) The so-called remission of the £3 fee is tantamount, in the humble
opinion of my Association, to adding insult to injury, in that, almost all
the Asiatics at present residing in the Colony are registered and have paid
£3, in many cases twice over.
(g) Sub-section 4 of Section 17, authorising the Lieutenant-Governor
to exempt a British Indian holder of a temporary permit from the pro-
visions of the Liquor Licensing Ordinance, is an instance of another added
insult to injury. My Association is not aware of any self-respecting Indian
who would want the precious exemption.
It is possible to enumerate still further objectionable features of the
proposed Ordinance, but my Association trusts that sufficient has been
given above to shew what the Ordinance means to British Indians.
My Association will be pardoned for stating that the relief sought
to be given by Section 21 is not recognised by the Indian community as
such. If the Government chooses to perform a simple duty towards a
British subject by allowing him to own his inheritance, it is no relief to the
community in general. As to permitting fixed property to be held by British
Indians for religious uses, my Association is advised that no provision is
necessary in view of a decision given by the Witwatersrand High Court
in a case recently adjudicated.
Responsible Government will soon be established in the Colony.
My Association, therefore, respectfully urges that, if the Government does
not intend to grant any real and substantial relief in accordance with
the oft-plighted word of British administrators, Law 3 of 1885 may be
allowed to remain undisturbed, and the Responsible Government may
be left to deal with the whole position in consultation with the Imperial
Government.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDUL GANI
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Indian Opinion, 1-9-1906
