259. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Unrevised
WARDHA,
June 19, 1935
MY DEAR AMRIT,
The frank admission of one's proved helplessness does not
make one a coward but may be the beginning of bravery. I am
taking you at your word and dictating. Writing with the left hand
is a pleasure to me but I cannot do it with the same ease and
quickness as with right hand.
Charlie has duly handed your letter.
I am returning the
photo-prints with autographs in the manner suggested by you.
I cannot remember Krishnalal Goswami. It may be that
he was in the Ashram during my absence. Charlie says he has
distinct recollection of having seen him in the Ashram. Mahadev
has not. What he has said to you about charkha seems to be
correct and shows that he knows something of the art of spin-
ning. Slivers I am sending with Charlie. You will tell me how you
find them. You should have the spindles locally made. If you
cannot secure good steel, they can be made of any iron. So long
as they are true it does not matter much. A weak spindle spins
as well as any other, so long as it remains true. But in an inexpe-
rienced hand a weak spindle will go wrong more frequently than
a steel spindle.
I am sending you also 450 note-paper sheets and an equal
number of envelopes done up in nine bundles. I was about to have
packets of 50 each pressed and nicely covered in some blank paper,
of course hand-made, when your letter came telling me that I
was to send the sheets coverless and that you would have them
dressed up for the windows. You ask me to give you the price.
The bundle that is coming to you with Charlie and the one that
was sent previously to this were made out of paper which has
cost me Rs.12. Odd sheets that were saved were used up by me.
There still remain 150 sheets with me. The labour of making
these I have not counted, nor the price of material specially pre-
pared for making the envelopes. The price of the latter can only
be trifling. The price of the former cannot today be estimated.
Two or three workers have been at it for some odd days. I did
not ask them to keep a record of all the time that they gave to
179
this work. Now I have given you enough material to put your own
price on the note-papers and envelopes. The least you have to
sell them for is Rs. 12. But you are at liberty to do what you
like with them. Of the slivers I can say nothing because all I
have to pay for is the cotton purchased from the khaddar bhandar.
But I have kept no account of what has been sent to you. The
raw material could not have cost more than a rupee and a half.
As to Quetta relief I have asked you to reserve for the time
being what you collect. Later on I shall be able to guide you. The
relief will last for some time. Of course this advice has force so
long as you have no definite idea about its direction. Immedi-
ately you know where you would like to spend your donation, you
will not hesitate to do so.
One thing I cannot help asking you to collect for and that
is the Harijan Wells Fund. You will note what I have said about
it in the ensuing number of the Harijan.
About the photos you will do what you like with them. They
are your property. I think this covers all the points raised in your
two unanswered letters. There is nothing wrong about the right
hand. It will be all right after due rest.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3716. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6872
