223. LETTER TO F. MART BARR
[March 26, 1933]
CHI. MARY,
My joint letter set forth my views not necessarily for your
acceptance. You are to do just what you think is best. My
letter was a help to your thoughts and no more. You can get
and give the best only if you do what appears to you to be pro-
per. You two have come to see things for yourselves and not to
take a set course at the Ashram.
I know you did not suggest but I meant that many in the
Ashram were unconsciously slavishly following the Ashram rou-
tine and therefore not getting the best out of it. And then many
of them, unlike you, have come in the hope of forming their cha-
racter and making something out of themselves. They may and
can afford to follow the routine unintelligently but you may not
and dare not. If you follow the routine you must do so intelli-
gently and whole-heartedly. Therefore you should take only what
you can easily digest of the routine.
You must not get malaria. You should take things easy. The
bowels must be kept in order. The stomach should not be loaded.
No cold bath whilst you are at all weak. No pulses, only a little
bread plus milk, greens and fruit. Smear the uncovered limbs with
paraffin oil. Do not be afraid of it or its smell. It does not soil
anything. The mosquitoes keep away from paraffin. Do not live
under tension. This is a mental process. 'Be careful for nothing'
is both a spiritual and physiological maxim.
The Punch is quite all right in spite of the hard facts of life but
the harder fact is that neither Mahadev nor I nor any other of our
company can give a minute to anything outside Harijan and other
kindred work. Therefore we arrange a Punch and Judy show from
among the threads of our work. And it beats the original, I assure
you. You may pass this on to your aunt.
Others besides you have asked me to write on Jesus. If God
wants me to do it, He will find the time for me.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5998. Also C.W. 3323. Courtesy: F. Mary
Barr
