134. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
[Before March 8, 1924]
BHAISHRI MAHADEV,
I cannot restrain myself from writing to you after reading
your letter to Krishnadas. Your complaint is literally true. The
questions you have raised did occur to me. But, being an invalid,
I could not do more. Having got ready at the last moment, I
naturally could not leave instructions. I ought to have given you
instructions about the red and green lines. So also about numbers.
The numbers were changed twice. You must have, therefore, read
two figures, 8622 as 827. I don't remember if it was 8622 or some
other number.
Devdas is industrious, but lazy in writing letters. I think one
who writes a bad hand is slow to write letters. Pyarelal is a day-
dreamer and lacks energy. Krishnadas is still a newcomer and
nervous; you cannot take from him any urgent work. In these
circumstances, you have to put up with the discontent prevailing
there.
Let me give you the gist of my talk with Motilalji. He re-
mained firm in his view favouring Council-entry, but could not
convert me. I too could not convert him. He, Hakimji and the
others will come to meet me again in the last week of this month.
At present some Sikh leaders are here for consultation. I am having
discussions with them. I shall let you know the result after
the discussions are over. Andrews, of course, is here. Jairamdas,
Rajagopalachari and Shankerlal are also here. In fact, Jairamdas
has been here nearly for ten days. I shall probably go to Juhu
next Saturday, though it is not definite. My going will depend
on the condition of the wound. I do hope you will not publish
anything from my letters in the papers. Most probably I shall
write to you at least once a week.
Now there are no more Jail letters to be given in Young India.
I cannot say when I shall be able to write down my experiences
[in Jail].
How is Mani? Tell her that, if she keeps on being ill, I
shall have to put myself to the trouble of writing to her. She
ought to get well even to save me from this labour.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 8443
