180. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
BARDOLI,
February 19, 1922
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I see that all of you are terribly cut up over the resolutions
of the Working Committee. I sympathize with you, and my heart
goes out to Father. I can picture to myself the agony through
which he must have passed but I also feel that this letter is un-
necessary because I know that the first shock must have been
followed by a true understanding of the situation. Let us not be
obsessed by Devdas's youthful indiscretions. It is quite possible
that the poor boy has been swept off his feet and that he has
lost his balance, but the brutal murder of the constables by an
infuriated crowd which was in sympathy with non-co-operation
cannot be denied. Nor can it be denied that it was a political-
ly-minded crowd. It would have been criminal not to have heeded
such a clear warning.
I must tell you that this was the last straw. My letter 1 to the
Viceroy was not sent without misgivings as its language must make
it clear to anyone. I was much disturbed by the Madras doings,
but I drowned the warning voice. I received letters both from
Hindus and Mohammedans from Calcutta, Allahabad and the
Punjab, all these before the Gorakhpur incident, telling me that
the wrong was not all on the Government side, that our people
were becoming aggressive, defiant and threatening, that they
were getting out of hand and were not non-violent in demeanour.
Whilst the Ferozepur Jirka incident is discreditable to the Gov-
ernment, we are not altogether without blame. Hakimji complain-
ed about Bareilly. I have bitter complaints about Jajjar. In Shaha-
janpur too there has been a forcible attempt to take posses-
sion of the Town Hall. From Kanouj too the Congress Secretary
himself telegraphed saying that the volunteer boys had become
unruly and were picketing a High School and preventing young-
sters under 16 from going to the school. 36,000 volunteers were en-
listed in Gorakhpur, not 100 of whom conformed to the Congress
pledge. In Calcutta Jamnalalji tells me there is utter disorgani-
zation, the volunteers wearing foreign cloth and certainly not
pledged to non-violence. With all this news in my possession and
much more from the South, the Chauri Chaura news came like
a powerful match to ignite the gunpowder, and there was a blaze.
I assure you that if the thing had not been suspended we would
have been leading not a non-violent struggle but essentially a vio-
lent struggle. It is undoubtedly true that non-violence is spread-
ing like the scent of the otto of roses throughout the length and
breadth of the land, but the foetid smell of violence is still power-
ful, and it would be unwise to ignore or underrate it. The cause
will prosper by this retreat. The movement had unconsciously
drifted from the right path. We have come back to our moorings,
and we can again go straight ahead. You are in as disadvantageous
a position as I am advantageously placed for judging events in
their due proportion.
May I give you my own experience of South Africa? We
had all kinds of news brought to us in South Africa in our jails.
For two or three days during my first experience I was glad enough
to receive tit-bits, but I immediately realized the utter futility of
interesting myself in this illegal gratification. I could do nothing,
I could send no message profitably, and I simply vexed my soul
uselessly. I felt that it was impossible for me to guide the move-
ment from the jail. I therefore simply waited till I could meet
those who were outside and talk to them freely, and then too
I want you to believe me when I tell you that I took only an
academic interest because I felt it was not my province to judge
anything, and I saw how unerringly right I was. I well remember
how the thoughts I had up to the time of my discharge from the
jail on every occasion were modified immediately after discharge
and after getting first-hand information myself. Somehow or other
the jail atmosphere does not allow you to have all the bearings
in your mind. I would therefore like you to dismiss the outer world
from your view altogether and ignore its existence. I know this
is a most difficult task, but if you take up some serious study and
some serious manual work you can do it. Above all, whatever you
do, don't you be disgusted with the spinning-wheel. You and I
might have reason to get disgusted with ourselves for having done
many things and having believed many things, but we shall never
have the slightest cause for regret that we have pinned our faith
to the spinning-wheel or that we have spun so much good yarn
per day in the name of the motherland. You have Song Celes-
tial with you. I cannot give you the inimitable translation of Ed-
win Arnold, but this is the rendering of the Sanskrit text. "There is
no waste of energy, there is no destruction in this. Even a little
of this dharma saves one from many a pitfall." "This dharma" in
the original refers to Karma Yoga, and the Karma Yoga of our
age is the spinning-wheel. I want a cheering letter from you
after the freezing dose you have sent me through Pyarelal.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 23-
