6. LETTER TO W. B. STOVER
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
June 16, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
I thank you for your letter. Your suggestion is undoubtedly
interesting. But I do not understand why you fall foul of the
charkha which the millions can easily take up; whereas your
suggestion requires technical knowledge and character at its
back. Your friends of the West have made a god of literacy. I
wonder what Jesus, whom you call the "Lord Christ", would say
if he came in flesh and saw the people of the West crazy over a
knowledge of letters, wealth and passing the best part of their
time and life in seeking happiness from the external. Supposing
that every person of education gave mechanically half an hour to
teaching every untouchable, of what avail will it be to him or to
the untouchables? And why are you so much enamoured of the
material progress of Japan? I do not know whether the material
has gone side by side with the moral progress. I have no wish to
judge the Japanese. I have not even the data for doing so even
if I wished. But neither literacy nor wealth without the moral
backing has any attraction for me. And do you know why I swear
by the charkha? I do so because not merely the untouchables
but millions of other people in India are starving because they
have no work and because now they have even become too lazy
to work. I am therefore presenting the charkha to the starving
millions as there is no other simple productive work which can be
presented to the millions; and I present it to the educated and
the well-to-do people of India as an example for the rest.
I have the highest regard for my missionary friends, and that
very regard makes me warn them in season and out of season
against misinterpreting the message of the Bible. You tell me,
"you have taken the Lord Christ for your leader and guide. There
is none better." You do not mind my correcting you. I regard
Jesus as a human being like the rest of the teachers of the world.
As such He was undoubtedly great. But I do not by any means
regard him to have been the very best. The acknowledgment of
the debt which I have so often repeated that I owe to the Sermon
on the Mount should not be mistaken to mean an acknowledgment
of the orthodox interpretation of the Bible, or the life of Jesus.
I must not sail under false colours.
Your letter is sincere and I felt that I could not better reci-
procate your sincerity than by putting before you frankly my
position.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
W. B. STOVER, ESQ.
MOUNT MORRIS
ILLINOIS, U.S.A.
From a photostat: S.N. 12521
