125. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
November 27, 1928
CHI. KUSUM,
I have both your letters. I was indeed afraid that you would
get fever. See that you do not get it again. It would help if you
take chiretta or Sudarshan powder regularly; or else you may take
quinine from time to time and also Kuhne baths. Ba told me
today that, after you had recovered, you used to eat cashew nuts.
If this is true, it would make me unhappy. I expect you to con-
trol your palate. You will be a good girl if you give up the
habit of eating things every now and then.
You thought it strange that you had to obtain permission
from two or three persons. The Secretary's permission should of
course be obtained. But it is also necessary to obtain the per-
mission of the head of the department in which you are work-
ing. In a big institution, the Secretary cannot take upon himself
the responsibility of granting leave to everyone. The application
for leave should be made to him through the head of the depart-
ment concerned. Anyone who understands his or her responsi-
bility towards the institution will apply for leave only if circum-
stances are convenient. I did not say all this to you to put you off.
I thought you had immediately grasped my point. I am pained
to know that you had not, and that you still think that I was
putting you off. Now that I tell you that I was not trying to
put you off, you will feel surprised and think the procedure rather
strange.
Anyone who wants to do all work in love has no choice
but to reduce himself or herself to zero. How often have I ex-
plained this to you? Love is the utmost depth of humility.
Today I stop this discussion here.
Ba is worrying about Manu. Who will help her now to wash
and dress her hair and to wash her clothes? She goes on asking
these and no end of similar questions. I have told her that I
am sure you are looking after these things either by yourself or
with somebody's help.
Sarojini Devi must be doing her share of work. Does she
remain cheerful?
A handkerchief of mine is left behind there. Prabhavati
probably knows where it is. Inquire about it. If you get hold
of it, keep it somewhere carefully.
I will not like it if you let your health suffer.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1854
