10. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
UNION -CASTLE LINE,
R. M. S. "KENILWORTH CASTLE",
July 3, 1909
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I hope you received the three letters I wrote from the train and
Capetown as also the telegram. The voyage has been so far very
delightful. Mr. Hajee Habib and I are getting on wonderfully well. The
sense of responsibility makes of one a different man. The sea has been
calm. The first-class life I abhor. Here there is real restraint on one's
liberty. The pampering that goes on is awful. Both Mr. Habib and I
go down to see our wine-drinking Indian friend 1 (you will remember
the face) who is a 3rd-class passenger and I often envy him his lot.
You will see this remark illustrated when (if at all) we travel together
as 3rd-class passengers. He no longer drinks. The life of the stewards
is the most enviable of all. The gaol life for me is the best. I am
doing a lot of reading but not with the same degree of concentration
as in the Pretoria gaol. The elegant distractions here are many and
various. I am leading a much simpler life than before, i.e., when I
last went to England. I allowed myself tea on the train. But here on
board no tea, no coffee, no breakfast are strictly adhered to. I avoid
as a rule the jam pot also. What say you to that ! Am feeling all
the better for the abstention. Brown bread, salad, cheese and fruit make
up my luncheon. Potatoes and any green vegetable, stewed fruit and
cream and bread and nuts make up my dinner. The meal does not
last much over 45 minutes. Can't reduce the time to 30 minutes. Have
finished Fletcher's book which, as you know, I have with me. Much
of it is highly technical. It is summed up in the following :
1. Do not eat without an appetite. Whether you have an appetite
or not is to be known by whether you have pure watering in the mouth
or not.
2. Masticate till the morsel is reduced to the liquid state.
3. Whether you have masticated or not is known by examining the
1 Bhikhubhai Dayalji Malia; vide also Vol. IX, p. 276.
faeces which should be consistent, free from odour and which should
leave the seat without soiling it.
I have been trying to follow the prescription. The last test has not
been yet quite satisfactory but under better circumstances, it seems
to me that it would be so. The condition of the faeces is certainly much
better than it was there. The motions are reduced to twice per day.
I have given you the above account knowing that both you and the
Buffer House would like it.
Hope you have got Mrs. Binion to put the lama in order. Everything
I lay my hands on is a perpetual reminder of you. This is good. But
please remember the compact. You are not to buy a new stationery
bag or socks or lama or dressing-case or a razor to make up the number
7. Otherwise all the pleasure of having used them will go. Those who
would live well could only consider themselves trustees of monies they
earn, for the sake of those who may need them. And a trustee dare
not use a penny more than is necessary, nor may he lose things he
has. I therefore feel the loss of the two razors, sandals and shaving
brush. These were not in the bag which arrived from Volksrust. I blame
myself partly for the theft as I neglected to buy a key and lock the
bag.
May I hope too that the monster is gone and that the other dressing-
case will go, if it has not already, and so also the jewellery?
Had a long chat with the great Merriman 2 , the Cape Premier. He
has promised to help. Let see how he redeems his promise. Friend
though he is of the great Smuts, I told him of my own experience
of the great South African statesman !
Now for business. I assume that Polak has left for India. I am
looking forward to your first experiences as Secretary of the Br. I. A.
What a rise! May you have strength to your bow. In the way of
instructions I have nothing to give. You have promised not to worry
and my instructions are to keep the promise. Then your work will be
smooth and, what is more, it will prosper.
How about the studies - architectural and devotional? Do the piles
still trouble you ? If they do, the formula is masticate, masticate,
masticate. Dr. Van Sommeren says if we do not know how to do
it, we should actually count 100 grindings or bitings with the teeth and
then not swallow. The food must voluntarily go down. If the practice
is continued for a month or so, the habit will become second nature.
If Mr. Kennedy is married, please give him my best wishes.
1 Here the source has 'satisfied' written after scoring out 'successful'.
2 John Xavier Merriman (1841-1926); Prime Minister of Cape Colony,
1908-10
Has Isaac 1 returned or is he still at Delagoa Bay?
How is Mr. Kennedy's brother ?
With love,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
