306. LETTER TO R. B. TALEGAONKAR
December 19, 1932
DEAR FRIEND,
Here are answers to the questions you left with me:
1. The reformer has to convert the people by patience,
gentleness and purity of character. My fast can only prepare the
ground for the reformer's work and make the reformer also more
active than before in the execution of his mission.
2. I would just as soon fast in respect of Dakornath Temple
as Guruvayur if the call came. I had no notion that I should have
to contemplate a fast regarding Guruvayur, as everyone knows
it came to me; but it would be wrong on my part to tack on other
temples. Nevertheless, there are many other ways in which the
movement for opening other temples is being, and should be, car-
ried on.
3. If I refuse to be party to conditional temple-entry by
Harijans, it is not because I feel less for the cow, but because it
is the best way of weaning Harijans from taking beef. In matters
of religion, there should be no bargaining. Every Harijan
knows that one of the essential conditions of being a good Hindu
is to abstain from taking beef or carrion. Therefore my formula
is that those Harijans who are in the habit of taking beef or car-
rion should be induced to give it up, irrespective of whether
the temples are opened to them or not, purely on the ground that
beef and carrion-eating is prohibited in Hinduism. Similarly
temples should be opened unconditionally. Even as it is the duty
of Harijans to abstain from beef and carrion without asking for
or receiving any consideration therefor, so is it the duty of caste
Hindus, irrespective of consideration, to throw open the doors of
temples to Harijans without claiming any consideration. Even
today there is no inquisition held as to the Hindu practice of
temple-goers. Very properly it is taken for granted that temple-
goers conform to the rules applicable to them regarding temple-
entry. So must we expect Harijans to do.
1 On December 16, 1932 (S.N. 18722)
2 In Gujarat
233
4. There are many courses that we can adopt in order to
ensure success in a movement. There are some courses, however,
which are beyond our capacity to adopt. My release is a course
which it is beyond my capacity to adopt.
5. To seek to abolish untouchability amongst untouch-
ables before caste Hindus abolish untouchability with reference
to untouchables is like an attempt to twist a rope of sand fore-
doomed to failure. When caste Hindus really abolish untouchabi-
lity, the other will crumble to pieces practically without an
effort.
6. In my opinion, seeing that the society now formed is one
to do penance or to discharge an obligation due to Harijans, it
should be composed of penitents or debtors, but there should be
a corresponding committee or society of creditors, that is Hari-
jans, whose wishes should be ascertained from time to time.
7. No law will abolish untouchability before caste Hindus
are ready to do so. Law can only help them when they need its
assistance. But it can never compel them.
8. In Hinduism, and for that matter in every religion, every
activity of a religious man is governed by his religion. A man can-
not be religious that is guided by his moral and spiritual sense in
some activities and not in others. When there is religion about
a person, it pervades his whole being.
9. All the three statements are not inconsistent with one
another, but they represent the same truth. Without Guru-
vayur there will be no Kelappan fasting, without Kelappan there
would have been no inspiration for me to fast for Guruvayur.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. R. B. TALEGAONKAR
1034 RAVIWAR PETH, POONA CITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18722
