134. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
Not revised
May 6, 1945
CHI. NARAHARI,
I have gone through your book Kanyane Patro. The letters
seem to have been written with great care but you have not been
bold enough.
Your views about mixed marriages are not expressed clearly.
Since I believe that we cannot have too many of such marriages,
I do not at all approve of marriages within the same caste. I
do not find you advocating mixed marriages on an extensive
scale even within the same province. You accept inter-provincial
marriages only as exceptions. I would encourage them and
they ought to be encouraged. Reformists, being indifferent to
religion, may do that, but their example will have no effect. We,
however, who keep religion in the forefront should make up our
minds how far we are prepared to go. If Hindustani becomes the
national language and castes and sub-castes as we know them
disappear-as they should-we should unhesitatingly accord the
highest importance to marriages between Ati-Sudras and caste-
Hindus. The question of provincial boundaries will not even
77
arise then. Where parents are wise, there should be no diffi-
culty even about marriages between persons of different religions.
Do we not look upon all religions as equal? It is with some
purpose that we have accorded a place to other faiths in our
prayer. The offspring may choose either religion. The couple
of our conception will give the children liberal education in that
regard. In my view this should be quite easy. In 'letters ad-
dressed to a girl', such things should be stated firmly and clearly.
Mahadev's article is a little out of focus. Vanamala's doubt is
correct. What do our Jain nuns do? And what about Swami-
narayan nuns? It will produce indigestion in the children if we
give them so much from English literature. Comparisons should be
made only between equals. Our culture is free from the extremes
of Western culture. We may know that culture after we have
grown up and compare it with ours. Growing children should
first understand and assimilate their own heritage. But I will not
make this too long.
I was forgetting one point. You have written with people
of our category in view, i. e., the upper three castes, and even
among them Brahmins and Banias. What about Rajputs? And
Sudras? Also Ati-Sudras? They permit divorce and remarriage.
There are also communities among whom there is no such thing
as marriage ceremony. Even then purity is observed. This thing
must be mentioned.
Accept from this only what you can assimilate. This will
give you a glimpse of my latest thinking. This is an important
letter. Make a copy for record in the office or ask Hemant-
kumar to make one.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9131
