366. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHAH
April 12, 1932
BHAISHRI HIRALAL,
I got your books and your letter full of love. I got them
late by a week because Dahyabhai had forgotten to send them
immediately. The books will be useful to me, and your letter
and notes will enhance their usefulness. But I am not as ambi-
tious as you seem to think I am. I only wish to acquire sufficient
general knowledge to be able to see God in the heavens more
clearly. Please send me a small book on astronomy which you
think will suit my purpose. I will take proper care of your books.
I have observed the care with which you have used them. Gene-
rally I hesitate to borrow such books from friends for fear that
they may be lost or damaged.
I cannot praise your industry and your neatness too much.
But don't you think that your claim to have discovered a master-
key may be a little exaggerated? What is that key? Do you
have convincing reasons for believing that it is a key, and a
master-key at that? Are those reasons accepted as convincing by
experts? What benefits do you promise from your discovery?
May it not be that there is the same drawback here as in the
case of the spinning-wheel, namely, that there is no master-key
at all? I am certainly ready to be convinced by you and will
weigh your arguments objectively. But I should like you to
cultivate the humility which would befit a dedicated seeker
1 Vide the preceding item.
2 In The Diary of Mahadev Desai, Vol. I, Mahadev Desai explains: "Hiralal
Shah wrote to Bapu that he had found the master-key of interpretation in
certain subjects."
after truth. I know that it cannot be cultivated consciously.
But it lies behind every genuine discovery. The man who has dis-
covered some new truth remains doubtful about his discovery
inspite of the immense evidence he may have in favour of his
hypothesis. The result is that, when ultimately he does put his
discovery before the world, he has realized its truth with
absolute conviction. The people are astounded and believe him.
There is authority, there is irresistible power, in his words.
The world is immediately convinced by them. It is simply awed
by the proofs he adduces in support of his hypothesis, for he has
examined it from every possible point of view. If this is so about
your discovery too, I should have nothing to say in the matter.
In that case, all honour to you. It is my wish that it may be so.
All of us, that is, all three, are quite well. Please tell
Shankar on my behalf that he should not endanger his health,
and ask him to write to me.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 93-
