435. LETTER TO H. W. EMERSON
ON WAY TO AHMEDABAD,
April 9, 1931
DEAR MR. EMERSON,
I thank you for your letter of 2nd instant, which shall receive
immediate attention.
Though I am still feverish and travelling, I dare not delay
writing to you on the matter mentioned in your letter of 31st March
and discussed between us on 6th instant, when we met at your
house. The only way I can account for the impression left on
H. E. the Viceroy and later on you, is that we have been thinking
at cross purposes. I could never surrender the primary function of
the Congress, viz., to speak for and represent the peasantry. The
Congress, as I told you, is predominantly a peasants' and workers'
organization. The Congress could not possibly implement the terms
of the settlement if the local authorities refused to recognize and
treat with sympathy the advances of the Congress when speaking
for the peasantry. The difficulties you mentioned about U.P., I am
convinced, could all have been solved if the local authorities had
sent for the Congress officials in their respective districts. Many
of the Congress officials are well known to them. I suggest that any
other attitude would be contrary to the spirit of the settlement,
and must defeat the very purpose we both have in view. It would
be wrong to accuse the Congress of breach of the settlement if the
local authorities by ignoring local Congressmen render it im-
possible for them to implement it. After all the terms have to
be carried out through the people and the Congressmen must fail if
they could not interpret the people's wishes and woes to the
authorities.
It is possible that the Congress officials may err as the Gov-
ernment officials may. These errors can be easily rectified. But the
Congress may not, even on that account, be looked upon with suspi-
cion or distrust whilst the settlement lasts.
After my investigation of the complaints received by you about
Gujarat and after my interviews with Mr. Garrett and then His
Excellency the Governor of Bombay I shall be able to give the
illustrations of the application of the principle I have endeavoured
to set forth.
Lastly I hardly need to give you my assurance that I shall
strain every nerve to see that the terms of the settlement are car-
ried out by the Congress so far as it is humanly possible.
My movement is. . . .2
Yours sincerely,
M. K.
H. W. EMERSON, ESQ.
A.I.C.C. File No. 16-B, 1931. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library; also Young India, 20-8-1931
