225. LETTER TO LORD MOUNTBATTEN
BHANGI COLONY, READING ROAD,
NEW DELHI,
April 11, 1947
DEAR FRIEND,
I had several short talks with Pandit Nehru, and an hour's
talk with him alone, and then with several members of the
Working Committee last night about the formula I had sketched
before you, and which I had filled in for them with all the im-
plications. I am sorry to say that I failed to carry any of them
with me except Badshah Khan.
I do not know that having failed to carry both the head and
heart of Pandit Nehru with me I would have wanted to carry
the matter further. But Panditji was so good that he would not
be satisfied until the whole plan was discussed with the few
members of the Congress Working Committee who were present.
I felt sorry that I could not convince them of the correctness
of my plan from every point of view. Nor could they dislodge
me from my position although I had not closed my mind against
every argument. Thus I have to ask you to omit me from your
consideration.
Congressmen who are in the Interim Government are stal-
warts, seasoned servants of the nation and, therefore, so far as
the Congress point of view is concerned, they will be complete
advisers.
I would still love to take the place that the late C. F. Andrews
took. He represented no one but himself. And if you ever need
my service on its merit, it will be always at your disposal.
In the circumstances above mentioned, subject to your con-
sent, I propose, if possible, to leave tomorrow for Patna.
I have not forgotten the book about tribal expeditions. I
have not yet been able to lay my hands on it for I cannot
recall the name of the author nor the year in which I read
the book. As I told you it was years ago in S. Africa that I
came across it. My search will continue wherever I am and
as soon as I trace it, it shall be sent to you.
I must also confess a slip of memory I am answerable for
in the course of our talks. I was wrong in connecting Sir Fran-
cis Mudie with the late Pandit Nehru . The incident I referred
to was in connection with Muddiman3, not Mudie. The charge,
almost universally believed by Congressmen against the present
Governor of Sind, remains unaltered—in spite of my slip of
memory.
I hope these constant interviews are not proving an un-
bearable strain.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1944-47, pp. 244-
