42. LETTER TO ABDUL BARI
SABARMATI JAIL,
[After March 12, 1922]
DEAR MAULANA SAHIB,
Just now I am enjoying myself in my house of freedom. Hakimji
and other friends are here. I feel your absence, but that does
not much worry me since we had ample discussion at Ajmer. I know
that you will certainly steadily stick to those principles that formed
the subject of our talk. I will earnestly request you to avoid making
any speeches in public. Personally, after deep thought, I have
come to the conclusion that, if there is anything that can serve
an effective and visible symbol of the Hindu-Muslim unity, it is
the adoption of charkha and pure khaddar dress prepared from
hand-spun yarn by the rank and file of both the communities.
Only universal acceptance of this cult can supply us with a com-
mon idea and afford a common basis of action.
The use of khaddar cannot become universal until both the
communities take to it. The universal adoption of charkha and
khaddar, therefore, would awaken India. It will also be a proof
of our capacity to satisfy all our needs. Ever since the commence-
ment of our present struggle, we have been feeling the necessity
of boycotting foreign cloth. I venture to suggest that, when khaddar
comes universally in use, the boycott of foreign cloth will auto-
matically follow. Speaking for myself, charkha and khaddar have
a special religious significance to me because they are a symbol
of kinship between the members of both the communities and the
hunger- and disease-stricken poor. It is by virtue of the fact that
our movement can today be described as moral and economic as
well as political. So long as we cannot achieve this little thing,
I feel certain success is impossible. Again, the khaddar movement
can succeed only when we recognize non-violence as an essential
condition for the attainment of swaraj and Khilafat both. There-
fore, the khaddar programme is the only effective and successful
programme that I can place before the country at present. I was
so glad when you told me that you would begin to spin regularly
when I be arrested. I can only say that every man, woman and
child ought to spin as a religious duty till a complete and per-
manent boycott of foreign cloth is effected, the Khilafat and Punjab
wrongs satisfactorily redressed and swaraj attained. May I entreat
you to use all your influence for popularizing charkha among your
Muslim brethren?
Speeches and Writings of M. K. Gandhi, pp. 745-
