16. LETTER TO SATYANANDA BOSE
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
February 13, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your very touching letter. But if I try to steal
away on to the sea, the consequences that you fear are certain to
happen.
I have found it utterly impossible to keep any move-
ment of mine a secret and on board I would find myself a pri-
soner or an animal on show. I must therefore try to go to some
cool place where I can ward off visitors and get a little quiet.
As it is I am regaining strength slowly. There need be there-
fore no anxiety.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. SATYANANDA BOSE
2/8, DHARMATALA STREET
CALCUTTA
From a photostat: S.N. 14102
17. TRUTH "BRAHMACHARYA"
A friend writes to Mahadev Desai:
You will remember that in an article on brahmacharya published in
Navajivan some time ago2—translated in Young India by you—Gandhiji ad-
mitted that he still had bad dreams. The moment I read it I felt that
such admissions could have no wholesome effect, and I came to know later
that my fear was justified.
During our sojourn in England my friends and I kept our cha-
racter unscathed in spite of temptations. We remained absolutely free
from wine, woman and meat. But on reading Gandhiji's article one of the
friends exclaimed to me in despair: 'If such is the case with Gandhiji
even after his Herculean efforts, where are we? It is useless to attempt
to observe brahmacharya. Gandhiji's confession has entirely changed my
point of view. Take me to be lost from today.' Not without some hesi-
tation I tried to reason with him: 'If the way is so difficult for men
like Gandhiji, it is much more so for us, and we should therefore redouble
our effort.' -the way Gandhiji or you would argue. But it was all in
vain. A character that had been spotless so long was thus bespattered with
mire. What would Gandhiji or you say if someone were to hold Gandhiji
responsible for this fall?
As long as I had only one such instance in mind, I did not write
to you. You would possibly have put me off by saying that it was an
exceptional case. But there were more such instances and my fear has
been more than justified.
I know that there are certain things which are quite easy for Gan-
dhiji to achieve, and which are impossible for me. But by the grace of God,
I can say that something which may be impossible for even Gandhiji
may be possible for me. It is this consciousness, or pride that has saved
me from a fall, though the admission above-mentioned has completely
disturbed my sense of security.
Will you please invite Gandhiji's attention to this fact-especially
when he is just in the midst of his autobiography? It is certainly brave
to say the truth and the naked truth, but the world and the readers of
Navajivan and Young India will misunderstand him. I fear that one man's
meat may be another man's poison.
The complaint does not come to me as a surprise. When
Non-co-operation was in full swing, and when during the course
of the struggle I confessed to an error of judgment a friend
innocently wrote to me:
Even if it was an error, you ought not to have confessed it. People
ought to be encouraged to believe that there is at least one man who
is infallible. You used to be looked upon as such. Your confession will
now dishearten them.
This made me smile and also made me sad. I smiled at the
correspondent's simpleness. But the very thought of encouraging
people to believe a fallible man to be infallible was more than
I could bear.
A knowledge of one as he is can always do good to the
people, never any harm. I firmly believe that my prompt con-
fessions of my errors have been all to the good for them. For
me at any rate they have been a blessing.
And I may say the same thing of my admission about the
bad dreams. It would do the world a lot of harm if I claimed
to be a perfect brahmachari without being one. For it would
sully brahmacharya and dim the lustre of truth. How dare I
undervalue brahmacharya by false pretences? I can see today that
the means I suggest for the observance of brahmacharya are not
adequate, are not found to be invariably efficacious, because I
am not a perfect brahmachari. It would be an awful thing for the
world to be allowed to believe that I was a perfect brahmachari,
whilst I could not show the royal road to brahmacharya.
Why should it not be sufficient for the world to know that I
am a genuine seeker, that I am wide awake, and that my striv-
ing is ceaseless and unbending? Why should not this knowledge
be sufficient encouragement to others? It is wrong to deduce
conclusions from false premises. It is wisest to draw them from
things achieved. Why argue that because a man like me could
not escape unclean thoughts, there is no hope for the rest? Why
not rather argue that if a Gandhi who was once given to lust,
can today live as friend and brother to his wife and can look upon
the fairest damsel as his sister or daughter, there is hope for the
lowliest and the lost? If God was merciful to one who was so
full of lust, certainly all the rest would have his mercy too!
The friends of the correspondent who were put back because
of a knowledge of my imperfections had never gone forward at
all. It was a false virtue that fell at the first blast. The truth and
observance of brahmacharya and similar eternal principles do not
depend on persons imperfect as myself. They rest on the sure
foundations of the penance of the many who strove for them and
lived them in their fullness. When I have the fitness to stand
alongside those perfect beings, there will be much more determi-
nation and force in my language than today. He whose thoughts
do not wander and think evil, whose sleep knows no dreams and
who can be wide awake even whilst asleep, is truly healthy.
He does not need to take quinine. His incorruptible blood will
have the inherent virtue of resisting all infections. It is for such
a perfectly healthy state of body, mind, and spirit that I am
striving. This knows no defeat or failure. I invite the corres-
pondent, his friends of little faith, and others to join me in that
striving, and I wish that they may go forward even like the
correspondent quicker than I. Let my example inspire those who
are behind me with more confidence. All that I have achieved
has been in spite of my weakness, in spite of my liability to
passion,-and because of my ceaseless striving and infinite faith
in God's grace.
No one need therefore despair. My Mahatmaship is worthless.
It is due to my outward activities, due to my politics which is
the least part of me and is therefore evanescent. What is of
abiding worth is my insistence on truth, non-violence and brahma-
charya which is the real part of me. That permanent part of me
however small, is not to be despised. It is my all. I prize
even the failures and disillusionments which are but steps towards
success.
Brahmacharya means not merely mechanical celibacy, but it
means complete control over all the organs and senses enabling
one to attain perfect freedom from all passion and hence from
sin in thought, word and deed.
Young India, 25-2-1926
