84. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Wednesday [January 8, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
For me, last night was momentous. Let me try to explain. I feel
that you are accepting my conclusions without being ready to follow
them out. Such a man dare not risk the unbalancing of his mind in
the attempt to follow out somebody else's conclusions. If you had proved
for yourself the correctness of the theory of life as I have endeavoured
to sketch it, if you had an inner conviction, if your belief in future
1 The addressee has recorded on this letter: "Mr. Gandhi left on the 9th, Thursday
for Phoenix and he handed this letter to me."
105
life was unshakable, if you had become sick of the world unto death,
if money had no attractions for you, if you were not influenced by
your surroundings, if you were longing for poverty and suffering, it would
be your duty to attempt to live the new life. But you are not any of
these things, so I think that you ought not to think of India or work
in Phoenix just now. I have an inner conviction about the things I have
mentioned. My conclusions are my own and I ought to risk even the
unhinging of my mind in the attempt to live the new life.
My mistake was in trying to force your pace and thinking that you
could not but be right in trying to do right. But the trying to do right
would not have been your act. Or the many thoughts that arise in
your mind, e.g., about Mr. Alexander1, or getting more work or more
money, would not find place in your system. The fact is, we cannot
help ourselves beyond a certain point. I feel sure, as I did not up to
last night, that your duty is just now to adhere to your practice and
your material advancement. In doing so, you have to watch yourself
You must not abandon the simple life, you must not revert to the
rake's life and pursue your calling as in trust for others. Make very
little use of your riches for your own comforts and keep poverty and
suffering as your goal. So doing, you will be more in tune with yourself
and it will be possible for you to come to India with a better preparation.
Instead of India being a preparation, let your practice be it. After all
it may only mean one year, it may even mean less. But, meanwhile,
you cannot live a double life. You cannot prepare in Phoenix for India.
You prepare for it in the midst of social attractions. You will thus test
yourself You will soon know when you are ripe for the change. I
was wrong in presenting India before you quite so soon and wrong
in suggesting a study of Hindi. You may drop the latter for the time
being. Of course you will continue it, if you like the study. Under this
plan you would come to Phoenix as a visitor as often as possible and
comparing the two lives you will make your final choice. Such is the
result of my last night's hard thinking. I hope you understand my
meaning. You will do exactly as you please but in my opinion you
would err in thinking of India.
Herewith draft letter to Alexander.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
1 Morris Alexander. Jewish Member of Parliament from Cape Town
