164. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
September 27, 1924
DEAR MOTILALJI,
Moved by affection and pity the Conference guided by you
has passed the resolution you kindly read to me last night. I
would ask you to assure the meeting that if I could have com-
plied with its wishes I would gladly have done so. But I have
examined and re-examined myself and I find it is not possible
for me to recall the fast. My religion teaches me that a pro-
mise once made or a vow once taken for a worthy object may
not be broken. And you know my life has been regulated on
that basis for now more than 40 years.
The causes of the fast are much deeper than I can explain
in this note. For one thing, I am expressing my faith through
this fast.
Non-co-operation was not conceived in hatred or ill
will towards a single Englishman. Its non-violent character was
intended to conquer Englishmen by our love. Not only has it
not resulted in that consequence, but the energy generated by it
has brought about hatred and ill will against one another
amongst ourselves. It is the knowledge of this fact which has
weighed me down and imposed this irrevocable penance upon
me.
The fast is therefore a matter between God and myself, and
I would therefore not only ask you to forgive me for not breaking
it but would ask you even to encourage me and pray for me
that it may end successfully.
I have not taken up the fast to die, but I have taken it up
to live a better and purer life for the service of the country. If,
therefore, I reach a crisis (of which humanly speaking I see no
possibility whatsoever) when the choice lies between death and
food, I shall certainly break the fast. But Drs. Ansari and Abdul
Rahman, who are looking after me with the greatest attention
and care, will tell you that I am keeping wonderfully fresh.
I would therefore respectfully urge the meeting to trans-
mute all personal affection of which the resolution is an index
into solid, earnest and true work for unity for which the Con-
ference has met.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Young India, 2-10-1924
