93. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
June 30, 1929
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,
I have your letters. I am at the moment sitting in a secluded
spot in front of the peaks of the Himalayan ranges covered with
snow. I spend all my time in the verandah. Here I finished revis-
ing my translation of the Gita. It will now be published if my friends
so desire. If it is not printed I shall send you a copy or you
will see it if you come here in the mean time.
Has the name Sita now stuck to your heart? If not it can be
given up. If it is, it would not pain me at all. The right to
give a name must belong to you. My wish is that you would
ask for suggestions from elders but do what you yourselves decide.
It would be a different matter if you were children. I have opened
this subject because Nanabhai says the name Sita hurts Sushila.
There is no reason to be displeased. Since I do not insist on this
why should she be unhappy about it?
Now about the alliance with a Marwari, I do not remember
whether I had told Manilal about it, but before I received the
offer of Sushila, it was my plan to form alliance with an edu-
cated Bengali girl. God may have joined you, because who knows
whether with the Bengali girl you could have merged as com-
pletely as you two now have. However, it was my intention even
before I betrothed Ramdas to go out of Gujarat. It is essential
that we do this. Of course, I wished to limit myself to the Vaishya
community. The unnatural restrictions that now prevail have done
and are still doing much harm. The alliance that I have just con-
cluded I expect to be as successful as yours. Here again the main
role has been Jamnalalji's. He has found a groom who is one of
his distant relatives. He is modest and educated. He was intro-
duced to Rukhi and the alliance is formed as she and Santok were
willing. This too is a way of bringing about India's unity.
Now do you understand, can you swallow it?
Sushila should not be impatient to come here. I can quite
understand her wish to see her family. But if it is found that she
41-10
must stay on for the sake of the work there, it is her duty to stay
on. This is my advice. But do only that which both of you
think right.
Yes, if the community does not want Indian Opinion and it
involves a loss it should be closed down, however necessary it may
be. But it must be proved that the community does not want it
and that the losses are not owing to our slackness or remissness.
Our writings should not be immature. Sastriji particularly insists
that the journal should never be closed down. Whatever you would
do should be done with deliberation, after considering the advice
of your friends and having made all the efforts needed to keep
it going.
I have with me Devdas, Prabhudas, Purushottam, Kusumbehn
senior, Jamnabehn, Khurshedbehn and Pyarelal. Ba is of course
there. Thus this time I have a large company. And I quite for-
get Brijkisan.
Now about vaccination. I do not believe in cow-pox. It is
a dirty practice. The cow's teats are made to fester till they stink
and a vaccine is extracted from it. This is inoculated into our sys-
tem. This is tantamount to partaking of beef. This question had
arisen in the South African jail; it also confronted us in the jails
here. But in the end no one let me off. Nor does it always prove
beneficial. The opponents of vaccination are growing in number.
But it would be all right if you got yourself vaccinated. What
I have stated above are my personal views. Generally people do
get themselves vaccinated. Do what you think right after both of
you go deep into this matter, study it with interest and form an
independent opinion about it.
I hope you read in Navajivan and Young India about my experi-
ment with uncooked grain. It still continues fairly well.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4756
