6. LETTER TO WP. SCHREINER
WESTMINSTER PALACE HOTEL,
4 VICTORIA STREET, S.W.,
August 17,1909
DEAR MR. SCHREINER,
You have permitted me to write to you on that part of the
Asiatic question which we discussed the other day. I have now time
to avail myself of your permission.
You will recall the question. The present legislation of the
Transvaal creates a racial distinction as to immigration - i. e., no new
Asiatic, however cultured he may be, may enter the Transvaal
because he is an Asiatic. Indians contend that this is a departure from
the traditional colonial policy and that it is unnecessary. The Cape,
Natal and Australia make good their policy of restricting Asiatic
immigration by having an education test applicable to all, but varying
in its severity. This policy cannot be described as dishonest because
the scope of the Act is known to all. But to prohibit even a very limited
immigration of Asiatics as such, is to put a deliberate affront on a
whole race. Moreover the recognition of such a racial distinction
cannot fail to reflect upon the resident Asiatic population and be used
as a precedent for further disabling legislation. From the Colonial
standpoint too there would seem to be no justification for the drastic
policy underlying the Transvaal Act. British Indians accept the
policy of virtual exclusion. The question is as to the manner of
procuring it. The Transvaal manner importing the colour bar offends
the self-respect of Asiatics. Hence the terrible suffering undergone
by over 2,500 Indian passive resisters.
If you will give my colleague and me an appointment, we would
wait upon you. I am personally more conjustice of our aspirations
1 The meeting took place on August 21.
6
LETTER TO J. X. MERRIMAN
7
than with agitating for relief from the Imperial Government.
I am,
Yours truly,
M.K. GANDHI
THE HONOURABLE W.P. SCHREINER
MORLEY'S HOTEL
TRAFALGAR SQUARE, W.C.
From a photostat: BC 112, file 12 (3.1). Courtesy: University Library,
Cape Town, South Africa
