78. LETTER TO SATISH CHANDRA MUKERJEE
September 8, 1924
DEAR SATISH BABU,
I was deeply touched by your wire. I am sending you a
consoling reply.
No one has displaced or wishes to displace Kristodas. I still
cannot do without him. Last time Kristodas did not accom-
pany me because he and I came to the conclusion that it was the
best for him and the cause. He is the wisest among the four who
are rendering personal service and doing secretarial work. Maha-
dev, Devdas and Pyarelal regard him as more advanced in wisdom
and tapasya than they. I wonder what led Kristodas to think that
any of them could ever think of ousting Kristodas. I do not need
four with me in my travels. One at least must remain behind
to attend to affairs. Only Mahadev or Devdas can constantly
remain behind if only because neither Pyarelal nor Kristodas
can attend to Navajivan and the Gujarati correspondence. Kristo-
das must therefore be a constant companion with me. He has
gone to Gulbarga because he alone was acceptable to Shwaib.
The latter would have taken Mahadev with him, if I had insis-
ted. But I know him to be very sensitive. I wanted him to go
under the best of auspices. And when he asked for Kristodas al-
though Mahadev was suggested, I unhesitatingly agreed. Kristo-
das was willing. He and Shwaib hit it off well together. Pray
therefore do not be anxious about Kristodas. He shall be with
me not merely for your sake. He will be with me for my
sake. I am more anxious to have him by me than you can be to
put him by me. It has been the privilege of my life to have
some companions whom I have felt honoured and comforted to
have by me. Kristodas is not the least among them.
I have written this with your pen. The first you sent me I
prized very much and always kept with me. In the jail, I lent
it to Indulal. It got spoiled. He sent it out for repairs. The
friend whom he entrusted with the precious charge lost it.
Kristodas has therefore given me the one I am using. I have also
received two print orders. May I thank you for all these delicate
attentions? Add one more by wiring a promise never more to
worry about Kristodas.
Yours,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5597
