516. LETTER TO MOHANLAL M. BHATT
October 30, 1932
I don't think that I can lay down rules for indefinite fasting
which would satisfy you. I might say only this. A fast should be
characterized by perfect truth and non-violence, and should be
undertaken only upon the prompting of one's inner voice and not
in blind imitation of somebody. One should never undertake a
fast for a selfish end; the aim behind a fast should always be com-
mon good. A fast should never be undertaken for any object which
is inspired by ill will towards somebody. But what is inner voice?
Can everybody claim it? These are important questions. Of course
the inner voice speaks to everybody; but he whose ear has not learnt
to recognize and listen to the inner voice will not be able to hear
it, just as a deaf person cannot hear even the sweetest music. The
ears of one who lacks self-control cannot recognize the true inner
voice. Only that person will be fit to recognize it who possesses the
characteristics of the sthitaprajna given in Ch. II of the Gita, or of
the devotee in Ch. XII, or of the gunatita in Ch. XIV or the one in
whom all the three gunas blend. The question put by Sundaram is
improper. But now that he has asked it, I ought to say that, accord-
ing to me, on the whole the Hindu religion is "nearest to the truth".
But at the same time I admit unhesitatingly that in holding this
view I may be making a mistake through ignorance or partiality.
The mistake, if any, is pardonable and one which has its use, be-
cause, in the absence of all ignorance and partiality it would be
impossible for any man to cling to his religion, and he would, and
ought to, embrace another religion in which he saw more of truth.
Call it God's maya or know it by any other name you choose, but
all human beings have this weakness. And yet, in spite of such at-
tachment to one's own religion, one ought to hold all religions in
equal regard. In other words, I should, as a Hindu, accept it as
natural for a Christian to believe that Christianity is nearer to the
truth and for a Muslim to believe that about Islam, and also that
it is necessary for them to do so if they are to follow their respec-
tive religions sincerely. I ought to bear them no ill will for such a
belief, nor should I regard their belief as mistaken. I hope that
what I have said will be clear to Bhai Sundaram and to all of you.
Probably this view of mine about equality towards all religions
is a new idea. If other people also have thought about the matter
along similar lines, I am not aware of the fact. For me at any rate,
the idea is original and it has given me the purest joy. My view
enables me to cling to Hinduism and to hold other religions in
reverence at the same time, and adopt from them without hesi-
tation whatever is good in them. I owe this discovery to non-vio-
lence.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. II, pp. 186-
