201. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
April 9, 1930
CHI. MAHADEV,
I am halting in Surat for a few hours on my way to Bhimrad.
The car took the wrong road, with the result that I missed the
train and came here by car. At present my very thoughts have
grown wings and they seem to have effect even when not ex-
pressed in speech or action. That is a fact. Thoughts which are
part of tapascharya are single-pointed, and hence their power is
greater than that of electricity or of still subtler ether. Your
suggestion, therefore, was acted upon immediately yesterday. All
the men in my batch will have to be dispersed and posted wherever
they may be needed. Surajbhan has already left, and so has
Jayantiprasad, each for his own district. Vamanrao Pataki also
has gone to his district. I did not have to suggest to any of the
three that he should go. They themselves felt that they should
go. Surendra is waiting at Navsari to proceed to Bhimrad.
Puratan and Haridas Gandhi are at Navsari waiting to leave for
Olpad. I have sent Abbas Saheb to Nadiad, where I will send
other men whom he may ask for, provided I am not arrested by
then. However, if I am not free and you are, it will be for you
to send them; and if even you are not free, those who are left
behind will make the necessary arrangements. Fortunately, Dayalji
at least will stay behind, and he will issue orders through the
children. If none else, there will always be Lord Krishna whose
orders are bound to be felt by all in their hearts and the work will
go on somehow. I am certainly ready to send Chhaganlal to
Wadhwan, but Kevalram can go there as well. I think you know
that he has offered to do so. However that may be, you may, if
you are free, communicate to me any other suggestions which may
occur to you. I have sent word to the Broach Sevashram people
that they may ask me if they need any men. As for you, I think
you will not be a free man for long.
I also have written to Saraladevi, but that was only about the
drink evil. Yesterday I sent a letter addressed to Kaka on this
subject. I think you must have read it. You will have seen from
it that I, at any rate, wish to start the movement against the
drink evil and foreign cloth along with the salt agitation on the
216
13th. Even if that should not be possible, I should like the
fight against the drink evil to start from Monday if you, Kaka
and other men and the Ashram women and other women visitors
feel the necessary self-confidence. I wrote to Saraladevi suggesting
that she might throw herself into this very work. If, however,
my plan itself does not appeal to all of you, you may leave it.
I do not at all believe that the salt tax will go in seven days. But
I think it very necessary to utilize this golden opportunity and com-
bine these three aims of our movement. Personally, I am convinced
that if we should succeed in these three things, swaraj would soon
be an accomplished fact, the women would realize their power in
no time and, without any effort on our part, the whole world
would see for itself how ours was indeed a holy war. Many
women can contribute their share in this movement even while
attending to their domestic duties. We have the land revenue
tax as a last resort. That is why, though I have discussed the
subject in my article "The Immoral Foundation"1, I do not wish
to touch the tax just now. Nor is it necessary to do so. At
present, my eyes are fixed on the 91 crore rupees and consider-
ing the prevailing atmosphere in the country I think we shall
easily succeed in our aim.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have talked at length on these matters with Mithubehn.
She has made up her mind. The Anavil Ashram will be handed
over to her for the use of women workers. Those women who
are willing to give all their time to the work will be admitted to
it. Of course there will be other conditions for admission. The
present idea is to make an intensive effort in the Surat district
where some work of this kind has been done, and to extend the
area of activity as the women's self- confidence increases. Such
of the Ashram women as are ready for this, like Mithubehn, should
start coming here. Mithubehn herself has already had experience
of this work and, therefore, the women who come here will have
the benefit of that experience. As the women coming from the
Ashram are trained in discipline, Mithubehn will find it easier to
take work from them. I have already discussed the matter with
Shardabehn. She and Dr. Sumant liked the idea very much.
Shardabehn said that she would certainly go there.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16785
