680. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
Personal
SEVAGRAM,
March 3, 1941
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have your letter. No one opens your letters. They are
directly passed on to me and mostly they are instantly destroyed.
If there is some point to remember they are destroyed after
they have been answered.
You are unnecessarily worrying so much. Who thinks you
are disqualified? You have got to come during the April holi-
days. You are of course needed here. If you had come to
Allahabad just like that, you would have been accommodated
somewhere. Surely you do not consider it a sin to come
specially to meet me. You must control your imagination.
Your view about the diet is not fully acceptable. Even so
437
it is partly true. You also make the patient fast in typhoid.
Half the improvement in Janakibehn's health is due to fasting.
Shastriji's sores are again drying up. Dr. G. is taking so
much interest in his case that he has suggested taking daily
photographs. He says his whole case is very curious. He is
not disappointed that the disease has reappeared. Kanchan has
also definitely benefited. She has not lost weight. Bharatanand
has apparently benefited from fasting. Rajkumari had rash on
her body and itching. She remained on oranges and grapes
for ten days. She was given milk last evening. The rash has
disappeared. You have to go deeper into the subject of diet and
fasting. But that must be after you complete your studies. It
is surprising that there is no information at all from Lahore yet.
There was a letter from Tari. It seems she is feeling
happy to be in the Harijan Colony. Arrangement for two
visits must have been made.
I have had the rosary sent to you. Why do you forget the
work it involved? Is it of no consequence that it had been
kept safely with so much care? I have not bought it from the
market. It is from my collection. But your mind has become
insensitive at the moment and that is why you do not like any-
thing. This is natural. That state will pass.
I came to know yesterday that Pyarelal would be released
on the 6th. Kanu or Sankaran will go to receive him. Mahadev
will be there or on the train. I shall consider if it is necessary
to send anyone else. I shall do so if there is need.
My health has not been spoilt by work. Change of work
has definitely been beneficial. The weight has increased by
1 lb. It was 110 lb. The blood-pressure was 142/92 yesterday.
This afternoon it was 184/112. I am not able to understand
that. The weather has deteriorated here. There have been
sudden rains and chill. Ba is well. Satya will have got through
without trouble.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
