44. LETTER TO "INDIAN OPINION"
MOTIHARI,
December 15, 1917
When I left South Africa, I had fully intended to write to
my Indian and English friends there from time to time, but I
found my lot in India to be quite different from what I had
expected it to be. I had hoped to be able to have comparative
peace and leisure but I have been irresistibly drawn into many
activities. I hardly cope with them and local daily correspondence.
Half of my time is passed in the Indian trains. My South African
friends will, I hope, forgive me for my apparent neglect of them.
Let me assure them that not a day has passed when I have not
thought of them and their kindness. South African associations
can never be effaced from my memory.
You will not now be surprised when I tell you that it was
only today that I learnt from Indian Opinion to hand, about the
disastrous floods. During my travels I rarely read newspapers and
I have time merely to glance at them whilst I am not travelling.
I write this to tender my sympathy to the sufferers. My imagi-
nation enables me to draw a true picture of their sufferings. They
make one think of God and His might and the utter evanescence
of this life. They ought to teach us ever to seek His protection
and never to fail in the daily duty before us. In the divine ac-
count books only our actions are noted, not what we have spoken.
These and similar reflections fill my soul for the moment and I
wish to share them with the sufferers. The deep poverty that I
experience in this country deters me even from thinking of finan-
cial assistance to be sent for those who have been rendered homeless.
Even one pie in this country counts. I am, at this very moment,
living in the midst of thousands who have nothing but roasted
pulse or grain-flour mixed with water and salt. We, therefore,
can only send the sufferers an assurance of our heartfelt grief.
I hope that a determined movement will be set on foot to
render residence on flats exposed to visitations of death-dealing
floods illegal. The poor will, if they can, inhabit even such sites
regardless of consequences. It is for the enlightened persons to
make it impossible for them to do so.
The issues of Indian Opinion that acquainted me with the
destruction caused by the floods gave me also the sad news of
Mr. Abdul Gani's death. Please convey my respectful condolences
to the members of our friend's family. Mr. Abdul Gani's services
to the community can never be forgotten. His sobriety of judg-
ment and never-failing courtesy would have done credit to anybody.
His wise handling of public questions was a demonstration of the
fact that services to one's country could be effectively rendered
without a knowledge of English or modern training. I note, too,
that our people in South Africa are not yet free from difficulties
about trade licences and leaving certificates. My Indian experience
has confirmed the opinion that there is no remedy like passive
resistance against such evils. The community has to exhaust
milder remedies, but I hope that it will not allow the sword of
passive resistance to get rusty. It is our duty, whilst the terrible
war lasts, to be satisfied with petitions, etc., for the desired relief,
but I think the Government should know that the community
will not rest until the questions above mentioned are satisfactorily
solved. It is but right that I should also warn the community
against dangers from within. I hear from those who return from
South Africa that we are by no means free of those who are en-
gaged in illicit traffic. We, who seek justice, must be above sus-
picion, and I hope that our leaders will not rest till they have
purged the community of internal defects.
The Hindu, 4-3-1918
