121. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
May 13, 1929
CHI. PRABHUDAS,
I have your letter. If my health permits, I will keep the date. Be assured
of that. Mirabehn will certainly be with me. Have I written that ? Will there
be difficulty if there are more persons? Are there good facilities for staying,
etc? Are there places cheap enough for persons to stay on their own? Write
to me if you want minimum number of persons to accompany me.
What Kishorelal writes about Chhaganlal is surprising. There is nothing
wrong in your letter. You have not been hasty. Even the letter I have sent, is
1 For Gandhiji's letter to Kishorelal on the same subject, dated "About May 18,
1929", vide Suppl. Vol. II, pp. 24-.
100
LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
101
not meant as criticism of Chhaganlal. I do not know that Narandas has
interpreted it that way. Narandas has said that Chhaganlal left because of his
weakness. I suggested to him to stay here on rent. So, he decided to call
back his luggage which had been sent to the station and stayed on. I do not
know anything about Jamnadas. But do not worry. I do not see much difficulty
if Chhaganlal comes there. The article in Navajivan had not been written
when I had raised a strong objection. After its publication, Chhaganlal is
free to go and stay wherever he likes. Now we have to reckon the value of
that article. Many persons at fault have been protected by that. I will talk to
Kishorelalbhai when I meet him in Bombay. Send him this letter if you want
to. I keep writing to Chhaganlal as well as to Kashi. I worry about them and
will keep on worrying about them and so, you may give up worrying about
them. If you want to make any suggestions, certainly do so.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I find from the letter I am just reading that Dadabhai's grand-daughter
Khurshedbehn will also be with me. Do not involve anyone in unnecessary
expenses for my sake. For toilet, there is no need for a western commode. A
hole can be made in one of the boxes and a bucket kept underneath. For
food, eggs and fruits you get there would be sufficient.
From the Gujarati original : S. N. 32965
