196. LETTER TO MISS DEVI WEST
BLOEMFONTEIN GAOL,
December 14, 1913
Name of convict: M. K. GANDHI
Number: 1739
TO WHOM SENT:
Name in full: Miss Devi West
Occupation: Schoolmistress
Postal Address: International Printing Press
Nearest Town: Phoenix, Natal
MY DEAR DEVI,
As I do not know where everybody else is, it is the most ap-
propriate for me to write to you.
I am quite happy and well here. It is almost as hot here as
in Phoenix this time of the year.
Hope that you and others are keeping good health and that
Devdas, Prabhudas and the other boys are observing the disci-
pline that was introduced after the ladies' withdrawal from Phoenix
and that the boys are thriving under it. Pray remind Devdas of the
promises he has made me at various times. Ask him if he can re-
call them all. When you or someone else writes to me, I should like
[to know] the day's routine for the boys. Is Shanti giving trouble? Is
Navin obedient? And are Sivparsad and Chhotam as playful as
ever? I hope that Rukhi causes no extra trouble to you or to
Maganlal. Krishna, Radha and Keshu are not out of my mind,
but they are used to being with Maganlal and, therefore, do not
call for special inquiry. I hope Rustom West is growing and
that he still remains the most beautiful baby in the world to
Mrs. Pywell and Mrs. West.
Please tell Mrs. Sam that I did not forget her message to
Mr. Sam but, as she knows, I never had the time or the opportu-
nity to have it delivered. I have no doubt however that she will
soon see Mr. Sam and then secure his approval of the proposed
match. That reminds me that Muthu promised to help all he
could and I hope he is keeping the promise.
Miss Schlesin, if she is there, must be proving very useful.
When the ladies and the boys return, please tell Mrs. Gandhi
that she will please me immensely by not disturbing the routine
established after her withdrawal and I hope that Ramdas and the
other boys will fall in with it. Your reply to this should be sent
after their return, so that you may give me full information about
them. I shall not withdraw any other letter but the reply to this.
I hope Mrs. Gandhi's old trouble did not revive and that
she kept good health. Please let me know too how the other ladies
fared. Jekibehn should adhere to the promises made by her to
me. Please tell that hardly a day passes when I do not give much
thought to her. As for her diet, I do not bind her to any promises
or resolutions she may have made. She may take whatever suits
her constitution. But she must keep not only good health but be
robust. She must grow her hair unless she has definitely heard
otherwise from Dr. Mehta.
How I wish Kashi and Santok could join the common house-
hold and Mrs. Gandhi could approve of it?
I hope Maganlal traced my Tamil volume that was missing;
otherwise he should inquire of Govindoo and find and keep it
safe. Most of my spare time is being devoted to Tamil study. A
short time is daily given to compiling the book on food values
and the uses of popular and comparatively harmless drugs.
A money order should be sent to Khushalbhai (Rajkot) to
cover Jamnadas' expenses whatever they may have been in Rajkot
and for his travelling and £10 extra. Out of the latter, he should
pay the widow of my deceased brother Rs. 20 per month. Khu-
shalbhai should also be asked to prevail upon my sister to cut
down her allowance to the extent of Rs. 5 or Rs. 10. Of this Rs. 5
may be added, if necessary, to the allowance to my brother's wife.
The whole of the money that may be sent may be debited to
suspense or emergency a/c.
Mr. MacIntyre should be reminded by Miss Schlesin to
start repayment that he promised to do so long ago.
Jamnadas, if he is there, should follow Maganlal in his die-
tary and other habits and he will keep well. I am anxious to
know how he has been keeping in body and mind.
Chhaganlal should take as much olive oil as he can and do
as much garden work as possible, and should sleep in the open
in all weathers and take deep breaths early in the morning and at
the time of retiring. He may also smear and rub his chest and his
back with olive oil every day for 15 minutes. This massage should
be given gently by some strong person. Maganlal or Ramdas
should do it. He should read Dr. Carton's thesis on consumption.
It was given by me, I think, to Maganlal to read. I hope Magan-
lal received from Mr. Dowd the books that were lent to Hassan.
Out of them, I should like Food Remedies sent to me.
I returned to the Gaoler at Volksrust the following: a roll
conta[in]ing Mr. Kallenbach's and my blankets and my writing
leather case, Uttar Ramcharit, Addison's Essays and Dayanand's
commentaries on Rigved &c. The Gaoler promised to return them
to Phoenix. If you have them, Addison's Essays should be returned
to Mrs. Polak. I hope she and the children are keeping well and
that her wants are being supplied.
The trustees under the Phoenix settlement should be kept
supplied with the monthly a/cs we prepare. Does Mr. Omar visit
the settlement. If not, remind him of his promise.
What has happened to Mr. Budree's case? You may inquire
of Mr. Budree or Mr. F. S. Tatham, to whom Mr. Polak handed
the case. Mr. Ismail Parekh wrote to me saying that the case
could be adjourned sine die.
Please also write to Khushalbhai, saying that I shall see to
my niece Tulsi's a/c being settled whenever I return to India.
If I do not within 18 months' time, I shall see to its settlement
otherwise. The interest I am doubtful about. I must add that I
wrote to Dr. Mehta, asking him to advance the monthly sum to
my brother's wife. If he has commenced to do so, £10 extra need
not be sent to Khushalbhai.
I implore Mrs. Gandhi not to be anxious about me. She will
help me to keep better by looking after her own health. And the
secret of it is in sticking to the dietary prescribed for her.
With much love to you all,
Yours very sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
This should be read by all and be sent to Miss Schlesin
wherever she may be. Remember me to Mr. Kotwal when you
write to him. I hope Lalchand is helping. How is he keeping
and the little baby?
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 5913
