38. LETTER TO PYARELAL
[After November 15, 1947]
I did receive copies of your correspondence with Nazimuddin.
I liked the whole of it. Here are replies to your questions:
As to his statement on Pakistan, in my opinion, Khwaja
Saheb has overshot the mark. I can understand their objecting
to propaganda in favour of reunion backed by action. But how can
they ban the holding or the propagation even of views contrary
to the Pakistan Government's present policy, or the cultivation of
public opinion in favour of those views? You should see Khwaja
Saheb personally or write to him to get the issue clarified. No
one may try to coerce the Pakistan Government but surely every-
one has a right to bring home to the Muslims the error of what
has taken place and to convert them to one's view if possible.
Send me the draft of your letter to Khwaja Saheb before posting.
You have referred to my attitude in regard to the British
Empire. Let me tell you, I derived no little strength from my
implicit loyalty to the British Empire in thought, word and deed.
I am doing exactly the same in regard to Pakistan.
What is happening in Tripura is very wrong. It is naked
coercion. But if the people of Tripura have no grit, if they are
stupid or if the State administration is rotten to the core, what
can one do? I do not think you can do anything in this matter.
. . . Of course, you can help with advice. If by coming into
personal contact with the State officials you could get them to
behave as men, it would be a great thing.
I cannot regard the Noakhali situation as 'normal' in any
sense so long as the corruption is not rooted out. Death at a
stroke is better than death by inches.
On the surface there is peace here. But so long as hearts
are not united it is like a castle built upon sand. You are per-
fectly right that so long as things on the top do not come right
here there will be no real improvement there.
The story about that little boy is very touching. The
decision about the use of the fine money was very appropriate.
The action taken by the local Muslims does them credit. . . .
I have already written to you that you should come whenever
the situation and your work there permit.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. II, pp. 530-
