13. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
ALIGARH,
November 23 [1920]
MY DEAREST CHARLIE 2 ,
I have your letters and your wire. Have I done you an
injustice? I simply wired saying I was trying to send you— I
did not say you had accepted the post. And I said what I did
on the strength of our conversation. In any case there will be
no pressure whatsoever brought to bear on you. You will simply
do what you can for the Muslim University.
Yes I realize the necessity of putting the English connec-
tion on a pure basis. In its present condition it is hateful. But
I am not as yet sure that it must be ended at any cost. It may
be that the English temperament is not responsive to a status of
perfect equality with the black and the brown races. Then the
English must be made to retire from India. But I am not pre-
pared to reject the possibility of an honourable equality. The
connection must end on the clearest possible proof that the English
have hopelessly failed to realize the first principle of religion,
namely, brotherhood of man.
Baro Dada's letter has not been received by me. It may be
in the Ashram or it may be received by me tomorrow on reach-
ing Delhi. I have duly telegraphed to you.
I cannot wire any message to Dr. Dutta but if there is
yet time I shall endeavour to write out something for him.
I do hope you are keeping well.
I do not wonder at the Gujarati children having been with-
drawn. I do not think you have lost anything. You cannot
whittle down principles to keep a single boy. I have not told you
what I am suffering for having got the senate [pass the] resolution
[as suggested] in your letter. They have threatened to boycott
me completely. But my position is absolutely clear. I do not
want swaraj at the cost of the depressed classes or any classes
for that matter. It will not be swaraj at all in my sense of the
term. My belief is that the instant India is purified India
becomes free and not a moment earlier. Only I must fight the
greatest devil of all—this Government—with all my might and
in doing so I shall be automatically fighting the lesser ones. This
threat of boycott is giving me the keenest pleasure for I feel that
there I am on still purer ground. In fighting the Government,
the motives of co-workers can be mixed. In fighting the devil
of untouchability I have absolutely select company.
With love,
Yours,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 956
