100. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
DELHI,
[January 17, 1935]
MY DEAR HARIBHAU,
I have your letter. I can't remember the letter you are refer-
ring to.
It is just likely that the tremendous pressure at which
I am dealing with my correspondence has put your letter out of
my mind and it is lying buried in the heap before me.
I have not said that there should be no propaganda. Pro-
paganda there must be. I have said, and I still maintain, that
there should be no paid propaganda or if there is, there
ought to be a separate collection about it. It is the business of
savarna Hindus to organize such propaganda. Therefore funds
should be raised, if funds are necessary, earmarked for that pur-
pose. My own impression is that paid propaganda creates no effect
whatsoever. We conduct schools and hostels with a definite object,
which is to discharge the obligation we owe to the Harijans.
It is wholly different in scope, therefore, from the establishment
of schools, etc., under the old regime. Every school we open is a
fresh nail in the coffin of untouchability, and having travelled all
over India in that cause you will let me judge the result. It is
therefore that I have said that the opening of schools and hostels
[is] the best propaganda for conducting the campaign against
untouchability. We have plenty of money; but where are the
schoolmasters to be had? Savarna schoolmasters are not to be
picked up in the streets. Now, reverse the process. If you utilize 90
per cent of the funds for propaganda and reserve 10 per cent for
schools, how will you measure the success you would have attained
in the conversion of savarna Hindus as we are able to measure
the result by the number of schools and hostels that we succeed
in opening and conducting? Daily I have letters from Harijans
complaining of our spending money for purposes other than open-
ing schools, hostels and the like. I have no letter from anywhere
complaining that we do not carry on enough propaganda. Yours
is the first letter received by me. In Maharashtra I do not know
what you will do in the matter of propaganda even if the whole
of the collections were to be used by you for propaganda work.
Show me a programme and I am prepared to examine it on its
own merits. I have no bias. One way or the other, my sole
concern is to see that untouchability is removed. I wonder if I
have made my point perfectly clear. If not, you must write again
developing your views.
The complaint you make about the composition of the
Maharashtra Provincial Board is, of course, your own speciality. It
has nothing to do with propaganda. You have simply to get Deo-
dhar to give you a minimum of time or ask him to retire in
favour of one who can give the time, or have him as the ornamen-
tal head but have a Vice-Chairman who would conduct the pro-
ceedings and actually organize the work from month to month,
and even from day to day. If you suggest any such Vice-Presi-
dent, I will discuss the thing with Thakkar Bapa in the first
instance.
Now about mill rice and hand-pounded rice. When you say
that mill-pounded polished rice is [not] dearer than hand-pounded,
I know that there is a flaw in your statement. Hand-pounded
rice is as much polished as mill-pounded polished rice. You have
to test the thing for yourself.
If you will take hand-pounded
unpolished rice, it would be any day and everywhere cheaper than
mill-polished rice when we compare the prices of unpolished
mill-pounded rice and unpolished hand-pounded. But you will never
have the mills to produce unpolished rice in large quantities. From
the health standpoint, I have universal medical testimony that
mill-pounded unpolished rice suffers in vitamin when compared
with hand-pounded unpolished rice. To remove the outermost
husk is a very simple and expeditious process. It is the polishing
process by the hand which sends up the price of labour which
I obliterate in my calculation because I do not want to go beyond
the process of removing the outermost husk. Make the investiga-
tion for yourself and then give me the prices. You are not the
only person who have committed the error if you have committed
it. It is most natural because we have never investigated these
processes nor have we ever troubled to know the distinction
between polished and unpolished rice. Unpolished rice is a
most beautiful grain. It is either yellow, red or dark white,
never white like the polished rice. The red variety is the best,
and sweet to taste, and cheaper withal. I opened out one grain
from the paddy and showed to those around me the full unpoli-
shed grain. I had not seen it before. But in a heap of half-polished
rice I saw a whole paddy grain. I immediately removed the
husk with my finger nails. Out came the beautiful red grain
from its husk. I would defy anyone to show that such unpolished
rice is dearer than mill-polished rice. Test again for your satis-
faction and then tell me if you still claim to be right in your
supposition that polished rice is cheaper than hand-pounded
unpolished rice.
Yours,
BAPU
SHRI HARIBHAU PHATAK
62 SADASHIV PETH
POONA CITY
From a photostat: G.N. 1374
