110. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[VOLKSRUST,]
January 29, 1909
CHI. MAGANLAL,
Received your letter. Please write to me what particular things you
intend to say to me before I enter the gaol. Remember that my period
[of bail] will be over on the 4th.
Do keep seeing Camroodeen Sheth frequently. There is everything
to gain by doing so. "Even hard black boulders are cut by a string."
My enthusiasm is such that I may have to meet death in South Africa
at the hands of my own countrymen. If that happens, you should
rejoice. It will unite the Hindus and the Mussalmans. In this struggle
a twofold inner struggle is going on. One of them is to bring the Hindus
and the Muslims together. The enemies of the community are constantly
making efforts against such a unity. In such a great endeavour,
someone will have to sacrifice his life. If I make that sacrifice, I shall
regard myself, as well as you, my colleagues, fortunate.
I have written to you to see Mr. Subramanyam who is a clergy-
man. I have on the whole found him to be a good man.
When you come to know who is making the effort about me, please
let me know. For the present I shall not write to anyone about it.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 4918
1 1 1 . CACHALIA'S SELF-SACRIFICE
The fact that each successive Chairman of the Transvaal [British
Indian] Association has proved himself worthier than his predecessor
is an indication that the Indian community's star is in the ascendant.
Mr. Cachalia has been to gaol. He has now declared his intention to
embrace poverty. His financial position is so sound that no one can
argue that he had little to sacrifice. He is prepared to forgo a flourish-
ing business. He does not mind being declared a bankrupt at the
instance of his creditors. Rather he takes pride in that. This is what we
can claim as wealth well earned. All this Mr. Cachalia suffers for the
motherland. He wants to honour his pledge. This is real self-sacrifice.
We offer our congratulations to him.
This excellent step is already proving infectious. Mr. Aswat has
emulated Mr. Cachalia's courage. We congratulate him as well.
This is a moment which will test the businessmen. We have often
defended them in the past. They have suffered losses. Some of them
have also courted imprisonment. We have mentioned all such instan-
ces from time to time. But this is the time when the businessmen will
be really tested. They have never staked their all, as the hawkers did;
now is the time for them to do so. Mr. Cachalia and Mr. Aswat have
shown the way. It is to be seen what the other businessmen do. Nearly
40 of them have signed a statement that they will not take out licences,
but close down their businesses instead. Those who are prepared for
this had better come out in the open in support of Mr. Cachalia's ac-
tion. The next phase of the campaign depends upon the businessmen;
it is they who will stand to suffer, should the movement be unduly
prolonged.
Everyone realizes that Mr. Cachalia has not lost his honour by
having been declared an insolvent; rather, it has been enhanced. The
creditors also know that it is none of Mr. Cachalia's fault. He has
brought distinction to the post of Chairman. Why, then, should the other
businessmen feel timid? If at all, what they should fear is a retreat.
When engaged in a battle, one can have nothing to fear in rushing
forward.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 30-1-1909
