8. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
UNION CASTLE LINE,
November 27, 1909
CHI. MAGANLAL,
I thought of communicating to you the ideas that arose in my mind
after reading Mr. McIntyre's letter about our financial position and
after writing a letter to Mr. West. Please share this letter with
Parshotamdas .
Phoenix will be put to test now. Probably we may not get money
from Johannesburg. Our pledge is that we shall bring out at least a one-
page issue of Indian Opinion and distribute it among the people as long
as there is even one person in Phoenix. Do not allow any intrigues to
flourish there. You must put up with anything that the others might
say. If the Durban office is closed down, let it be. Always bear in
mind that the main point should be stuck to. In order to give one's
life for it, one has to give up the rest. The main point is to bring out
the paper at any cost and not to leave Phoenix. If this one point is
kept, the other things may go. We do not want to make a fetish of
the journal and worship it. But we do want to keep our pledge. Our
victory does not lie in issuing the paper, it lies in the pledge. There is
nothing in getting the Transvaal Act repealed but there is everything
in keeping the pledge. Our soul is moulded by our pledge and that is
and should be the significance of keeping our pledge as well as of carry-
ing on our other activities. You might suggest that the office may
continue even if Mr. West has to go to Durban. Or let Manilal go
[to Durban]. I would confide to you two only that I intend to sacri-
fice Manilal in the struggle if he is willing and if Ba agrees. That
will calm his restless mind. In fact, he wanted it himself. But if this
does not materialize, it is just as well that he goes to Durban, and
you remain in Phoenix. This should be done only if it is necessary.
Make up your mind not to be upset if money does not come from
Johannesburg. You may tell them that in that case you will provide
the necessary funds by earning the money in some other way. You
may also declare that you will continue to live and die in Phoenix
even when no one else remains there. The others will catch your spirit,
provided it is born of your steadfast mind and not of arrogance. The
spirit has to be genuine, not merely expressed in strong words. Be quite
sure that its echo will definitely be heard. Let the other necessary
changes also be made. If any changes that you consider needless are
made, let them also be made. There should not be any insistence in
matters of pecuniary profit and loss. It is out of our ignorance that we
believe we get our bread because of our efforts. It is best if one realizes
that He who has given us teeth will also give us food for chewing.
From the facsimile of the original Gujarati in Gandhiji's hand in Jivan-nu
Parodh by Prabhudas Gandhi
