521. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR,
April 19, 1932
BHAI SUMANGAL PRAKASH,
I have your letter. Kanta must not be coerced into giving
up the facilities she enjoys. So long as she does not herself
want to give up the privileges, she should not be made to do
so. To cite my example is right and not right. It is right because
so long as I am engaged in public work people are bound to
take me as a model, which will only create misunderstandings,
because what I expect others to practise I cannot for various
reasons practise myself. So there is a flaw in my leadership.
Citing my example might not be right because my position is
very different from that of others. One reason is my physical
weakness. Another reason is my title of Mahatma. A third reason
is my special situation. In whatever class I may be I have to
have special food, because my body and my vow demand it. This
applies to some extent to all prisoners. It is a different matter
that every prisoner cannot have this facility as easily as I can.
I am permitted interviews once every week instead of once
every three months. As for letters there is almost no restriction.
I have decided in my mind that I have no intimate friend. I
meet relatives, not because they are relatives but because my
meeting them serves some moral purpose. My writing letters
also has the same end in view. Whether deep down it gives me
some kind of pleasure I do not know. There seems little likelihood
because withdrawal of permission to write letters or to see visi-
tors would not upset me. In 1930 I refused to avail myself of the
facility of interviews because the Government would not accept
my condition. In 1922 I had stopped writing letters. Lately I
have been kept apart from others. That also is a reason.
One should not make comparisons with me on this account,
but if this is not obvious I would not like to persuade anyone
by arguments. There is no doubt a slight difference between
one who has got 'A' class after some efforts from outside the
jail and one who has been given 'A' class by the jail authorities
themselves. But it is no use stressing this difference. The ideal
should certainly be that there should be no classification, and
where as a result of classification people have been given better
classes they should give up the privileges of those classes. Very
few are today acting up to this idea. Therefore one does not
want to bring the least pressure to bear on a delicate girl such
as Kanta. She is a thoughtful girl and on her own practises
such self-control as she can.
Kanaiyalal's untimely demise is distressing. But instead of
losing courage you must be doubly careful. The prayer I made
on behalf of Manilal was impelled not by wisdom but by a
father's love for his son. Only one prayer is proper and that is
"May God do as He wills." Of course one may ask what
meaning this prayer has. The answer is that prayer should not
be given a gross meaning. It means that to free ourselves of
attachments we become aware of the God dwelling in our hearts
and conceiving Him as separate from us, we pray that we may
not be taken where we are impelled by the mind but that we may
be taken where God who is our Master takes us. Whether our
good lies in our dying or in our living we do not know. There-
fore we should not rejoice in life or tremble at the thought of
death. We should treat the two as the same and remain untouch-
ed. This is the ideal and it may take a long time to attain to
it. Indeed very few can attain to it. But this need not discourage
us from pursuing it. And the more difficulties we face in the
pursuit the greater should be our efforts to overcome them.
If we think over the matter deeply we can conquer the
palate. We must not accept defeat. Man's full span of life is
considered to be a hundred years. It can be more but however
long it may be, time is an unending stream in which a human
lifetime is not even a millionth part of a drop. What can there-
fore attachment for it or calculation about it avail? And any
calculations we may make can never be definite. We can only
guess and say at the most how long a human life can be. For
the rest even the healthiest children meet with untimely deaths.
We cannot even say that a man given to lustful pleasures will
not enjoy a long life. The most we can say is that a man who
has been free from lust from the very beginning, who leads a
simple life, stands a good chance of enjoying a long life span.
But to seek to conquer pleasures of sense for the sake of a long
life is like digging up a mountain for the sake of a mouse. We
must conquer sensual pleasures for realizing the Self. If self-control
leads to shortening of life rather than to prolonging it we should
not care. A life free of disease and long in years is the least
significant result of self-control.
Being in jail Kanta naturally cannot practise hydrotherapy.
Therefore the best way for her is to consult the best doctors.
It is possible that if she restricts herself to a diet of milk, curd
and fruit she may have some relief in the matter of her men-
strual trouble and her toothache. Relief from pyorrhoea may be
attained by chewing a datun for half an hour morning and
evening and by massaging the gums inside and outside with a
finely ground clean mixture of salt and charcoal powder. I am
not writing separately to Kanta.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy :
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library
