188. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON,
September 20, 1937
MY DEAR IDIOT,
I have written with the right hand with a vengeance. In
ten minutes more the prayer commences and the silence breaks.
Then no more of right hand writing till next Monday.
Nothing more about me than what M. has told you.
I hope you had a good meeting with the women. You can't
desert the rich. You have to do the best you can with them.
You must have inexhaustible patience.
Tell Charlie, he must keep to regular hours and simplicity
for food. It won't do to have another attack, if he is to shoulder
the burden of Palestine. It is wrong for him to write for money.
It is one thing to accept small gifts for work done without the
monetary motive behind it. But to write for gain seems to me to
be quite wrong. It would be a different thing if he as a school-
master was writing school books. That labour merits its hire.
But not an original work say like the Indian Fight for Freedom or
the Lift of Jesus.
You are silent about your eczema.
Poor Sharda may have duodenal ulcer. But she is all right
and quite brave. Her father, who has come here, is on his
back with fever. Lilavati is on the mend. Ba is better though still
limping. Balkrishna is the same as before. Batra is in the Punjab.
The medicine I am taking is no patent. It is a well-known
bazaar root irradiated. If I may take the neem leaf or bark,
what is wrong with another bitter root? There is as much harm
in this root as there is in the castor seed. Therefore don't take
fright over my drug. I am careful.
My love to Nabi Bux. He should return by this time.
The weather has suddenly become warm. We might have a
downpour.
We had a good meeting of A. I. S. A. and A. I. V. I. A.
The Urdu numerals are handy. Thoughtful Rebel as ever!
I shall ask for more when I have mastered this much. It will
be treasured as I have treasured your list of equivalent Hindi
names for tools.
Love.
ROBBER
From the original: C.W. 3612. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6421
