328. LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY
[JOHANNESBURG,
December 14, 1907]
[THE HON'BLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
PRETORIA
SIR,]
I have the honour to state that I was discharged yesterday from
the Johannesburg gaol. I was sentenced to be imprisoned for one month
under the Peace Preservation Ordinance and the Asiatic Law Amend-
ment Act for remaining in the Colony without a permit, my permit
having expired on the 30th day of September last. The reasons for my
having disobeyed the order of the Registrar of Asiatics that I should
leave the Colony are set forth in the letter addressed to him by me. The
Hindu temple at Germiston, in its present form, owes its existence to me.
I was, and still am, the only priest in charge. On proceeding to the
temple yesterday, I found it in a desolate condition. The temple had
remained closed for the whole of the month. I cannot here describe
adequately the state of my feelings on seeing the condition of the temple
yesterday.
I am aware that now, in accordance with the laws of the Colony,
I should leave it within 7 days if I wish to escape imprisonment. But a
law higher than the laws of the Colony dictates to me another course
that, as a British subject, and as a preacher of religion in charge of the
Hindu temple at Germiston, I should adhere to my duty, irrespective of
all consequences. With due submission and in all humility, and consis-
tently also with my duty to the Imperial Government and to the local
Government, I beg now to inform you that it is not my intention to leave
the Colony. The Hindu congregation at Germiston and I myself would
appreciate the strength of the Government in allowing me to continue
my duty to my temple and congregation by issuing to me a permit, for
which I hereby apply.
In this connection, I cannot help stating that the charges, of which
I still know nothing, hinted at by the Registrar of Asiatics and which were
given as the reason for refusing to extend my permit, were, so far as I
have guessed them, unfounded. If there are any charges against me,
I request that they may be formulated and I may be put on my trial;
and, if I have, in anything I have done, departed from my religion, as
I know it, or from my avocation of priest, I should immediately and volun-
tarily leave the Colony. If the charges are such that they cannot be
brought against me legally, even then I should be prepared to answer
them before any impartial person with a legal training who might be
specially appointed by the Government for the purpose. This is the least
that I venture to claim from a civilised and Christian Government.
[1 have, etc.,
RAM SUNDAR PUNDIT]
Indian Opinion, 21-12-1907
