104. LETTER TO D. HANUMANTHARAO
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 11, 1926
MY DEAR HANUMANTHARAO,
I like your letters, the latest more especially, though I dis-
sent entirely from several of your conclusions. I like your robust
faith in the no-drug theory and I like also your insistence on my
avoidance of all drugs under every conceivable circumstance, but
experience has taught me that reformers develop a certain amount
of intolerance and fanaticism which hinder the reform that they
have so much at heart.
The evils that you recite about quinine, for instance, are
evils that arise from taking large doses and for a prolonged period,
whereas I took it in five-grain doses, never more than 10 grains
in 24 hours, diluted in fresh lemon juice and plenty of water and
mixed with soda bicarb. In all, I took not more than 30 grains
spread over 5 days. Thus for 4 days I had only 5 grains per day.
I have suffered from no visible evil effect and I was able to
satisfy so many anxious friends and doctors who insisted on my
taking 15-grain doses.
The indiscriminate attack upon quinine will prove futile
because that is the one drug whose general potency for the tempo-
rary cure of malaria is not to be questioned. People won't be
frightened by the possible evil effect of quinine if it produces the
tangible present result of checking the ravages of malaria. The
attack therefore must be a flank attack.
The reasons for my taking quinine were just the same as
the reasons for undergoing the operation when I was under res-
traint. If the restraint then induced me to give in, how much
more the restraint of unadulterated love should have done in the
latest instance? But nothing could either have induced me to
undergo the operation at the Sassoon hospital if I had not been
convinced that it was purely an echo of my own weakness. But
that weakness is weakness of faith in the absolute efficacy of what
you call "nature treatment". Even nature treatment is under
exploration and is a growing thing. It has not yet reached that
perfect stage when we can ensure absolute results. And if you
have in mind something beyond nature treatment, that is faith
in God and consequent absolute resignation; I own I have not yet
attained that stage. We can only come to it by painful effort.
We cannot put it on like a garment, nor can one be argued into
that absolute consciousness of the presence within us of the
"All-Protecting Power."
I reason with you at length because I honour your sincerity,
but I detect your growing impatience and intolerance which are
calculated to hinder your progress as a nature-cure advocate.
Do not again run away with the idea that all things that taste
bitter are necessarily bad. Bitterness, sweetness, etc., are relative
terms. Do you know that for some people sweetness is more
nauseating than bitterness? Will you not subscribe to the state-
ment that a regular use of sugar is more harmful than a regular
use of the bitter nim leaf? And I am not at all sure that a person
who will clean his teeth well with a brush made from nim tree
will not keep his mouth in a nice and healthy condition. Or will
you prescribe for him a tea-spoonful of sugar powder to brush his
teeth with?
Lastly on the principle of "physician, cure thyself" I must
ask you to become strong and robust and to be an object-lesson
and advertisement for nature-cure.
This letter is written not to discourage you from bombarding
me. Only you must be prepared to receive counter-bombard-
ments.
I wonder if you have received my letter written to you some
days ago regarding those two friends who want to come to the
Ashram and about the Ashram at Nellore. It was sent to you
at Vizagapatam. You had then given no other address.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. D . HANUMANTHARAO
C/O D. V. RAMASWAMI IYER
VIZAGAPATAM
From a photostat: S.N. 19350
