160. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
PUDUPALAYAM,
February 13, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
It is in Raja's Ashram, and it is Tuesday morning. About
50 people have joined it, but he is able to manage them all.
The climate is so fine that there can be no difficulty on its account.
Muriel Lester and her friend joined us at Coimbatore. They
left yesterday to see the Governor of Bengal. The suggestion was
made by me. The subject of discussion will be exclusively Midnapur.
I don't think anything will come out of the effort, but it was
our duty to do this much. The two ladies will return on Sunday.
Amtussalaam is laid up in bed. She is lying just in front of
me. Her heart is gold, but her body is brass.
You must have read the Poet's attack. I am replying to it
in Harijan. He of course made amends afterwards. He gets
excited and writes, and then corrects himself. This is what he
does every time.
Bhansali has got his lips stitched up. He mixes flour and
water and drinks the liquid with a straw. He says he got a tailor
to stitch up his lips. And he adds that he enjoys complete peace
of mind. He intends to wear a loin-cloth or a shirt. He is some-
where near Than in Kathiawar.
There was a very good letter from Chhaganlal [Joshi]. He
has read a good deal. His mental condition also is good. His
health is good. It seems he has also been getting milk, etc., in
sufficient quantity. The date of his release is drawing near.
I have permitted Amala to go to Sabarmati. Just now she
feels quite happy.
Valji has come here. His health is so so. Swami's friend,
Himmatlal Khira, has come. His health has not been fully
restored. I, therefore, don't think that he can stay here. Mathura-
das has come for a few days. There is nothing special behind
the visit.
I have received Rajendrababu's call. I shall have, therefore,
to break off the tour somewhere and go. I have sent a wire
and am awaiting a reply by wire. I have informed him that I
cannot go before the 24th at the earliest.
Ba's letter is enclosed.
Devdas is happy in Delhi. Prithuraj is carrying on well.
His work is satisfactory.
Lakshmidas must have gone to Patna now. I am not think-
ing just now of sending any more workers.
I have just received a letter from Bal. The Ashram batch
is working hard. It seems to be giving a good account of itself.
Bal and Raojibhai are in joint control of the store. Parnerkar
and Soman are in Patna. Maganbhai is in the publicity de-
partment.
A copy of Ba's letter is enclosed.
Please be satisfied with this much today.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[PS.]
There is a letter from Kusum from Broach. She has been
to Africa in connection with her brother. She had a long letter
from Pyarelal. But its contents are meant for me. He has written
in it about the Gita and about his studies. I was forgetting an
important thing. I have just received the Government's reply
to the effect that I cannot see Mani and Mahadev.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 76-
