419. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[November 11, 1930]
CHI. NARANDAS,
This time, too, I got your packet in two parts, first the Eng-
lish letters and then on the next day the others. There was also
a previous occasion when this happened. They open the packet
and look into the letters, hurriedly or carefully as they feel in-
clined before they hand them over to me. They are of course re-
quired to read the letters. The letters are given to me in two
parts so that I may get some of them at any rate as early as pos-
sible.
I had again a long letter from Keshu. I find much substance
in what he says. He has gone deep into the matter. I have form-
ed the impression that . . .2 is hiding something. Read my letter
to Keshu and to . . .3 before you pass them on. I have asked
him what he thinks about Keshu. I think his unpunctuality and
other shortcomings are such as we can tolerate. Being sincere, he
does not want to make a false show. He refuses to do anything
which is beyond his capacity or which does not appeal to him. But
he has certainly the spirit of service in him. Since he is pure at
heart, I think it is our duty to bear his minor faults. But
Mahadev is there now and he says that he will abide by Maha-
dev's decision. If Mahadev cannot settle the matter, in the last
resort I will do so.
What you say about Hari-ichchha is correct. If you cannot
stop the marriage from taking place in the Ashram, put up with
the event. I had indeed guessed about it and that is why I put
that question to Harilal in my letter to him.
Did you read the further details about speed in spinning on
the takli which Balkrishna gave in his letter this time? It is in-
creasing there. I count the attainment of this speed a very import-
ant achievement. I remember that four years ago a speed of
hundred rounds per hour was considered excellent. Now 160
rounds is the standard for passing, according to Vinoba. Gangabehn
has undertaken a big task. But God has always blessed her
undertakings with success. Don't mind if Kusum has gone. Who
will now help you personally? I am sure you will feel hard press-
ed for want of enough workers to help you. Owing to so many
hands having left, the burden of work is likely to increase rather
than diminish. Who will take Kanta's place? Send me a final
list of all the women who leave.
I approve of your diet. If it suits you, it is almost an ideal
combination. Do not increase the quantity of ground-nuts and do
not eat ground-nuts and copra on the same day. The quantity of
milk must not decrease now. Half a pound is the minimum you
should take. It is Dr. Muthu's view that that quantity supplies the
necessary vitamins. If you feel weak, increase the quantity of milk
or curds. Read my letter to Bhansali. If he still wishes to be ad-
mitted, do what you think best. If you are firm with him, you will
have fewer difficulties with him. Also read my letters to Lilabehn.
I don't see any substance in Mathew's suspicion. Read my
reply to him. Parnerkar should take rest. Perhaps change of air
may also be necessary. He ought to improve his health.
I must get now a strong piece of leather for the soles or a new
pair of utility shoes. There are people who deserve "shoes",
but, when they get them, they do not accept them very cheerfully.
I, on the other hand, became fit for "shoes" long ago and am now
impatient to get them!
Send with anyone who may come on a visit here Krishna-
das's books in Kashi's possession. I am in no hurry about them.
Tuesday morning, November 11, 1930
Tell Devdas that I have still not received his letter. Where
and when was it posted? What did he say in it? Let him write
again. If he can give me the date of that letter, I can make fur-
ther inquiries.
Does anyone go and visit Somabhai and others who are in
jail? I know that it is difficult to visit such a large number. But
you should select those who are likely to be visited by nobody
else. It would be good if you could make some arrangement for
visiting such prisoners.
Prabhavati gets no Gujarati papers at all. We regularly receive
Mumbai Samachar and other papers, and out of these you should
send one or two to her. She wrote to me about this once or twice
but I forgot to mention it in my letters. I had a separate letter
from . . . 1 yesterday. Before I could write to him the letter which
I wished to do, I had this letter of repentance from him and so
the reply which I have given to him is altogether different from
what it would otherwise have been. The impression I have formed
from his letter is that he is still hiding much. You will understand
this if you read my letter. It has been a painful story.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Read my letter to Surendra Mashruwala. Call him and tell
him that, if he wishes to come and stay in the Ashram, he is
welcome to do so.
There are 82 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
