548. LETTER TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
SEVAGRAM,
August 14, 1940
CHI. SUSHILA,
I have your letter. What should I write to you? You have
ready answers to all questions. If we see the same thing from
the same point of view, our perceptions will be similar. But if
we see from opposite points of view, our perceptions would
never be the same, and each would firmly stand by his own
perception. That is the case with us. God is between us. Let
us be guided by Him. The wonderful thing is that while
I admit only one sentence, you demand the same sentence.
You say that I am putting you in the same category as
Mahadev, etc. I say that I have not thought about you in any
other way. But that is not sufficient for you. You yourself would
test me whether I treated you as I would Mahadev, and if I failed
in the test you would desert me. It is surprising that you do
not laugh at such a demand on your part. But your mind does
not let you understand or perceive anything straight. Under
such circumstances I would only say that I have no doubt
given you what you asked. Come when you realize this. Why
should you be concerned whether the dispensary exists or not?
If it is not there, it will be set up if you desire it when you
come. Surely you would not be coming because of the dispen-
sary or on the condition that it should be in existence? I see
that my mind rebels against it. The dispensary without you,
the very sight of it pains me. The dispensary was set up for
your sake. I believed that you would get some satisfaction
out of it. What could be more tragic than that that very dis-
pensary became the provocation to make you run away from
here? And now you tell me that if I close down the dispen-
sary, you hope to pay for the expenses incurred. Patience! May
you have a lot of money. I shall not hesitate to accept whatever
you send me out of it. I have not written all this to obtain
any reply from you. Nothing would be achieved by indulging in
arguments. I think it would be appropriate to close this chapter.
Time will do its work.
347
The arrangement about the Harijan Sevak is that Pyarelal
will send the Hindustani translations of English matter and
you will be translating the Gujarati into Hindi. Rajkumari and
Mahadev will translate the Gujarati matter into English. This
is the present arrangement.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library. Courtesy: Dr. Sushila Nayyar
