146. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
January 20, 1931
DEAR MAJOR DOYLE,
I thank you for your prompt reply. The Times of India's latest
report says that Sjt. Appasaheb Patwardhan commenced his fast
on 10th instant. I know that he has not superfluous flesh on him
and it is a matter of great anxiety to me to feel that he may be
still fasting. Could you please ascertain how he is doing and let
me know also whether permission has been granted him to spin.
Your reply raises what is to me a very big question. You call
the labour of spinning a privilege. But to all who spin for sacrifice
it is a sacred duty. And why is it impossible for administrative rea-
sons to have instruments of this labour all over the prison if it
is not impossible to have other instruments of labour? In 1922
all the prisoners who wished were allowed to spin in this prison
and their work was used for the prison as may be done again. The
wheels too were made in the prison. I am not idly raising this ques-
tion of spinning. It is, as you as well as the Government are aware,
a matter of vital importance for me and some of my associates. It
goes beyond politics and economics. With some of us life would
not be worth living if we could not serve God through this little
labour. Evidently C class prisoners who have been spinning in
Sabarmati, Nasik and perhaps other prisons have been doing so
without authority and with the unwarranted connivance of the
local officials. But such a sacred duty cannot be performed in a pre-
carious manner under connivance. Either the Government should
recognize the right of prisoners to spin even as they recognize their
right to pray and eat and perform the other necessary functions
although their performance may, as it does, cause inconvenience
or they should say they are not prepared to recognize this right
in which case in justice it should be withdrawn from all classes of
prisoners. In reality the discrimination in such a matter between
A class and B class prisoners on the one hand and C class on the
other shows clearly the absurdity and the injustice of the classi-
fication of prisoners. And I feel myself with all the conveniences
given to me regarding spinning to be a much pampered and privi-
leged prisoner. I have no desire to enjoy a single privilege that any
other prisoner may not for similar reasons enjoy. I would ask you
107
please therefore to treat this matter of sacrificial spinning as one
of urgency. I am sorry again to put you and the Government to
trouble but you and they will appreciate my position.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 19988
