175. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
[BOMBAY,]
April 5, 1919
DEAR GURUDEV,
This is an appeal to you against our mutual friend, Charlie
Andrews. I have been pleading with him for a message from you
for publication in the national struggle which, though in form it
is only directed against a single piece of legislation, is in reality a
struggle for liberty worthy of a self-respecting nation. I have
waited long and patiently. Charlie's description of your illness
made me hesitate to write to you personally. Your health is a
national treasure and Charlie's devotion to you is superhuman.
It is divine and I know that if he could help it he would not
allow a single person, whether by writing or his presence, to dis-
turb your quiet and rest. I have respected this lofty desire of
his to protect you from all harm. But I find that you are lectur-
ing in Benares. I have, therefore, in the light of this fact corrected
Charlie's description of your health which somewhat alarmed
me and I venture to ask you for a message from you—a message
of hope and inspiration for those who have to go through the fire.
I do it because you were good enough to send me your blessings
when I embarked upon the struggle. The forces arrayed against
me are, as you know, enormous. I do not dread them, for I have
an unquenchable belief that they are supporting untruth and that
if we have sufficient faith in truth1, it will enable us to overpower
the former. But all forces work through human agency. I am
therefore anxious to gather round this mighty struggle the ennobling
assistance of those who approve it. I will not be happy until I have
received your considered opinion on this endeavour to purify the
political life of the country. If you have seen anything to alter
your first opinion of it, I hope you will not hesitate to make
it known. I value even adverse opinions from friends, for though
they may not make me change my course, they serve the purpose
of so many lighthouses to give out warnings of dangers lying in
the stormy paths of life. Charlie's friendship has been to me on
this account an invaluable treasure, because he does not hesitate
to share with me even his unconsidered notes of dissent. This
I count a great privilege. May I ask you to extend at this critical
moment the same privilege that Charlie has?
I hope that you are keeping well and that you have thoroughly
recuperated after your fatiguing journey through the Madras
Presidency.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
