13. LETTER TO A FRIEND
August 9, 1918
If you read my book again you will find the answers to many
of your questions,—what fruits to take, for instance.
The question of the use of oils, etc., is a difficult one. My
experience is that not more than half an ounce [of these] should
be taken. We do not have olive oil in this country. Sesame oil is
good as a substitute but it is not quite as harmless. Dates and
peanuts are no doubt hard, but if they are made part of one's diet
they can be tolerated. Of almonds very few should be taken. It is
not good to eat too many milk products. One can subsist quite
well on peanuts taken with guavas, etc. Peanuts are no substi-
tute for almonds. Wheat is fruit in a way. But the word "fruit"
is used in a technical sense in my book and is precisely defined.
More will be found about vegetables than about fruits in my book.
But I see that vegetables are necessary in India. Pulses are difficult
to digest. On further experience I have come to the conclusion
that the best diet for India is wheat and vegetables. Those who
have to do much physical labour may well use pulses too. From a
religious point of view what I said about milk still stands. But,
from the point of view of health and under Indian conditions, giving
up of milk seems an impossibility. It is many years since I gave
up milk and I am under a vow never to take it in this life. But I
cannot advise others to give up milk so long as I have not a sub-
stitute having the qualities of milk. I had hoped that it would be
possible to manage on sesame and peanuts, and it is in a way
possible, but as compared with milk these are somewhat deficient.
My advice to you is that, if you are in good health, you may
take in the normal way wheat, milk, rice, etc., and on ekadashi
days take such fruits as may be easily available. You should fast
when you feel indisposed and have a ten-mile constitutional early
in the morning every day. One question is left unanswered. It is
quite the right thing to chew sesame seeds, etc., instead of taking
the oil. Eating more than two or three tolas of anything con-
taining fat can be harmful. It seems better to eschew salt for two
or three months in the year than to give it up altogether. I have
been watching for the last three days what effects the eating of salt
has on my body. If you write after a month or two I shall give
you my experience.
Yours sincerely,
MOHANDAS
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhai ki Diary, Part I
