333. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Sunday
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
I hope to leave here on Thursday, Pragji Desai with me, probably
also Mr. Omar's son.
Here is my bill of fare.
4 bananas (even less)
2 d.
Olive oil
I d.
monkey-nuts
1 d.
114 lb. dates (a special kind) 1 ½ d.
papaw from the garden
1 d.
lemon
1 d.
7 ½ d.
My second meal is also of the same style. Monkey-nuts I use in
the shape of butter. My meal takes me no more than 20 minutes.
Whether it is the oil or monkey-nuts or both I am feeling much stronger.
Here is my day's work. To get up with the boys 4.45 a.m. Garden
work 5 a.m. to 7 a.m. with the boys. I work a little after that. The
boys have their bath and breakfast between 7 and 8. I attend to the
patients during the time. From 8 to 11 the boys do their lessons which
I take and set between 8 and 9. From 9 to 11, I work at the press,
11 to 12 meal time, 12 to 4.30 press work, attending patients, etc.,
4.45 to 5.45 gardening with the boys. Dinner 6 to 7 p.m. More lessons
with the boys, who retire at 8.30 p.m. I receive visitors and try to
retire at 10 p.m.
It you were here I could certainly profit by your knowledge of
gardening. I am discussing with the press people as to the gardening
and the proposal is that all but Kababhai should give 4½ hours to
gardening every day. If we can but carry out the programme, what
a glorious thing it would be ! We propose to do joint cultivation on
Cordes' ground as it is fenced and put in there fruit trees which would
give a return enough to support at least a few. There are two Kaffir
boys working at the press. I am suggesting that we should use them
mostly for field work.
Reverting to the food question, I see that I could easily live on
the products of Phoenix, barring oil. All fruit just now is very dear.
Otherwise I should live on 8 d. per day and not ; as now. 8 d. per
day would be exactly £ 1 per month. I often substitute lemons by raw
mangoes which are soaked in olive oil. Mangoes are home grown-not
so lemons just now.
I am writing this amid many interruptions. So I shall close with
love. Will you please read this to Mr. Kotwal and others so that they
may understand the progress of my experiment.
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
