288. LETTER TO J. STUART
21-24, COURT CHAMBERS,
CORNER, RISSIK & ANDERSON STREETS,
P. O. Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
January 19, 1905
J. STUART, ESQ.
RESIDENT MAGISTRATE
DURBAN
DEAR MR. STUART,
I venture to bring to your notice the journal, Indian Opinion, which
has been now in existence for the last eighteen months. During that period
I have been intimately connected with it. In my humble opinion, it is
discharging a worthy mission in that it acts as an interpreter between
the two great communities in South Africa. Its aim is Imperial and though
it does and it must lay stress upon the grievances of the British Indians
in South Africa, it often tones down the feelings of the Indian community,
and it never fails to point out to it its shortcomings in the clearest possible
terms, but now in its new garb and in its new abode, it represents much
more. It represents a scheme which is briefly described in the enclosed,
and if it is at all successful, it may mark a revolution in business methods.
Anyhow the fact that there are four independent Englishmen who were
engaged in their own businesses, [who] have given them up in
order to work for its realisation and that there is an equal number of
Indians who have done likewise cannot but commend itself to you. In spite,
however, of this band of eight founders the scheme must depend upon
public support for success. There are two ways in which, I venture to
think, you could assist the enterprise. The first by becoming a sub-
scriber and by occasionally writing for it either over your own signature
or anonymously. The terms of subscription are 12/ for Natal and 17/-
outside Natal. The Offices are at Phoenix, Natal. If the object of
Indian Opinion commends itself to you and you consider the scheme it
represents worthy of support, will you kindly let me have a letter of en-
1 Vide Vol. III, pp. 549-50.
2 The document is not available; but it appears to have been the same as that which
Gandhiji enclosed in his letter to Gokhale, on January 13, concerning the publication of
Indian Opinion from Phoenix. That it was probably an off-print or a cutting of "Ourselves"
from Indian Opinion, 24-12-1904, is borne out by Gandhiji's reference to it in his letter of
December 10, 1904 to Dadabhai Naoroji.
3 Among the Englishmen were Herbert Kitchin, Albert West and Henry Polak, and
among the Indians were Chhaganlal Gandhi, Maganlal Gandhi and Anandlal Gandhi, the
last two having accompanied Gandhiji on his return to South Africa in 1902.
couragement which I may pass on to the editors for publication, apart
from the two requests above made.
Yours faithfully,
M. K. GANDHI
PS. I venture to think that you could write for the paper now and
then on non-political matters.
M.K.G.
From the original: Courtesy, Miss Kellie Campbell, Durban.
