215. LETTER TO A. CARTWRIGHT
[JOHANNESBURG,]
July 14, 1908
DEAR MR. CARTWRIGHT,
This is what I have understood from the telephonic conversation
you had with me this morning. General Smuts is willing to recognize
the validity of Dutch £3 registration certificates, provided that proof
is otherwise given to substantiate the bona-fide ownership of such certi-
ficates, and that this proof should, if possible, be European proof.
General Smuts thinks that there may be 15,000 registration certificates.
These cannot be accepted on mere production. With reference to
this matter, I have always contended that the burden of proving
ownership should rest upon the person producing the certificate. Proof
will have to be given to the satisfaction of a court of law, unless the
Registrar is satisfied therewith. The same thing will apply to those
who do not hold registration certificates, but are bona-fide refugees of
standing. It is impossible to vouch for European proof in each case.
I am positive that there are not 15,000 registration certificates out. If
there were, it will be open to General Smuts to bring forward new legis-
lation to stop any such influx. What with the refugees apart from
certificate-holders and certificate-holders themselves, I do not think
that, at the outside, there can possibly be more than a thousand im-
migrants. Proof of the pudding will be in the eating. I have suggested
that a limited period be fixed within which all such applications should
be made; so that there need be no difficulty at all about this. The right
of appeal is restricted to the Magistrates' court in connection with any
such men . . .3 I had the conversation with General Smuts . . .4 same
treatment. . .5 Hindus, Mahomedans, Christians . . .6
Now I come to the question . . .7 point, so far as I can see it,
from the Government's standpoint, of utter insignificance, from an
Indian standpoint, of paramount importance. I do not quarrel with any
legislation that General Smuts may choose to bring, but I do
emphatically protest against Indians being made consenting parties to
any such legislation. They must have the right to protest and to carry
on any agitation they choose to, in connection with it. If he is willing
to concede, as I understood this morning he was, the points referred to
above, then the Immigrants' Restriction Amendment Bill shown to me
may be brought with the necessary alterations, and he may, if he chooses,
insert a clause prohibiting the immigration of educated Asiatics. The
result will be a petition to Parliament against that clause, a petition to
the Imperial Government, and, if I can carry my countrymen with
me, undoubtedly passive resistance. Whether I can carry them with
me or not I am not in a position yet to tell you definitely. My endea-
vour is undoubtedly, as it must be, to persuade them to do so. I told
you through the telephone that I found Mr. Essop Mia, last night, to
be weak on the question. He thought that, if the three points were
yielded, we should be satisfied. I ventured to differ from him. When
your message was received, he was at the office, and I discussed the point
with him. He now stands aghast at his opinion, and he thinks that the
handful of Indians in the Transvaal will merit the curse of the whole
of India, if they consented to the educational disqualifications. I repeat
again: it is the consent that [is] all, and not independent legislation that
General Smuts may choose to bring. He must not only [sic] before
us and say . . . 1 repealing the Act, that was placed before me, he will
notice my query also against this section; but I am quite satisfied that
appeal to the Supreme Court should be on questions of law and not on
questions of fact.
The appeal, however, that I have asked for is from Mr. Chamney's
decision, in connection with pending applications. That was what
General Smuts refused at the interview. I take it that now he is willing
to concede the right. The matter is, to my mind, self-evident.
General Smuts mentioned that I had received from Mahomedans
£2 apiece per voluntary registration certificate. This I stigmatized as
a damnable lie, and I repeat it. It has been propagated, evidently, by
some enemy of the Indian community. What I have done is to charge
a fee of two guineas for legal work done for voluntary registration appli-
cations, whether I made them on behalf of Hindus or Mahomedans. I
asked the book-keeper to give me the number of such applications made
by me, and it does not exceed 235. These applications involve more
than two guineas worth of work. I had to examine the case of each
individual applicant, then to fill in the form, to send a clerk with the
man, and, in many cases to carry on voluminous correspondence with
the Registration Office. This was work strictly within my province,
1 Three lines are missing here.
and I have worked like any other Attorney. But, as I held the office
of Secretary of the British Indian Association also, I informed
Mr. Chamney that, if individual Indians came to me and wanted me to
prosecute their claims before him, I charged a fee of two guineas, and
asked him to convey that information to General Smuts also. This, you
will see, is totally different from his statement . . . 1 that I have charged
£2 from every Mahomedan for a voluntary registration certificate. .
application question, passive resistance may prove a farce [sic] can
only speak for myself and say that I should deserve severest condem-
nation even from General Smuts and all my European friends, if
I, a barrister having received a liberal education, were to say that my
fellow-barristers should not enter the Transvaal or any other Colony,
because they were Indians. Let the education test be as severe as
General Smuts chooses to make it. I, for one, would today undertake
to see Mr. Sorabji away and accept a test that would admit profes-
sional men, but a racial test I can never accept. What my countrymen
will do in the Transvaal may be known tomorrow, or as time passes.
This is the position as it stands at half past four today. I have done no-
thing else than discussed this question with most prominent Asiatics,
and I can conclude by hoping that General Smuts will show sufficient
statesmanship by not making this matter a stumbling-block. A unified
South Africa is an admirable dream, but dis. . .3 Empire, without
India, is, in my opinion, an abomination, if the policy of excluding
British Indian[s] from South Africa at any cost is persisted in, it can
only end in disaster.
May I ask you please to read this letter carefully. If I am vague
on any point, kindly ask me to explain. If you think that my presence
is needed, wire for me. I [believe] that you and Mr. Hosken can
bring this difficult question to a satisfactory end.
If I can [make] my meaning absolutely clear, I need not offer any
apology for the length of this [letter].
I remain,
Yours truly,
A. CARTWRIGHT, ESQ.
PRETORIA CLUB
PRETORIA
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4842
