313. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
Unrevised
May 4, 1929
CHI. KAKA,
I have your letter. I hope work on the revised second edition
of the Jodanikosh is going on. Thinking about the subject, I feel
that you should ask Balubhai to have the municipal schools to
follow the spellings given in the Jodanikosh, that is, it should be
made obligatory for the teachers to follow this spelling.
You
should make similar efforts to get the spellings adopted in all the
other educational institutions in Gujarat.
While taking these steps to popularize the spellings of Jodani-
kosh, we should also print a much larger number of copies of it;
the size should be reduced and special paper should be used. If
possible we should have it printed from plates or stereotyped.
As for Mathuradas, I suppose all you have to do now is to
ask him to come over. I am still using the modhiyun designed by
you. I have not been able to see its superiority over the one de-
signed by Lakshmidas. It is certainly superior to Keshu's,
though. Have you obtained Lakshmidas's opinion about your
modhiyun? How much cheaper is it? You will have to discuss
this with Mirabehn. She is right in looking at everything from the
point of view of the villagers. She, therefore, dispenses with the
pulley and favours a soft spindle. If such a spindle works perfect-
ly well, we could obviate the need for everybody learning how to
straighten it, and reduce its cost to a pice. This will be no small
gain. Your modhiyun may not perhaps fit into such a spindle,
since that particular part has to be wide enough. The spindle is
held close in Keshu's and your modhiyun, and it seems to me that
it will not work unless the spindle is absolutely straight. Think
over this problem and discuss it with me when I arrive there. You
may also write to me about it if you wish.
I definitely hope that I shall be there from May 28 to
June 10 at any rate. Out of these days I will give one full day
to you.
Whether it would be better for Prabhudas to stay with you or
in Almora, we can decide only after we have more information
about Almora. If I go to Almora, I will make the necessary
inquiries in this connection. Or we may leave the final decision
to Prabhudas himself.
It is difficult to solve the problem of Jamnadas. It is an achieve-
ment on your part that now you feel no resentment against
the Gandhi family. As long as it is there, one cannot be objective.
Now let any member of the Gandhi family distrust you if he
will. You will have done your duty if you say and do what you
think right. I suppose Jamnadas and others must have become
very sensitive these days. Even ordinarily Jamnadas is rather sensi-
tive. We have, therefore, to overlook his shortcomings as far as
possible. In any case, I cannot think just now what ultimately we
will have to do about the school.
Bal is silent nowadays, what is the state of his mind?
I refrain from writing to you about the Udyoga Mandir so
as to conserve your energy and to save your time and mine. But
you should certainly write to me anything you may wish to. Do
intervene whenever it becomes necessary to do so in the ordi-
nary course.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9481. Courtesy: Kakasaheb Kalelkar
