98. LETTER TO SUPERINTENDENT, AHMEDABAD
CENTRAL PRISON
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
July 21, 1928
SIR,
The Manager of the Satyagraha Ashram has handed me
your letter of the 20th instant containing the information that
three strangers with two dogs were crossing the jail fields at
7.30 p.m. on some day not mentioned in your letter under reply.
Though the two paragraphs of your letter show no connection
with the Ashram, the third paragraph asks the Superintendent
of the Ashram to enquire into the matter and instruct the persons
whoever they may be not to trespass into Government fields
and you end with the threat that "otherwise it might lead to un-
necessary troubles". Will you please tell me how the Ashram is
to enquire into a matter with which it has no connection and
instruct persons whom it does not know about an occurrence
whose date is not given? And may I know the meaning of the
threat contained in your letter under reply? But I may point
out to you that much to the annoyance of the inmates, some
persons from the Jail did trespass into the Ashram grounds during
the evening of the 19th instant, and fortunately for the Jail offi-
1 Vide also "Letter to G. V. Subba Rao", 27-7-1928.
cials, the Ashram has by its constitution rendered itself power-
less to punish such trespass. But if you have any desire to keep
your own subordinates under discipline and prevent them from
molesting inoffensive neighbours, you can have all the evidence
you may need in order to establish the charge I am making.
I may mention further for your information that I read out
your letter to the inmates of the Ashram at the prayer meet-
ing at 7 o'clock yesterday evening, and I was told that the occur-
rence you refer to might have happened on the previous evening
and that, at the time you mention, those who are in the habit of
going out for a stroll in the direction of Sabarmati Station did
see some persons with two dogs walking towards Wadaj in haste.
These persons have no connection whatsoever with the Ashram.
Whilst I am replying to your letter of the 20th instant, I
take the opportunity of adverting to another letter of yours dated
the 21st May last. I acknowledge the friendly tone of that letter,
but I cannot help saying that your conviction that no violence
was used by the Jail Warder in question could only rest on very
slender basis. I wonder how you could arrive at a definite con-
viction without hearing both the parties. I was astounded on
reading your letter of the 21st May to find that you seem to
rely more upon the word of your warders than on that of men
occupying some status in society and having no reason to bring
a false charge against anybody.
You should also have known that the parties referred to in
the second paragraph of that . . .1
From a photostat: S.N. 13483
