407. LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI
JOHANNESBURG,
August 6, 1906
THE HON'BLE D. NAOROJI
DEAR SIR,
The Colonial Secretary, Mr. Duncan, has made a statement in the
Legislative Council of which I send you copy herewith.
The statement is most extraordinary, and if legislation is introduced
based on it, frightful injustice will be done to the Indian community.
There is not a vestige of justice and fair treatment about the proposed
legislation. Robbed of the soft words which clothe it, it means that every
Indian in the Colony will have to be now registered for the third time
without the slightest excuse. Land is to be registered in the names of
Indian trustees for religious purposes, but this is no gain whatsoever as
the Supreme Court has decided that such land can be registered in spite
of Law 3 of 1885. The only relief that is to be granted is in one individual
case about which I have already written to you, namely, that of the estate
of the late Aboobaker Amod, and if that relief is granted, it is not a question
of just and fair treatment but it is a question of simple duty to be dis-
charged by the British Government towards an individual British subject.
If the proposed legislation is passed, the position of the British Indian
will, as a matter of fact, be much worse than it is now. It should not be
forgotten that the £3 registration is not an annual tax. Those who are
in the Colony have paid the £3 and, under Law 3 of 1885, they cannot
be called upon to pay over again. The proposed remission is, therefore,
totally meaningless, for it is not to apply to newcomers, who are to be
barred entirely until the coming Responsible Government chooses to
pass an immigration law which may impose very severe restrictions. The
question of granting visiting permits is also, I have no hesitation in saying,
a blind, because such permits can be legally granted even under the exis-
ting law. That they are not granted where they ought to be is a discredit
attached to the Government from which it cannot free itself by passing
new legislation. I very much fear that the real situation is not under-
stood by the Imperial Government, and that the local Government has
evidently convinced the Imperial Government that, by passing legislation
in the direction sketched by Mr. Duncan, they would be really granting
concessions.
I have said before that, under the proposed legislation, the position
would be much worse. I say so because I know that endless mischief is
likely to be caused by new legislation. Indians were registered during the
[rule of the] Dutch Government; registration then was simple. They
were again registered after British rule was established; registration was
then much more complex, and respectable Indians have been called upon
to put their thumb-impressions. The third registration, if it comes at all,
will, it is needless to say, be stricter still. All this because a few Indians
who were not resident before war have stolen into the Colony and if they
have done so, it is owing to the corrupt officials who were in charge at
one time of the Permit Department. The matter had become so serious
that, on the initiative taken by the British Indian Association, these officials
were arrested and criminally tried. They were discharged by an indulgent
jury but the Government was so satisfied of their guilt, that both these
officials were discharged.
1 Vide "Letter to Dadabhai Naoroji", p. 240.
I hope, therefore, that unless some substantial justice can be done
to British Indians before Responsible Government is granted, and unless
the British Government will, in accordance with pre-war promises, put
them, in its own words, on the same footing as British Indians at the Cape,
it will be infinitely better that Law 3 of 1885 remained as it was and that
the whole question was considered by Responsible Government.
Of course, all these remarks will still leave it free to the Government
to do justice in the case of the late Aboobaker Amod with which, after
all, the British Indian community as a whole is not concerned.
The unforeseen situation having arisen here, the question of a depu-
tation proceeding from South Africa must remain in abeyance, as all the
energy will have to be concentrated upon preventing this latest proposal
to perpetrate an injustice on the British Indians in the Transvaal.
I venture to think that a personal interview with the Secretary of
State for India as also the Secretary of State for the Colonies is necessary.
I remain,
Yours truly,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.] I have run short of the cuttings and I cannot get them as today
is a Bank holiday.
M.K.G.
From a photostat of the original signed by Gandhiji : G. N. 2275
