392. LETTER TO HINDU CENTRAL COMMITTEE
February 13, 1933
DEAR FRIENDS,
1. In continuation of my letter acknowledging yours of 4th
instant I have now to say that I have read the statement of
the Hindu Central Committee with much attention and when
after reading the statement I saw the names of distinguished
lawyers amongst other notabilities as the original members of the
Committee I was filled with sorrow.
2. Take this assertion in the statement:
We feel that there is no question of inferiority complex in the divi-
sions of Hindu society and least of all, no sin has been committed all these
centuries by the orthodox Hindus who have been following the tradi-
tions established by all the merciful humanitarian sages of this land.
Is this assertion borne out by the evidence of the senses?
If the Committee were to contend that there is in the Hindu
Shastras no inferiority or superiority I should at once agree. But
untouchability as it is practised today with the attendant system
of locations and deprivation practically of all the amenities of life
for the so-called untouchables is surely proof of their inferiority.
These disabilities have been often enumerated in the public Press.
The precept of equality therefore seems to have been systematically
and cruelly disregarded by modern Hindu society.
Is the
Committee able to point out any act on the part of what it calls
the orthodox Hindus for the amelioration of the economic and
material condition of the depressed classes? And is not the very
existence of a class called "depressed" sufficient contradiction of
the above-quoted assertion?
3. The Committee then proceeds and says:
There are also in many places in the country large sections of the
population amongst caste Hindus who are worse than Panchamas both
economically and culturally.
I am unaware of any sections of caste Hindus who are both
economically and culturally worse than Panchamas, and if there
are I should very much like to know their names.
4. The third statement of the Committee to which I would
invite attention is:
It will be a travesty of truth to suggest that the orthodox Hindus have
not been generous in their dealings with the Panchamas or Harijans in
the villages.
Is it a sign of generosity on the part of caste Hindus to give
leavings of their dishes to Harijans, to force their labour against
a starvation wage, to deny to them the services of physicians,
schoolmasters, barbers and practically all the other services to
which they, the caste Hindus, are used?
5. Another statement of the Committee is:
Except in the higher classes today, there is no unemployment problem
in the country.
Surely, this is a sweeping statement at complete variance
with known facts as found in historical and Government records.
6. The Committee then proceeds:
The first creed of the orthodox Hindu is always the gift of food to the
hungry and he has always felt it as a religious duty and his first prayer
has been to the Lord to vouchsafe happiness to all human beings.
The creed is undoubtedly there. Has the Committee any
evidence to show any corresponding action on the part of the
orthodox Hindus in connection with Harijans?
7. Then the Committee goes on to say:
It cannot be suggested for one moment that though the Congress has
thrown itself whole-heartedly in favour of this agitation for the removal
of untouchability and for temple-entry after the announcement of the
fast of Mr. Gandhi, it has done any appreciable service for the economic
and material uplift of the depressed classes.
The Committee should know that it is not possible for the
Congress "to throw itself whole-heartedly into the agitation". It is
being carried on by the general Hindu population organized by
the recently formed Servants of Untouchables Society. That
Society invites all without distinction of party to help it to
remove untouchability. This Society has planned a wide construc-
tive programme. In so far as the Congress itself is concerned, its
Hindu members have a record for the service of Harijans which
is second to that of no other similar organization.
8. But the Committee goes on:
If the call to join the movement for such uplift comes from persons
who are pledged to temple-entry, the orthodox Hindus on their part can-
not but view it with suspicion, especially when it is preceded by Gandhi's
cry of "Leave the temple-entry to me".
I fail to see why the orthodox Hindus should view with
suspicion the call for joining the movement for uplift because
it comes from persons who are openly advocating temple-entry,
not by compulsion but by conversion. And what can be the
meaning of emphasis on my statement "Leave the temple-entry
to me"? I am charitable enough to assume that the Committee
framed that sentence without knowing the context in which
"Leave the temple-entry to me" was first used. It was said in
answer to correspondents who were impatient to offer satyagraha
and adopt energetic measures for opening other temples. In order
to keep the movement within fixed limits and in order to confine
direct action by way of fast for the present at least to Sjt. Kelap-
pan and myself I said to the correspondents, "Leave the temple-
entry to me and go on with the other constructive programme of
economic and educational uplift". The Committee can easily
verify this from my writings. I hope therefore that the Committee
will disabuse their minds of the prejudice betrayed against me
in the sentence quoted.
9. The next sentence in the Committee's statement runs:
If Mr. Gandhi and his followers will give an undertaking to save
temples and other religious institutions from interference by the mixed legis-
latures of the land, we are willing to whole-heartedly co-operate with them.
I have shown repeatedly that the two Bills before the Legis-
lative Assembly imply no interference with temples or other
religious institutions. They seek to restore the status quo existing
before certain decisions of law-courts, well known to the legal
members of the Committee. I can give the assurance on my
behalf and on behalf of my co-workers that we have no desire
whatsoever to invoke interference by the legislatures in matters
of religion and if only the Committee will co-operate in the pro-
secution of the general movement for the removal of untouchability,
not of the desirable type such as is mentioned in the Shastras
in the interests of sanitation, but of the-in my opinion-un-
desirable type as is being practised today, the Committee will soon
discover that there is no cause whatsoever for alarm or suspicion
and that if there is anything in the two Bills that can be shown
to be an interference with religious liberty, the defect can un-
doubtedly be remedied without difficulty.
10. With the sentiment expressed in the last two sentences
of the statement of the Committee I can whole-heartedly agree, for
so far as I am concerned there is no desire indiscriminately
"to import Western ideals of society, civilization and equality".
Perhaps, no one has written, and endeavoured as much as possible
to act in accordance with the writing, against Western civilization
and I have not the slightest desire to destroy the foundations of
Hindu caste system, if by that is meant varnashramadharma. The
movement against untouchability is on that very account deliberately
circumscribed and restricted to the very things described by the
Committee except temple-entry, and as to this last, it can be
shown conclusively that there is no desire whatsoever to force
temple-entry but by proper disciplined agitation to bring about a
change in Hindu public opinion, a change not inconsistent with
the spirit of the Shastras.
11. If the Committee will dispassionately read my analysis
of the statement, I am not without hope that it will see that who-
ever has framed the statement has committed the members of the
Committee to assertions which cannot be supported by existing
facts. The statement though sent to me is merely a copy of what
has already been sent to the Press, but on reading the statement
I discovered that according to the Committee's admissions there
was a great deal that was common between the Committee and
the reformers and that the assertions which were made in order to
emphasize differences were mostly if not wholly imaginary and not
capable of proof. I felt that I would point out to the Committee
in a private communication the glaring flaws in the statement
and see if there was not any possibility of meeting on a common
platform.
12. If the Committee however considers that all the
assertions made in the statement can be supported and that I am
labouring under self-delusion, I would be glad to be corrected. If
the Committee sees any good in my letter, I invite it to send one
or more representatives to confer with me with a view to exploring
possibilities of common action or at least of understanding the real
differences in matters of principle. Pending your reply, I am not
sending this letter to the Press, but if the Committee finds it to be
hopeless, it is at liberty to publish it.
Yours sincerely,
THE HON. SECRETARIES
HINDU CENTRAL COMMITTEE
459 MINT STREET
P.T., MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20232
