205. LETTER TO M. CHENGIAH CHETTY
KUMARA PARK, BANGALORE,
July 26, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,
Sjt. Rajagopalachariar has shown me your letter. I thank
you for the warning about the management of Khadi Funds.
I do not know what happened to the Khilafat Funds, except that
the banker with whom the funds were placed failed. But I may
state that I never had anything to do with the management of the
Khilafat Fund. For the Khadi Funds, I am certainly responsible.
There is a Council of the All-India Spinners' Association which is
entrusted with these Funds and their management. Seth Jamnalal
Bajaj who is a very well-known merchant of long standing and a
director of several important concerns is the treasurer of the Asso-
ciation. Sjt. Shankerlal Banker who is the son of late Ghelabhai
Banker of the Bank of Bombay is the Secretary. The moneys are
kept in well-known banks. Proper books of account are kept and
they are audited by chartered accountants from time to time.
There are inspectors appointed to inspect the accounts of sub-
ordinate organizations. Everything that is humanly possible to
safeguard the Funds and their proper distribution is being done.
I enclose herewith a copy of the printed report published by
the All-India Spinners' Association in which you will find the
audited accounts also. If, after perusal of the report or even before,
you have any suggestions to make for further safeguarding the
Funds, I shall be thankful to receive them.
With reference to my appeal at the Mahila Samaj for orna-
ments and calling them streedhan, I do hold very strong views.
Ever since I have been in India, and even in South Africa, I have
not hesitated to induce sisters both Indian and European to part
with their jewellery. As long ago as 1906, I remember the late
Surendranath Banerjea having also appealed to the ladies at
Lahore, and I remember too that ornaments were showered upon
him. I do not feel that in my appeal I am doing anything out
of the way. Indeed yours is the first note of dissent I have yet
had. In fact, many well-to-do friends have been glad of my
appeal, and some of them even took me to their homes when
I was appealing on behalf of the Tilak Swaraj Fund and asked
me to appeal to their womenfolk to part with their ornaments,
their intention being to wean the latter from a craving for
hoarding and wearing costly jewels. I have been often publicly
thanked for having succeeded to some slight extent in intro-
ducing simplicity in the households of the rich people of the land.
Never has any pressure been brought to bear upon the sisters.
In every case where wives have parted with their jewellery, I
have presumed the co-operation of their husbands.
I have
never accepted from little girls anything unless their parents
or guardians were consenting parties. Nevertheless, I have be-
lieved that it is wrong on the part of husbands to arrogate to
themselves the right of dictating what their wives shall or shall
not do with their jewellery. It is the one thing which is in their
exclusive possession, and I think that they should have the freest
right to dispose of them how they will. But this is my own per-
sonal opinion and has nothing to do with what has actually
happened in practice.
Do you think that because some people, who in their en-
thusiasm parted with their foreign cloth and allowed them to
be burnt, now repent, I should also repent with them for
having asked them to do what they did in a moment of lucidity
and what it was their sacred duty to have done. If you do, I
must again respectfully dissent from you. I had not only no com-
punction when I made an appeal for burning of foreign cloth, very
costly in many instances, but I have not the slightest trace of
repentance in me for having got the response I did. I always look
forward to that act of burning as one of the many sacred acts
I have been privileged by God to be party to.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. M. CHENGIAH CHETTY
CHAMARAJPET
BANGALORE CITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 12618
