159. LETTER TO M. A. JINNAH
September 22, 1944
DEAR QUAID-E-AZAM,
Your letter of yesterday (21st instant) so disturbed me that
I thought I would postpone my reply till after we had met at the
usual time. Though I made no advance at our meeting, I
think I see somewhat clearly what you are driving at. The more
I think about the two-nation theory the more alarming it ap-
pears to be. The book recommended by you gives me no help.
It contains half-truths and its conclusions or inferences are unwar-
ranted. I am unable to accept the proposition that the Muslims
of India are a nation, distinct from the rest of the inhabitants of
India. Mere assertion is no proof. The consequences of accept-
ing such a proposition are dangerous in the extreme. Once the
principle is admitted there would be no limit to claims for cut-
ting up India into numerous divisions, which would spell India's
ruin. I have, therefore, suggested a way out. Let it be a parti-
tion as between two brothers, if a division there must be.
You seem to be averse to a plebiscite. In spite of the admit-
ted importance of the League, there must be clear proof that
the people affected desire partition. In my opinion, all the peo-
ple inhabiting the area ought to express their opinion specifically
on this single issue of division. Adult suffrage is the best method,
but I would accept any other equivalent.
You summarily reject the idea of common interest between
the two arms. I can be no willing party to a division which
does not provide for the simultaneous safeguarding of common
interests, such as Defence, Foreign Affairs and the like. There
will be no feeling of security by the people of India without a
recognition of the natural and mutual obligations arising out of
physical contiguity.
Your letter shows a wide divergence of opinion and outlook
between us. Thus you adhere to the opinion often expressed by
you that the August 1942 Resolution is "inimical to the ideals
and demands of Muslim India". There is no proof for this sweep-
ing statement.
We seem to be moving in a circle. I have made a suggest-
ion. If we are bent on agreeing, as I hope we are, let us call
in a third party or parties to guide or even arbitrate between us.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
The Hindu, 29-9-1944
