132. LETTER TO MEGHJIBHAI GANDHI AND
KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 14, 1908
RESPECTED MEGHJIBHAI 2 AND KHUSHALBHAI 3 ,
Your letter to hand. I have given expression to some of my
thoughts in my letter to Raliatbehn which is enclosed herewith.
Please read it yourself, ponder over it and also read it out to her. If she
is staying with Karsandas please forward it to her and let me know her
state of mind [after her bereavement7].
Gokaldas is gone. We are helpless. Our relations were such that I
feel like crying even as I write this; but the ideas that I have been
excogitating for a long time have now become stronger and more
emphatic at this moment. I find that we are all engrossed overmuch in
the affairs of this world. I see that the whole country is in the same
predicament in which our family finds itself. I express here only those
ideas which are now uppermost in my mind.
Out of a false sense of prestige or mistaken notions of affection, we
think of marrying off our boys and girls at a very early age. We spend
a lot of money doing so and then look on sadly at the young widows.
I do not suggest that people should not marry at all. But surely we
should observe some limits. We marry off little boys and girls and
make them miserable. They have children and get into difficulties.
Sexual intercourse is allowed by our shastras only for the purpose of
progeny. For the rest it is sheer indulgence.
I do not see that we follow this path in the least. If what I say is
true, by marrying off our children as early as we ourselves were
married, we only make them sensual; and thus the tree of lust flourishes.
I do not think this is religion whatever others may say.
I shall say no more. You have given me the news from your end,
but what answer can I give you? I only express these thoughts as they
occur to me, and, though younger than you, place them before the entire
family through you. This is the service I can render to the family. If
you consider this presumptuous, please forgive me. I put these thoughts
of mine before you on this occasion after fourteen years of study
and contemplation and seven years of practice.
Respects from
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati: Mahatma Gandhijina Patro, ed. by D. M. Patel, Sevak Karya-
laya, Ahmedabad; 1921, and from the Hindi: Prabhudas Gandhi: Jivan-Prabhat;
Sasta Sahitya Mandal, New Delhi; 1954
