188. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
KODAMBAKKAM,
MADRAS,
February 19, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
Today is my silence day. Preparations for the evening prayer
are going on. I am surrounded by people, among whom is
Muriel Lester. We are in a poor suburb of Madras today.
Ganesan has found a new place.
There will be a tannery, etc.,
here. A dispensary is already in existence. This place is like the
walled enclosure of a mahajan or a dharmashala, but it is in a
dilapidated condition just now. There is a verandah on four
sides enclosing a big open space, in which grow three or four trees.
They have had even to fetch water from a distant spot.
Miss Lester has been to Bengal. The Governor gave her
three hours and even invited her to dinner. She was treated with
the utmost courtesy. He assured her of his determination to
tolerate no excesses, but in the end nothing came of the visit.
I must now prepare to leave for Bihar. It seems I shall have
to go immediately after finishing with Karnataka. Let us see what
happens.
183
We visited the Christkula Ashram yesterday. Dr. Paton
lives there. His superior is an Indian named Jesudasan. He is
a good man. He is a friend of Kumarappa. It is a fine place.
They have built a church there and spent a large sum on it.
One
may say that Christianity has been given an Indian garb.
Durga and Mani Parikh have been to see Mahadev. But I
have not heard from them as yet.
Nanibehn Jhaveri has been operated upon in Ahmedabad for
bleeding. Tarabehn Modi is also in Ahmedabad. She is in pain.
I got your letter regarding Bihar. What you say is perfectly
correct. I will certainly make an effort when I go there.
Kripalani is likely to come tomorrow.
I am enclosing with this a letter from Kusum regarding her
brother. It is heart-rending.
Kusum is very careful about
propriety and never crosses its limits.
You must have come to
know about Kaka. His efforts have borne fruit. He will now take
rest for two years. You must have read about Jawaharlal, too.
Srinivasa Sastri's wife is ill and is in a hospital. I had sent
Mathuradas to inquire after her. I shall see what I can do to-
morrow.
There is a heap of papers which require to be attend-
ed to, and I have still not been able to write a single line for
Harijan. I will do as God commands.
The frost in Gujarat seems to have damaged the crops much
more than I had thought. But who is likely to listen today to
the woes of cultivators?
I visited Pondicherry. I could see nobody there. Mother
didn't reply at all. But Govindbhai came and saw me when I
was in another place.
He told me the whole story. The Ashram
is being watched, and so there was some risk even in letting me
visit the place. Half the number of the inmates are Gujaratis.
Govindbhai was also in the Ashram formerly. The daily routine
in this Ashram is as follows: They get up at five in the
morning. Every sadhaka has a separate room for himself. There
are about 150 sadhakas. They come from everywhere. Among
them are Dilip and Harin Chattopadhyaya, the husband of
Kamaladevi. The Ashram has rented about 40 houses. The food
is similar to that provided in our Ashram. Shri Aurobindo
comes out only on three days in the year. Shri Aurobindo and
Mother don't sleep at all. Shri does recline in an armchair bet-
ween 3.30 a.m. and 4.30 a.m., but he does not sleep. The
sadhakas have to send up their diary every day. They can ask
questions. Letters from Shri and Mother are delivered to them
four times a day. Between them, they write about 200 letters
daily. No letter remains unattended to. Shri knows innumerable
languages. He reforms sadhakas through secret influence on their
minds. Harin Chattopadhyaya has given up drinking, etc. Liquor
and meat are forbidden in the Ashram. This is the description
given by Govindbhai, and he has invited me to join the Ashram.
I hope you will be satisfied with this.
Blessings to both from
BAPU
[PS.]
I have received a postcard from Tulsi Maher. He is safe.
He has not given more details.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 78-80
