671. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
September 18, 1928
CHI. DEVDAS,
When I address someone with 'thou' in speaking, it is even
more appropriate and expressive of love to do so in letters also.
That is why sometimes you cease to be 'you' and become 'thou'.
True love does not speak and often does not even act, and yet
it cannot but be felt. Though I thus know that 'you' and 'thou'
are mere external forms, I have adopted a certain style of ad-
dressing persons in letters which I have now started following
in writing to you children, too.
It is quite true that these days my letters have ceased to
be letters. Both physically and mentally I am so much tied up
that I am unable to see even the people in the Ashram whom
I want to see. And writing letters gets indefinitely postponed.
Today I have put off writing several important letters and am
devoting the little time left before the prayers to writing this.
In my quest for truth I have realized that as for me I can
find it only through experience, that is, not by giving up action
in the world but by remaining non-violent while continually
engaged in action. I have been utterly drained in getting the
recent changes in the Ashram adopted. You know very well how
much I am interested in women's progress. But except for two
or three there were no women staying in the Ashram of their
own choice. Even those who do cannot be said to understand
even cursorily the rules of the Ashram. Do all the men do so?
Then what can we expect about the deeper meaning of the
rules? Even I who was the author of the rules do not know their
full meaning, though I am realizing it more and more clearly
every day. Thinking over the problem and discussing it, I saw that
in following and enforcing the rules and building up the Ashram
we have, unknowingly and unintentionally but most certainly,
oppressed the women. They could neither leave their husbands
nor the Ashram. Though perfectly willing to stay, they are
equally unable to observe the rules.
It seemed to be a sin to show the slightest leniency in the
observance of the rules if the Ashram continued in its original
form. I regard the rules that have been framed as essential ele-
ments of satyagraha. In fact they have been kept a little mild
so that they are within the capacity of all. Hence, as we pro-
gress towards truth, these rules should be made more stringent.
I therefore felt that if we wished to keep the women with us,
the Satyagraha Ashram must take a different form. Hence the
Ashram will now remain only as a symbol and an ideal in our
minds without any external activities. The Ashram has been
therefore handed over to the new agency that has been created.
The Ashram land also will be transferred to it at a nominal
rent. The Ashram will thus exist at present in an almost in-
visible form. But as the burden on the others will in this way
be lightened, that on those who have taken the vows will
increase, for even in the new Udyog Mandir it is the same per-
sons who will be working. They will have to be guardians of the
vows and make their contribution to the Udyog Mandir in that
spirit. The underlying hope is that if the Ashram inmates have
the true spirit of the Ashram in them, the Udyog Mandir itself
will be reborn as a more perfect institution. This is enough for
the present, as I must now leave for the prayer.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Kusumbehn Desai's Diary. S.N. 32577/
SV:I.31
