283. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
TITHAL,
[June] 2, 1937
CHI. MUNNALAL,
Indu has given me your letters. After reading them, I
wonder whether to laugh, weep or be angry and I was inclined
to do these things in that order and I finally decided not to
do any of them. I could not follow what Indu told me orally,
nor have I been able to judge whose fault it must have been.
I hope to reach there on the 11th instead of the 12th. I
shall listen to the story when I come there. Or perhaps by that
time the cloud might have cleared.
Therefore I wish to say
nothing about the discord. Do what you can to settle it among
yourselves. You have written to me saying that I have thrust
on you the burden of winning over Lilavati, Balvantsinha and
others. If I had put on you the burden of village service for which
you and others are in Segaon, you would have been able to carry
it. But this very distinction that you have made is not proper. We
have resolved that village service is not different from overcoming
anger, etc. The equation would be: To win over Lilavati and
others is to overcoming anger and that is equal to serving the
villages. But so long as you regard them as two separate things,
they will remain so from your point of view. I have, however,
solved this problem, too. As I have already told you and
Balvantsinha, you can have separate arrangements for your meals,
etc. You will have to deal only with me. You should spend all
your time in the service chosen by you. After careful think-
ing, you rejected the suggestion. And I also see that you were
right in doing so. Nobody has ever been able to serve by living
in this manner. We are not born independent. From conception
to death we are and will remain dependent on others. But I
will not go into all this philosophy here. We will discuss it when
we meet and find time.
You don't have to think what your duty should have been as
regards that goat. It was simply obstinacy on your part. It
is good if you can save even one goat by changing people's ideas.
But if you save a million goats without their approval, it is of
no value. If at all it has any, it is almost nil. In fact you
should apologize to the people and tell them: 'My duty was to
explain to you your dharma and not threaten you with a fast. I,
therefore, apologize to you for having held out such a threat.
Though I will not go on a fast to stop you, still I will continue
to tell you that it is an evil custom. And will go on trying to
prove that with arguments.'
I didn't follow anything regarding Balvantrai. I will be
able to do so only when I go over there.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8578. Also C.W. 7018. Court-
esy: Munnalal G. Shah
