129. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
April 24, 1937
CHI. NARANDAS,
I had got your letter. I had a talk with Shankerlal at
Hudli about Jaisukhlal. Shankerlal says that there is no connec-
tion between the charge against him and his being relieved.
But he is of the opinion that there is not sufficient work in
Kathiawar to justify payment of Rs. 75 to Jaisukhlal and that his
work would not be worth that much anywhere else either.
Jaisukhlal has not mastered the art of running a store, or of pro-
ducing khadi, nor that of working in a spirit of co-operation with
others. But he has no doubt at all regarding Jaisukhlal's integ-
rity. If this statement of Shankerlal is correct, then no injustice
is done to Jaisukhlal. If you do not agree with Shankerlal's ex-
planation, then you may employ him in the work you are doing
for the spread of khadi. Take from him such work as will en-
able him to earn Rs. 75 or something more if he can. You can
do this and, if he has the ability to earn Rs. 75 through
khadi work, may help him to develop in.
I myself am observing the extremely suspicious nature of Jai-
sukhlal and it has caused me much pain. He sees Chhaganlal
Joshi at the back of all his misfortunes, while I myself have been
able to see no such thing in any matter. I know Chhaganlal's
merits and defects very well. I have even lived with him. I
have seen in him no such failing that he would be after a man
and do him ill just out of spite. His opinions are very often base-
less. I also know that he lacks the capacity to cite evidence in
support of his views.
I have not informed you till now and on inquiring I find
that Kanaiyo also has not done so. He was fairly ill during the
Hudli trip. Either from over-exertion or for some other reason,
he had got fever. He had got it as soon as we arrived there and
it came down after four days. But he did not suffer in the least.
The treatment also was the best possible. It consisted in his drink-
ing as much water as he could—he took hot water with lime-juice
and salt, then he was put on water mixed with honey, and then
he was given fruit and then milk. He is still on milk and fruit.
He used to get good sleep. It can practically be said that he
did not require any nursing. He was not given any special
comfort apart from a cot. He was given no privacy at all,
nor was there any such facility.
Today he has come riding five miles on bicycle of his own
free will. There was no necessity for him to come for the sake of
any work. But once he feels well he cannot sit idle. And I do
not stop him from exerting himself within the limits of his strength.
The matter was not at all worth writing to you about. There
was no cause for worry. We had an experienced doctor with
us. But even his help was not taken. He did wish to give some
medicine, but I emphatically forbade any medicine.
Kanaiyo also has great faith in fasting as of course I too
have. This time a special feature of my treatment was that I
did not try enema at all. It could have been given with some
special arrangement, but he used to pass stools in the normal
course. I, therefore, did not insist on giving him enema. He
did not suffer in the least; no doubt it was thanks to his fast
and also to the purity of his life.
At the time of giving away Manu and Nirmala, he had in-
sisted on attending, and had joined in singing "Vaishnava Jana".
Kanti also arrived exactly on the day of kanyadan. Manu was
therefore very happy, although she spared Kanti, having per-
suaded herself to be content with Kanti's presence.
How is Kumi's work going on? If she gets her daughter
admitted in the National School, exempt her from payment of
fees.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8517. Court-
esy: Narandas Gandhi
