158. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
Saturday, Chaitra Sud [7]1, March 20, 1926
BHAISHRI KAKA,
You wrote a letter, and then tried to withdraw it, but in vain.
You have succeeded with your letter as much as Swami did in
trying to stop you. You have been paid in your own coin. I
found your interpretation rather far-fetched. When the seers
proclaimed milk to be sacred and recommended it in place of
meat they had in mind the beef-eating Hindus. They did not
mean it for vegetarians. All these things are pure only in compa-
rison with the other impure food. I take goat's milk not because I
regard it as sacred, on the contrary I do regard it as impure; and
whenever I take it I do so with conscious aversion, and yet I am
ever afraid if I am not yielding somewhat to temptation. I have
absolutely no doubt that milk cannot be our food whether we look
at it from the point of view of dharma, or human anatomy or
even biochemistry. And if I could resist the temptation to utilize
some of my faculties, you will never see me taking goat's milk.
I have no doubt man's ideal food is the ripe fruit of the forest
cooked by Nature. But I have neither adequate knowledge of che-
mistry, nor as much self-control as I would have, nor the desired
patience. I cannot be hypocritical and therefore support myself
with goat's milk. However, like fasting, giving up of milk is also a
possible aspect of my life. And once I develop absolute detach-
ment to life no one can possibly stop me. If I could be stopped
my detachment would not be absolute.
But when I give up even goat's milk, I would just the same
uphold the sanctity of milk for the people. Since I recommend to
the public buttons made from the bones of deceased cattle, will you
ask me, who do not use buttons, to use them? When I ask mecha-
nics to use the fat from non-butchered cattle for their machines,
I hope you will not ask me to store one or two maunds of fat in
the Ashram? Of course we all would appreciate the purity of
the fat from deceased cattle in preference to that of the butchered
ones.
If I were to feel that I cannot fully uphold the vow of non-
violence by giving up cow's milk I would rather give up the vow
because it would no more deserve that status.
If you still find any defect in this do write to me. If you think
it is my delusion to give up cow's and buffalo's milk you ought
to try and save me from it.
Today it has been decided that I should go to Mussoorie.
Whether or not you come there, everything will be ready for you
there, just the same.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 19878
