345. LETTER TO LEO TOLSTOY
LONDON,
November 10, 1909
DEAR SIR,
I beg to tender my thanks for your registered letter in connection
with the letter addressed to a Hindu, and with the matters that I dealt
with in my letter to you.
Having heard about your failing health I refrained, in order to save
you the trouble, from sending an acknowledgment, knowing that a written
expression of my thanks was a superfluous formality; but Mr. Aylmer
Maude, whom I have now been able to meet reassured me that you were
keeping very good health indeed and that unfailingly and regularly you
attended to your correspondence every morning. It was a very gladsome
news to me, and it encourages me to write to you further about matters
which are, I know, of the greatest importance according to your teaching.
I beg to send you herewith a copy of a book written by a friend—
an Englishman, who is at present in South Africa, in connection with
my life, in so far as it has a bearing on the struggle with which I am so
1 Vide "Substance of Interview with Lord Crewe", pp. 408-11 and Appen-
dix XXXIII.
2 Some words have not registered on the office copy.
3 On November 7, Lord Ampthill had informed Gandhiji that one of his
children was ill, and put off an appointment with him fixed for the next day.
4 Vide "Letter to Leo Tolstoy", pp. 444-.
5 M. K. Gandhi: An Indian Patriot in South Africa by Rev. J. J. Doke
connected, and to which my life is dedicated. As I am very anxious
to engage your active interest and sympathy, I thought that it would
not be considered by you as out of the way for me to send you the book.
In my opinion, this struggle of the Indians in the Transvaal is the
greatest of modern times, inasmuch as it has been idealised both as to
the goal as also the methods adopted to reach the goal. I am not aware
of a struggle in which the participators are not to derive any personal
advantage at the end of it, and in which 50 per cent. of the persons affected
have undergone great suffering and trial for the sake of a principle. It
has not been possible for me to advertise the struggle as much as I should
like. You command, possibly, the widest public today. If you are
satisfied as to the facts you will find set forth in Mr. Doke's book, and if
you consider that the conclusions I have arrived at are justified by the
facts, may I ask you to use your influence in any manner you think fit
to popularise the movement? If it succeeds, it will be not only a triumph
of religion, love and truth over irreligion, hatred and falsehood, but it is
highly likely to serve as an example to the millions in India and to people
in other parts of the world, who may be down-trodden and will certainly
go a great way towards breaking up the party of violence, at least in
India. If we hold out to the end, as I think we would, I entertain not
the slightest doubt as to its ultimate success; and your encouragement
in the way suggested by me can only strengthen us in our resolve.
The negotiations that are going on for a settlement of the question
have practically fallen through, and together with my colleague I return
to South Africa this week, and invite imprisonment. I may add that
my son has happily joined me in the struggle and is now undergoing
imprisonment with hard labour for six months. This is his fourth im-
prisonment in the course of the struggle.
If you would be so good as to reply to this letter, may I ask you to
address your reply to me at Johannesburg, S.A., Box 6522.
Hoping that this will find you in good health.
I remain, etc.,
M. K.
From an illustration of the original in Mahatma, Vol. I; also, from a photo-
stat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5173
9-34
