341. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
April 4, 1933
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ,
I hope you got my letter sent to you as soon as I learnt
that you had reached the Ashram. I have now got your own
letter. In a few days' time I expect you to write to me in Hindi,
for there is not much difference between Marathi, Hindi and
Gujarati. They are all sister languages; a large part of the
vocabulary is common to them and it is easy enough to detect
a similarity in grammar.
You will resist the temptation to give. I would ask you to
be in no hurry. You have gone to the Ashram for the purpose
of taking, therefore quietly and persistently take in all that the
Ashram has to give and when that has been done, begin giving
by all means, and you will find that you are able to take much
more than you had expected. Do not combine giving and taking
for the time being, rather believe that you cannot fail to be un-
consciously giving while you are taking properly. I am most
anxious that for the time at least you should bury yourself in
the Ashram, and when you have either assimilated enough of the
Ashram atmosphere and attitude or rejected it as unassimilable
or unsuitable, you should proceed to the next stage, and in all
you do whilst you are in the Ashram, I would like you to be
guided implicitly by Narandas. That seems to me to be the
best way of taking the most out of any institution.
I had seen the rough draft of your reply to Dr. Ambedkar's
statement. There was not much in it and in no case could I
have published it, seeing that Dr. Ambedkar's statement was not
published in the Harijan. The draft was so roughly drawn that
I did not know that you would want it back. I think I des-
troyed it after having read it.
I am surprised at what you tell me about Sind, because
there there are very staunch workers. Jamshed Mehta is a host
in himself. Narayandas Bechar has given himself to the Harijan
cause and there are several others. The Harijans in Karachi
are better housed and better looked after than elsewhere. Of cou-
rse there is room for improvement, but that would be so in every
case. However if you will send me concrete proposals I would
gladly forward them to Jamshed Mehta. I hope that you have
completely thrown off the headache you had in the beginning.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 791; also S.N. 20826
