394. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
June 1, 1945
BAPA,
I have your long letter. It does not reveal your anger but
your practical sense. However, the practical sense suggests that
you should not relinquish the post you have accepted. I had
often read in South Africa the letter Gokhale wrote on his return
from England expressing his deep apology. One of the sentences
in that letter was : "How can I give up the office under duress
when I have not accepted it under duress?" You are in a simi-
lar situation. The only difference is that there is no pressure at
all on you. So it will be sheer cowardice to give up the post and
with that the freely available opportunity of rendering service.
The tongue that calls you a coward only condemns itself. More-
over, to give up doing service means putting a burden on Mridula,
that is, on the women. Why should you do that? Give it up
when I tell you and if what I tell you appeals to you. The fact
is Mridula does not want to give up anything. I feel that we
should leave only when she has become competent enough to
enable us to give up.
In the mean time, we should retain her and encourage her. The
words of mine you quote are the only true words. She should not
consider anything as passed by me unless it has received your inde-
pendent approval. However, if she does not do that, you should
ignore it but should do what you want to. About Rs. 2,000
I clearly remember having told her that she should not con-
sider anything passed as long as Bapa had not considered and
approved it independently. If she has employed two or three
women, I would certainly be in favour of retaining them. But if
you disapprove of it, I will do the same.
I do not feel that you are giving me trouble. Whatever the
trouble may be, it will end. I will see to it.
What remains now is the question about the office. It is in
a large measure in your own hands.
I will see what I can do about Bhavnagar and Kathiawar.
It is good that Anantrai is here. Come here only if you want
change of air and not to know my mind or to explain to me.
Moreover, at the moment you want to work for Servants of
India Society. You may gladly do that. I might, if I wanted,
come to your help. But I do not want to do that. I have to
curb many such good intentions. Enough for now.
BAPU
SERVANTS OF INDIA SOCIETY
POONA
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy; Pyarelal
