353. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 6, 1945
CHI. MU.,
Why need you feel embarrassed? This problem cannot be
solved in that way. Ask me any question you wish without
the slightest hesitation. My statement has undergone some revi-
sion and may undergo more. I don't wish to exclude anybody.
I have mentioned four. Perhaps they will say, "We were not objects
of your experiment; we slept with you as with a mother." I would
not contradict them. It is enough here to mention that such a
thing has happened. I don't consider Abha, Kanchan and Vina
as part of the experiment. If we distinguish between sleeping to-
gether and the experiment, the difference between the two in my
view is a big one.
Abha slept with me for hardly three
nights. Kanchan slept one night only. Vina's sleeping with me
might be called an accident. All that can be said is that she
slept close to me. If Abha had continued, her case would have
been an altogether different one. Kanchan's case was rather tragic.
I didn't understand her at all. What Abha or Kanchan told me
was this; that she had no intention whatever of observing
brahmacharya, but wished to enjoy the pleasure of sex. She, there-
fore, stayed only reluctantly and undressed only for fear of hurt-
ing me. If I remember rightly, she was not with me even for
an hour. I then stopped both the women sleeping with me, for
I realized that Kanu and you were upset. I myself advised them
that they should tell you both and also Bhansali. You will thus
see that these three names cannot be included in the experiment.
Lilavati, Amtussalaam, Rajkumari and Prabhavati are not here.
I have deliberately included Pra. in the experiment. Maybe I
should not. She often used to sleep with me to keep me warm even
before I was conscious that I was making an experiment. I used
to draw her to me when she lay on the floor, shivering, for my
sake. This is an old, old story. I think I have now told you
everything. If you have any more questions, you may ask me. Kan-
chan's labouring under a misunderstanding pained me, but I was
helpless.
I formed no judgment regarding Sushila and you. I did
not get sufficient material for doing that, either. If she herself
wishes and you too wish it, I would spare some time and hear
you both. I will examine witnesses and try to weigh the evi-
dence. But let me repeat that if you two feel as brother and sister
to each other, you should not ask even your father to examine
you and pronounce judgment. But do as you wish.
I understand about a separate kitchen. I shall try. Will the
purchase of provisions for the hospital and the Ashram kitchens
be under one account or two? I see that a catering service can
be run only if it is managed by a third party. I think this is
enough for today. About the third party and going to villages,
etc., later on. I have not revised this. If you feel that anything
needs correction, ask me.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5841. Courtesy: Munnalal G.
Shah
