563. LETTER TO H. S. SUHRAWARDY
SRIRAMPUR,
NOAKHALI DISTT.,
December 22, 1946
DEAR FRIEND,
I sent you yesterday by way of postscript a mere acknowledgment
of your letter of 15th instant which came in as mine was going for
despatch. I observe that Bihar is still on your brain and that you are
evidently so worried by the many cares of office that you have not
taken the trouble to read my letter carefully, for you have quoted me
from memory which has proved a false friend even to men of genius
rightly proud of their memory. If you don't mind, let me assist you
by quoting the relevant portion from my letter of 5th instant referred
to by you.
If I find any confirmation of the most serious statements made
by you about Bihar, I confess that I have egregiously blundered
by resuming normal diet. But I am loath to reject the testimony
of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, then of Dr. Rajendra Prasad, both
responsible men and persons who had gone specially for the purpose
of seeing things for themselves and allaying mob fury. They admit
that the behaviour of the Hindu crowds was bad enough in all
conscience but they do not bear out the statements made in your
letter nor do they uphold the figures given by you. They also tell
me that mob fury has subsided and that the Government have
regained control undoubtedly with the assistance of the military. If
I could feel that my presence was at all necessary in Bihar, I assure
you that I would not need any encouragement from you to do so.
On the contrary, my informants assure me that my presence is
not required in Bihar. In these circumstances, unless I feel sure
of my ground, I know that I must not go to Bihar But I would
like to make the assurance doubly sure and with that end in view
I would be glad to get your permission to send copies of your letters
to the Prime Minister of Bihar and know his reaction. There too
you will pardon me, will you not, for not taking your statements
as gospel truth. For one thing, you have no first-hand knowledge
of events. I suggest that there should be impartial commission,
appointed with the consent of the two Governments, to go into the
disturbances both in Noakhali and Bihar. If your statements are
true and the callous behaviour of the Bihar Government, which you
so graphically describe, can be sustained, it is a bad day for the
Bihar Government, a bad day for Hindus and good-bye to restoration
of friendly relations between the two communities, and it would
be a serious question for me to consider where I stand. The least
I can permit myself to say is that then I should have no hesitation
in publicly denouncing the Bihar Ministers and Bihar Hindus. I would
plead with you to suspend, if you at all can, final judgment in the matter.
To this, which I hold is a full and frank statement of my position,
you were good enough to reply :
I was a little bit taken aback to read in your letter that having heard something
from Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Babu Rajendra Prasad you thought that nothing
had taken place in Bihar to justify your presence there.
I hope that the juxtaposition of the two quotations is enough to
demonstrate to you the wholly unwarranted inference drawn by you. But
if you still maintain in the correctness of your inference I shall gladly
endeavour to demonstrate the unwarranted nature of your inference.
Further, you say :
I do not know . . . whether they said that there had been no murders, loot,
massacre, rape, abduction, conversion or cruelties of unimaginable bestiality and
brutishness.
I suppose, in support of this charge you have the report issued
by the Bihar Provincial Muslim League, of which you have been good
enough to send me a copy. In parenthesis, I may say that no other
copy was received or seen by me. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Dr.
Rajendra Prasad admit loot and massacre but they do not admit rape,
abduction and conversion in Bihar and if "unimaginable bestiality and
brutishness" are used to convey more than has been conveyed by the
words preceding, I would like you to instruct me as to the exact
implication of the phrase. I had a visit only the other day from Pandit
Dhanraj Sharma, M.L.A. (Bihar Congress). I try to get as much
information as I can from those who come to me from Bihar. Perhaps,
it will interest you to know what he had to say about the charges
such as have been made in the Bihar report referred to above. I have
read the main parts of that report and I must confess that it is not
a balanced document. Its framers have failed to convince the reader
of a fair measure of impartiality. Be that as it may, it carries no
conviction to me and is in flat contradiction to what all my informants
have given me including Pandit Dhanraj, a copy of whose letter I am
sending you. The Bihar report confirms the suggestion I have made
to you for the appointment of an impartial commission of inquiry. To
this suggestion of mine, you have omitted to make any reply. Now
that I have got a copy of the report of the Bihar Provincial . . .1 suggest
to them the appointment of such a commission. I shall certainly tell
you of the result.
You proceed to say :
It is true that it is the Muslims who have suffered in Bihar and not Hindus.
And then you insinuate,
therefore, perhaps, your going to Bihar will not have any effect in re-establishing
confidence amongst Muslims but the problems are by no means dissimilar.
Let me say that I do not regard the Muslims to have less claim
on my service or attention. However, I admit that my going to Bihar
for the time being will fail to re-establish confidence amongst Muslims.
I must not go into the causes at this stage. I cannot help deploring
the fact. This distrust is so utterly baseless. I regard myself as an
efficient servant of India. Let me tell you, whether you as a late friend
and other members of the Muslim League believe me or not, that I
am here to regain the lost confidence. Nothing will move me away
from Noakhali unless the lost confidence is regained, which will be
the case if the Hindus and Muslims in these districts trust one another
without needing the presence of the police or the military.
I observe that insistence on my leaving Noakhali is gathering volume.
You also share that feeling. I urge you to show me how my presence
offends and ask you to instruct the District Magistrate and the
Superintendent of Police to keep a strict watch on my movements and
tell these gentlemen in what way I have been erring. Let me repeat
my assurance that I have come here with no intention whatsoever of
sowing dissension between the two communities or to prefer the interest
of Hindus over that of Muslims. I am doing everything I can to dispel
all fear and the spirit of helplessness. I have told you how the fear
is still persisting. I do wish that I could support your hope that the
process of confidence and rehabilitation is making progress.
I must say I do not know that dissensions at the centre are widening
nor have I the slightest notion that "the Congress has accepted the lead
of the great Hindu Mahasabha leader, Mr. Shyama Prasad Mukherji".
Throughout its long career it has never accepted the leadership of anyone
who has not been avowedly a whole-hearted Congressman.
As to the rest of the points covered by my three letters whose
1 The source is mutilated here.
2 Only this one sentence has been reproduced in Vol. LXXXVI, p. 254.
receipt has been acknowledged in your letter under reply, I shall await
a further and considered reply.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Encl: 1
THE HON. THE CHIEF MINISTER OF BENGAL
CALCUTTA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
