113. LETTER TO J. D. REES
[HOTEL CECIL,
LONDON,]
November 6, 1906
DEAR SIR,
Mr. Ally and I are greatly obliged for your letter of even date.
We have indeed watched your advocacy of the cause of the British Indians
in the Transvaal, and in due course we would have waited on you.
We are now sending your name to Lord Elgin as a member of the deputa-
tion. As you know, the deputation will meet Lord Elgin on Thursday
next at 3 p.m. at the Colonial Office. All the members of the deputa-
tion have been requested to attend at the Colonial Office at 2.30 p.m.,
so that a short conference may be held. Sir Lepel Griffin will head the
deputation. I beg to enclose herewith a list of the members forming
the deputation, as also a copy of the Representation to Lord Elgin which
will form the basis of submission to him on Thursday, and copy of the
precis of the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance.
I hope you have received the Circular issued by several members
of the House of Commons, convening a meeting of the Liberal, Nationalist,
and Labour Members of Parliament. I venture to trust that you will
find time to attend the meeting. If possible, Mr. Ally and I will take
an opportunity of sending in a card to you at the House, so that we
may be able to place the position before you more fully than we could
at the conference on Thursday.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
3 enclosures
J. D. REES, ESQ.
HOUSE OF COMMONS
LONDON
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 4497
1 Vide pp. 97-.
[ENCLOSURE]
PRECIS OF ASIATIC LAW AMENDMENT ORDINANCE, 1906
[LONDON,]
November 2, 1906
DEFINITION: The term "Asiatic" shall mean any such person as is des-
cribed in Article 1 of Law [3] of 1885.
The term "Asiatic" under Law 3 of 1885 includes the so-
called coolies, Arabs, Malays, Mohammedan subjects of the
Turkish Dominions.
This Ordinance however excepts the Malays from its operation.
REGISTRATION: Section 3 requires every lawfully resident Asiatic in the
Transvaal to be registered, for which no charges shall be made,
and in accordance with the section, an Asiatic lawfully resident is
one who has received, or may receive, a permanent permit to enter
and reside in the Transvaal, unless such permit is fraudulently
obtained, or any Asiatic resident and actually in the Transvaal
on the 31st day of May 1902.
SECTION 4: Requires every such Asiatic to make an application for
registration, such application to be made in the case of children
under 16 years of age by their parents or guardians.
SECTION 5: Lays down that, if the application for registration is refused,
the applicant shall be directed to leave the Colony, under the process
described in the section.
SECTION 6: Says that any Asiatic who is the guardian of any Asiatic child
under the age of eight years shall upon making application for
registration on his own behalf supply such particulars and furnish
such means of identification in respect of such child as may be
prescribed by regulation, and if such guardian is himself registered,
the particulars aforesaid which he has supplied shall be pro-
visionally noted on the Register, and such guardian shall within
one year make application for registration on such child's behalf
at the office of the Resident Magistrate of the district in which he
himself resides.
The section then proceeds to lay down the procedure for the
separate registration of such child after he has attained the age of
eight years.
SECTION 7: Deals further with the registration of children.
SECTION 8: Provides that any person who shall fail to make application
for registration. . . either on his own behalf or as guardian. . . shall
1 This was prepared by Gandhiji to apprise sympathizers, particularly mem-
bers of the introducing deputation, of the real scope and nature of the Ordinance.
6‒
be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding One Hundred Pounds,
and in default of payment to imprisonment with or without hard
labour for a period not exceeding three months.
SECTION 9: Provides that every Asiatic of the age of 16 years and up-
wards entering or residing in the Transvaal shall upon demand
made upon him by any member of the Police Force lawfully estab-
lished in this Colony, or any other person authorized thereto by the
Colonial Secretary, produce the certificate of registration of which
he is the lawful holder, and shall also on like demand supply such
means of identification as may be prescribed by regulation.
In the case of children under 16 years, the guardians or parents
have to produce a certificate and supply particulars of identification.
SECTION 10: Makes certificates of registration conclusive evidence as
to the right of the lawful holder to remain in the Colony. (N.B.
To-day every Asiatic in possession of his permit has such right by law.)
SECTION[SJ 11 & 12: Lay down the procedure for lost certificates.
SECTION 13: Provides that no Asiatic shall obtain a license to trade
without production of certificate of registration.
SECTION 14: Makes the Registrar practically the arbiter as to the age
of an Asiatic.
SECTION 15: Exempts declarations made for the purposes of the Ordinance
from stamp duty.
SECTION 16: Imposes a fine of £500 or in default imprisonment with
or without hard labour for a term not exceeding two years, or
both fine and imprisonment, for the following acts:
(1) Any fraudulent or false statement or incitement to make such
statement in connection with registration.
(2) Forgery of registration certificate.
(3) Use of such certificate by a person not the lawful holder.
(4) Incitement to any person to use such certificate.
SECTION 17: Authorizes the issue of temporary permits, and authorizes
the Lieutenant-Governor at his discretion to order that any Asiatic
in possession of a temporary permit "shall not during the currency
of such permit be deemed to be a Coloured person for the purpose
of the provision of the Liquor Ordinance".
SECTION 18: Gives the Lieutenant-Governor power to frame regulations
under the Ordinance.
SECTION 19: Generally provides that any Asiatic failing to comply
with any requirement of the Ordinance shall be liable to a fine
not exceeding £100, or in default to imprisonment with or without
hard labour for a period not exceeding three months.
1 For the form of this certificate, vide appendix.
The other Sections provide a heavy penalty for any Asiatic bringing
without a permit a child under 16 years of age into the Colony, and
among other things cancels [sic] such person's permit and certificate of
registration, and renders him liable to expulsion, and makes it lawful for
the heirs of the late Aboo Baker Ahmed to hold a piece of land bought
by the late Aboo Baker Ahmed before 1885, and left under his will to
the heirs.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 4447
