232. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
October 17, 1934
CHI. HARILAL,
You are constantly in my thoughts. If I had time, I would
go on inflicting long letters on you. If the change that you
have described endures, a painful episode in my life would end
and I would be extremely happy in this the last stage of my
life.
I do not wish that you should do anything beyond your
strength. Only as much as your reason and heart accept will
endure and seem natural. I am sure that if you followed rules
of diet, etc., you would be completely all right. Do not regard
yourself as an old man.
I would not be pained if you could do nothing, but I would
certainly be pained if you were to break your word to me or do
anything which might amount to breach of trust with anybody.
At the moment, it is I who trust you most. Others, that
is Ba, Ramdas, Devdas, Kanti, etc., are less hopeful for they
have memories of bitter experiences. I have them, too, but I had
never given up hope about you, and always believed that one
day you would be reformed. I believe that that day has come
now. May God help you.
187
Write to me and give me exact details of your debts and
the names of the parties to whom you owe them. I wish to
help you as much as I can consistently with my dharma. Do
you have to pay interest on the loans?
I see that you have not been able to give up smoking. So
long as you find it absolutely necessary to smoke, you may do
so as if you were taking medicine. Perhaps you do not know
that it is not in the least difficult to give up smoking. It can
be done by adopting a simple diet. What do you eat? Are you
ready to make changes in your diet?
I had a long letter from Maneklal. He says that you are
afraid of temptations in Rajkot.
If there is the slightest truth
in that, let me know.
Have no hesitation at all in telling me
the exact truth. Write to me frankly and open out your heart
as you would do to a very intimate friend. You made many
friends in the past. Forget now the harm that those friend-
ships did you. Now regard me as your only friend. That will
certainly do you no harm. And, moreover, there is a Supreme
Friend between you and me, who dwells in our hearts and, there-
fore, knows our thoughts.
I very much wish to send for you here and keep you with
me. But my condition is quite peculiar just now. I don't enjoy
a moment's leisure. I rise up at 2.30 every morning. Today
I rose at 1.45. It is nearing 3.30 now. If I called you, I would
feel tempted to talk with you, which, however, I cannot afford
to do. I can't stop thinking about you all the time, though.
Maybe, father's love doesn't fall away from even a devotee of
Mother Gita, or perhaps the Gita teaches that I should be thus
concerned with you. Be that as it may.
If you have no fear
just now of being overcome by temptations, remain there for
the time being and learn spinning on the takli, etc., thoroughly.
If you are not keeping a diary, start doing so.
A letter for Manu is enclosed. Ramdas is fairly well. He
is still in hospital, though. There is no fever, but he has not
regained strength.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
