340. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
SODEPUR,
ON THE TRAIN TO SANTINIKETAN,
December 18, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,
I have received all your letters. The letter written on rough
paper is also lying with me. Today I shall answer whatever I
possibly can.
I am doing quite a bit of work here.
As for hand-carding I believe that this makes the cotton very
clean. It is not so well cleaned either by machine or by any
other means. By all these other means the fibre does become
somewhat weak. In my view hand-carding is a grand process.
Combing should be given a place in it. Hand-carding teaches
us cleanliness and patience. Adding the time spent in hand-
carding [to that of the whole process] the speed of spinning the
yarn seems slow. But that does not matter. Hand-carding of
course cannot provide a livelihood. But it has a very significant
part in self-reliance. As the process of hand-carding has not been
very much in vogue, we have not had a real estimate of its
power. We shall have an idea of its power if large numbers of
people take to hand-carding. Show this letter to Vinoba also.
Hand-carding is his discovery. He has also had a wide experi-
ence. I would like to know if I am mistaken in this.
Because the sadhu had gone away, it was quite proper that
he was asked to leave the Ashram. In my view this does not
mean that it was quite wrong to have kept him in the Ashram.
This will enable you to understand my argument.
I have no doubt that there should be separate classes for
women. As for Om Prakash I shall be content with whatever you
think right. It would not be proper for me to write anything
about this.
I think the proper thing would be for me not to lay down
limits as to the expenses of the people who are staying in the
Ashram and who come as visitors. For my experience these
days should be regarded as limited. In my view you have all
gone too far ahead. And when one has left a thing behind, one's
view of it becomes less acceptable. The same applies to me.
234
A doctor, however great a specialist he may be, does not regard
himself as a specialist when he has given up practice. Others,
who have acquired degrees later would be considered more
competent. Hence, if it is decided to limit the expenses, let me
first know the amount now being spent. Then I shall provide
whatever light I can.
As for quarters for workers in the Ashram, I have discus-
sed the matter at length with Shantabehn. But I am neutral.
Shantabehn must be well now.
I shall not write anything from here about the work of
Kamle and Om Prakashji. It would be improper for me to
write. But I shall be ready to write to them when you write to
me that I can place your views before them.
I understand what you say about Kailasbehn. It would
have been better if I had asked you to be present when I spoke
to her. I admit that what happened was improper. But I was
dealing with things under such pressure that, much as I should
have wished it, I could not have kept you with me all the
time. This does not imply that I should not be warned again.
Even a cautious person is likely to commit mistakes. Hence,
it is a good policy to give a discreet warning.
It seems to me that however much we may get to know
Vinoba, there is still more to learn. Do take the girls and the
boys with you. Let there be one rule in this matter, that is,
there should be no undue pressure on Vinoba. We should value
his time.
Do you want a wall clock or a timepiece?
As a general rule, the new entrants should bear their own
expenses. If it is decided to keep anyone free of charge, it
should be done after recording the reason for doing so. I hope
you have kept some such book there.
What decision did you want from me with regard to Cha-
krayya? What do you want now?
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
On the train. Have not revised.
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 4536
