131. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Unrevised
YERAVDA MANDIR,
Tuesday morning, August 19, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,
We now come to the observance of non-stealing. On deeper
reflection we see that all observances are implicit in Truth and
ahimsa or truth alone. This can be expressed thus:
Truth
Truth
Ahimsa
Ahimsa
or
Brahmacharya Control of
the palate
Non-
stealing
Non-
possession
Fearlessness
and so on
89
Ahimsa may be deduced from Truth, or may be paired with
Truth. Truth and ahimsa are one and the same thing. I am
partial to Truth, however. In the final analysis there can only be
a single reality. The highest Truth stands by itself. Truth is the
end, ahimsa is the means thereto. We know what ahimsa or
non-violence is, although we find it difficult to follow the law of
love. But as for Truth, we know only a fraction of it. Perfect
knowledge of Truth is difficult of attainment for man even like
the perfect practice of non-violence.
Asteya means non-stealing.
It is impossible that a person should steal and simultaneously
claim to know Truth or cherish love. Yet everyone of us is con-
sciously or unconsciously, more or less, guilty of theft. We may
steal not only what belongs to others, but also what belongs to
ourselves, as is done, for instance, by a father who eats some-
thing secretly, keeping his children in the dark about it. The
Ashram kitchen stores are our common property, but one who
secretly removes a single crystal of sugar from it stamps himself a
thief. A child who takes another's pen steals. It is theft to take
anything belonging to another without his permission, even if it
be with his knowledge. It is equally theft to take something in the
belief that it is nobody's property. Things found on the roadside
belong to the ruler or the local authority. Anything found near the
Ashram must be handed over to the secretary, who in his turn will
pass it on to the police if it is not Ashram property. Thus far it is
pretty smooth sailing. But the observance of non-stealing goes
very much farther. It is theft to take something from another even
with his permission if we have no real need of it. We should not
receive any single thing that we do not need. Theft of this de-
scription generally has food for its object. It is theft for me to take
any fruit that I do not need, or to take it in a larger quantity
than is necessary. We are not always aware of our real needs,
and most of us improperly multiply our wants and thus un-
consciously make thieves of ourselves. If we devote some thought
to the subject we shall find that we can get rid of quite a number
of our wants. One who follows the observance of non-stealing will
bring about a progressive reduction of his wants. Much of the
distressing poverty in this world has arisen out of breaches of the
principle of non-stealing.
Theft thus far considered may be termed external or physical
theft. There is, besides, another kind of theft, subtler and far more
degrading to the human spirit. It is theft mentally to desire
acquisition of anything belonging to others, or to cast a greedy
eye on it. It is mental theft if anyone, whether a grown-up person
or a child, feels tempted by the sight of an attractive thing. One
who takes no food, physically speaking, is generally said to be
fasting, but he is guilty of theft as well as a breach of his fast if he
gives himself up to a mental contemplation of pleasure when he
sees others taking their meals. He is similarly guilty if, during his
fast, he is continually planning the varied menu he will have after
breaking the fast. One who observes the principle of non-stealing
will refuse to bother himself about things to be acquired in
future. This evil anxiety for the future will be found at the root
of many a theft. Today we only desire possession of a thing; to-
morrow we shall begin to adopt measures, straight if possible,
crooked when thought necessary, to acquire its possession. Ideas
may be stolen no less than material things. One who egotistically
claims to have originated some good idea, which, really speaking,
did not originate with him, is guilty of a theft of ideas. Many
learned men have committed such theft in the course of world
history, and plagiarizm is by no means uncommon even today.
Supposing, for instance, that I see a new type of spinning-wheel
in Andhra and manufacture a similar wheel in the Ashram, passing
it off as my own invention, I practise untruth and am clearly
guilty of stealing another's invention.
One who takes up the observance of non-stealing has, there-
fore, to be humble, thoughtful, vigilant and in habits simple. I
have written the Ashram letters today under much pressure of
time. Motilalji and others are here and I spent practically the
whole of the last week in discussions with them. Even now I must
give some time to them. I could, therefore, take up writing letters
only yesterday evening after the prayers and started writing this
after the morning prayers today. There are, therefore, the fewest
letters this time and I have made them as short as I could. You
will read about . . . behn in my letters to Gangabehn and
Bhansali. Be firm and go on doing what you think proper. My
immediate reaction is that, if . . . behn's mind has become steady
and recovered its purity, we can condone her violation of the
pledge to go away and live outside the Ashram. The chief thing
to consider now is how to help her to overcome her passion and,
on the other hand, to safeguard her freedom. Women have been
so completely suppressed that in their helplessness they cannot
even think. The Ashram, therefore, should adopt a very liberal
attitude towards them. This involves many risks. We should take
them if we wish to serve women. Act upon this view within the
limits of your capacity. When I see . . . behn's face in my mind's
eye, I see nothing but innocence and fear on it. She is not the
cause of her fall. After hearing about this misconduct, I can see
the signs of impurity on the face of . . .1 I cannot see such signs
on the face of . . . behn. What I see on her face is simplicity.
And ignorance, of course. She can almost be compared to
Rishyashringa. There is of course this important difference that
. . . behn has had the experience of passion, whereas Rishya-
shringa had never had such experience. The poet, however, has
described him as if he was only waiting for a touch. That is the
condition of countless seemingly innocent men and women today.
"Desire is aroused by coming together." Hence we have no right
to condemn anyone. Our duty, plainly, is to show love and to
exercise more vigilance in regard to ourselves. I have written
enough today.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
There are 30 letters in all.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
