117. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
JOHANNESBURG,
August 24, 1913
I thank you for your letter of the 19th instant.
I have come to Johannesburg in order to attend the Doke
Memorial Service and shall be here for a few days. If, therefore,
General Smuts desires my presence in Pretoria, I would be pleas-
ed to come down. I submit the following for General Smuts'
consideration regarding the points dealt with in your letter.
As to South Africa-born Indians, it is perfectly true that
I did not raise, in the correspondence of 1912, this point. It had
entirely escaped me until a friend drew my attention to it. But I
assured the friend that no difficulty need be anticipated as the
correspondence setting forth the provisional settlement of 1911
protected all existing rights of British Indians. I freely admit that
I do not lay claim to a full knowledge of all such rights possess-
ed by my countrymen throughout the Union or even the Trans-
vaal. The fact that very few South Africa-born Indians availed
themselves of the right was used by me to show that the Govern-
ment had no occasion to fear a sudden influx into the Cape of
South Africa-born Indians if the right was retained. From the
Indian standpoint, I wanted to emphasize the fact that we were
fighting for the sentiment, viz., that the liberal and reasonable
view, taken by the old Cape Legislature, should be left untouched.
And I fear that I must press that view again on General Smuts'
attention. I have already submitted that the Cape members laid
stress on this point because the Right Hon'ble Mr. Fischer foster-
ed, I submit, without a knowledge of the facts, the view that there
was a large influx of South Africa-born Indians into the Cape.
I observe that your letter seems to suggest that I am asking for
a breaking of the Provincial boundary altogether. Though this
would be a legitimate desire, I have not asked for it as I know
that it is no part of the provisional settlement.
As to the second point, I am glad that the Government inter-
pretation agrees with that of the Indian community.
As to the Free State difficulty, the point raised by me has not
been understood. I do not ask, for the sake of asking, that the
attention of intending immigrants should be drawn to the dis-
ability. But I have submitted that the wording of the Act seems
not to require the declaration in question at the Free State border.
If such is also the Government interpretation of the Act, the Free
State difficulty could be solved without any statutory alteration.
In order to allay anxiety on the part of the Free Staters, I sug-
gested that the disability in the Free State might be notified on
the general declaration to be made at the first port of entry at
the coast. I need hardly say that I have assumed the legal pos-
sibility of an Indian being permitted under the new Act to enter
the Free State.
As to the fourth point, the question of the legality of the mar-
riages already solemnized in South Africa of the resident Indian
population, as also of the marriages hereafter to be solemnized
within the Union, is of vast practical importance. A definite assu-
rance that legislation will be introduced next session is necessary
to settle this very thorny problem. Regarding the plurality of
wives, I have not asked for a general recognition of polygamy.
All I contend is that, in continuation of the practice hitherto
followed, existing plural wives of domiciled residents should be
allowed to enter. And this was the assurance given in the letter
quoted by me in my correspondence with you. The number of
such wives could be easily ascertained at the present moment,
and the toleration may be restricted only to the number so ascer-
tained.
I observe that cases have already arisen in Natal out of the new
Act. I cannot help remarking that the marriage case is inconsis-
tent with the assurance contained in your letter under reply.
For Kulsambibi is admittedly the only wife in South Africa of her
husband. I would respectfully suggest that the case be withdrawn
and the lady set free. The other cases are regarding domicile.
The Government contention seems to be that, even where there
1 Vide "Letter to Secretary for Interior", p. 124.
is no dispute as to facts or the bona fides of the holder of a certi-
ficate of domicile, his right should be impugned if he has been
long absent from the Province of domicile. If such is the Gov-
ernment interpretation of the new Act, existing and acquired rights
are threatened. And in the event of a decision unfavourable to
the Indian community, a position will be created that would be
totally intolerable and inconsistent with the provisional settlement
as also the declaration of the Right Hon'ble General Botha and
other members of the ministry that there is no desire to harass
the resident Indian population. I, therefore, venture also to sug-
gest that these cases may be withdrawn. I have assumed that you
are fully aware of these cases. They are reported in the current
issue of Indian Opinion.
May I ask for an early reply?
Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913
