343. LETTER TO P. C. JOSHI
AS AT SEVAGRAM,
CAMP PANCHGANI,
July 30, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,
I had duly received your letter of 14th June and also your
letter of 26th of July sent with Shri Kumaramangalam.
Your answer to my first question provokes further question
for your reply. I understand that although the chief actors among
the Allied powers are by no means inclined towards real demo-
cracy, you think that by the time the war ends, their designs
will be confounded and that the people all the world over will
suddenly find self-expression and overthrow the present leaders.
In the peoples, according to answer, I am entitled to include
us, other Asiatics and Negroes, for that matter perhaps, also the
proletariat of Japan and Germany. If such is your belief, I must
confess that I do not share it but I keep myself open to con-
viction. Meanwhile I suggest that the title 'people's war' is highly
misleading. It enables the Government in India to claim that
at least one popular party considers this as people's war. I sug-
gest, too, that Russia's limited alliance with the Allied powers can-
not by any stretch of imagination convert what was before an im-
perialistic war against that Nazi combine, into a people's war.
Holding the view I do, it is superfluous for me now to an-
swer your argument that "this war has split the world into two
camps". Between Scylla and Charybdis, if I sail in either direc-
tion, I suffer shipwreck. Therefore I have to be in the midst of
the storm. I suggested a way out. Naturally it has been re-
jected because the powers that be do not want to relax their
grip on India. As I am composing this letter to you, I have read
and re-read your argument. Every paragraph offends; for, to me,
it lacks reality. Please believe me that my prejudice against
your party has nothing to do with my examination of your
answer to the first question.
Q. 2. Your answer, as far as it goes, I hold to be com-
pletely satisfactory. I will not ask you for further proof about
your finances.
1 Vide Appendix XVI.
434
After I have dealt with your answers, I will put my difficul-
ties before you. Your answers to the other questions do not
admit of a categorical reply. I understand your answers and ap-
preciate them too. If I was free from prejudices, I would have
no hesitation in accepting your answers. But my difficulty is real
and I ask for your sympathy. When I make the admission that
I have prejudices, it is an appeal to you to have patience with
me and to disarm my prejudices in the best manner you can.
I can only give you my assurance that I am ready to see anybody
you want me to see, to read anything you want me to read and
to examine every argument or fact produced by you as dispas-
sionately as I can. I give you this further assurance that I have
not acted upon my prejudice, nor shall I do so, unless the pre-
judices harden into a confirmed belief that your party represents
a force of evil and is really an obstacle in the way of the fight
for freedom. I am not likely to have that belief easily and, if I
have it, you shall have ample notice so as to enable you to wean
me from it. I know your worth. You have very able young
men and women, as selfless as I would claim to be. You are all
hard working and possess great energy and you impose strict
discipline on your workers. All this I prize and admire. I would
not easily lose such a force because of any preconceived notions
of mine.
If I have been inordinately long in dealing with your answers
which you sent me so promptly, it was because, as you are aware,
I was preoccupied and also because I was examining the evidence
that was pouring in upon me unsolicited against your party.
I asked them to let me use their names and they have given me
the permission. I take the latest first, i.e., Babu Manoranjan
Chaudhary. I did not even know that he was coming and when
he did ask for an appointment3, it was in connection with my
acceptance of the Rajaji Formula . But really he took the greater
part of my time to tell me that the communists had done great
injury to the national cause. I am using a milder term than was
really used before me. He has left papers which I have not been
able to study. And he has also left with me a printed book
which I have glanced through personally and it makes bad read-
ing. The printed book can be seen by any deputy you may
choose to send. Probably you have seen it yourself.
The other is Sjt. Kaleswara Rao of Bezwada. He also sent
me a long letter from which I quote the salient passages (see
enclosure Add to this the numerous letters I have received from
correspondents, known and unknown, all impeaching the party.
I understand, too, that Shri Jayaprakash Narayan is also 'dis-
illusioned'.
You have referred me to Mian Iftikharuddin and Shaukat
Ansari, both of whom I know well and for whom I have great
regard. Unfortunately Iftikharuddin is in jail. I have never
talked about Communism to Shaukat, because I know him and
his wife Zohra apart from their politics. But no general assurance
from them will obliterate the evidence that has forced itself
upon me and of which I have given you a bird's-eye view. I
will ask you not to dismiss all this evidence as so much prejudice.
I would ask you not to be angry with your critics, however ignorant
they may be. You will have legitimate cause for anger, if their
criticism is malicious and conceived with a hostile intent. Lastly,
I ask you to believe me that I want to impress the services of
everyone of you for the cause of independence to be fought
along the lines that I have chalked out for myself and the whole
country. And if I am convinced that I am going astray and
that yours is the correct method, I would like to be won over
by you to your side and I will sincerely and gladly serve as
an apprentice wanting to be enlisted as a unit in your ranks.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, pp. 17-22
