446. LETTER TO " THE STAR"
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before September 14, 1906]
TO
THE EDITOR
The Star
SIR,
You have been good enough, in your leading article on the British
Indian protest regarding the Asiatic Draft Ordinance, to give advice to
the British Indian Association which, in your opinion, is not very "judi-
ciously" led.
It is a trite saying that "our neighbours always know best what is
good for us," and I have no doubt that, on that principle, your opinion,
that the British Indian community is badly led, is also correct. However,
for the present, I am more concerned with the attitude you have taken up
regarding the British Indian protest than with your judgment about the
leaders of the Association.
You think that the community has no case whatever against the new
Ordinance, because it is purely a matter of fresh registration and that
it imposes no fresh disabilities on any class of His Majesty's subjects. I
join issue on both the points. Just as the administration of the Peace
Preservation Ordinance has been distorted in order to prohibit Indian
immigration, so also the scope of Law 3 of 1885 has been distorted by the
new Ordinance to meet a demand that was never made during the Dutch
regime. The Dutch law was aimed at the traders. Its policy was not to
restrict immigration, but to penalise the immigrants who wanted to trade,
and it was for that reason that, originally, it fixed a registration fee of
£25, which was reduced to £3 on the intervention of the British Govern-
ment.
The present Ordinance, which is supposed merely to amend Law 3
of 1885, and, therefore, to continue its scope and not entirely change it,
as a matter of fact, provides for a system of identification which, in its
operation, cannot but be most galling to those who have to submit to it.
Re-registration does not mean taking a census of the Indian population,
but it means the following:
Every Indian resident in the Colony has to carry with him a registration
certificate containing degrading identification particulars. He has to
have his new-born child provisionally registered, giving such particulars
as to identification as may be required by the regulation to be framed
by the Lieutenant-Governor. He has to take out a registration for children
above the age of eight years with similar conditions as to identification.
All this is absolutely new and never contemplated by Law 3 of 1885.
And yet you have no hesitation in saying that the Ordinance does not
impose any disability on the resident Indian population.
Let me assure you that the policy of passive resistance is not a brutum
fulmen. It is simply a resolve on the part of my countrymen to decline
to submit to conditions that are quite unbearable, and if, as suggested
by you, it provokes "a movement of their wholesale expulsion as an ex-
pensive nuisance", it will be a great relief. That it will be a new departure
in the British policy, of course, does not matter to the new school of Im-
perialists, of whom you are, undoubtedly, a leading light. My country-
men have remained long enough in the background — not discreetly, as
you suggest, but rather indiscreetly. Their coming out of their seclusion
will not mean much loss, if it brings no gain. In their opinion, they have
already lost almost all.
If your inciting of South Africans results in their taking some interest
in the Indian question, I make bold to say that, in spite of your suggestion
above referred to, it will open their eyes, and show them how heavily
they have sinned against British Indians, and how much they have mis-
understood them.
I am, etc.,
ABDOOL GANI,
CHAIRMAN,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
The Star, 22-9-1906
