434. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
June 3, 1927
I have almost finished reading the current issue of Vaidika
Dharma. I wish to make some comments about the article on
brahmacharya in the issue. You have interpreted brahmacharya only
as preservation of the vital fluid and mentioned manly pursuits
like hunting and so on in that context. Visiting foreign lands and
founding colonies have also been mentioned. In my humble view
this involves unsound logic. The first fallacy consists of narrow
definition. The brahmacharya which you have explained by first
quoting a mantra from the Atharva- Veda, viz., the gods overcame
death by the strength of brahmacharya, and by practising it man
also can overcome death, cannot be restricted to mere preserva-
tion of the vital fluid. The other is the fallacy of too wide defini-
tion. Brahmacharya need not be associated with acts of valour, etc.
We see this in the world today. If the mere preservation of
semen is the object of brahmacharya, it can be attained, as I have
said in one of my letters, in a few minutes by a surgical opera-
tion. This operation does not make a man impotent; but allows
him to indulge in sexual pleasures without losing his vital fluid.
Such a man does not lose by way of manly adventures either.
I am sure, however, that you will not call this brahmacharya.
The brahmacharya which you seek is attainable only by the
subjugation of sexual and other desires. The preservation of the
vital fluid, although important, is only a bye-product. Its direct
and primary objective is nothing less than communion with the
Brahman. This is the only desirable and legitimate adventure on
the path of brahmacharya. Why should a man take to the uphill
task of conquering desires for the sake of brahmacharya, when
manly adventures like vanquishing the enemy or undertaking foreign
expeditions can be achieved by thousands of people without practi-
sing brahmacharya? And nobody does it, as I can vouchsafe from
my fairly wide experience. Where can we find braver warriors
than the German and the English soldiers? They are regularly
provided with prostitutes. Hundreds, if not thousands, of innocent
girls are sacrificed to the sexual hunger of these soldiers. No one
despises these brave Kshatriyas who defend the country; on the
other hand, educated and civilized men and women dote on
these soldiers. I am not employing epithets like Kshatriyas, etc.,
on my own or to explain my meaning. In my view they are no
warriors at all. I do not consider them defenders of the country.
Dharma declines when we sing praises of these men. But under
modern civilization there is nothing but praise for these people.
Now let us come to the Indian scene. Pathans, Sikhs and
Gorkhas are the three acknowledged martial races. There is a
similar provision of prostitutes for them as in the case of the
German and other soldiers. They have an honoured place, you
know, in the Empire. If you look at the ancient lores, adultery
has been tolerated in the case of Kshatriyas. I write all this be-
cause I wish that the people should derive full benefit from your
profound studies of the Vedas and other ancient scriptures. This
will be possible by putting the scriptures in the crucible of modern
conditions, by objective observation and intense churning. I can
write a lot on this subject, but this should do to indicate to you
the burden of my theme. Another reason for my brevity is that
I have little energy. I have great respect for your learning and
truthfulness, which has impelled me to write so much.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai's Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
