437. LETTER TO SECRETARY, HOME DEPARTMENT,
GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
DETENTION CAMP,
August 27, 1942
TO
THE SECRETARY TO THE BOMBAY GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,
With reference to the Government orders about the writing
of letters by the security prisoners, it seems that the Govern-
ment do not know that for over thirty-five years, I have ceased
to live family life and have been living what has been
called Ashram life in association with persons who have more
or less shared my views. Of these Mahadev Desai, whom I
have just lost, was an associate beyond compare. His wife and
only son have lived with me for years sharing the Ashram life.
If I cannot write to the widow and her son or the other mem-
bers of the deceased's family living in the Ashram, I can have
no interest in writing to anyone else. Nor can I be confined
to writing about personal and domestic matters. If I am permit-
ted to write at all, I must give instructions about many matters
that I had entrusted to the deceased. These have no connec-
tion with politics which are the least part of my activities. I
am directing the affairs of the A.I.S.A. and kindred associations.
Sevagram Ashram itself has many activities of a social, educa-
tional and humanitarian character. I should be able to receive
letters about these activities and write about them. There is the
Andrews Memorial Fund. There is a large sum lying at my
disposal. I should be able to give instructions about its disposal.
To this end I must be in correspondence with the people at
Santiniketan. Pyarelal Nayyar who was co-secretary with Maha-
dev Desai, and whose company as also that of my wife was
offered to me at the time of my arrest, has not yet been sent.
I have asked the I.G.P. about his whereabouts. I can get no
information about him, nor about Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel who
was under my care for the control of his intestinal trouble. If
I may not correspond with them about their health and welfare,
again the permission granted can have no meaning for me.
I hope that even if the Government cannot extend the faci-
lities for correspondence in terms of this letter, they will appre-
ciate my difficulty.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government, 1942-44, pp. 3-
