74. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
November 26, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,
Today is Sunday. I came into Town last night as I have to go
with Cachalia today to Krugersdorp to make collections for the Polak
deputation. 2
Call too is in Town. He came in yesterday morning. Call will not
stay long at the Farm I fear. He does not like anybody on the Farm
except myself. He cannot bear the sight of children (Indian). He
considers that no one on the Farm knows how to eat, sit, walk, run
or stand. The slightest thing upsets and irritates him. I do not let the
children go near him. When he eats, the children are not to be near
him. He has the kitchen verandah all to himself. I have withdrawn
the night school from the school room and it is held in the kitchen
room. Special food has been brought for him. Of course the above
condition shows disease. He tells me these things quite freely. I am now
1 On November 15; vide also P. 91, fn. 1.
2 Vide Vol. XI, p. 67.
seeing whether Call could be placed elsewhere. If he had all the
conditions agreeable to him, he is likely to recover quickly. Beyond
good, non-stimulating food, fresh air and good surroundings, he needs
nothing more. Call's condition shows how bad we must all be. Call's
bad points come to the surface because the poor man has lost control
over himself. But Call at his worst seems to be an angel and certainly
a good man compared to what we should be if we lost control over
ourselves and the worst in us had full play. The inner man must be
in harmony with the outer. We ought to be able to think and feel as
we act. That is, if I act politely towards you, I ought to feel that also.
Do I always think and feel well of people when I act well with them?
I am afraid it is not always thus. To that extent that I fail, I am a
liar. And yet I must not act otherwise. I must continually try to eradicate
feelings and thoughts which are contrary to my actions as they ought
to be. Then I should be a wholly truthful man. May you and I have
the privilege of becoming such men. I am full of thoughts on this matter
which if I had the time I should put down in this letter but I must
close.
Your remarks on your niece are good.
The windmill was finished on Friday. We shall begin to draw water
from Tuesday probably. Call may lay the piping. He has offered to
do so and if he is well, I shall let him.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
