627. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
SEVAGRAM,
April 12, 1941
CHI. PREMA,
I had your letter written from Saswad. Yesterday I got
the one written from jail. I was delighted to read the account
of conditions there. I am sure that, if all the women live in
harmony and do constructive work with faith, they will bring
swaraj nearer.
On the 6th everybody here, excepting the children and the
sick, fasted for twenty-four hours. Today also we intend to do
the same. Non-stop working of some charkhas, one carding-bow
and several taklis is in progress. Babla and Kanu had a big hand
in arranging this. All are working with zeal.
And now for your questions:
1. All that I can say about fasting is that it is part of my
life. A fast may come any time. At the moment, however, I am
not thinking of any. But my strength comes from the possibility
of my undertaking one and from my faith in the method. In the
last resort a satyagrahi vindicates his honour by laying down his
life, as one who believes in violence does by killing. What a
big difference! Let nobody, therefore, look upon the possibility
of a fast by me as the sword of Damocles. If the fast does come,
welcome it and pray that God may grant me the strength to go
through it.
2. Harijan was stopped because of an unexpected letter from
Delhi. I could see from it that they were not well-disposed to-
wards the paper, and I do not want it to be made an issue in this
struggle.
3. The current political developments have had no effect on
me, for I have realized that nothing is possible just now. That
is why I have said that this is going to be a long struggle. On
the whole our good lies in that.
Mahadev has again gone today to Bombay for a day. He has
gone leaving Durga ill here. Both are courageous. They have
willingly sacrificed themselves.
My blessings to all the women.
Ba is still in Delhi. She is improving, but will take time to
get well completely.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10418. Also C.W. 6857. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
