222. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
August 16, 1909
MY LORD,
I beg to enclose herewith for your perusal copy of a letter I have
addressed to the Private Secretary to the Secretary of State for the Colo-
nies, which I hope will meet with Your Lordship's approval.
I commend to Your Lordship's attention this week's Indian
Opinion. The inquiry about the death of the Indian Nagappen shows
that the allegations made as to bad treatment have been substantially
proved. The Transvaal Leader has made very severe strictures upon the
conduct of the gaol authorities. Mr. Ritch has drawn Lord Crewe's
attention to the proceedings.
I remain, etc.,
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5016
1 In their reply of September 30, the Transvaal Ministers pointed out to the
Governor that "the allegation that the water supply in the Pretoria Prisoners Reserve
Camp is not sufficient is absolutely untrue", that prisoners had ample bathing faci-
lities, that the other allegations made in Khan's statement were without basis, that the
Indian prisoners were invariably housed in cells by themselves and were treated humane-
ly and that there was no desire on the part of the prison officers to treat them harshly
because they were passive resisters.
2 Vide the preceding item.
3 This was the issue of 17-7-1909, which reproduced from The Transvaal Leader
of 8-7-1909 a dispatch from its Pretoria correspondent reporting the official enquiry into
Sammy Nagappen's death. It was conducted by Mr. Bateman, Governor of the
Johannesburg Fort. Indian Opinion published the Leader's critical editorial of July 10
on the prevailing prison system and the character of the enquiry, demanding a fresh
judicial investigation of the case. The issue also contained similar comments by the
Pretoria News and the Jewish Chronicle and letters addressed by a number of influential
European ministers of religion to the Transvaal Press. The Government had to yield
to public opinion, and commissioned Major F. J. Dixon, Assistant Resident Magis-
trate, Pretoria, to hold a public enquiry. Vide "Letter to South Africa", pp. 483-.
4 Ritch forwarded a copy of the report of the official inquiry to the Colonial
Office on August 16.
