408. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
April 22, 1932
DEAR COL. DOYLE,
If you will turn up the file left by Major Martin, you will
find I am referring to a matter that has been pending for some
time. Kaka Kalelkar you know perhaps as well as I do. He is
at present in the Belgaum Central Prison. He was transferred
from Visapur to Belgaum. I have been trying to get accurate
information about his health and that of three other companions,
but beyond getting a little vague information after considerable
delay I have been able to make no headway. In the reply Major
Martin sent me just before he left, he said that he was asking
for the information that I had sought. The information already
received by Major Bhandari shows that Kakasaheb is weak.
Probably he has lost weight and does not get cow's milk which he
used to get here. Therefore if there are no political reasons to the
contrary, I suggest his transfer to Yeravda, and if he can be put
with me I should bring him up, I hope, to the weight he reached
here in 1930, i.e., to 116 lb.
Of the other three prisoners referred to in my letter to Major
Martin of 13th April, Narahari Parikh has nose trouble which
often causes great pain. His wife Mrs. Parikh writes saying that
she cannot even get acknowledgment from the Belgaum Prison
although she has sent reply-paid postcards. She has not heard
from her husband at all and naturally she is worrying. I have
myself written to Kakasaheb inquiring not only about him but
about the other three also, because they are all inmates of the
Ashram, but I have no reply from him or them. I would like
to have their personal letters if I may. I presume that the object
of allowing me to hold correspondence with fellow-prisoners was
to give me the human satisfaction that I need in the way of
getting information from them as to their well being.
I know that you have only just arrived and must be very
busy. I would not have worried you almost immediately on your
arrival, but for the pressing necessity of the cases I have brought
to your notice.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9
