97. LETTER TO CREDITORS
[JOHANNESBURG,
January 20, 1909]
[GENTLEMEN,]
I regret to inform you that a meeting of my creditors will be
called, at the Offices of the British Indian Association, 21-24 Court
Chambers, Corner of Rissik and Anderson Streets, at 3 p.m., on
Friday, the 22nd inst. My financial position is not the cause of calling
this meeting, but I, as Chairman of the British Indian Association, in
view of the determination of the Government to ruin the British
Indian merchants who declined to accept the Asiatic Registration Act
until the promise of General Smuts is redeemed, and until the status of
the educated Indians is placed upon a firm footing, can no longer conti-
nue to carry on my trade with safety to my creditors or myself. I
may state that, evidently on instructions from the Law Department, the
magistrates are now imposing heavy fines upon merchants who trade
without licences, without the alternative of imprisonment. Rules have
been gazetted, laying down the manner in which goods are to be sold for
these fines.
In saying this, I do not complain either about the magistrates
imposing severe penalties or about the Government framing these rules.
They are in their own estimation entitled to compel submission to their
laws. I only claim that the British Indians are in their turn entitled
to resist by their sufferings laws which they consider are in conflict with
their national honour and conscience. Under these circumstances,
so long as the struggle lasts, there is no course left open to me but to
hand over what I possess to my creditors, rather than allow those posses-
sions—which, after all, I hold in trust for them—to be sold. I am aware
that I should also consider myself responsible to convert these goods
into money, and pay my creditors in cash, but my private interests
have to give way to the public interest, and, seeing that I cannot sell
my possessions by auction, to the advantage of my creditors, I have
decided to call them together and place my position before them, and
ask them to take over the goods and my other assets. Should the struggle
happily come to an end in the near future, or whenever it ends, I should
be pleased to take over the goods as they are, and sell them for the benefit
of my creditors. But as to the disposal of my possessions at the forth-
coming meeting, I shall place myself entirely in my creditors' hands.
Indian Opinion, 23-1-1909
