322. LETTER TO "THE TRANSVAAL LEADER"
[JOHANNESBURG,]
May 23, 1914
[SIR,]
In your today's issue of the Leader, you publish certain re-
marks made by Mr. Justice Mason, to which you give the headings
"Credibility of Evidence" , "Judge's Remarks on Indians".
1 This was signed by A. M. Cachalia and was in reply to the following
report in The Transvaal Leader: "Some rather strong observations regarding the
credibility of Indian witnesses were made by Judge and counsel in the Wit-
watersrand Local Division yesterday. The case was one in which an Indian
applied for the sequestration of a compatriot's estate and the latter resisted
an order on the ground that the applicant was not a creditor to the amount of
£50 as provided by the Insolvency Law.
"Mr. Justice Mason remarked that the evidence in support of the respon-
dent's case was what one very often found in Indian cases. There generally
seemed a number of witnesses for one side fortuitously at hand when the oppo-
site side gave away its whole case. . . .
" . . . In giving judgment, Mr. Justice Mason said that the respondent's
case was that, in order to defeat other creditors, the applicant agreed with him
I have no desire in any way to controvert His Lordship's state-
ment which may be justified by the facts brought to his notice
from time to time, but it should be well understood by the public
that Mr. Justice Mason confined his remarks to a certain class of
Indians only, whom my Association has no desire to direct
from such criticism. He did not, as Mr. Greenberg appeared to
suppose, condemn Indian evidence on national or racial grounds
at all. There are also certain classes of non-Indians equally guilty
of attempts to mislead the Court, but I do not presume that, in
similar circumstances, you would speak of the Judge's remarks on
Europeans. It is notorious that lawyers, like doctors, see mainly
the seamy side of life, and they will necessarily draw conclusions
from what they see. In spite, however, of what might have been
to a less just man a strong temptation to exaggerate, Mr. Justice
Mason confined his remarks to that section of the community
which he believed to be guilty and did not level an indictment
against the whole of the Indian community, as one might suppose
from the first few lines of your report.
I trust that you will find space for this letter in order to re-
move any wrong impression that might have been created.
[I am, etc.,]
Indian Opinion, 3-6-1914
