14. LETTER TO P. S. TO LT.-GOVERNOR, TRANSVAAL
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION,
Box 6522,
JOHANNESBURG,
April 20, 1903
TO
THE PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR
PRETORIA, TRANSVAAL
SIR,
Your letter dated 31st March and numbered LG2131 was
delivered only today as the wrong box was marked on the
envelope.
The objection referred to in the letter under reply has been
fully answered by my letter of the 2nd instant which still
remains unanswered.
The affidavit of the ex-Manager of the National Bank at
Wakkerstroom shows conclusively that Hoosen Amod's store was
not closed in July 1899, but that owing to the War he closed
it himself on the 2nd day of October 1899. His store was never
closed by the Landdrost, and he could not do so because
Hoosen Amod held his licence for the full year 1899, and not
a quarterly licence as now.
The statement that Hoosen Amod's lease has not expired is,
my Committee is informed, quite correct. His lease is and has
been, my Committee is informed, in the possession of the Magis-
trate, and the Lessor is prepared to make an affidavit confirming
the statement.
Hoosen Amod informs the Committee that some interested
store-keepers in Wakkerstroom have thoroughly prejudiced the
Magistrate against him, and given him false information regarding
the alleged closing of the store by the Landdrost.
Objections have been raised against him one after another
as the previous ones failed not to allow an answer.
He has been put to considerable loss for no fault of his own.
Many Indians not having half his claims are now trading, and
Hoosen Amod, a store-keeper of ten years' standing, backed by
non-interested Europeans in Wakkerstroom and in possession
of a long lease still in existence, finds his store forcibly closed.
The Notice lately issued protects those occupying his position.
My Committee respectfully submits that the injustice he is
labouring under is manifest beyond doubt and craves justice at
His Excellency's hands.
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ABDOOL GANI
CHAIRMAN, BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Pretoria Archives : LG. 92 97/LG
