162. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS
[JOHANNESBURG,]
October 9, 1913
[ SIR,]
Messrs Medh and other British Indian passive resisters, who
last week served a term of imprisonment at the Fort of Johan-
nesburg, complained that Dr. Visser was unnecessarily and wantonly
rude and insulting to them. They were asked to strip them-
selves entirely bare in the presence of other prisoners, for medi-
cal examination. They respectfully submitted to the doctor that
it was contrary to their moral scruples and to their notions of
decency, and they added that they were prepared to submit to the
examination in a separate cell. Dr. Visser grew angry over this
request and used most insulting language. The exact expression
used by him was "the . . . coolies". He also charged them with
disobedience, but my Committee is informed that the charge was
never pursued, and that, upon their complaining to the Super-
intendent of the gaol, they were privately examined. My Com-
mittee hopes that an inquiry will be instituted into this complaint,
and necessary steps will be taken to prevent officers using language
alleged to have been used by Dr. Visser, even though it be towards
pnsoners.
The discharged passive resisters also complained that there
was no ghee or any vegetable fat supplied with their meals, as used
to be the case before. Their meals, my Committee understands,
consist of rice, mealie meal, vegetables, and a little bread. My
Committee showed, it is submitted, during the last campaign of
passive resistance, that ghee or some vegetable fat was absolutely
necessary for maintenance of the human frame in fair order. My
Committee understands that animal fat for one of the meals still
forms part of the diet given to the Native prisoners. It is therefore
respectfully requested that instructions will be issued to supply
one ounce of ghee per day, as was the case formerly with British
Indian prisoners, who are precluded from taking meat or animal
fat.
Yours, etc.,
Indian Opinion, 22-10-1913
