2. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
YERAVDA MANDIR 3 ,
June 1, 1932
CHI. PARASRAM 4 ,
I was glad to hear that Nirmala's enthusiasm for Hindi was
increasing. By all means teach Hindi poems. I do not know
whether the lines on the palms (of our hands) have any signi-
ficance, but there is no profit in trying to know what the future
holds whether through these or through astrology or by any
other means; on the contrary, it is definitely harmful. And, one
who is a lover of the Gita, i.e., who leaves the results of one's
work to God, should never desire to know the future. I have
not received the booklet, but will go through it when I get it.
Destruction of small creatures as a result of essential activities
is unavoidable. As far as possible, we should be careful about
those which we can see with our naked eyes; more than this, we
cannot do. Tiny insects like ants are not crushed under our feet
when we walk. They are protected by their very smallness. But
larger insects may be so crushed. Hence it has been regarded
as our duty to look at the ground in front of us while walking.
All these precautions are signs of our kind-heartedness, but non-
violence is something more far-reaching and wonderful. It should
1 The source has 'Xian'.
2 Premal Jyoti, by Narasinhrao Divetia; vide also p. 34.
3 Literally, Yeravda temple, that is, Yeravda Central Prison, where Gan-
dhiji was imprisoned from January 4, 1932 to May 8, 1933. This place-line is
not reproduced in subsequent letters.
4 A khadi worker and a Hindi teacher; also a member of Gandhiji's secre-
tariat for some time
be apparent in all our work, in our relationship with one another
and in all our dealings with our fellowmen. We should remain
unconcerned when we see a peacock devouring a snake. The latter
is food for the former and we cannot interfere with it. Tulsidas's
quatrain about women which you have quoted is not only not
applicable to all women but it is not even a criticism of women.
It criticizes man's sensuality. Tulsidasji's point in it is that man,
being lustful, thinks only of women, and he has written these
lines to show what man becomes like when he is seized by lust.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7500. Also C.W. 4977. Courtesy:
Parasram Mehrotra
