3. LETTER TO LORD IRWIN
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, SABARMATI,
March 2, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,
Before embarking on civil disobedience and taking the risk
I have dreaded to take all these years, I would fain approach
you and find a way out.
My personal faith is absolutely clear. I cannot intentionally
hurt anything that lives, much less fellow human beings, even
though they may do the greatest wrong to me and mine. Whilst,
therefore, I hold the British rule to be a curse, I do not intend
harm to a single Englishman or to any legitimate interest he may
have in India.
I must not be misunderstood. Though I hold the British rule
in India to be a curse, I do not, therefore, consider Englishmen
in general to be worse than any other people on earth. I have
the privilege of claiming many Englishmen as dearest friends.
Indeed much that I have learnt of the evil of British rule is due to
the writings of frank and courageous Englishmen who have not
hesitated to tell the unpalatable truth about that rule.
And why do I regard the British rule as a curse?
It has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of progres-
sive exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil
administration which the country can never afford.
It has reduced us politically to serfdom. It has sapped the
foundations of our culture. And, by the policy of cruel dis-
armament, it has degraded us spiritually. Lacking the inward
strength, we have been reduced, by all but universal disarmament,
to a state bordering on cowardly helplessness.
In common with many of my countrymen, I had hugged the
fond hope that the proposed Round Table Conference might
furnish a solution. But, when you said plainly that you could
not give any assurance that you or the British Cabinet would
pledge yourselves to support a scheme of full Dominion Status,
the Round Table Conference could not possibly furnish the
solution for which vocal India is consciously, and the dumb mil-
lions are unconsciously, thirsting. Needless to say there never
was any question of Parliament's verdict being anticipated. Instances
are not wanting of the British Cabinet, in anticipation of the
Parliamentary verdict, having pledged itself to a particular policy.
The Delhi interview having miscarried, there was no option
for Pandit Motilal Nehru and me but to take steps to carry out
the solemn resolution of the Congress arrived at in Calcutta at
its Session in 1928.
But the Resolution of Independence should cause no alarm, if
the word Dominion Status mentioned in your announcement had
been used in its accepted sense. For, has it not been admitted
by responsible British statesmen that Dominion Status is virtual
Independence? What, however, I fear is that there never has
been any intention of granting such Dominion Status to India in
the immediate future.
But this is all past history. Since the announcement many
events have happened which show unmistakably the trend of
British policy.
It seems as clear as daylight that responsible British statesmen
do not contemplate any alteration in British policy that might
adversely affect Britain's commerce with India or require an im-
partial and close scrutiny of Britain's transactions with India. If
nothing is done to end the process of exploitation India must be
bled with an ever increasing speed. The Finance Member regards
as a settled fact the 1/ ratio which by a stroke of the pen drains
India of a few crores. And when a serious attempt is being made
through a civil form of direct action, to unsettle this fact, among
many others, even you cannot help appealing to the wealthy
landed classes to help you to crush that attempt in the name of
an order that grinds India to atoms.
Unless those who work in the name of the nation understand
and keep before all concerned the motive that lies behind the
craving for independence, there is every danger of independence
coming to us so changed as to be of no value to those toiling
voiceless millions for whom it is sought and for whom it is worth
taking. It is for that reason that I have been recently telling the
public what independence should really mean.
Let me put before you some of the salient points.
The terrific pressure of land revenue, which furnishes a large
part of the total, must undergo considerable modification in an
independent India. Even the much vaunted permanent settlement
benefits the few rich zamindars, not the ryots. The ryot has re-
mained as helpless as ever. He is a mere tenant at will. Not
only, then, has the land revenue to be considerably reduced, but
the whole revenue system has to be so revised as to make the
ryot's good its primary concern. But the British system seems to
be designed to crush the very life out of him. Even the salt he
must use to live is so taxed as to make the burden fall heaviest
on him, if only because of the heartless impartiality of its incid-
ence. The tax shows itself still more burdensome on the poor
man when it is remembered that salt is the one thing he must
eat more than the rich man both individually and collectively.
The drink and drug revenue, too, is derived from the poor. It
saps the foundations both of their health and morals. It is defend-
ed under the false plea of individual freedom, but, in reality, is
maintained for its own sake. The ingenuity of the authors of the
reforms of 1919 transferred this revenue to the so-called responsible
part of dyarchy, so as to throw the burden of prohibition on it,
thus, from the very beginning, rendering it powerless for good. If
the unhappy minister wipes out this revenue he must starve
education, since in the existing circumstances he has no new source
of replacing that revenue. If the weight of taxation has crushed
the poor from above, the destruction of the central supplementary
industry, i.e., hand-spinning, has undermined their capacity for
producing wealth. The tale of India's ruination is not complete
without reference to the liabilities incurred in her name. Sufficient
has been recently said about these in the public Press. It must
be the duty of a free India to subject all the liabilities to the strictest
investigation, and repudiate those that may be adjudged by an
impartial tribunal to be unjust and unfair.
The iniquities sampled above are maintained in order to
carry on a foreign administration, demonstrably the most expensive
in the world. Take your own salary. It is over Rs. 21,000 per
month, besides many other indirect additions. The British Prime
Minister gets £ 5,000 per year, i.e., over Rs. 5,400 per month at
the present rate of exchange. You are getting over Rs. 700 per
day against India's average income of less than annas 2 per day.
The Prime Minister gets Rs. 180 per day against Great Britain's
average income of nearly Rs. 2 per day. Thus you are getting
much over five thousand times India's average income. The British
Prime Minister is getting only ninety times Britain's average income.
On bended knees I ask you to ponder over this phenomenon. I
have taken a personal illustration to drive home a painful truth.
I have too great a regard for you as a man to wish to hurt
your feelings. I know that you do not need the salary you get.
Probably the whole of your salary goes for charity. But a system
that provides for such an arrangement deserves to be summarily
scrapped. What is true of the Viceregal salary is true generally
of the whole administration.
A radical cutting down of the revenue, therefore, depends upon
an equally radical reduction in the expenses of the administration.
This means a transformation of the scheme of government. This
transformation is impossible without independence. Hence, in my
opinion, the spontaneous demonstration of 26th January, in which
hundreds of thousands of villagers instinctively participated. To
them independence means deliverance from the killing weight.
Not one of the great British political parties, it seems to me,
is prepared to give up the Indian spoils to which Great Britain
helps herself from day to day, often, in spite of the unanimous
opposition of Indian opinion.
Nevertheless, if India is to live as a nation, if the slow
death by starvation of her people is to stop, some remedy must be
found for immediate relief. The proposed Conference is certainly
not the remedy. It is not a matter of carrying conviction by
argument. The matter resolves itself into one of matching forces.
Conviction or no conviction, Great Britain would defend her Indian
commerce and interests by all the forces at her command. India
must consequently evolve force enough to free herself from that
embrace of death.
It is common cause that, however disorganized and, for
the time being, insignificant it may be, the party of violence is
gaining ground and making itself felt. Its end is the same as
mine. But I am convinced that it cannot bring the desired relief
to the dumb millions. And the conviction is growing deeper and
deeper in me that nothing but unadulterated non-violence can
check the organized violence of the British Government. Many
think that non-violence is not an active force. My experience,
limited though it undoubtedly is, shows that non-violence can be
an intensely active force. It is my purpose to set in motion that
force as well against the organized violent force of the British
rule as [against] the unorganized violent force of the growing party
of violence. To sit still would be to give rein to both the forces
above mentioned. Having an unquestioning and immovable faith
in the efficacy of non-violence as I know it, it would be sinful
on my part to wait any longer.
This non-violence will be expressed through civil disobedience,
for the moment confined to the inmates of the Satyagraha Ashram,
but ultimately designed to cover all those who choose to join the
movement with its obvious limitations.
I know that in embarking on non-violence I shall be run-
ning what might fairly be termed a mad risk. But the victories of
truth have never been won without risks, often of the gravest
character. Conversion of a nation that has consciously or un-
consciously preyed upon another, far more numerous, far more
ancient and no less cultured than itself, is worth any amount of
risk.
I have deliberately used the word "conversion". For my am-
bition is no less than to convert the British people through non-
violence, and thus make them see the wrong they have done to
India. I do not seek to harm your people. I want to serve them
even as I want to serve my own. I believe that I have always
served them. I served them up to 1919 blindly. But when my
eyes were opened and I conceived non-co-operation, the object still
was to serve them. I employed the same weapon that I have in
all humility successfully used against the dearest members of my
family. If I have equal love for your people with mine it will
not long remain hidden. It will be acknowledged by them even
as the members of my family acknowledged it after they had tried
me for several years. If the people join me as I expect they will,
the sufferings they will undergo, unless the British nation sooner
retraces its steps, will be enough to melt the stoniest hearts.
The plan through civil disobedience will be to combat such
evils as I have sampled out. If we want to sever the British
connection it is because of such evils. When they are removed
the path becomes easy. Then the way to friendly negotiation
will be open. If the British commerce with India is purified of
greed, you will have no difficulty in recognizing our independence.
I respectfully invite you then to pave the way for immediate re-
moval of those evils, and thus open a way for a real conference
between equals, interested only in promoting the common good
of mankind through voluntary fellowship and in arranging terms
of mutual help and commerce equally suited to both. You have
unnecessarily laid stress upon the communal problems that un-
happily affect this land. Important though they undoubtedly are
for the consideration of any scheme of government, they have little
bearing on the greater problems which are above communities and
which affect them all equally. But if you cannot see your way to
deal with these evils and my letter makes no appeal to your heart,
on the 11th day of this month, I shall proceed with such co-workers
of the Ashram as I can take, to disregard the provisions of the
salt laws. I regard this tax to be the most iniquitous of all from
the poor man's standpoint. As the independence movement is
essentially for the poorest in the land the beginning will be made
with this evil. The wonder is that we have submitted to the cruel
monopoly for so long. It is, I know, open to you to frustrate
my design by arresting me. I hope that there will be tens of
thousands ready, in a disciplined manner, to take up the work
after me, and, in the act of disobeying the Salt Act to lay them-
selves open to the penalties of a law that should never have dis-
figured the Statute-book.
I have no desire to cause you unnecessary embarrassment, or
any at all, so far as I can help. If you think that there is any
substance in my letter, and if you will care to discuss matters with
me, and if to that end you would like me to postpone publica-
tion of this letter, I shall gladly refrain on receipt of a telegram
to that effect soon after this reaches you. You will, however, do
me the favour not to deflect me from my course unless you can
see your way to conform to the substance of this letter.
This letter is not in any way intended as a threat but is a
simple and sacred duty peremptory on a civil resister. Therefore
I am having it specially delivered by a young English friend who
believes in the Indian cause and is a full believer in non-violence
and whom Providence seems to have sent to me, as it were, for
the very purpose.
I remain,
Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
H. E. LORD IRWIN
VICEROY'S HOUSE
NEW DELHI-
Young India, 12-3-1930; also S.N. 16624
