243. LETTER TO SONIRAMJI
July 21, 1932
BROTHER SONIRAMJI 2 ,
I am in receipt of your letter. I have heard many interpreta-
tions of the occult significance of the sacred thread. But all these
interpretations are only guesses. I do not think that all these
ideas were present at the time when the sacred thread came into
use. Those people who described themselves as Aryans adopted
the use of the sacred thread in order to distinguish between Aryans
and non-Aryans. This must have happened at the time when the
art of making cloth from cotton was discovered. Crores of people
merely put on the dhoti then, as they do even now, with the rest
of the body uncovered. In any case those who are believed to
be non-Aryans did so. The Aryans, therefore, adopted the sym-
bol of the sacred thread in order to encourage and improve the
art of spinning and prove that it was sacred work. I have no evi-
dence from history in support of this statement. It is only my
conjecture. Today there is no distinction-and there ought not to
be any-between Aryans and non-Aryans.
An admixture of
blood between the two races took place thousands of years ago and
the present inhabitants of India are the progeny of such an ad-
mixture. If the sacred thread is to be worn at all, all [the castes]
should have the right to wear it. I see no meaning in such a
movement. For this reason, after giving up the use of the sacred
thread I never tried to wear it again nor do I wish to do so.
Inasmuch as the practice of wearing the sacred thread is likely to
have created the distinction between higher and lower castes, it
should be discarded. I would advise Gauri Prasad to give up his
infatuation for the sacred thread. It is the sign of a brahmachari.
If a person observes brahmacharya that itself is the best sacred thread.
Why is a cotton thread needed?
To keep the water in a well clean it should be covered with a
wire-netting. There ought not to be any dirt anywhere around it.
The well should be deep and (a certain quantity of) "permanganate
of potash" or chlorine should be put into it every month. The
quantity (of the drug) to be used should be ascertained from a
doctor. In addition to taking these precautions it would be advi-
sable to get the water analysed from time to time.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. I, pp. 323-4, and Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. 11, pp. 403-
