331. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 7, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,
I have your several letters. As to the second edition of
Holloway's, we must give up the idea for the time being.
As to the second Harijan day, can you tell me how much
was collected on the previous Harijan day?
It is most vexing that the Hindi Harijan is taking all this time.
I wonder if I sent you or Ghanshyamdas an offer from Delhi from a
man to take over his weekly which he is now publishing-6G1Q. It
might be worth while seeing him. According to his statement,
Indra knows him.
The English edition would be out on Saturday. We are bring-
ing out 10,000 copies of the first issue. It will be stopped if it does
not become self-supporting, and it cannot but be self-supporting
if all the Provincial Boards subscribe to a certain number of copies.
They must need them for their workers if they are efficiently work-
ing organizations. Every such organization has to have a common
organ. This applies to you also. So you will please telegraph
to me how many copies you will want and you have to pay in
advance for the copies you may need. You may send for the mini-
mum number, so that at your end too there may be no waste.
Some copies no doubt you will have to distribute free.
I would like you also to send Patwardhan a cheque or draft
for Rs. 500. I had Rs. 544-6- with me which I wanted to trans-
fer to you, but now I am paying that amount to Patwardhan.
It would be regarded as a loan as from you to the paper, and
as soon as subscriptions arrive, the loan will be refunded, unless
there is a loss from the very commencement. Thus, you will credit
me with Rs. [5]44-6- as having been received from me for un-
touchability work and debit Harijan with Rs. 544-6- in addition
to the Rs. 500 I have asked you to send from there. Patwar-
dhan cannot possibly need more than Rs. 1000 to go on with.
Before he begins to receive subscriptions, moneys have to be dis-
bursed for stamps, wages and paper.
If there is any news to impart for publication in Harijan you
should send a telegram to Shastri; as a matter of fact, if you are
receiving reports from all the Boards, you should be able to send
Shastri a press telegram every week.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1108
