293. LETTER TO LORD AMPTHILL
[LONDON,]
October 5, 1909
MY LORD,
I beg to thank you for your letter of the 4th instant. I hope that you
enjoyed the short holiday you were able to give yourself. I purposely
refrained from wearying you with any further information on the sub-
ject. I may now, however, state that Mr. Polak has been very active
in India. The public meeting in Bombay was a very great success. Since
then, meetings have been held at Surat, Ahmedabad and Kathore.
The Indian Press has been discussing the question at much greater
length than heretofore and certainly much more intelligently. It now
recognises, as it did not do before, that the Transvaal Indians are suffering
not for achieving a selfish purpose, but for removing national dishonour.
I gratefully note your advice as to Lord Morley's letter, and the
information you gave me as to the question you have on the Notice
Paper of the House of Lords.
I have just received a reply from Lord Crewe, copy of which and
draft reply thereto I enclose herewith—the latter for your approval or
amendment. The reply comes close on what appeared in The Times
yesterday from its Johannesburg correspondent. Mr. Smuts spoke to
the Rand Pioneers, and the correspondent giving the purport of his
speech says:
Mr. Smuts did not touch on current politics, although various efforts were made
to draw him on such questions as, the views of the Government on the subject of
coalition, and the rumoured change in the position taken up towards the Asiatic
passive resisters. The latter still remains a rumour.
Lord Crewe's letter, in my opinion, is both satisfactory and highly
unsatisfactory—unsatisfactory, because Lord Crewe evidently fears
Mr. Smuts unduly: satisfactory, because negot[iation]. . .3
I feel that Mr. Hajee Habib and I should not go away without
undertaking some public activity. At first thought, this is what appears
to be necessary. We should address, if it is possible, a meeting of the
members of the House of Commons who would care to listen to us;
we should invite assistance and co-operation from all part[ies;] we
should place the position before representatives of various religious
denominations; we should circulate the short statement which has been
approved by you, with a covering letter bringing the situation up to
date; interview those editors who would permit us to see them and
address a general letter to the Press. This would probably mean our
staying at least to the end of the month. I am also again considering
whether it may not be wise for us to pay, subject to consent from the
European and the Indian committees in Johannesburg, a brief visit to
India and then return via London to South Africa. The first step, how-
ever, I take it, would be to send a letter to Lord Crewe, which I would
do as soon as I have the draft returned by Your Lordship. With refe-
rence to the rest—at your discretion we might have a discussion if you
could spare the time and are coming to the city, or, in the absence there-
of, I would value Your Lordship's advice.
I remain, etc.,
1 This was answered by Lord Crewe on November 16, when the House of
Lords assembled for the winter session.
2 This was dated October 4; vide the enclosure, p. 457.
3 A line is missing here.
4 This was released on November 5, 1909.
5 Gandhiji and Lord Ampthill met the next afternoon.
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT LETTER
[LONDON,]
October 5, 1909
THE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE
COLONIAL OFFICE, S. W.
SIR,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
4th instant, in connection with the British Indian question in the Trans-
vaal. Mr. Hajee Habib and I are grateful to the Earl of Crewe for the
efforts His Lordship has made and will still make in order to bring about
a satisfactory settlement, but my colleague and I feel that it is time for us
to inform public opinion before our departure, which we are desirous
not to indefinitely prolong. I assume that the Earl of Crewe has no
objection to our making public the net result of the negotiations, so
far as they have progressed.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5111-
