496. LETTER TO KASTURBA GANDHI
CHANDANPUR,
May 10, 1934
BA,
I have still not received your letter this time. The above place,
where I am writing this, is ten miles from Puri. It is one o'clock
after midnight just now. After cleaning my teeth, I wrote one
postcard and have now taken up this letter for you.
We decided
the day before yesterday that from now on I should tour on foot.
One cannot propagate dharma by travelling in trains or cars, nor in
bullock-carts. That can be done only on foot. The local leaders
and Thakkar Bapa finally agreed. We started the tour on foot
the very same day. This has given me new strength. Yesterday
we covered more than eight miles, but I felt no fatigue. I have
got up quite fresh at this odd hour. People came in huge crowds,
but there was complete peace. The pushing and jostling had
stopped.
Comparatively more work was done. The composition
of the party remains the same. Among the women, Sushila, Prabha-
vati, Om and Mira are there of course. Besides them there are
Purbai Sonamani who was in the Ashram, and Ramabai, Gopa-
bandhubabu's wife. Jivrambhai also is in the party. And so
also are Harakhchand, Purushottam's father-in-law. All of them
will part from us at Cuttack. From there I shall have to go to
Patna for three days. The All-India Congress Committee is
meeting there. Personally I want to return from there to Orissa
and complete the tour. But that will be finally decided when I
meet the other co-workers.
Kusum Desai had met me in Puri. She has gone to her
relations in Calcutta. She is likely to see me again in Patna.
Vasumati is in Wardha. Ramdas, Nimu and the child are quite
happy, as also Devdas, Lakshmi and her baby; also Hariji, Lakshmi
and her baby. Pyarelal is still with Rajendrababu. Valjibhai, Bal
and Prithuraj are with me. Chandrashankar is not in the party.
He is still ill. I send with this a copy of the Gita Praveshika or
Ramagita. You will have no difficulty in understanding it. If you
want another copy, let me know. Leave this one behind you.
I have already written to you suggesting what you should do after
you are released. However, do what you like. There was a letter
from Uttamchand. He has gone to Maroli. His wife too has
gone with him.
Blessings to all from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Bane Patro, pp. 25-
