307. LETTER TO "THE OUTLOOK"
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before January 12, 1907]
[TO
THE EDITOR
THE OUTLOOK
SIR,]
May I congratulate you on having recognized by your exhaus-
tive leader on "British Indians in the Transvaal" in your issue of
November 24 the Imperial importance of the question? And may I, at
the same time, point out that you have, in justifying the anti-Indian
policy of the Europeans, done, no doubt unconsciously, an injustice to
British Indians in a twofold manner?
First, in my humble opinion, you have missed the central question.
You seem to think that Indians on the one hand demand an open door
for an unrestricted influx of their countrymen, and that the white colo-
nists on the other, from an instinct of self-preservation, demand that the
door should be tightly closed. Such, however, is not the case. Indians
ask for the ordinary civil rights enjoyed by all human beings, except
criminals, in any civilized state. They admit the principle of restric-
tion of further immigration of their brethren along the lines even as
adopted by Australia, but they say, with Mr. Chamberlain1, that they
may not be restricted solely because they are British Indians. If Impe-
rialism has any meaning, how can any exception be taken to a position
such as above? I have no doubt that you, sir, will admit that even
1 Vide Vol. II, pp. 354-.
a self-governing colony, so long as it chooses to remain a part of
the Empire, may not go so far as to degrade and ill-treat those whom it
finds settled within its borders on assumption of self-governing powers.
Secondly, you talk of the necessity of sacrifice of a "principle of logic"
(as you are pleased to term it) to the principle of "high expediency". To
me, it is not logic so much as morality you would sacrifice on the altar
of expediency; but assuming that a logical or a moral principle may be
so sacrificed, what is "higher expediency"? It is a wanton wounding
of the susceptibilities of a finely strung and highly loyal community like
the millions of India, or a firm refusal on the part of the Imperial watch-
dog sitting, in Lord Milner's language, on the watch-tower, and sweep-
ing the whole horizon before him to protect an unreasoning and
unreasonable colour prejudice.
You incidentally mention the Treaty of Vereeniging. May I draw
your attention to the fact that, even if the term "Native" as used there
were to include British Indians, it merely suspends a consideration of
the granting of the political franchise to the "Natives" until after the
establishment of responsible government in the Colony. British Indians
have, however, in unmistakable language stated that they do not aspire,
at any rate at the present stage, to political power.
I am,
Yours, etc.,
M. K.
Indian Opinion, 12-1-1907
