507. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR,
December 7, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,
Hitherto I had been an admiring reader of your articles. That
admiration remains, but now there is added to it the viewpoint
of a student and a critic. I see that your book is not a self-
teacher on the subject. By reading it one cannot learn carding.
Even those who know it a little would not be able to carry out
the reforms you suggest. The book is excellent in itself, but as a
self-teacher it seems to me incomplete. As far as I have under-
stood your book I think you have rejected the method you had
explained to me and have followed a new one. I thought I had
already adopted it. But on reading your book again, I find that I
had done nothing new at all. Now my suggestion is that you
should send me a draft lesson as if you were teaching me the
method. It is not necessary to rewrite the whole of your book. How
much cotton should I hold out to the string at a time and in
how many pulls should it get carded? With how much cotton
should I begin the carding? Should the pad be arranged anew
every day and why should it be of half-carded cotton? And should
that in its turn be carded the same day? Should all the cotton put
on the mat in the beginning be carded the same day? As we pull
at the string, the bow also swings, doesn't it? The left hand should
be used only for raising and lowering the carding-bow and it is
moved forwards and backwards by the action of the rod; isn't that
what you mean? If you cannot find time to explain all this, don't
pay any attention to this letter. Your main work is to examine those
who are learning there and improve their proficiency. I am like a
by-stander who is looking on. I know that I have no right to engage
your attention on such matters just now. This letter has two aims,
one to point out the deficiencies in the book and the other to seek
help for myself. Treat the second as of less importance. I have
put briefly to Vithal the questions I have asked above. Let him
give me his time. He will learn something while doing so.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3749
365
