364. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ON WAY TO WARDHA,
November 18, 1937
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,
I fancy I could read the personal letter in your eyes as you
were hovering round me that awful Sunday night and silent
Monday. The weakness has not yet left me. I need pro-
longed rest from all mental toil, but that perhaps cannot be had.
This I write to report to you what I have done about the
prisoners in Bengal, and to ascertain whether it meets with your
approval. The negotiations have been a taxing affair. Before
entering upon them I had consulted the two Brothers as to
the desirability of securing relief through negotiations. It was
possible to be indifferent as to the result and rely upon the growth
of public opinion forcing release whenever it was to come. The
Brothers were emphatically for negotiations, whilst public agi-
tation continued. I unfolded my plan also and it was after
the style of my telegram to the Andamans prisoners. And so I
saw the repatriates detenus brought back from Deoli and last
night the Hijli prisoners. The Ministers have agreed to release
what they call 'village and home domiciled' detenus almost forth-
with, and inside of four months to release those in the detenu
camps whom they may consider to be safe. For the rest they
will accept my recommendation, if they are not earlier released.
My recommendation will depend upon my ascertaining the
present belief of the detenus. If I am able to say to the Govern-
ment that they do not believe in methods of violence for the at-
tainment of independence and that they will pursue such Con-
gress activities as are approved of by the Congress from time to
time, they will release them. A declaration of policy might
be made any time. I need not go into the details of the conver-
sations with the prisoners in the several prisons and in Hijli
camp. I wonder if all this commends itself to you. If you
strongly disapprove of it, I would like you to telegraph. Other-
wise I shall await your letter.
The strikes in Ahmedabad of which I have no knowledge,
except from what I gather from the papers, as also what the
papers say about Sholapur, disturbed me. If we cannot control
the situation either because a section of the Congressmen would
not submit to Congress discipline or because the Congress cannot
control the activities of those who are outside the Congress
influence, our holding of offices is bound to prove detrimental
to the Congress cause.
The 'Bande Mataram' controversy has not yet died out.
Many Bengalis are sore at heart over the W. C. decision. Subhas
told me he was trying to calm the atmosphere.
I expect to have to go back to Bengal soon after the assump-
tion of office by the incoming Governor.
I hope you are keeping well. The paragraph in the news-
paper about Sarup was disturbing. Is her health unequal to
the strain she is undergoing?
This is being written as we are nearing Nagpur. We
arrive Wardha this evening.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1937. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 247-
