2. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
PHOENIX,
Saturday [September 19, 1908]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE 2 ,
You have certainly developed a taste for elegant letter-writing. I
hope it will continue and that not only regarding the Upper House but
regarding all.
I can no longer use my right hand. The fingers have suffered through
overuse. They may regain their elasticity after some time. This is an
effort to write with the left hand.
Many thanks for the curtains and the baths. Both will be most useful.
You never do things in halves. The bath having come by the passenger
train has cost 13/- on carriage. The curtains are also included. But
seeing that you always believe you have money, I am not going to
pay anything. Has it not been said that what is yours is mine too although
mine is not yours. This is a very suitable doctrine for one party to
the contract and I suppose I must put up with it till at last I have
nothing else but joint property stock. Of course wife is delighted that
she is to have curtains instead of a table cloth for a wall in front of
her. Mrs. Pywell went mad over them and had all kinds of suggestions
and when I said that we might use one curtain only and dispense with
the elegant folds she had no hesitation in her own mind in voting me
down an idiot. In order to counterbalance, I should suggest sacking
for curtains. But then wife would simply kick. I have now to think
of a few shillings for rods, etc. The bath was used yesterday for a
patient on the settlement.
I am glad you have the £76 from Riversdale, but my gladness is
much tempered by the thought that the bulk of it may find its way
to Hepworths or others for more superfluous clothes, tools and other
toys for the 'baby' (I am not responsible for the expression).
1 The date is inferred from the reference to payment of fine and the message
for Doke ; vide Vol. IX, pp. 57-8, 100-101 and 105.
2 Nickname given by Gandhiji to the addressee, a prosperous German
architect, who became his close associate in his experiments in simple living,
sharing with him a special bond. Upon his death on March 25, 1945, Gandhiji
wrote: "He used to say to me often that when I was deserted by the whole
world, I would find him to be a true friend going with me, if need be, to the
ends of the earth in search of truth." Vide Vol. LXXIX, p. 301.
3 Mother-in-law of A. H. West
3
Cordes has gone to Delagoa Bay. He will soon be with you. He
is very ill-balanced. His nerves are high-strung. You will be able to
soothe him. He loves you and values your advice. Many of his
inferences, which he calls facts, are bad and without foundation. I will
leave here Monday, the 21st instant, pass Wednesday there, return to
Volksrust by the Wednesday evening mail.
Please tell Mr. Doke 2 that I have not been able to collect my
thoughts for the message he wants. This was begun on Saturday and
has been written in 3 sections. Now it is Monday morning. I may
however have time today as wife is really looking remarkably well.
Now for business. I am sure I cannot pay the fine and go to London.
It is not my working up the authorities in London I rely upon. Passive
resistance is not that. I am certain that I should work better being
in gaol. It is good for me and equally so for the people. After all the
chief thing is to educate them; to show them how to suffer for communal
good. When the time comes to go to London for the sake of the struggle
the way will be open. We won't have to force it then.
If you and Mr. Doke come here I should feel delighted. I am half-
minded to send a wire but am not going to.
Please remember me to the 'monster' expert.
Yours sincerely,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India
