207. LETTER TO D. R. MAJLI
POST ANDHERI,
March 23, 1924
MY DEAR MAJU,
Early in the morning my first thought went out to you, and
I asked myself how I could help you to be yourself again. Belgaum
is to have the honour of holding the next Congress Session.
I know you want to take your part in the preparations. I know
also that you are one of the best of workers. All that you need do
is to become perfectly calm and get rid of excitement. I fear that
you have been thinking too much, in the jail, of our country's
troubles; but it would not do for us merely to be thinking of the
troubles. What are we? We should leave all the cares to God.
Ours is to do our level best in lightening the burdens of India.
Have you ever read Tulsidas's Ramayana? If you do not know
Hindi fairly well, probably you have not read it. The great saint
wrote his Ramayana, in my opinion, to glorify Rama's name. For
me it has been a talisman. My nurse, whom I used to love as
my mother, and in whose company much more of my time was
passed in childhood than in my mother's, used to tell me that if
I thought of evil spirits at night and dreaded them, I could
ward them off by repeating the name of Rama. Having faith in
the nurse, I followed her prescription, and whenever at night vague
fears seized hold of me, I used to recite the sacred name, and it
answered the purpose. As I grew old, the faith weakened. My
mentor, the nurse, was dead. I ceased to take the name of Rama,
1 This paragraph constitutes the message which was read at a meeting
of the Journalists' Association at the Voice of India Office, Bombay, on March
25; K. Natarajan, editor of The Indian Social Riformer, presided.
2 This was held in December 1924 under Gandhiji's presidentship.
3 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. X.
and my fears revived. In the jail I read the Ramayana with greater
attention and still greater devotion than ever before, and whenever
I felt lonely or felt the pride in me rising and telling me that I
could do something for India, to give me due humility and to make
me experience the presence of the Almighty, and thus to remove my
loneliness, I used calmly to recite the name Rama with all the halo
that Tulsidas has surrounded it with. I cannot put in words the
indescribable peace that then came on me. As you know, Mr.
Banker was torn away from me for some time. When he rejoined
me, he related his own experiences to me. He used to experience
all kinds of dreadful things after the cell-door was cruelly locked
upon him. But he related to me graphically how the recitation of
the name calmed him and gave him strength also to shed all those
unbecoming fears. I, therefore, send you the much-tried prescrip-
tion. Think, whenever you feel you are excited, of Rama and the
peace-giving nature of the recitation. Continue to recite the name
slowly, forgetting everything, and considering yourself as one of
the tiniest atoms in the mighty universe, and God willing the excite-
ment will subside, and you will experience a blissful peace. The
sages of old knew from experience what they were saying when
they prescribed for troubled souls Ramanama, Dwadash Mantra
and such other things. The more I think of them, the more true
all those mantras appear to me today. I wish you could have
faith enough to repeat Ramanama or such mantra which memory
might have hallowed for you, and I know that you will soon be
yourself again.
Yours sincerely,
[Ps.]
You know that you owe me a letter. I wrote immediately
in reply to your postcard. I await your acknowledgement of
my letter.
SJT. D. R. MAJLI
BELGAUM
From a copy : C.W. 5141. Courtesy : Krishnadas
