628. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
September 24, 1935
MY DEAR KHER,
I ought to have written this to you whilst Swami was here,
but I simply could not do it and then it escaped me altogether,
till I got a reminder from Swami yesterday afternoon. I see no
contradiction between what Thakkar Bapa has written and what I
conveyed to Swami. Harijan Sevak Sangh won't take direct
responsibility of owning the property in Pandharpur, but it will
provide the majority of trustees and continue to do so, as vacan-
cies occur by any reason whatsoever. The idea behind this
arrangement is that the Sangh should not undertake any financial
responsibility. Its burden would be fully discharged when it has
appointed trustees who are able to manage property financially
and otherwise. This proposition was adopted under my advice.
The Sangh has not sufficient workers to enable it to take charge of
properties that are being offered to it. This Pandharpur proposi-
tion has been entertained because you and Swami are interested
in it and because both of you are connected with the donor, who
I am sure holds advanced and liberal views on untouchability and
other matters and who wholly endorses the Sangh's campaign
against untouchability. I hope this is sufficiently clear and quite
satisfactory from the point of view of the Buva. If any further
elucidation is required please do not hesitate to write to me. I
understand from Shri Kavde who was here for two days that the
Buva was expected to be somewhere near Wardha during the first
week of October. If that does happen I would like you to urge
him to pass a few days with me at Maganwadi so that I can
make his personal acquaintance and understand his desire about the
management of the Dharmashala in Pandharpur. In view of the
conversation I had with Swami and Shri Kavde I would advise
that in drawing up the trust-deed you give the trustees full powers
of mortgage, alienation, etc., so long as the corpus is used for the
exclusive benefit of Harijans. I have explained to Swami why I
consider the possession of this power by the trustees as a vital part
of the deed.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
443
