377. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
April 7, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,
I have your letters and enclosures, also copy of an article of
yours in an old number of The Modern Review.
I understand and even appreciate the moral repulsion against
'fasting unto death'. I have perhaps some repulsion, if not the
same repulsion, against fasting unto death myself, but I remain
unmoved. There are many other things I have done and am still
doing against my will, because I count my will as nothing
before God's will when I see it clearly before me. I will make
myself as certain as it is humanly possible to be that the will that
appears to me to be God's is really His, and not the Devil's.
But when I am clear about it, I rejoice in obeying that will,
rather than mine, although I may have no human companion
to endorse it. That this kind of fasting has a definite place in
Hinduism, and properly so, I have not a shadow of a doubt,
but it is a privilege that comes only to a few, and when it comes
in obedience to a call from above, it has a mighty force, only
fasting unto death is a corrupt expression. Where I used it first,
it had its definite meaning. Now it is being used torn from its
context and looks certainly barbarous. But it is there, and its
real meaning is unmistakable, and you can almost say that It is
not so much a 'fasting unto death' as it is a 'fasting unto a new
life'.
All the same, I value your letter and the information you
give me about the English attitude. I do want English sympathy
in this big struggle. I do want also to be understood. You
cannot therefore be too frank or too communicative with me. I
shall never misunderstand whatever these few English friends
might have to say.
Kirby Page's article which you have sent I shall see as soon
as I get time, and if there is anything worth saying, I shall
reduce it to writing.
I hope that your brother's septic teeth were extracted and
that he had benefited by the extraction.
You know all about Verrier's change of mind. He had
changed it before your blessings were received, and you know the
reason also for the change. Whilst I was prepared to bless the
marriage, I cannot help saying that I blessed the change still
more. So much depended upon Verrier's decision. I told him
that if it was a human want on his part, he must marry, no matter
what misinterpretation might be put upon his action. The change
came over both Verrier and Mary without any prompting from
anybody at all.
Yours sincerely,
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 1301; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40) (3), Pt. IV, pp. 281-
