289. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 2, 1933
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I hope you got my wire regarding Jnana. Chhaganlal's letter
is enclosed. I infer from it that Jnana has not arrived there. If
you have been able to know how Jnana had agreed, please let me
know.
I don't see any necessity at all for you to put yourself to
trouble for attending the meeting on the 12th. You may commu-
nicate your views, if you wish to. If I think it necessary, I will
read it out. The better course would be to send it to Aneyji.
You need not come for Kamala either. Everything possible
will be done. I have been making inquiries. Kamalnayan pays
frequent visits. I saw Janakidevi also. Kamala, too, came and saw
me. She is still a child. She has grown up in an atmosphere of
loving indulgence and, therefore, has not developed a proper sense
of responsibility. That is not her fault. Our children naturally
take after us. We may change as we grow older, but our children
cannot adopt all the changes which take place in us. Harilal is a
convincing example of this. He has crossed all limits, and that,
too, openly. I craved inwardly for pleasures of the senses but gra-
dually acquired outward self-control. If I had not succeeded
in the end in controlling my mind, too, I would have been
rightly counted a hypocrite. But how can we expect that the
changes which took place in me would have any effect on Hari-
lal? I am afraid I have strayed from the subject and inflicted a
sermon on you.
Take care of your health in everything you do. If Prabhu-
das has come there, let me know what his condition of mind is.
What does he intend to do now?
How is the health of Vinoba, Balkrishna and Chhotelal?
Radhika was here for some time. She is in Deolali now.
Keshu is still here. He is calm. He has not been able to come
to a decision yet. I think he will by and by. I have given
him plenty of time for the purpose.
What have you decided to do about the sum of Rs. 5,000
which Sushila, Lakshminivas's wife, has donated for Harijan work?
Devdas and Lakshmi live in Ranchhoddas's bungalow.
Rajaji lives with Ghanshyamdas. My health is steadily im-
proving. I walk three times a day and for 45 minutes in all.
The weight has reached 97 pounds. It will increase still further.
There is no cause now for worrying about me.
Most probably, Narandas's Purushottam will come here and
receive training under Dinshawji in nature-cure methods.
When do you expect your work there to be finished? Giridhari
will be re-arrested today. He was released yesterday. He was
ordered to go to Hyderabad, but he has not obeyed the order.
I hope you are being careful about food, etc. Write to me
in detail.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
I discussed today problems with Harijan workers from
10 to 11.30.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2917
