343. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG,]
February 7, 1907
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,
Your letter reached me on the 4th.
We are going to get the money for the advertisement of the Maho-
medan estate. Please send the bill.
I have received the bills sent by you. I shall now see how much
can be realized.
I did understand your suggestion about the riddles. I do not think
it proper to introduce the riddles feature so long as we are not in a position
to have it regularly and offer prizes ourselves. What can be the object
of the man who wants to spend money on this? How long can he be
expected to do so? Moreover, we can hardly expect many to take
part in the competition. However, you may inquire of your correspondent
if he intends paying for the prizes indefinitely. It would be very strange
indeed if he wanted to do so. On the other hand, it would not be proper
for us to start this feature if he agrees to give prizes once in a while. You
may, however, write to me if you have more to say.
I follow what you say about Sanghavi.
Mr. B. P. Ibrahim has not asked us to discontinue the advertisement.
I shall ask him about it when he comes. I shall see about the customers
whose names you have sent me.
I am still trying to make arrangements for the Hamidia [Society].
I know that Manilal is weak in his arithmetic. Please give him
adequate attention.
How much English has the new man studied? Who is he? Is
he the son of an indentured labourer?
I shall be able to credit the money payable to Hirji Valji.
Regarding the Anti-Indian Law Fund bill, Hemchand says it was
paid in cash here.
As the post will not reach me on Saturday evening, you need not
bother about sending me proofs here. It will be enough if you let
me know in your letter of Thursday what subjects have already been
dealt with. It will enable me to know what topics I need not write
about.
About your going to England, I think it is desirable, if you can go
immediately. But your going depends mainly on your work there.
(1) When can you be conveniently free?
(2) Who will take care of your work in your absence?
(3) Will Harilal be able to look after the Gujarati columns?
I think the proper time for you to leave for England is when you
can get away from the Press. When you think you can do so conveni-
ently, you will first have to discuss it with all your colleagues and then
write to me.
That Kalyandas is leaving seems to me a calamity. I think you
should as far as possible avoid going to town. Maganlal may go if he
has the courage to undertake the work in town. Harilal should look
after the Gujarati work and Maganlal should look after the accounts, that
is, the original entries should be made by him. If, however, Maganlal
cannot cope with the two jobs, and if West cannot do it, then I think
your going will have to be put off for the present. You will then be
able to leave only after I go there, that is, in the beginning of next year.
I may be able to go there towards the end of this year. But if I do not,
I can go there only in March next year; and your going will be postponed
till then. I am thinking of sending for Kalyandas's brother [from India].
Perhaps Goko too might come. But all this is uncertain. You have to
consider whether or not you can leave, if Kalyandas is not there and
no extra hand has been recruited. Think all this over and let me know.
It would be better, I think, if you talked things over with West and wrote
to me. What does he feel about it? If your visit to England Materializes,
you will be unable to go to India. You may think of going to India on
your way back. What you do must depend mainly on your choice.
Though Harilal has agreed to stay, I find some uncertainty in
what he writes. Therefore, I wrote to you to treat him in such a manner
as to have a steadying influence on his mind.
1 Gokaldas
6‒21
The poster is found useful here. It may prove useful there too
if we can arrange to send a man regularly to town. Do not think any
more of discontinuing it. Try to make the best use of the posters now
that they have been printed. It is worth trying if Sanghavi, Omar Sheth
and others exhibit the posters and also stock copies of Indian Opinion
for sale. Ask Adams also. Some people in Maritzburg also might well
stock these things. But all this requires time.
It is absolutely necessary to fix a particular amount per month
so that nobody draws more. The better course would be to inform
me every month how much each one has drawn, so that I can write to
those who have [over]drawn.
Or you may discuss the matter with
Anandlal.
I feel the balance-sheet should now be made ready without delay.
If Kalyandas can leave in April, please assign Maganlal mainly to this
job and get it done by that time.
Please see what I have written to West yesterday about Sam
Sardar's son who wants to stay there.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
[PS.]
In the printed list for Johannesburg which you sent, Mr. Ally's
name is crossed. Why? Please find out and let me know.
Please send the paper to the following address if it is not already
going there: Joseph Royeppen, 36, Stapleton Hall Road, Strand Green,
N. London.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 4697
