174. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
SEGAON, WARDHA,
July 12, 1936
MY DEAR IDIOT,
I have your letter. Do not strain to write to me. You must
not thin away. Do not waste your energy. Your letters to me
must be a pleasure and a recreation or they must not be written
at all. We shall not come closer by reason of letters. Absence
of them can't separate us or create coolness. Why should you
become a chronic invalid?
Your sense though of an idiot evidently led you aright. For
your Simla khadi experiment seems to be succeeding beyond
expectations. I suppose I must call it a mere accident. Idiots
can't design good things!
The cottage here is a picture. I have just now a young
sadhu.
He is a great bhajani, singer of bhajans of his own
composition. He will be with me for a month. I occupy one cor-
ner, he occupies another, the third is occupied by Munnalal, a
co-worker. The first accommodates a plank bedstead which you
have seen. That corner will be taken up by Ba, if she comes,
and you. So, you will prepare yourself for the proper village life.
No privacy except in the bathroom which you will share with
me. You must shudder to think of the fate that awaits you. You
will enjoy the newness. There is no noise in spite of the seem-
ingly crowded state of the room. All round is open and beautiful.
Fresh breeze blowing throughout the day. It is quite cool. Per-
fect walks all over. When you come for two nights you will tell
me what changes you will want.
You are there perhaps much more crowded than you are
likely to feel here. All of us sleep under the sky without a roof
separating us from it.
Nevertheless you should bring your mos-
quito net and the cork for your thermos which you have made
mine. I am managing with the one which is now almost all
eaten away.
Agatha expects to attend the Ceylon Conference which you
have tabooed for yourself.
This is the newest sample of Maganwadi paper. You will
have this in an envelope of Maganwadi make.
Love.
TYRANT
From the original: C.W. 3582. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6391
