188. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
POST ANDHERI,
March 20, 1924
DEAR FRIEND,
I hope you have received my letter written in reply to yours.
I have now another letter from you more difficult to deal with
than the first because the second is a business letter.
I must not make any engagements in anticipation of the com-
pletion of my convalescence. Much will depend upon how I feel
then and what the position is in the country. At the end of the
convalescence, I must be totally untrammelled with any previous
engagements, and this in the interest of the common cause. Do
you not agree? Nor must I seek to influence Sir Prabhashanker
Pattani . That would be going out of my beat and, after all, what
is the worth of a Parishad for the holding of which the permission
is obtained through the intervention of a stranger, and for purposes
of the Parishad I must be considered a stranger. The proposition
that no permission is required from the head of a State for holding
conferences is really untenable. That ordinarily conferences are held
without permission does not mean that the right of interference is
waived by the head of the State concerned or that an absolute
right of holding a conference accrues to the conveners. I would
therefore strongly advise the conveners of the proposed conference
that they should formally and courteously ask for permission. If it is
refused, it may be a proper ground for leading an agitation against
such decision. Why would you not write to Sir Prabhashanker?
He knows you well enough to secure a favourable reply.
I hope that you will be successful in your begging mission.
I quite agree that Kathiawar educational institutions should
receive aid from the Provincial Committee wherever, in its opinion,
such aid is necessary.
You are quite right in stopping Devchandbhai from coming to
me. The message I sent to him was that he would be welcome
when he came, and if he does come, I shall enlarge upon the
reasons for not pressing upon me the invitation for Presidentship.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : S.N. 9596
