301. LETTER TO HARJIVAN KOTAK
KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR,
December 15, 1945
CHI. HARJIVAN,
I got your letter of the 10th yesterday. You seem to be very
impatient. You ask my blessings by wire. We are after all poor
people and trustees of those much poorer than we. And how can
we so much as wish for blessings? Even if we have such a desire,
how can we have it met telegraphically? So thinking I refrained
from sending a wire. Why should you need any blessings? Here
is the secret of blessings. When we are engaged in a work which
is worthy of blessings, then the work itself is a blessing; it does
not wait for blessings from others. Seeking blessings from other
people is, therefore, meaningless; it is nothing but self-deception.
It no doubt has a meaning in that blessings act as a stimulant
from which a weak person derives momentary encouragement.
But this kind of encouragement is not of much help. If you
understand this and still really need my blessings, you certainly
have them for your work of producing the tools necessary for
making khadi provided it is done intelligently. When I say
intelligently I mean that we should not manufacture spinning-
wheels, winding frames, taklis, etc., just to sell; we should make
only as many as are needed and see that they are so perfect that no
one may find fault with them. Our aim should be-and is-that
all the things are produced locally. Only then will the villages
prosper. What I am now saying is covered by the new line of
thought on khadi that I am propounding. Whatever I have
not elaborated may be deduced from the aforesaid.
Yesterday Sardar was here. He wanted to know why he was
not informed about your leaving the khadi shop. I could not give
him a satisfactory answer. I take it that you must have gone
through all the formalities since you are so alert. However, if
you have anything to say in this regard, write to Sharda. I see
from your letter that Sharda is with you. Is she doing anything?
Blessings from
BAPU
HARJIVAN KOTAK
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
213
