387. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
URULI-KANCHAN,
March 28, 1946
BHAI MUNSHI,
I have your letter about Kamlesh. I see that you have
had the same experience that I had. In these circumstances I
don't think I can give him the work of Hindustani Harijan.
Dr. Sharma is a naturopath. We have bought some land
for him near Khurja Road and set up a Trust for the same.
The trustees are Sheth Lakshminarayan Gadodia and Jajuji. A
difference has arisen between Gadodiaji and Sharma regarding the
latter's fee. In itself the dispute is about nothing very impor-
tant. But it involves determination of the truth or otherwise of
the facts. They have entrusted that task to me. But I cannot
undertake it because I myself am deeply involved in the affair.
Moreover, if I have to decide the dispute, I would have to go
into the minutest details. I am not in a position to do so. I
am busy with so many things that if I started giving my time
to individual cases, I would not be able to do justice to the public
tasks I have taken up. I am, therefore, getting out of all such
involvements, and so wish to put this burden on you.
Actually you should be offered a fee for this work. But I
am not in a position to ensure that. Gadodiaji can pay the fee,
but he has agreed to be a trustee in this venture for love of public
service and, since I myself am involved in the affair, I cannot ask
him to pay you any fee. And Dr. Sharma is in no position to
pay the fee. Hence I must entrust this task to you purely as a
form of public service as I have entrusted to many others.
What I am thinking is that Sharma may give a statement
setting out this case, then Gadodiaji may do the same, and
Sharma may reply to his statement. You may then, if you wish,
meet both or call either; otherwise you may decide on the basis of
the statements themselves. I think this will not involve much work.
If you express your inability to undertake the work in the
conditions I have explained, I will not take it ill. Nobody
should consider whether I would be pleased or displeased in any
matter connected with my personal work, for I think I have, or
rather God has, dulled all such feelings in me. If that were not
so, I would be crushed under the weight that I bear, and would
have to give up my aspiration to live up to 125.
If you feel that you can decide this matter, it will be neces-
sary to draw up some kind of a rough agreement authorizing
you to do so. I will get it drawn up and signed by the parties,
or will do as you wish.
I am arriving there on the 31st. I will be staying in some
Harijan quarters. I had forgotten that Lilavati was the President
of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. As a responsible office-bearer, there-
fore, she will know where I shall be staying Rameshwardas, of
course, will know positively, and Sardar, too. Please, therefore,
find out. Come and give me your reply personally, but it will
suffice, if you even send a message. I will be leaving for Delhi
on Monday.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C. W. 7694. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi
