109. LETTER TO MRS. CHANCHALBEHN GANDHI
Thursday [January 28, 1909]
CHI. CHANCHAL,
Your letter received after a long time. I am pained to see that
your mind is restless. However, I would always want to know your inner
feelings. Do not hide them thinking that I shall be unhappy.
It is not right that you should think you are away from your father's
house. I consider you to be my daughter, not a daughter-in-law. Had
I considered you as my daughter-in-law, I would have looked upon
you as a child. I take you to be my daughter, and hence I do not want
to accept that you are a child. You have not been able to understand
that. Just as I do not consider Manilal a child, so also I would not consi-
der you one. Had I kept up our relations as between father-in-law and
daughter-in-law, that is, had I kept up such a distance between us, I
would have, in accordance with my usual nature, first tried to win you
over and would have taken work from you freely only when a sense of
oneness with the family had developed in you. But I had taken it for
granted that you would forget our relationship of father-in-law and
daughter-in-law as I have fondled you in my lap as a daughter long
before your marriage to Harilal, You have not forgotten that. Try to
forget it now.
I must on no account behave in a way that may cause any harm
to you or make you unhappy. There have been innumerable women in
India who saw their ultimate good in separation from their husbands.
Damayanti became immortal on account of her separation from Nala.
Taramati separated from Harishchandra and that separation led to the
good of both. Draupadi's separation from the Pandavas proved a bless-
ing to them and the entire Hindu nation sings the praises of her
resoluteness. Do not think that these instances have not taken place.
Lord Buddha left his wife and became immortal and so did his wife.
This is an extreme case. By these examples I only want to show you that
your separation is not going to do you any harm. That it would cause
you mental agony is quite natural. That is a sign of love. But that does not
necessarily mean that it will do you harm. Weal and woe depend
on the purpose behind separation. My separation from Ba was almost
1 This letter seems to have been written after the preceding one wherein Gandhiji
refers to her separation from Harilal during the struggle.
2 Addressee's father, Haridas Vora, and Gandhiji were great friends.
involuntary; that is, it was not of my choice and yet it proved to be
a blessing to us both. By giving these examples, I do not want to impress
upon your mind that you have to live in separation for ever. I write this
so that you are not unhappy over your separation during the struggle.
I shall hardly be a cause of your separation after the struggle is over.
My effort, however, is to change your mental attitude. That also will
be effected after you understand and get used to it.
Preserve this letter. Read it again and again. Ask me whatever you
do not understand. Do both of you read it. My object in writing this is
your welfare. I am always eager to promote it. But I do not insist that
you should accept my ideas. My only desire is that both of you should
grow with your own effort.
Blessings from
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 9527
