514. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 23, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,
I got the large packet of letters sent by you. You will find
with this a letter for Mary and one for Greenlees. Lakshmidas
and Anandi have come here. Anandi has been having fever and
the temperature remains at 99. It even rises by one or two points
in the course of the day. It does not fall below 99. But I am
completely hopeful that we shall be able to cure her fever here.
For one thing, the climate of the place is excellent.
When Dudabhai comes there, have a talk with him and
come to a definite decision. If he agrees, let the marriage take place
as soon as possible. If he does not give his willing consent, tell
him that we shall not be able to look after Lakshmi any longer.
If your own experience is contrary to my inference and if you feel
inclined to let her stay, you may ignore my opinion.
Impart to Amina as much as you can. It would be good if
she daily practises the Urdu script. What happened about Par-
vati? Is Ranchhodbhai in difficulty about anything? I worry
about him as I have had no letter from him. Parnerkar's scheme
which all of you have approved is an old one, though it is cer-
tainly good. Ask him to write to me. What arrangement do you
propose to make for selling milk? I follow what you say regard-
ing the land at Bidaj. Let me know how you find Duncan. If
the impression which he has produced on me turns out to be
correct, he is likely to prove a fine worker.
What is the composition of the plaster applied to Kanu? By
whom was it recommended? In all such cases of injury, com-
plete rest for the injured part is the most important thing. Some-
times the injury is to such a part that, in order to give rest
to it, it is necessary to rest the whole body. But this is the qui-
ckest remedy for curing the pain. Have a talk with Prabhudas
and try to help him to overcome his restlessness.
If Bhagwanji devotes himself whole-heartedly to his new job,
he can do excellent work. Has Dhiru's health improved? I am
not happy that he has stopped writing to me altogether. I hope
you had a talk with Motibehn.
Have any people there enlisted
themselves as subscribers of Harijan? Or do any people buy
retail copies? Do you get any visitors?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
