22. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG,
December 6, 1909
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE,
As soon as we arrived at Cape Town, your cablegram announc-
ing the magnificent donation from Mr. Tata was received, and now
I have your inquiry from Poona as to our requirements. I have just
cabled as follows:
PRESENT
REQUIREMENT
THOUSAND
POUNDS.
EXPECT
IM-
PRISONMENT
BEFORE
END
MONTH.
MUCH
MORE
REQUIRED
LATER.
What I observe is that the expenses are necessarily great, and our
resources in South Africa are exhausted. There are enough Indians in
the Transvaal alone who could still carry on the struggle, if they would,
without outside help, but they are not now inclined to help. They
think that they have given enough. These are the weaker members
of the community. The strongest have ruined themselves pecuniarily,
and they simply go to gaol as often as the Government arrest them.
Their families have also to be supported. When this struggle com-
menced, I bore the whole of the expenses of the office, as also the rent of
offices, which were really for my practice, but, for the last two years, I
have done very little legal work. I have also found the expenses for run-
ning Indian Opinion, which is by no means yet self-supporting. These
are the current expenses:
Office here
£50
Office London
£40
Indian Opinion
£50
Distressed families
£25
These I apprehend will be the minimum monthly expenses. Almost
all connected with Indian Opinion are working practically under a vow
of poverty, including the Europeans, but, as the paying subscribers
are very few, it is necessary to give help. I feel that, if contributions do
arrive from India, we should continue the above expenses. If they do
not, it is my intention to cut down much of the expense of Indian
Opinion, thus depriving the struggle of one of its greatest supports, and
to close down the London office. The active passive resisters who are
likely to remain staunch to the last we count as one hundred. These
will force themselves on the attention of the authorities. The bulk of
the community will help by attending meetings, making protests, and
also by contributing something. This would enable the passive resis-
ters to support their dependents. To reduce the struggle to this extent
means an indefinite prolongation, but, as it has been undertaken very
largely as a matter of discipline, those of us who understand it would
not at all be disappointed, and are prepared for life-long suffering.
I cannot blame our countrymen in the Transvaal or in South
Africa for not paying as liberally as they have hitherto. The struggle
has cost already, I think, no less than £10,000. In this I include the
expenses of all sub-committees, which are not found in the advertised
accounts of the Central Association, but I exclude the enormous losses
that individuals have suffered. It is no wonder then if many now
lose heart and decline to give even pecuniary help.
As, however, the national importance of the struggle is now being
recognised in India, I feel that we might receive pecuniary support,
and that openly. I am anxious to make as much of it as possible. I
have now placed practically the whole of the situation before you. Some
of the bravest Indians representing all races are at present in Diep-
kloof Gaol. The foremost among them I count Mr. Rustomjee, who has
now finished over nine months of continuous imprisonment. He is very
much shattered in health. I paid him a visit yesterday; he is resolved
upon dying in gaol if need be. Another is a cultured Mahomedan
priest, Imam Abdul Kadir Bawazeer. The third is a Mahomedan mer-
chant of standing, Mr. Ebrahim Aswat from the Surat District. The
fourth is an undergraduate and Jain, Mr. Nanalal Shah. The
fifth is a Brahmin from Ahmedabad, Mr. Umiashanker Shelat. He
has refused to carry slop-pails, and is now confined in a solitary cell.
But perhaps the bravest and the staunchest of all is the indomitable
Thambi Naidoo. I do not know any Indian who knows the spirit of the
struggle so well as he does. He was born in Mauritius, but is more
Indian than most of us. He has sacrificed himself entirely, and has sent
me a defiant message, saying that, even though I may yield and accept
anything less than Lord Ampthill's amendment, he alone will offer
resistance and die in the Transvaal gaols. I may perhaps add to this
list another young man, Mr. Sorabji. He left a lucrative post in order
to lay the foundation of the second stage of the struggle and claim entry
as an educated Indian. He came light-heartedly not knowing what
was in store for him, but for the last eighteen months he has been practi-
cally in gaol. I could continue to multiply the names. In all, there are
about thirty Indian passive resisters in the gaols at present; many more
would certainly claim the honours if the Government would give them.
The possibilities of a struggle such as this it is very difficult to measure.
I hope that the Motherland will come to the rescue, and assist us as
far as possible. The moral effect of continued pecuniary assistance from
X-
India will also be very great. I hope that my letter from London has
duly reached you, and that it has received your consideration.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
[PS.]
I propose to utilise the funds just received £ 1673 from you towards
liquidating debts already incurred mostly for Indian Opinion. You shall
have full account of disbursements.
M. K. G.
From the typewritten original signed by Gandhiji with the postscript in his hand :
G. N. 4111
