124. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
"PARNAKUTI", POONA,
[On or before June 25, 1934]
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,
I tried my best but couldn't write to you during the whole
of the last week. Hoping that I would be able to write, I kept
back even the girls' letters.
Even today I am writing under great pressure. If I had
sufficient time, I would fill pages. But now please be satisfied
with what I can give.
I will go on doing all I can for Chandubhai. I will leave
nothing undone. I am going to Gujarat only because it was
necessary to tour it. Since I am going, I must collect for the
Harijan Fund. You must have read about the decision I have
announced. Merely watch for the present what is happening.
Who knows what is for good and what for ill? All that we can
hope for is that we shall always do what we think is for the
best. I think what is happening is really for the best.
I hear that you have not been keeping well for some time,
Do everything possible and improve your health. If necessary,
ask for outside doctors to be called in. As you know, even a
mother doesn't serve unless the child asks for what it wants.
Ask for anything which you are entitled to and get the nostrils cured.
I am afraid you may not have liked the resolution which
was passed this time. I see nothing but good in it. Big Brother
came and saw me.
Let us see what happens now.
There is
such an infinite number of dust particles in the air that nobody
can cleanse the air of them all. We may do the best we can
and not worry about the result.
Cling to the principle that it
is futile, even harmful, to think from there about what is happen-
ing outside and let not your peace of mind be disturbed.
Khurshedbehn and two other ladies are here. The former
suffered much (in jail). Her health is better now. She is pin-
ing to go to the Frontier Province.
The assault on Parikshit is not a trivial matter for me. That
there has been hardly any protest against it seems more terrible
to me than the fact of the assault itself.
Ba has joined me. Her health is fairly good. She is quite happy.
Kanti is with Devdas. He is studying. His aspirations are
noble indeed.
Velanbehn and Anandi are with me. My party has become
quite a large one these days. I am thinking now whom I can
send away. Bablo is with Jivanji.
. . . has turned out to be a worthless man. He has again
been guilty of the same kind of lapse, but he doesn't seem to
have realized its seriousness. I have now advised him to go to
Rajkot. Narandas will stay there for the present. . . .2 should
stay there and do what he can.
He has forfeited Jamnalalji's
trust. He doesn't seem even to have kept the accounts properly.
Radha (Gandhi) has joined Prof. Karve's school. I didn't
know about this at all. She arranged the business herself. She
came and saw me yesterday.
I couldn't give her much time,
though. Here also I get very little free time.
Swami is here. Rajaji also. Jamnalal left for Bombay only
yesterday. . . .3 was fairly seriously ill in Abu and is here now.
He has come to discuss the arrangements with me. Swami will
have to return to Bihar.
You must have read the news about Mirabehn. There is no-
thing more behind it. She suddenly felt that she herself should
go and do something. I consented and she left. Her personality
had become suppressed under me. I hope she will regain her
former independence of character. She has gone only for three
or four months. She had been to [Bombay] to acquaint Maxwell
with the condition of ordinary prisoners-to describe her own
experiences.
I met Ambalal Sarabhai. Saraladevi has benefited considerably.
This is enough for today. I wrote this letter in the morning
in 'Parnakuti'. We are now going to Bhamburda.
Blessings from
BAPU
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 106-
