6. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
Not revised
KAZIRKHIL, RAMGANJ P. S.,
NOAKHALI DISTRICT,
February 22, 1947
CHI. AMRIT,
Just as I am dictating to friend Rangaswamy I get your
letter and I have interrupted the dictation in order to see your
letter. I have now read it and hasten to dictate my answer.
I have received all the letters referred to by you and I
have sent replies also. I can't recollect just now but I will see
if I can give you the dates. I do hope that by the time this
reaches you, you will have recovered your voice fully.
Of course there is every chance of your getting back your
Hindi and Roman-Urdu dictionary. I don't think I carry it
with me. I will enquire and send it to you, care of Sardar
as soon as I trace it.
There is no cold here but there is still a freshness in the
an. Real hot weather has not set in. Nights are quite cool and
I use all my blankets. But there is no need to worry about
me. I am keeping good health and have been able hitherto to
go through my programme with clockwork regularity.
The second stage of the pilgrimage ends in Haimchar on
Monday, the 24th instant. It is Thakkar Bapa's headquarters. I
want to watch myself for a few days in Haimchar before re-
suming the third stage. It may also be that I might have to
hurry to Bihar. Sardar Niranjan Singh Gill4, who was in Bihar for
three days, gave me the impressions of his tour and had strongly
recommended that I should go to Bihar if only for a few days.
I have put myself in communication with the Prime Minister of
Bihar and await his reply.
I begin the pilgrimage every day at 7.30 or 7.35 and the
stages are so divided as not to require me to walk more than one
hour and fifteen minutes at the most. The least I have been
called upon to walk is thirty minutes. Once and only once has
it been one hour and thirty minutes.
I see that this dictionary business causes a lot of worry and
takes away much of your time. Would you like to be relieved
of that work? If you would, I would then like to keep your
dictionary for the time being.
I am glad that the licensing clause in regard to khadi has
been removed. How I would love to think that you have
carried conviction to the Prime Minister of the Punjab about
vanaspati Pyarelal is in his village, now about twenty miles from
here, and doing excellent work. Sushila has gone to Sevagram
in order to put matters straight about the maternity home and
hospital. It is growing by leaps and bounds and has become
very popular. She may return to her village work here as soon
as she has finished her work in Sevagram. Renuka is here
with me at the village. Her village is less than two miles from
here. In appearance she looks just as she was. She has had to
take great care of herself. But she is all right otherwise. Only
this morning she enquired about you. I told her that I heard
from you fairly regularly but that you were trying to save my
time as much as possible. She asked me whether you were
ever coming to this part of India. I told her not whilst I
was moving from day to day but that if I stayed for any
length of time in one place and if you are well and available
from your work in the Assembly or otherwise, I would like
you to come for a few days, and she was happy. She is doing
her work steadily with her little band of workers.
Manu I have reserved to the last. Everybody here knows
everything about her. Therefore I would love to say a word or
two for your information. But I must forbear for it is now to-
wards one o'clock and I must have a little bit of rest and
grease on the soles of my feet.
Love.
BAPU
[PS.]
Keep both the shawls with you. Give them to me when we
meet. Have you given your consent to the Central Advisory
Board's recommendation regarding military training?
Blessings from
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 4190. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G. N. 7826
