256. LETTER TO EFY ARISTARCHI
AMRAOTI,
November 16, 1933
MY DEAR EFY,
I have your letter with the very beautiful card which you
want me to keep in my copy of the Bhagavad Gita. I am not going
to carry out your wish literally, for, that will defeat it. I do not
read from the Gita every day. I listen to its reading in the
morning. And since your idea, I take it, is that I should have
the picture daily as a book-mark I propose to keep it in the book
which I may be reading for the time being and transfer it from
book to book.
I see that you are having Gujarati lessons, probably from
Manu, for, you have addressed your name in Gujarati.
I am glad that you are coming in close touch with Manu
and Elizabeth. You ask me what I wish about this love affair.
I regard both as very lovable, very sincere and very earnest, but
what I fear is that they do not measure the full consequences of
the proposed marriage. I can thoroughly appreciate their view-
point. For them it is enough that they love each other. But I
have always held that whilst young people should first make their
choice, its finality should be dependent upon the approval and
blessings of the elders. I have seen young love so often dis-
appointed in after years. However deliberate the choice, somehow
or other later years proved the choice to have been ill made. In
this case I see grave danger ahead. The most fatal objection, how-
ever, that I can see to this proposed match is that Elizabeth desires,
and from her own standpoint perhaps naturally so, that the pro-
geny should be brought up in the Roman Catholic faith. I do not
mind it at all. But, even though Manu may have no objection,
his parents and his people whom he loves dearly will never be
able to reconcile themselves to their grandchildren being brought
up in a faith other than their own.
Then there is the question of the whole Hindu culture. I see,
even at the present moment, a conflict going on between Hindu
culture and the Christianity of Indians; the latter are being torn
between two almost opposite attractions. Somehow or other,
Christianity has become synonymous with Western culture. Per-
haps rightly so, for, the religion of the Western people is predomi-
nantly Christianity and therefore Western culture may be fittingly
described as Christian culture as Indian culture would certainly
be described as Hindu culture. The progeny of Elizabeth must
be brought up in entirely different surroundings unless Manu
decides to tear himself away from his own surroundings and
lives an exclusive life or decides to settle down in the West. I
think that, spiritually considered, Elizabeth herself should not
be a party to the possibility of Manu having to tear himself
away.
Then there is the question of Elizabeth herself. She would
be hard put to it to accommodate herself to Indian surround-
ings. Her constitution may be undermined or she would have to
live a life out of all correspondence to her surroundings. There is
ample justification for Europeans saying that they cannot possibly
exist in India without incurring expenses out of all proportion to
the Indian average. It is difficult enough even for Mira, in spite of
her tremendous love for India, in spite of her iron will, to bend her-
self to the Indian simplicity, and Mira is the general average. But
even she has to be protected against herself and compel[ledJ to
give herself facilities which her associates are not given. She would
have become bed-ridden long ago if I had not laid down the law
from the very first and I know that she has extraordinarily accom-
modated herself to the Indian life. But, even she would have
failed completely if she had married an Indian and made the futile
attempt of bringing up her children after the Indian style. No-
body who has not lived in India like Indians can possibly have a
conception of what I am writing. India is the poorest country in the
world. And it is a tremendous job for a Western girl to come
to India and marry an Indian with a fixed determination of living
the essentially Indian life. I do not recall a single Indian who
has taken a European girl for his wife living the life of the ave-
rage Indian. He simply cannot do it if he will do justice to his
wife. And I myself much less . . .1 reconciled to ourselves to Manu
having lower his idea for the sake of Elizabeth. It is for reasons
such as this that I have cried out for celibacy for those who dedi-
cate themselves completely to God, i.e., to the service of God's
creation. There is no difficulty in my treating Mira as my
daughter or you, but, imagine me having any European girl as
daughter-in-law. I should be frightened. I could not shoulder
the burden, because I could not reconcile myself to Devdas, for
instance, having to tear himself away from his natural surround-
ings. I feel it to be premature for Indians to contract marriage
relations with Europeans. When India has improved her condi-
tions or when Europeans have boys and girls who have become
inured to uttermost simplicity and have become domiciled in
India I can look forward with happiness to Indo-European
marriages.
Now, I think, I have given you a long enough letter and
ample matter for thought. You know, at least somewhat, what I
would wish, but I do not, in any shape or form, expect you to
give effect to my wish, if what I have said does not appeal to
you. And, if you think otherwise about the future of Manu and
Elizabeth, you will not hesitate to tell me so. Whilst I deeply
appreciate your losing yourself in me I would not be guilty of
enslaving your reason or your heart. Imperfect as I am, I would
not have you to become a partner in my errors. You must, there-
fore, exercise your full judgment in everything you do in associa-
tion with me. My love for you will be none the less for your
differing with me when you feel the need for difference in thought,
speech or action.
I have not put before you one more thing that I have stated
in my letter to Elizabeth.
I would simply state the proposition
without arguing it.
I believe that, when husband and wife profess a different
faith, the progeny should be brought up in the faith of the hus-
band. There are, to me, sound religious and philosophic reasons
for this proposition. If this proposition does not appear to be
sound, you should ask Elizabeth to show you my letter to her.
I am working just now under tremendous strain. I get very
little time for carrying on correspondence. This letter too, I am
dictating under trying circumstances. I would, therefore, like
you, if you think it wise, to share this letter with Elizabeth as also
Manu. But, if you think it wise not [to] do so, please tell both
of them that I have their joint letter as also Elizabeth's previous
letter, both of which I appreciate and about which I have written
to you.
I hope you received my letter wherein the £ 15 sent by
you were acknowledged. I cannot warn you too often against
unduly denying yourself.
Love.
BAPU
PRINCESS EFY ARISTARCHI
HOTEL SCHOTZKY
FREIBURG 1-B
(GERMANY)
From a facsimile in Mahatma, Vol. III, facing p. 344
