52. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Sunday night [July 23, 1911]
MY DEAR HENRY,
The first news I must give you now is that Foolabhai's letter tells
me that I.O. is suppressed in India. You know Foolabhai of
Potchefstroom. The news lacks confirmation. But if it be true, it is
nothing surprising. They could not very well suppress my translations 6
of Ruskin's Unto This Last and not suppress I.O. which either in the
English or the Gujarati columns re-echoes those views more or less
forcibly. If the paper is suppressed, my first thought is that I must
accept the challenge and go to India at the earliest possible moment.
This may alter our or my plans. It is evident that sooner or later the
Andamans must be my home. And why not ? That home should be
as sweet as any other if it be purchased with duty done. But what
about you ? You and Millie must consider the thing. Of course, you
1 Son of Khushalchand Gandhi, Gandhiji's cousin
2 Ada West, sister of A. H. West, who had adopted the Indian name 'Devi'
3 Vide also Vol. XI, p. 118.
4 Vide also the following item.
5 From the following item
6 Entitled "Universal Dawn"; vide Vol. X, p. 245.
are not at [all] bound to follow me in my expanded activity. Phoenix
ought still to continue. But with me wandering in India or being taken
to the Andamans you will have to ensure your own living. If you have
sufficient faith in Truth of course your living is assured. 'Look at the
lily of the valley, etc.' Of course it may be that I am agitating you
quite uselessly. And yet it is not so. This position is bound to arise
sooner or later. The sooner probably the better, if it is in its own time.
This does not in any way alter your immediate programme. You will
continue your honeymoon together with your work there and go to India
in October. Only I thought I must pass on the news with my reflections.
You will have with this copy of the draft Trust Deed. Please let me
have your criticism in detail. A copy is going to Or. Mehta too. Every
settler is also having a copy for consideration. I propose to attach to
the Deed a schedule containing the signatures of [the] settlers. Please
let me have yours. It should be on foolscap-size paper so that I may
be able to use the very paper for the other signatures.
I hope you have now Gregg's opinion. There was no delay after
I understood your cable.
With love to you all,
BHAI
[PS.]
Kallenbach will probably leave 2 next week by s. s. Armadale
Castle. I hope you will make it a point to meet him at Waterloo. He
is travelling 3rd-class throughout. I am anxious that he should meet
Miss Winterbottom3, Aylmer Maude and such other men and women.
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives
of India
1 Vide also Vol. XI, p. 534.
2 For Europe, mainly to visit his family in Germany
3 Florence A. Winterbottom; Corresponding Secretary of the Union of Ethical
Societies, London
