209. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
April 4, 1928
MY DEAR MALKANI,
I have your telegram. I am sending not Jaisukhlal Gandhi
but Mathuradas who is bringing this letter. He is perhaps better
fitted for the work because his knowledge of English is better and
being a Cutchi knows the language and habits of many people
there. Of course he is a well-tried worker. He has been working
in connection with khadi for many years now and has a wide know-
ledge of mercantile business. He was born and brought up in
Malabar. He really came with Lakshmidas. He has been just now
taken up by Kakasaheb for the Vidyapith in order to develop the
charkha work. Therefore he is loaned to you from the Vidyapith
and his honorarium will be paid by the Vidyapith. His travelling
expenses are being paid just now on your account, that is, the
Committee's account, but if there is any difficulty about paying
his railway expenses, you will please tell me. I take it that you
won't want to keep him beyond 15th of May. If you do want any-
body beyond that time, I will have to send you someone else
because he will be wanted by Kakasaheb on the first of June and
before that he would want to go to Calicut to bring his family.
About your own honorarium, I have now a letter from
Thakkar Bapa who says you told him also that you would want no
more than Rs. 150. What is this? I do not mind the Rs. 200,
but I want to know how you came upon Rs. 150 and why after-
wards you had to increase your demand? I am anxious for all
of us to be deliberate and firm in all we do. The only hope I see
of our regeneration lies in some at least developing decision, fore-
thought and the like. You are not to take this amiss, nor to revert
to Rs. 150 unless you can clearly do so whilst you are doing
relief work. But if you find that you made a miscalculation or if
you fixed Rs. 150 without previous consultation with Mrs. Malkani
and others concerned, you must humbly make the admission and
ask for Rs. 200. You understand why I write all this, don't you?
I want you to come up to my expectations.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
SJT. N. R. MALKANI
From a photostat: G.N. 927
