449. LETTER TO LOKANATH MISRA
February 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,
I have your very touching letter, but you must not be
bewildered nor be pained. My reply was in Gujarati, but the
translation you have read is fairly correct. What I have said in
answer to the questions put by the ex-Dewan of Morvi I have
said repeatedly in my writings. It could not have escaped you if
you had followed my writings carefully. Nor is it inconsistent with
the law of heredity. The law cannot be changed but if we know
the law we will suit our actions in accordance with it and that is
precisely what my answer means. Essential qualities are trans-
mitted from father to son. If parties having like qualities marry,
they carry out the law of heredity and therefore also the law of
varna. Such marriages have taken place in Hindu society ever
since the establishment of varnashrama. This ought to give you
satisfaction. You do not expect me to give you a detailed reply
to the conundrums you have raised. You will believe me when
I tell you that I have not even the time for doing it. If you will
carefully follow the pages of Harijan, all your doubts will be solved.
But if they are not, you should dismiss me from your consideration.
1 Vide "Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari", pp. 13-24.
The cause is far superior to me. You and I live for the cause
and work for it. If I err in the common prosecution of the
common cause, you will leave me and march forward towards the
goal. The limits of untouchability work are well defined. Never
mind my views of extraneous matters, such as caste and varna,
intermarriage and interdining. I am not presenting my views
on these matters for public acceptance at the present moment.
I give those views for the satisfaction of enquirers, for I would
have my friends and the public to know me as I am and not
picture me as something they fancy but has no likeness to me.
If even this does not give you satisfaction, you must find time to
come to me and discuss the whole thing with me till you have
full satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,
SJT. LOKANATH MISRA, M. A., B. L.
SECRETARY, ANTI-UNTOUCHABILITY COMMITTEE
PURI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20284
