368. LETTER TO INDIANS IN SOUTH AFRICA
[JOHANNESBURG,
Before July 15, 1914]
DEAR BROTHER OR SISTER,
On the eve of my departure from South Africa, I should like
to leave a brief message in writing.
There has been no limit to the love I have received from
the Indians in this country. I am sure those who have given such
love will always prosper. I hear it said that our community is un-
grateful. My heart tells me that this is said in ignorance and
impatience. Were the Indian people really so, I would have
felt no pride in being called a son of India, nor could I recite
with utter sincerity the sublime poem, India, a refuge of all those that
suffer.
Though I have had more than human love from Indians,
I also know that there are some of them who believe themselves,
and are taken by others, to be my enemies. For me, however,
they are no enemies. Those who speak ill of us sometimes prove
to be our true friends. I do not consider at the moment whether
this is so in my case or not. I only want to show that I am not
free from responsibility for their speaking ill of me. If I had
perfect love for them, they would never have bitter things to say
against me. Such love, however, is hardly possible for man.
Whilst I lack it, I shall bear their hostility; I shall not regard
them as my enemies.
There are easy and effective measures which will enable
Indians to live in peace in this country. All religious antagonism,
as that one is a Hindu or a Muslim, a Christian or a Parsi,
should be forgotten. Let there be no provincial distinctions such
as Bengalis, Madrasis, Gujaratis, Punjabis, etc. All ideas of
high and low which divide men into Brahmins, Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas and Shudras should be abandoned. Indians are all sub-
ject to the same laws; if so, how can we fight them disunited?
We needs must observe truth. I know it is futile to
expect, in this land, that everyone will be perfectly truthful; it
should, however, be possible for us to adhere to truth, by and
large. Otherwise, Indians cannot live on here as Indians, or
human beings.
Whenever there are hardships, they will have to be fought
courageously. Should Indians refuse to fight them, blinded by
self-interest or because of weakness, they will assuredly be over-
whelmed by disaster.
If the leaders are selfish, greedy, lazy, given to lying and
licentious, the common people will make no progress. And so,
should the latter remain backward, the responsibility will be that
of the leaders and theirs, too, will be the guilt.
Indians from Bombay are often rude to those hailing from
Calcutta and Madras and indifferent to their feelings. The term
colcha has still not gone out of use in our language. Such ways
are fraught with danger and, if not abandoned, will assuredly
bring the community to grief. The people from Bombay know
very well that their compatriots from Calcutta and Madras are
far more numerous than they. Even from the point of view of
self-interest, therefore, it is necessary that we show them due
regard.
Even good Indians show contempt for Colonial-born Indians.
I have believed, and still believe, that they are wrong in doing
so. Colonial-born Indians do have some defects; but, then, who
has not? They have also many fine qualities. It is worth noting
that, if the satyagraha campaign has been a glorious perfor-
mance, it was because of the sacrifices of Indians born in this
country. Large numbers of such Indians, and many women too,
have gone to gaol. To help forward any Colonial-born Indians,
either educated or uneducated, will be an act of piety on the part
of the community meriting a reward, and I am sure it will be
duly rewarded, for such has been my experience.
We are very dirty and some of us behave so abjectly, be-
cause of greed, that the whites feel disgusted, as they well might.
If the leaders exert themselves, they can end all the filthiness that
we notice around us. That there should be too many people
sleeping in small rooms, that these should hold stores of foodgrains,
fruit, etc., and never be washed, that lavatories should be kept
unclean, that bedsteads should never be aired in the sun, that
the windows should never be opened, that the place should never
be dusted, that sleeping, cooking, bathing, relaxing, should all be
done in one and the same room— this is pathetic indeed. This way
we turn ourselves into denizens of hell in this very world. This
state of affairs must change.
Gold-smuggling by members of the community is on the
increase. Some Indians want to get rich quick. They will get
into trouble and disgrace the name of the community as a whole.
I wish they would rein themselves in.
As some Tamils and Calcuttamen have become slaves to the
wicked habit of drink, so have some Gujaratis too. The Indian
who weans them from this will be a man of noble soul indeed.
Indian businessmen can exercise a good influence, if they mean
to, over these helpless brethren whose state is so pitiable.
As I understand it, the Settlement which has taken place is a
charter of our freedom. We could not have accepted less than what
it gives. More it is not possible to secure at present. It is my
emphatic advice, therefore, that every effort should be made to
preserve what has been obtained and to resist the Government if
it seeks to take away anything from it. If it places upon the terms
of the Settlement a construction different from ours, or mine,
or if a court does so and the Government then refuses to make
any modifications, there will be cause for friction and the Gov-
ernment will again invite the charge of breach of promise.
The main difficulty for the present will be regarding the Deal-
ers' Licenses Act. Even in this matter, however, redress will be
easier wherever things are under the jurisdiction of the Union Gov-
ernment. Where, on the other hand, licences are granted by the
municipalities, things will be very difficult. The remedy for this
is to put up a fight whenever licences are taken away, apply to
courts and petition the Government, hold meetings and pass
resolutions. If, at the end of all this, there should be no redress,
there will be nothing for it but to resort to satyagraha. This is easy
to offer in the matter of licences. If only the hawkers show courage,
the struggle for licences could be won. It is possible that traders
will have to suffer for some time. I hope they will not fail to do
their duty at the critical moment. We must demand complete free-
dom to trade, and ought to get it. Everything depends on the traders.
The Gold Law in the Transvaal is a very oppressive measure.
The settlement secures to all the right to carry on business wherever
they are doing so at present. People can shift their business from
one place to another in the same town, but they cannot go over
to another town. So much can be taken as included in the clause
on "existing rights". If the Government permits less than this, that
will be a breach of the terms of the Settlement. To secure more
than this, independent efforts will be necessary, and I don't think
these can be made at present. Great care will have to be exer-
cised to see that they do not keep us in the dark and pass compli-
cated laws on these and related subjects. In regard to the Gold
Law also, it should be easy to offer satyagraha against it, if it is
administered with excessive severity.
As regards the Transvaal Law of 18851, I don't see any pos-
sibility of our being able to touch it at present.
On the issue of marriages, it is not possible to secure any-
thing more for the present. To waste efforts on that will inter-
fere with other important tasks. There is no better law elsewhere
than the one which has been enacted.
We need not fight for votes or for freedom of entry for fresh
immigrants from India. I think we shall have to rest content at
present with the removal of the taint [of racial discrimination]
from the law.
However, if the Indian community is strong and itself enter-
prising, if it maintains unity, truthfulness and courage, the follow-
ing expectations may be realized in 15 years:
1. Complete freedom of trade.
2. Full rights of ownership of land in all Provinces and
3. Freedom of movement from one Province to another.
In order to bring all this about, it will be necessary to have
the Licensing Acts, the Gold Laws, the Township Act, Law 3 of
1885 and the Immigration Act amended, for which purpose pub-
lic opinion will have to be cultivated among the whites of South
Africa. This is not difficult to do.
The community need not be anxious on account of the in-
dentured labourers. There is nothing in the new law which can
be interpreted to mean that the Government may send them away.
1 Vide Vol. I, p. 383.
I appeal to all Indians to help Mr. Polak and seek his help.
No one is as well informed about our question as he. He has re-
gard for the community, is honest, has ability and is full of enthu-
siasm. It is my earnest request to Indians in all Provinces that they
utilize Mr. Polak's services and follow his advice. Others will
not be able to draft petitions as well as he can. He will not accept
money for any public work, which means that he will remain in
South Africa only if he can pay his way by his professional work;
otherwise, he will leave for England. I know that he still does
not earn enough to meet his needs and, therefore, I earnestly
appeal to the Transvaal Indians to entrust their legal affairs to
Mr. Polak.
Indian Opinion is run only for the service of the community. So
is Phoenix. Those who have settled there have not done so
with the intention of making money. They draw only as much
as they need for a simple and plain life. It will be so much of a
loss to the community if it does not utilize the services of those
who are working in this spirit. Mr. Omar Hajee Jhaveri and
Parsee Rustomjee are now the owners of the Phoenix lands and its
managing trustees in South Africa. The community can get all infor-
mation about Phoenix through them or even directly. I request
every Indian to understand the objects of Phoenix. I cannot help
saying that it is a great field for anyone aspiring to serve India.
This, some may indeed feel, is rather improper of me to say in
view of my close association with Phoenix; it is, however, my
sincere belief.
Though I am leaving for the motherland, I am not likely to
forget South Africa. I should like friends who may have occa-
sion to go to India to come and see me there. I do intend, of
course, to work in India in regard to the disabilities here. And
I shall be able to work better if the people in South Africa ask for
my services. I think the expenses to be incurred in India on this
work by way of stationery, postage, printing, etc., should be met
from here. The money I have been given I propose to use only for
this purpose.
Above all, I wish to say that it is up to the community to win
its freedom and that its ultimate weapon, an irresistible one, is
satyagraha.
If I have harmed any Indian, knowingly or unknowingly, if
I have been the cause of pain to anyone, I crave God's forgive-
ness and theirs.
I am, of course, a satyagrahi and I hope always to remain
one, but in December last I fell more under the spell of indenture.
Since the term girmitio ("indentured labourer") is already in use
about me in Gujarati.
I am,
As ever,
The community's indentured labourer,
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji's hand: S. N. 6020
