221. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[Before December 11, 1932]
CHI. JAMNALAL,
I got both your letters. I have to cope with extremely heavy
pressure of work, and, moreover, since my views regarding Kamal-
nayan are not the same as yours, I did not think it necessary to
write immediately. I had, therefore, intended to write to you at
the first available opportunity. I was going to write today in any
case when I got your second letter. One may feel after reading
it that your health had become a little worse, but I have no fear
of that happening. It is good that the discharge has started
again. It will not help you in any way if it is stopped with
artificial means. The cause for the cramp in the stomach may
be that you probably ate something in excessive quantity. On
one or two days recently the bread was not properly baked.
Perhaps you will find toasted bread easier to digest. You have
sufficiently strong teeth for that. I am sure you know that bread
should be chewed thoroughly. The bread can be toasted for you
here, for it is supplied to you from our ward. And as I have a
hand in baking the bread, there will be no difficulty in supplying
you toasted bread. If you eat bread at all the three meals,
fresh toasts can be prepared for all of them and supplied to you.
You should also not give at present, as you have been doing,
too much time to interviews connected with business. According
to Dr. Modi, complete rest is essential. It is not advisable even
to talk much. To derive the full benefit of the air of this place,
it is extremely essential that you should take complete rest and
talk very little.
Colonel Doyle talked with me about you for a fairly long
time. We had a talk just the day before yesterday. His advice
was that you should go to Europe. I don't think that necessary
at all. We should do our best with whatever help we can get in
this country and rest satisfied. Do let me know, however, if you
wish to go to England. I also expect to get in a day or two a
reply to my request for permission to see you frequently.
And now about Kamalnayan. You will require special permis-
sion if you wish to send him to South Africa. He will not get pro-
per facilities for education there. He will not be admitted to any
English school or college. They have started a college for Indians,
but from our point of view it can have nothing special to offer.
Facilities for private education will also be meagre. As for
Phoenix, it is in the midst of a jungle. If Kamalnayan goes and
lives there, he will have to spend most of his time working in the
press. From all points of view, therefore, South Africa should be
left out of consideration. But it is otherwise with Ceylon.
Kamalnayan can join anyone of the schools there. The climate
of Nuwara Eliya is excellent. There is hardly any place which
can surpass it in the beauty of natural surroundings. We will also
find there a large number of persons whom we know. Bernard
Alovihari is a close friend. He is a very good scholar and a man
of character. He was on the same boat with me when I re-
turned from England. He belongs to one of the ancient families
of Ceylon. If Kamalnayan does not feel happy there, we can
immediately call him back. You can also write to him frequently
and so can he to you. According to me, therefore, Ceylon is the
only country to which we can send Kamalnayan to satisfy his
desire for learning English, without sacrificing our principles. He
also likes the idea. If, however, you do not approve of it, let him
remain at Wardha for the present. If he is happy there, we can
desire nothing better than that. But I gathered from my con-
versation with him and knew from his letter that he was not
happy in Wardha. That is how the problem arose.
Manilal, who was to leave on Wednesday, has had to post-
pone his departure. He can now leave on the 29th.
Chhaganlal Joshi arrived here yesterday to help me. This
will not lighten my burden, but work will not remain unfinished
to the same extent as it did every day till now.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2907
