193. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
February 15, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,
I am still awaiting the promised reply in connection with the
Immigration Bill. I take this opportunity of reiterating what I
have briefly submitted in my telegrams
As to sub-sections (f) and (g) of Clause 5, if the interpretation
is as given in your telegram to the effect that the jurisdiction of the
courts is not ousted, it will be entirely satisfactory. In view, how-
ever, of the decision of the Natal Bench, I am very nervous as to
the Clause, in spite of the assurance given in your telegram. I am,
therefore, taking legal opinion myself.
As to Section 7, passive resisters can have nothing to complain
of, if the present legal position, namely, the ability of educated
Asiatics to enter Natal or the Cape from the Transvaal by passing
the education tests provided by the respective laws of the Provinces
is retained.
As to the Free State, if the reading of your Law Officer is
correct, that the declaration under Section 8 of Chapter 33 of the
Orange Free State Constitution will not be necessary, this serious
difficulty will have been solved, but as it is a matter of vital im-
portance, we are taking legal opinion on it too.
Lastly, if domiciled Indians of Natal cannot, as a matter of
right, claim to have domicile certificates issued to them, passive resis-
ters cannot consistently object to Section 25(2) of the Bill. I
would, however, take the opportunity of pointing out that, if one
thousand certificates were confiscated, it entirely proves my state-
ment that the certificates that have been issued could not be trans-
ferred without detection. That a thousand certificates have been
confiscated between, I suppose, 1896 and now, shows that sixty
Indians per year were ready to demean themselves by using certi-
ficates of domicile not their own, and that, being detected, they
received a punishment fitting their crime.
I am,
Yours sincerely,
ERNEST F. C. LANE, ESQ.
CAPE TOWN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy : S. N. 5625
