64. LETTER TO J. L. MAFFEY
AHMEDABAD,
January 1, 1918
TO
J. L. MAFFEY, C.I.E., I.C.S.
PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
DELHI
[DEAR MR MAFFEY,]
It grieves me to have to worry His Excellency in the midst
of his many and onerous engagements. But I think that I am
rendering a service in writing this letter. It is needless to say that
I have been keenly following the agitation for the release of
Messrs Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali. I met their mother
during my stay in Calcutta, and I ascertained the position of the
brothers from her. She gave me the fullest assurance that her sons
were in no way disloyal to the British Raj, and that in the scheme
of Reform they contemplated permanent retention of the British
connection. I have been attending the sessions of the Muslim
League held there and I have moved freely among the leading
Muhammadans. It is my firm opinion that the continued intern-
ment of the two brothers and the refusal to discharge them is creat-
ing greater and greater dissatisfaction and irritation from day to
day. The Muhammadans, and also the Hindus for that matter,
bitterly resent the internment. I am sure that it is not a healthy
feeling. There is undoubted unrest among the Muhammadans.
Discharge of the two brothers will, I am sure, greatly mitigate it.
It will not remove it entirely so long as the war lasts. I had the
privilege of supporting the resolution passed at the League about
the release of the brothers. The audience were weeping whilst their
mother's address was being recited.
I am prepared to give due assurances to the Government about
their future conduct. I feel that, in order to be able to live a healthy
public life, either the brothers should be discharged or should be
properly tried and convicted. I recognize the danger at the present
moment of having a public trial and all it means. But I am certain
that the continued imprisonment is no less dangerous. I there-
fore suggest that I should be allowed to go to Chindwara and
visit the brothers. I would get from them a public declaration of
their loyalty, on the strength of which they may, in my humble
opinion, be discharged without risk of public peace being in any
way imperilled.
I may add that I know the brothers well. They are intensely
devoted to their religion and equally devoted to India. I make
bold to say that they will not make to me a statement which they
do not fully intend to carry out. I hope, therefore, that the per-
mission I have requested will be granted me. Will you kindly
place my request before His Excellency? I need hardly say that
I should be pleased to run down to Delhi if my presence is requir-
ed. My address up to the 10th instant will be Ahmedabad and
Motihari, Champaran from the 13th.
Yours sincerely,
N. A. I. : Home, Political (Deposit): January 1918, No. 31; also from
a photostat of the office copy in Gandhiji's hand: S.N. 6424
