255. LETTER TO SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE
Strictly Confidential
SEGAON, WARDHA,
December 18, 1938
MY DEAR SUBHAS,
I must dictate this as I am wilfully blind. Whilst I am dic-
tating this Maulana Saheb, Nalini Babu and Ghanshyamdasji are
listening. We had an exhaustive discussion over the Bengal Min-
istry. I am more than ever convinced that we should not aim at
ousting the Ministry. We shall gain nothing by a reshuffle. And
probably we shall lose much by including Congressmen in the
Ministry. I feel, therefore, that the best way of securing compa-
rative purity of administration and continuity of a settled prog-
ramme and policy would be to aim at having all the reforms that
we desire carried out by the present Ministry. Nalini Babu
should come out, as he says he would, on a real issue being
raised and the decision being taken by the Ministry against the
interests of the country. His retirement from the Ministry would
then be dignified and wholly justified. I understand that so far
as the amendment of the municipal law is concerned, separate
electorate for the scheduled class is given up. There is still in-
sistence on separate electorate for Mussalmans. I do not know
whether opposition should be taken to the breaking point. If the
Mussalman opinion is solid in favour of separation, I think it
would be wisdom to satisfy them. I would not like them to
carry the point in the teeth of the Congress opposition. It would
be then a point against the Congress.
If my opinion is acceptable to you, the release of the Pri-
soners becomes a much simpler matter than it is today. And if
this opinion commends itself to you there should be an open
declaration about the new policy. This ought to result in easing
the tension that prevails in Bengal, and Bengal will be automat-
ically free from the state of suspended animation. Maulana Saheb
is in entire agreement with this opinion and so are Nalini Babu
and Ghanshyamdas.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: C. W. 7784. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
