358. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
April 10, 1932
DEAR BOYS AND GIRLS,
I hope to get in the next letter a short report of your pro-
gramme of work during the National Week . We here have not
been able to do anything besides fasting and spinning a little
more than on other days. You still make mistakes in spelling
words. See that such mistakes do not occur. You should learn
from my deficiencies. We have had that Jodani Kosh prepared in
a hurry for people like you.
If you really keep awake during prayers, you have certainly
advanced one step.
Mother Gita has already answered the question, 'What makes
us commit sin?' Desire and anger do that. All of you will be
able to see this truth if you recollect your own actions of this type
in the past. Think and verify the truth of this. The Students'
Union is not independent to the extent that it functions subject
to the Ashram rules. The freedom of all such associations is
limited to some extent. The Students' Union is of course free in
its own field.
If I liked any manual work worth the name in my student
days, I may perhaps say that I liked book-binding and carpentry.
There are so many crafts and industries relating to spinning
alone that the question of selecting some other work in addition
does not arise. In order to have a full knowledge of the science
of spinning, one must have some knowledge of each of the follow-
ing: agriculture, chemistry, dyeing, painting, carpentry, smithy,
weaving, knitting, sewing, carding, ginning, laundry work, history
of the industries of the different countries, engraving, arithmetic,
geometry, etc. Think for yourselves and see whether a general
knowledge of the subjects just mentioned is or is not essential for
[proficiency in the] science of spinning. I have enumerated here
only the arts and the crafts which I could remember. If you
sit together and discuss, you will find some more to add to the
list. Let me know if you can think of more. I hope that you
will preserve my list at least.
We worship Krishna the perfect avatar of God and not the
Krishna who is supposed to have done so many bad things.
That is, we worship not the historical Krishna but Krishna, the
Prince of Yogis, who served to Arjuna the nectar of the Gita.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 9020. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
