504. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
September 15, 1938
CHI. MAHADEV,
I have sent the mail in the morning so today I was not in a
hurry to send this. Important letters must be despatched. I
understand about work. There is no objection to your working
in moderation. Are you following Sushila's instructions on walk-
ing about on the terrace twice a day?
I have learnt a new thing from Durga: that the remedy for
scorpion-sting is a bhajan. What kind of scorpion would it be that
permits one to sing a bhajan? And what a singer she must be who
can sing a bhajan despite the pain of a scorpion-sting?
I did not ask Shuaib to post Jivaraj's letter. He was to give
it to you so that you could send it after affixing the late fee
stamp. When two persons do a job which should be done by
one, it is bound to be spoiled. I am making this criticism in
order that you may have the benefit of our experience here.
I remember to have sent you yesterday a telegram for Para-
meshwaran. But the memory of a man of 69 cannot be very
trustworthy. On the back of one telegram a reply was written.
The remaining were in a letter. Please do inquire.
I understood from Sushila that what I had written in my
letter to Jivaraj was what you desired.
Behnji was not the cause of my circular. It was Mirabehn.
That day she had lectured Pyarelal and Sushila. Though warned
she had misunderstood Amtul Salaam. There was a violent quarrel.
I, therefore, thought that if I did not clarify things the poison
would spread and so I sent round the circular. I see that most
of the people here, poor fellows, know nothing. So my conclusion
is that Mira was the sole cause of the ill-feeling which has been
generated. That is part of her nature. What can we do about
it? I will show you the circular as also the replies received.
You need not worry about this matter. Despite such shocks, the
blood-pressure seems to be behaving normally.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
The following for Parameshwaran:
343
"Your coming unnecessary. BAPU."
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 11652
