197. LETTER TO NORMAN LEYS
THE ASHRAM,
SABARMATI,
July 23, 1926
DEAR FRIEND,
I am obliged to you for your letter. I would like you hence-
forward not to apologize for anything that you may say. I give
you my assurance that I shall not misunderstand you.
The proof you have sent me I had in book form from some
friend in London. It is a good and well-reasoned paper. I dealt
with it at length in the pages of Young India sometime ago.
Now for your question. The position in India at the present
moment is, in my opinion, only seemingly hopeless. And, it is
hopeless not because the different parties have no coherent pro-
gramme, but because no party has got the force of arms or any
other at its back to vindicate its policy if the Government reject it
as it has repeatedly rejected every party's programme. Let me
remind you that the differences between the parties here, so far as
the demands are concerned, are not of principles but of experience.
If the Liberal Party pitches its demands low, it does so not because
more cannot be digested, but because more cannot be obtained.
But, if the Government were to grant all the demands of say the
Swaraj Party, the other parties would join. This I say, apart, of
course, from the communal trouble, of which I write later. There-
fore, if the Independent Labour Party confers with the most forward
party in India and evolves a constitution which is accepted by the
Parliament, you will find all parties acclaiming it. So, if I were you
and if I was called upon to guide or lead the Independent Labour
Party, I would go to India, find out the forward party, confer with
its leaders and then evolve a programme by which I would stick
through thick and thin.
But the communal trouble does block the way. And again
thinking in your terms, I would reason thus: 'These Indians-
Hindus and Mussalmans-are fighting like cats and dogs amongst
themselves, but they have neither the means nor the courage of
fighting against my country which has wronged them in the past
and which is still wronging them. I don't want to be a party to
that wrong any longer. They will fight. That fight must end soon,
if my country will not aggravate it and prolong it either conscious-
ly or unconsciously. I must have no communalism on the Statute-
book. I would provide for all parties equal opportunities and I
would have preference in education for weaker parties whether in
numbers or otherwise. I would therefore make statutory provi-
sion for such preferential education.' If you approach the ques-
tion with this mentality, you will not need agreement amongst all
parties about communal representation, but you will deal with it
along lines of substantial justice. This seems to me to be the
only way of evolving a constitution in the present disturbed state
of things.
Then there remains your last question. I do indeed think that
the authorities are partly responsible for the communal dissensions.
I know that primarily the fault is ours. If we were not disposed
to quarrel, no outside power on earth could make us. But, when
an outside power whose strength lies in our weakness notices our
dissensions, it takes advantage of them consciously or uncon-
sciously. Everyone in India knows this and feels the effect of it also.
Some honest British officials have not hesitated to make the ad-
mission before me and some have unguardedly betrayed them-
selves by making inconvenient admissions or remarks. But I must
not labour this point. I am well aware that you can do nothing to
remedy this evil even if you believed in it. The remedy lies en-
tirely in our own hands. All that you can do is to give us, if you
are in power, a good and workable constitution. But you will cer-
tainly not be able to control your agents here. The agents them-
selves know that they are agents only in name but in reality they
are principals. I have before now described the Civil Service
as a gigantic and most powerful secret corporation that the world
has. Like the Masonic Brotherhood, it has got its signs and its un-
written language through which it corresponds with its mem-
bers. Nor need this surprise anybody. It is impossible, without
resort to dubious methods, for one hundred thousand men to live
in the midst of three hundred million human beings and impose
their rule and trade upon them against their will.
I think I have covered the full ground of your letter. I hope
I am intelligible. I may not convince you of the positions I
have taken up. I would gladly argue further, if you wish me to.
I thank you for the most careful and sympathetic manner in
which you are approaching this important question which is one
of life and death to us.
Yours sincerely,
DR. NORMAN LEYS
BRAILSFORD
NEAR DERBY
From a photostat: S.N. 12169
