247. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
CHANDA,
November 14, 1933
CHI. MANI,
I got your long letter. You did well to speak out your
mind. You would only harm yourself if you hide your thoughts
from me. After a man's death, we must not remember his short-
comings, but should remember only his virtues. My absence had
nothing to do with his actions. It is not that I fail to appreciate
his virtues. I did not go there because I could not have taken
part in anything. I feel that at present I should be either in
Yeravda or among Harijans. When I say that I am out of pri-
son only for the sake of Harijans, I do so not only for the bene-
fit of the Government or the world but because that is how I
really feel in my heart. I simply cannot take part in any other
activity. People also seem to have understood this. I could not
have tolerated the restrictions imposed by the Government and
would not have been able to have things according to my own
way. I would not have been able to advise you or Dahyabhai.
And so I bore the attacks in silence. Apart from this, there is
another thing, too, in my life which you should know. Rasik
was on his death-bed and he even wished that I should
be by his bedside.
But I did not go to Delhi, Ba did.
Rasik died. I did not shed a single tear. I was taking my
meals when I received the wire. I finished my meal and resum-
ed my work. There have been many such incidents in my life. I
have formed certain views about death and they are becom-
ing stronger as the years pass. I do not look upon death as a
calamity. Marriage may be that, death never is. Does this set
your doubt at rest? If not, ask me again.
You have given a good description of the events there. It
was very painful. We should understand the meaning of people's
love. That love is not of the individual but of the virtues which
they want to see in, and, therefore, attribute to him. Their love,
therefore, is a pure thing. It is a sign of the popular awakening
and an eye-opener for the world. Nobody can doubt that Vithal-
bhai was a lover of freedom.
Now about Ba. If I had had time, I would have explain-
ed the point more clearly in that letter. Ba's mind has weakened.
She wants and yet does not want to court arrest. Deep down in
her heart she knows that it is her duty to do so, and cannot
forsake that duty, but she does not like to go as I am out. I
have not put any pressure. I have left her free to do as she
wishes. What I wanted to say was that you should urge her
and strengthen her resolution to do her duty, for she believes
in you and loves you. Anything I might say is likely to be
regarded as an order and might kill her individuality. I, there-
fore, tell her nothing. But even my silence is interpreted by
Ba to mean that I want her to go.
I understand [what you say] about your teeth and legs.
Follow the doctor's advice. It is very necessary to wait for a
while, you need not insist on immediate action.
I am writing to Dahyabhai.
Blessings from
BAPU
[PS.]
Write at Wardha only.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 113-
