276. LETTER TO N.
June 30, 1933
N.,
I have your letters by me. I deal with the last first.
You are going through a terrible but wonderful trial and
I hope that God will give you the strength to stand it. If you
will but realize that we are an utterly poor family, that we are
far away from the ideal of poverty, you will find the burden
easy to bear and the illness of S. an ordinary occurrence in
the lives of poor people. You will have a doctor, not so the bona-
fide poor. They do not even know what a doctor can be. They
have the utterly incompetent village physician and they have to
be satisfied with what services his often selfish nature would per-
mit him to render. You will, therefore, be quite content with
whatever relief can be afforded to S. in the Ashram itself.
You will not compare yourself to some of the pampered Ashra-
mites whom your keen faculty for observation could not have
missed. But when you have a feeling of irritation over this
knowledge and resentment that neither you nor S. can be pam-
pered, recall the fact that one whom you have adopted as your
father is the first among the pampered Ashramites and if you
are prepared to suffer my being pampered, then you will find it
easy to tolerate the pampering of others and then, perhaps, you
will find why they are pampered, if they are pampered, and
then you will make the further discovery that compared to yet
others you yourself might also be ranked amongst the pampered
for there are degrees in pampering. Anyway, I want you to be
happy, calm, and contented in the face of S.'s illness and your
own boils.
You and I sail in the same boat in the distrust of doctors, but
that distrust has to have its recognized limitations and must be
based upon enlightenment. You are wholly unjust to the doctors
who are attending upon me. They have been most careful,
conscientious and helpful. They have not stopped oranges as you
imagine. What they have said is according to the latest natural
healing methods. They know that I am not likely to accept
any of their nostrums and therefore they are making an honest
effort to suit my peculiarities. I can describe to you what they
have prescribed, what exactly I am doing and perhaps you will
feel that they have said or done nothing that should offend
against the laws of natural healing.
The use that I want to
make of doctor's presence at the Ashram for S., is to know exactly
what is wrong with S. and why he has lost weight. The doctor
there would not easily prescribe any medicine but he will give
general guidance for which you and I and the Ashram as a whole
must be thankful. Then we mayor may not accept his advice.
But nonetheless it is necessary to have a proper diagnosis of the
boy's illness.
As for your boils, you are quite right in giving up even
milk for the time being. Take plenty of juicy fruit, hot water and
lemon and salt or hot water, lemon and goor or honey. If it is
goor, the water should be strained. The best thing is to dissolve
it in cold water and then put the strained goor-water on the stove.
It is as well that you have recalled some of the instances
of your violent nature. I had detected it and therefore your
letter has caused me no surprise, but you are not to get rid of
that violence by making a brave effort. Nor must you wreak
it on S. and don't insist upon S. eating this thing or that thing.
After all he has got to like the things he eats, and remember that
we are all largely a mixture of our parents. You may not, there-
fore, resent S. being a second edition of yourself in many respects.
Tell me whether S. has made friends with anybody else in
the Ashram, whether amongst grown-up people or children.
Now for the dogs. You are quite right we ought to be able
to find a solution. The European countries have found it by kill-
ing the dogs beyond their wants. India would not tolerate
that solution and yet has not found an ideal solution in terms of
ahimsa. The society for the care of animals takes charge of stray
dogs, etc. Unfortunately, these societies are not well-organized.
However, the Ashram is in touch with one such society and very
often there is a clearance. Ask Narandas how it is that dogs
have not been cleared by the society.
N.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19110
